
The Ethics of Surgery
 


1
The Ethics of Surgery
CONFLICTS AND CONTROVERSIES
Edited By Robert M. Sade, M.D. 
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY, INSTITUTE OF HUMAN VALUES IN HEALTH 
CARE, MEDICAL UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA, CHARLESTON
 

3
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide.
Oxford  New York
Auckland  Cape Town  Dar es Salaam  Hong Kong  Karachi
Kuala Lumpur  Madrid  Melbourne  Mexico City  Nairobi
New Delhi  Shanghai  Taipei  Toronto
With offices in
Argentina  Austria  Brazil  Chile  Czech Republic  France  Greece
Guatemala  Hungary  Italy  Japan  Poland  Portugal  Singapore
South Korea  Switzerland  Thailand  Turkey  Ukraine  Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by
Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© Oxford University Press 2015
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law,
by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization.
Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The ethics of surgery: conflicts and controversies/edited by Robert M. Sade.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978–0–19–020452–5 (paperback: alk. paper)—ISBN 978–0–19–020453–2 (hardcover: alk. 
paper)
I. Sade, Robert M., 1938–, editor.
[DNLM:  1.  General Surgery—ethics—Collected Works.  2.  Physician-Patient Relations—
ethics—Collected Works.  3.  Physicians—ethics—Collected Works.  4.  Surgical Procedures, 
Operative—ethics—Collected Works. WO 21]
RD27.7
174.2'97—dc23
2014024382
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
 

I dedicate this book to two mentors early in my professional life, who 
not only encouraged and supported my development as a surgeon, but 
also were the finest practitioners of the art and science of surgery I have 
known: Aldo R. Castañeda and the late M. Judah Folkman.
 


vii
CONTENTS
Contributors   xi
Preface   xvii
Acknowledgments   xix
Introduction   1
ROBERT M. SADE
Section 1:  The Problem of Surgical Ethics
ROBERT M. SADE
	 1.	 Ethics Gap in Surgery   19
ROBERT M. SADE, TIMOTHY H. WILLIAMS, DAVID J. PERLMAN, 
CYNTHIA L. HANEY, AND MARTHA R. STROUD
	 2.	 Ethics in Cardiothoracic Surgery: A Survey of Surgeons’ Views   26
THOMAS A. D’AMICO, MARTIN F. MCKNEALLY, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 2:  Professional Integrity
ROBERT M. SADE
	 3.	 Deceiving Insurance Companies: New Expression of an Ancient Tradition   37
ROBERT M. SADE
	 4.	 Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident: End of Residency, End of Career?   47
CAROLYN M. DRESLER, MICHAEL S. KENT, RICHARD I. WHYTE, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	 5.	 Must Surgeons Tell Mitral Valve Repair Candidates About a New Percutaneous 
Repair Device That Is Only Available Elsewhere?   58
ERIC R. SKIPPER, KEVIN D. ACCOLA, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	 6.	 The Surgeon’s Work in Transition: Should Surgeons Spend More Time Outside 
the Hospital?   69
JAMIE DICKEY, ROSS M. UNGERLEIDER, JOSEPH S. COSELLI, 
LORI D. CONKLIN, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	 7.	 Should Sleep-Deprived Surgeons Be Prohibited from Operating Without 
Patients’ Consent?   80
CHARLES A. CZEISLER, CARLOS A. PELLEGRINI, AND ROBERT M. SADE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	
viii	
Contents
	 8.	 Are Thoracic Surgeons Ethically Obligated to Serve as Expert Witnesses for 
the Plaintiff?   94
DONALD C. WATSON, JR., FRANCIS ROBICSEK, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 3:  Relationships with Patients—Autonomy and Consent
ROBERT M. SADE
	 9.	 Should a Jehovah’s Witness Patient Who Faces Imminent 
Exsanguination Be Transfused?   107
KEITH S. NAUNHEIM, CHARLES R. BRIDGES, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	10.	 No Heroic Measures: How Soon Is Too Soon to Stop?   118
THOMAS A. D’AMICO, MARK J. KRASNA, DIANE M. KRASNA, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	11.	 Should Surgical Errors Always Be Disclosed to the Patient?   130
CONSTANTINE MAVROUDIS, CONSTANTINE D. MAVROUDIS, 
KEITH S. NAUNHEIM, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	12.	 Another Surgeon’s Error: Must You Tell the Patient?   141
SUSAN D. MOFFATT-BRUCE, CHADRICK E. DENLINGER, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	13.	 Impending Loss of Insurance Coverage Is an Indication to Proceed 
with Complex, Expensive Surgery   151
ANTHONY L. ESTRERA, SHARON IKONOMIDIS, JOHN S. IKONOMIDIS, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	14.	 Ethical Obligation of Surgeons to Noncompliant Patients: Can a Surgeon 
Refuse to Operate on an Intravenous Drug–Abusing Patient with Recurrent 
Aortic Valve Prosthesis Infection?   163
J. MICHAEL DIMAIO, TOMAS A. SALERNO, RON BERNSTEIN, 
KATIA ARAUJO, MARCO RICCI, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 4:  Innovation and Uses of Technology
ROBERT M. SADE
	15.	 Surgical Innovation: Too Risky to Remain Unregulated?   181
HAAVI MORREIM, MICHAEL J. MACK, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	16.	 Who Should Adopt Robotic Surgery and When?   194
JESSICA K. SMYTH, KAREN E. DEVENEY, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	17.	 Should Access to Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Be Limited to 
High-Volume Surgical Centers?   204
JOSEPH E. BAVARIA, PHILIP GREEN, GREGG F. ROSNER, 
MARTIN B. LEON, ALLAN SCHWARTZ, AND ROBERT M. SADE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	
Contents	
ix
	18.	 Should the Use of Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation 
Be Rationed?   214
JOHN E. MAYER, JR., GRAYSON H. WHEATLEY III, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 5:  Organ Donation and Transplantation
ROBERT M. SADE
	19.	 Heart Donation Without the Dead-Donor Rule   231
FRANKLIN G. MILLER AND ROBERT M. SADE
	20.	 Saving Lives Is More Important Than Abstract Moral Concerns: Financial 
Incentives Should Be Used to Increase Organ Donation   238
BENJAMIN HIPPEN, LAINIE FRIEDMAN ROSS, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	21.	 Prisoners on Death Row Should Be Accepted as Organ Donors   250
SHU S. LIN, LAUREN RICH, JAY D. PAL, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 6:  Conflicts of Interest in Surgery
ROBERT M. SADE
	22.	 Politely Refuse the Pen and Note Pad: Gifts From Industry to 
Physicians Harm Patients   265
KENNETH V. ISERSON, ROBERT JAMES CERFOLIO, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	23.	 Should the Financial Link Between Industry and Physician 
Consultants Be Severed?   276
STEPHEN J. IMMELT, VINCENT A. GAUDIANI, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	24.	 Full Disclosure—Should Presentations and Publications Include Dollar 
Amounts and Duration of Surgeon-Industry Relationships?   286
J. PETER MURPHY AND ROBERT M. SADE
Section 7:  Ethical Issues in Health-Care Policy
ROBERT M. SADE
	25.	 Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy: LVAD for a 
Patient With Leukemia   301
PATRICK M. McCARTHY, RICHARD D. LAMM, AND ROBERT M. SADE
	26.	 Should Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting Be Regionalized?   311
BRAHMAJEE K. NALLAMOTHU, KIM A. EAGLE, VICTOR A. FERRARIS, 
AND ROBERT M. SADE
	27.	 A Clash of Rights: Should Smoking Tobacco Products in Public Places 
Be Legally Banned?   324
CAROLYN M. DRESLER, MARK J. CHERRY, AND ROBERT M. SADE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	
x	
Contents
	28.	 Should a Medical Center Deny Employment to a Physician Because 
He Smokes Tobacco Products?   335
JAMES W. JONES, WILLIAM M. NOVICK, AND ROBERT M. SADE
Index   345
 

xi
CONTRIBUTORS
Kevin D. Accola, MD: Florida Heart Institute, Cardiovascular Surgeons, 
PA, Orlando, Florida
Katia Araujo, PsyD: Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami-Dade County 
Attorney’s Office, Kaplan University, School of Criminal Justice, 
Miami, Florida
Joseph E. Bavaria, MD: Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Hospital of the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Ron Bernstein, JD: Miami-Dade County Attorney’s Office, Kaplan 
University, School of Criminal Justice, Miami, Florida
Charles R. Bridges, MD: Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and the Pennsylvania Hospital, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Robert James Cerfolio, MD: Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
Mark J. Cherry, PhD: Department of Philosophy, St. Edward’s University, 
Austin, Texas
Lori D. Conklin, MD: Department of Anesthesiology and Chief, Division 
of Vascular Anesthesia, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
Joseph S. Coselli, MD: Texas Heart Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Charles A. Czeisler, PhD, MD: Division of Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Division of Sleep Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Thomas A. D’Amico, MD: Division of Thoracic Surgery, Duke University 
Medical Center, Duke University Health System, Durham, North 
Carolina
Chadrick E. Denlinger, MD: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina
Karen E. Deveney, MD: Department of Surgery, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon
 

	
xii	
Contributors
Jamie Dickey (Ungerleider), MA, MSW-LCSW, PhD: Family and 
Community Medicine, Center for Integrative Medicine, Student Wellness 
Center, Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston-Salem, North Carolina
J. Michael DiMaio, MD: Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
Carolyn M. Dresler, MD, MPA: Center for Tobacco Products, Food and 
Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland
Kim A. Eagle, MD: University of Michigan Cardiovascular Center, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan
Anthony L. Estrera, MD: Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular 
Surgery, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas
Victor A. Ferraris, MD, PhD: Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic 
Surgery, Linda and Jack Gill Heart Institute, University of Kentucky 
Chandler Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky
Vincent A. Gaudiani, MD: Pacific Coast Cardiac and Vascular 
Surgeons, California Pacific Medical Center Heart Institute, and 
Cardiac Surgery, Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula, 
Redwood City, California
Philip Green, MD: Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York
Cynthia L. Haney, JD: Division of Legislative Counsel, American Medical 
Association, Washington, DC
Benjamin Hippen, MD: Metrolina Nephrology Associates and Carolinas 
Medical Center, Charlotte, North Carolina
John S. Ikonomidis, MD, PhD: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
Department of Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina
Sharon Ikonomidis, MS, PhD: Department of History, Humanities and 
Political Science, Trident Technical College, Charleston, South Carolina
Stephen J. Immelt, JD: Hogan Lovells, LLP, Baltimore, Maryland
Kenneth V. Iserson, MD, MBA: Arizona Bioethics Program, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
James W. Jones, MD, PhD: The Center for Medical Ethics and Health 
Policy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Michael S. Kent, MD: Division of Thoracic Surgery and 
Interventional Pulmonology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts

	
Contributors	
xiii
Diane M. Krasna, CRNA: Meridian Cancer Care, Jersey Shore University 
Medical Center, Neptune, New Jersey
Mark J. Krasna, MD: Meridian Cancer Care, Jersey Shore University 
Medical Center, Neptune, New Jersey
Richard D. Lamm, LLB, CPA: Institute for Public Policy Studies, 
University of Denver, Denver, Colorado, Former Governor of Colorado
Martin B. Leon, MD: Center for Interventional Vascular Therapy, 
Columbia University Medical Center/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 
New York, New York
Shu S. Lin, MD, PhD: Departments of Surgery, Immunology, and 
Pathology, and the Duke Lung Transplant Program, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
Michael J. Mack, MD: Cardiovascular Research and Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Heart Hospital Baylor Plano, Baylor Healthcare System, 
Baylor Plano, Plano, Texas
John E. Mayer, Jr., MD: Department of Cardiac Surgery, Children’s 
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Constantine Mavroudis, MD: Congenital Heart Institute, Florida Hospital 
for Children, Orlando, Florida
Constantine D. Mavroudis, MD, MSC: Penn Surgery, Cardiac Surgery 
Direct Program, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Patrick M. McCarthy, MD: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
Martin F. McKneally, MD, PhD: Toronto General Hospital, Department 
of Surgery and Joint Centre for Bioethics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada
Franklin G. Miller, PhD: Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Susan D. Moffatt-Bruce, MD, PhD: Department of Surgery, The Ohio State 
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio
Haavi Morreim, JD, PhD: College of Medicine, University of Tennessee, 
Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee
J. Peter Murphy, MD: Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Missouri 
Baptist Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri
Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, MD, MPH: Division of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan

	
xiv	
Contributors
Keith S. Naunheim, MD: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
St. Louis University Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri
William M. Novick, MD: University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, Tennessee
Jay D. Pal, MD, PhD: Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of 
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas
Carlos A. Pellegrini, MD: Department of Surgery, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington
David J. Perlman, PhD: School of Nursing, Center for Bioethics, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Marco Ricci, MD: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of 
New Mexico Health Science Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico
Lauren Rich, RN, BSN: Departments of Surgery, Immunology, and 
Pathology, and the Duke Lung Transplant Program, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
Francis Robicsek, MD, PhD: Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery, Carolinas Heart Institute and Carolinas Medical Center, 
Charlotte, North Carolina
Gregg F. Rosner, MD: Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York
Lainie Friedman Ross, MD, PhD: Departments of Pediatrics, Medicine, 
and Surgery, MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Robert M. Sade, MD: Department of Surgery, Institute of Human Values in 
Health Care, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston
Tomas A. Salerno, MD: Department of Surgery and Division 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine 
and Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, Florida
Allan Schwartz, MD: Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York
Eric R. Skipper, MD: Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, 
Sanger Heart and Vascular Institute, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, 
North Carolina
Jessica K. Smyth, MD: Department of Otolaryngology, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina

	
Contributors	
xv
Martha R. Stroud, MS: Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina
Ross M. Ungerleider, MD: Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Brenner Children’s 
Hospital, Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center, Winston Salem, 
North Carolina
Donald C. Watson, Jr., MD: Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery, Asheville, 
North Carolina
Grayson H. Wheatley III, MD: Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, 
Arizona Heart Institute, Phoenix, Arizona
Richard I. Whyte, MD, MBA: Division of Thoracic Surgery and 
Interventional Pulmonology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts
Timothy H. Williams, MD: Cardiothoracic Surgery, St. Francis Hospital, 
Greenville, South Carolina


xvii
PREFACE
This book was not created de novo but evolved as a consequence of the grow­
ing interest in biomedical ethics as it applies to surgery. Although it is set in 
the context of cardiothoracic surgery, the ideas, conflicts, and controversies 
that it addresses are applicable to all surgical specialties. The evolution of 
certain ideas and events ultimately led to the creation of the book itself.
In the mid-1990s I came across a paper that piqued my interest. It com­
pared the frequency of discussion of bioethical issues in medical compared 
with surgical journals. The study found that ethical topics were discussed 
more than four times more frequently in medical than in surgical journals. 
In an attempt to identify the causes of this “ethics gap,” I conducted a pilot 
survey within my own institution, the Medical University of South Carolina 
in Charleston. Although the study provided no clear explanation for the dis­
crepancy, its findings were of sufficient interest that it was accepted for pre­
sentation at a surgical conference in 1999. This paper, “The Ethics Gap in 
Surgery,” was published the next year in a surgical journal and is reproduced 
as the first chapter of this book. The presentation and publication of this pilot 
study led to two important outcomes.
Immediately after the oral presentation, I discussed the implications of 
the ethics gap for both surgical practice and surgical education with the newly 
appointed editor of the Annals of Thoracic Surgery (the Annals), Dr. L. Henry 
Edmunds. He considered and then accepted the idea that oral and writ­
ten discussion on ethical topics in the context of surgery could be valuable. 
Subsequently, Hank appointed me as ethics editor of the Annals, the official 
journal of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) and the Southern Thoracic 
Surgical Association (STSA). This post had not existed previously. From that 
position, I was able to facilitate the publication of a series of articles on ethi­
cal issues in surgery, many of which are found in this book.
The second significant outcome came several months after the publica­
tion of the ethics-gap paper. Dr. Martin McKneally and I, both members of 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Standards and Ethics Committee at the 
time, explored the possibility of creating an organization for providing eth­
ics education for cardiothoracic surgeons. As a result, the Ethics Forum (the 
Forum) was created. (The name was recently changed to the Cardiothoracic 
Ethics Forum, but Ethics Forum was used throughout previously published 
material in this book, so I use it in this book rather than the new name when­
ever referring to the Forum.) Martin and I invited a few surgeons who were 
 

	 xviii	
Preface
interested in ethics to join us, and this group subsequently met regularly to 
plan programs on ethical issues for presentation at national meetings of sur­
gical societies. It gradually evolved to comprise the entire membership of the 
ethics committees of the STS and the American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery (AATS), as well as a few former members of those committees who 
had sustained an interest and scholarly involvement in surgical ethics.
Eventually, discussions of ethical issues became a permanent fixture in 
the programs of the annual meetings of the STS, the AATS, and the STSA. 
To expand the audience for these programs beyond those in attendance at the 
meetings, their proceedings were published in the Annals and the Journal of 
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery (the Journal), thus reaching a reader­
ship of thousands. Some of the ethics-related writings in these journals did 
not originate in conference presentations but came from solicited manu­
scripts on ethical issues.
Between 2000 and the end of 2013, more than forty ethics programs were 
presented at the annual meetings of cardiothoracic surgical societies, and 
members of the Forum had published more than 300 articles on topics in 
ethics, nearly all in surgical journals, mostly in the Annals and the Journal.
I have selected articles that I have written or coauthored from the Annals 
and the Journal—they comprise most of this book’s content—in hopes of fur­
ther augmenting the educational value of the Forum’s efforts by presenting 
them to an expanded audience of surgeons and surgical trainees. This book 
is not intended to cover the field of surgical ethics comprehensively; rather, 
it focuses on issues that have been determined by the members of the Forum 
(nearly all of whom are practicing surgeons) to be controversial and of cur­
rent relevance to surgeons and surgeons in training.
The book has two goals. The first is to provide educational materials in 
surgical ethics for the enjoyment and enlightenment of practicing surgeons 
and other physicians, surgical residents, and medical students. The second is 
to make surgeons aware that ethics is not a static, stable discipline; rather, it 
is a dynamic field that is animated by varying perspectives on important con­
troversies, perspectives that arise from diverse training backgrounds, from 
differences in personal value systems, and sometimes from fundamentally 
differing worldviews. If these goals are achieved, I believe that surgical prac­
tice will be better for it, to the ultimate benefit of the patients we treat.

xix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The publication of a book is the culmination of the efforts not of one person 
but many. Most of the material in this book came about as a result of the 
collaboration of dozens of individuals. In the beginning, Martin McKneally, 
MD, my colleague and friend, and I germinated the idea of developing an 
educational program for the field of thoracic surgery. We worked together 
to create the Ethics Forum, members of which over the past fourteen years 
are listed below (records were poorly kept or missing in the early days, and 
I apologize to anyone in that group whom I inadvertently omitted).
From the beginning, L. Henry Edmunds, MD, editor of the Annals of 
Thoracic Surgery, was enormously helpful and supportive of the publication 
of much ethics-related material in his journal. Special thanks goes to Heide 
Pusztay, managing editor of the Annals of Thoracic Surgery, who has been 
extraordinarily effective in support of our publication efforts. The editors of 
the Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Andrew Wechsler, MD, 
and subsequently Lawrence Cohn, MD, have also been encouraging by pub­
lishing ethics papers in their journal. Enthusiastic support for the activities 
of the Forum has come from the leadership of both the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons (STS) and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, most 
particularly from Robert Wynbrandt, STS executive director, and Grahame 
Rush, the STS director of information services.
On the home front, my work over many years has benefited greatly from 
the support of my administrative assistants, most recently and notably Ms. 
Megan Fier. The Department of Surgery and Division of Cardiothoracic 
Surgery of my home institution, the Medical University of South Carolina 
(MUSC), have provided both financial and moral support over many years, 
in particular Fred Crawford and John Ikonomidis, both of whom I am for­
tunate to count as friends as well as colleagues. My move from the active 
practice of pediatric cardiac surgery into the field of bioethics was greatly 
facilitated many years ago by discussions, encouragement, and financial sup­
port from Layton McCurdy, who was dean of the MUSC college of medicine 
at the time.
Many thanks are due to my editor, Peter Ohlin, senior editor of Oxford 
University Press, for his guidance through the process of bringing the materi­
als in this book from a nascent idea to final publication, with the assistance of 
Lucy Randall, Associate Editor. Stephen Hoffius was of great help in editing 
the final manuscript.
 
 

	
xx	
Acknowledgments
A huge thank-you goes to the many coauthors of the papers that compose 
the bulk of this work. We have learned a great deal from one another, and we 
have had a lot of fun putting together the talks and debates at annual surgical 
society meetings and carrying them through to publication. Members of the 
Ethics Forum are noted below. Coauthors of the essays in this book are listed 
in the pages following.
Members of the Ethics Forum, 2000–2014
Cary Akins, MD
Mark Allen, MD
Lawrence Bonchek, MD
Charles Bridges, MD, ScD
David Campbell, MD
Thomas D’Amico, MD
Jennifer Ellis, MD
Richard Engelman, MD
Kathleen Fenton, MD
Mark Ferguson, MD
Richard Freeman, MD, MBA
David Fullerton, MD
Stephen Guyton, MD, MHA
John Hammon, MD
Lynn Harrison, Jr., MD
Wayne Isom, MD
James Jaggers, MD
James Jones, MD, PhD
Leslie Kohman, MD
Nicholas Kouchoukos, MD
Jeffrey Kramer, MD, MBA
Sidney Levitsky, MD
Michael Mack, MD
Constantine Mavroudis, MD
Martin McKneally, MD, PhD
Eric Mendeloff, MD
Walter Merrill, MD
Bryan Meyers, MD, MPH
Lynda Mickleborough, MD
John Mitchell, MD
Scott Mitchell, MD
Susan Moffatt-Bruce, MD, PhD
Gordon Murray, MD
Keith Naunheim, MD
Kenneth Oberheu, MD
Mark Orringer, MD
Lorraine Rubis, MD
Richard Sanderson, MD
Mark Slaughter, MD
Scott Stuart, MD
Gregory Trachiotis, MD
Ross Ungerleider, MD, MBA
Donald Watson, MD
Andrew Wechsler, MD
Winfield Wells, MD
Richard Whyte, MD
Walter Wolfe, MD
Joseph Zwischenberger, MD

1
Introduction
Robert M. Sade
Health-care ethics is a broad field that includes many overlapping subcatego­
ries: bioethics (concerned broadly with health-care issues, including public 
policymaking), clinical ethics (concerned with decision-making at the bed­
side), medical ethics (concerned with the appropriate behavior of physicians), 
organizational ethics (concerned with choices made by health-care organiza­
tions among available options), and surgical ethics (a subcategory of medical 
ethics, focusing on issues of special significance to surgery). Ethics in general 
aims to provide justifications for judging a particular action right or wrong or 
for choosing and acting upon the best among competing options.
Theoretical approaches to answering questions of how to make the best 
choice among several options for action have been controversial ever since 
the earliest deliberations on the morality of human action. Dozens of dis­
tinct approaches have been proposed and used in ethical analysis, but most 
fall into one of three general categories: deontological (rule-based), conse­
quentialist (outcome-based), and teleological (virtue-based). Each of these is 
associated with conceptual problems. To apply rules in choosing a particular 
action, one has to decide which rules to follow, and there is little agreement 
on which rules or rule systems are most easily defensible or best justified. 
Choosing an action based on consideration of its consequences while hoping 
for the outcome that best optimizes human welfare is made difficult or impos­
sible by the problems of identifying the full range of effects and consequences 
of the action options. While the virtues that are best suited for human welfare 
have been well described over millennia, there has been little agreement as to 
which of them are most important for human happiness or excellence.
Like all physicians, surgeons have many different roles at various stages 
of their careers. Their dominant role, of course, is caring for patients, but they 
may also be teachers of medical students, residents, and other trainees, as 
well as of each other; innovators and researchers seeking to improve patient 
care or adding to the foundations of scientific knowledge; and administrators, 
 
 

	
2	
The Ethics of Surgery
contributing to the administration of medical centers. In each of those roles, 
surgeons are guided by the ethics relevant to the role. I do not mean that 
there are different ethics for different functions within the health-care sys­
tem, only that I believe the Code of Medical Ethics of the American Medical 
Association is misleading when it says
Assuming a title or position that removes the physician from direct 
patient-physician relationships does not override professional ethical 
obligations. . . . Adherence to professional medical standards includes . . . 
placing the interests of patients above other considerations, such as . . . 
employer business interests.1
To back up a bit, the ethical principles that guide clinicians, educators, 
administrators, and researchers are the same as they are for all human beings. 
Our human nature requires a common set of responses to the challenges we 
face every day. Although the principles apply to all of us, they have a hierar­
chy of importance that is critically different in each of the roles, because in 
different roles, the surgeon faces different sets of challenges.
Human beings make thousands of choices every day, starting, for 
instance, with a health-related decision whether to have bacon and eggs or 
oatmeal with berries for breakfast, ranging up to high-impact decisions, such 
as whether to recommend medical treatment versus major surgical interven­
tion for patients with severe coronary artery disease. Virtues are habits of 
mind that become engrained and automatic when an individual analyzes spe­
cific situations intelligently and chooses the correct response repetitively over 
long periods of time. For example, we have the virtue of honesty because we 
choose to tell the truth rather than to lie in order to gain a transient advan­
tage, and we do this time after time. We have the virtue of integrity because 
the actions we choose from among many options are consistent with our per­
sonal beliefs and values, time after time.
We use those virtues, which serve as principles of action, to guide us in 
making important decisions. Some of the virtues that are particularly impor­
tant for physicians are these: respect for the right of all patients to decide 
what is done to them; integrity, by which I mean consistency between our 
beliefs and our actions; honesty in all of our interactions with patients and 
colleagues; cognitive and technical competence in making accurate diagno­
ses and carrying out correct treatments; and compassion for the suffering of 
our patients. These are important virtues for all human beings, as well as for 
physicians in our various roles. Their rank order changes, however, depend­
ing on the nature of the job we are doing and the goals we strive toward as 
clinicians, educators, administrators, and researchers. I explain what I mean 
by changes in rank order.
The first goal of physicians in a clinical setting is to serve the good of the 
patient. Patients must trust that their physicians are acting in their best inter­
est in order for the healing relationship to have successful outcomes—patients 

	
Introduction	
3
who do not trust their physicians are unlikely to follow directions or accept 
their physicians’ advice. Two aspects of the patient’s good must guide the 
virtue of fidelity to the patient’s interests. First, serving the biological good 
of the patient requires scientific objectivity and competence in technical skill 
and medical knowledge. Second, serving the subjective good of the patient 
from the patient’s viewpoint requires the virtues of respect for the patient’s 
personal values and preferences, honesty in disclosing relevant information 
for the patient to make good decisions, and compassion for the patient’s sit­
uation. This can be summed up as a single virtue: trustworthiness, which 
encompasses all of the above. Yet physicians may strive to earn the patient’s 
trust but may not always be worthy of it. For example, patients harmed by 
mistakes made during their treatment have a right to know what happened, 
and it is the surgeon’s responsibility to tell them, but only half of 1,300 physi­
cians who responded to one survey believed that a serious error should be 
disclosed to the patient.2 Also, many physicians condone lying to insurance 
companies to benefit patients,3 yet deceptions of this kind undermine the pos­
sibility of developing the virtue of honesty and thereby challenge the patient’s 
trust.
As educators, the first goal of physicians is to transmit to their students 
and trainees accurate and unbiased knowledge and skills that are required 
in their future practices, with integrity, avoiding abuse of the asymmetry of 
power between teacher and student. The road to those goals is not always 
smooth. The Association of American Medical Colleges surveys all recent 
medical graduates with its Medical School Graduation Questionnaire. In 
the 2012 survey, a section dealt with mistreatment of students, citing fifteen 
serious abuses. No less than 47.1% (about 6,000 of the more than 12,000 
respondents) experienced at least one of those abuses.4 There are no data on 
mistreatment of students and trainees by specialty, but in the view of many, 
surgeons top the list of transgressors.
Many surgeons serve as administrators in one form or another during 
their careers. Hospital administrators are in the business of maintaining hos­
pitals, and the central goal of a businessperson is to preserve the hospital’s 
long-term success. In doing so, they have to be concerned with the financial 
balance sheet and must develop and administer policies that support the hos­
pital’s mission. Administrative failures, however, have led to scandals that 
have damaged the reputations of university medical centers, such as Emory 
University, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania, and the 
University of Wisconsin.5
Another role that many physicians fill is that of research scientist. The 
primary goal for the investigator is to discover new knowledge that will 
improve the care of patients. Scientists must operate with the virtues common 
to all human beings, including respect for their subjects’ self-determination, 
cognitive and technical competence, and compassion for the humanity of 
their subjects. The ethical principles that are most important to achieve the 

	
4	
The Ethics of Surgery
goals of science, however, are integrity and honesty, because without them 
the very foundations of science will be seriously undermined. Yet research 
misconduct is surprisingly widespread in biomedical research. In a recent 
study of thousands of biomedical scientists, 33% admitted that they had vio­
lated at least one of ten egregious scientific transgressions, such as fabricating 
or falsifying research data, in the previous three years.6
Most physicians do the right thing most of the time in each of the vari­
ous roles they fill during their professional lives. Yet there is clearly room for 
improvement in reinforcing the virtues that are required for success in each 
of the roles they fill.
What Sets Surgical Ethics Apart?
Surgical ethics differs from other categories of ethics because of special 
aspects of surgery. Several examples of the differences come to mind: vulner­
ability and trust, absence of complete information at the moment decisions 
must be made, a requirement for manual dexterity, the widespread use of 
medical devices in surgery, and distinctive aspects of surgical research.
VULNERABILITY AND TRUST
The foundation of the patient-physician relationship is trust, because without 
it patients are unlikely to take the physician’s advice seriously, may make 
choices that are inimical to their best interests, will not return for follow-up 
visits, and, when trouble occurs, are likely to blame the physician and per­
haps even pursue a lawsuit. Physicians promote trust in many ways: through 
clear explanations, projection of empathy, and honesty in all aspects of deal­
ing with patients.
Respecting confidences and privacy are of special importance in med­
icine because of the unique intimacy of the patient-physician relationship. 
Patients share a great deal of private financial and business information with 
their lawyers, emotional and other private information with clergy, and a 
wide range of deeply personal information with their spouses. Yet none of 
those confidantes is privy to all of the details that patients share with their 
physicians, and none has access to every part of the patient’s body as does the 
physician in the course of a physical examination.
Within medicine, the degree of intimacy between patient and physician 
varies, but nowhere is access to physical privacy greater than in the field of 
surgery. The informed-consent process requires that the surgeon gain insights 
into the patient’s emotional state and personal values, as is true in nearly all 
medical disciplines. But, in addition to this personal information, the patient 
also knows that at the time of surgery she will be anesthetized and devoid of 
 
 
 

	
Introduction	
5
all resources to protect herself—she will be entirely dependent on the sur­
geon’s knowledge, skills, and professional integrity. These facts place surgical 
patients at the top of the scale of trust, and the corresponding responsibility 
makes extraordinary demands on the surgeon, exacting the highest level of 
professionalism.
Finally, among all the medical specialists, surgeons are the most 
accountable for their patients’ outcomes. There are many reasons for this, 
but the most important is the underlying expectation of success—cure or 
­palliation—before a surgeon operates. Charles Bosk put it in this way:
If a surgeon operates on an eighty-three-year-old patient with gallblad­
der problems and the patient dies, then the surgeon cannot very well 
make the claim that the patient died of old age. He must first explain how 
and why the patient received a scar on his abdomen. Now, an internist 
medically managing the same gallbladder problem with the same result 
can legitimately claim that the patient died of old age. Deaths and com­
plications present different questions to different specialists. When the 
patient of an internist dies, the natural question his colleagues ask is, 
“What happened?” When the patient of a surgeon dies, his colleagues 
ask, “What did you do?”7
SURGICAL DECISION-MAKING
Uncertainty is an omnipresent feature of medical practice. Before we can 
help a patient, we must accurately determine the nature of the problem. We 
accomplish this using many modalities, such as the patient’s medical history, 
the history of the current illness, a well-executed physical examination, and 
a wide variety of diagnostic examinations and tests. Although we often can 
determine the precise nature of the patient’s illness, there is usually some 
degree of uncertainty. For surgeons, the problem of incomplete informa­
tion is greatly magnified by the short time frames between the arrival of the 
patient and the need for intervening to treat the problem. This is especially 
the case in urgent or emergency situations, when the surgeon often must act 
without all the evidence he needs. Acquiring diagnostic information takes 
time, and balancing the need for information against the urgency of interven­
tion may force difficult choices driven by limited time.
Unexpected events during the course of an operation place considerable 
pressure on the surgeon to make the right decision, often when he does not 
know precisely what the problem is. In such situations, the patient’s welfare 
is at stake. Because surgeons must maintain a high level of alertness through­
out operations in order to execute technical maneuvers accurately and to 
deal with unexpected situations, they must maintain a level of self-awareness 
beyond those needed by nonsurgeons. Surgeons, like all human beings, have 
 

	
6	
The Ethics of Surgery
stresses in their personal lives that can interfere with their professional func­
tioning. They must control their reactions to such stresses in order to avoid 
distractions and concentrate on what they are doing. One example of such a 
stress is sleep deprivation, raising ethical questions of whether an operation 
should be done in the face of inadequate sleep in the hours before the sched­
uled procedure.
Surgeons are sometimes called upon to make decisions that pit their pro­
fessional obligations against the patient’s instructions. For example, during 
the course of a usually safe operation, a surgeon operating on a patient who 
is a Jehovah’s Witness may unexpectedly face a rare exsanguinating hemor­
rhage. Because years of training have instilled a deep dedication to turning 
death aside whenever possible, the surgeon may feel an obligation to save the 
patient’s life with banked blood that is immediately accessible, against the 
patient’s express refusal of transfusions. Moral distress often accompanies 
such situations.
MANUAL DEXTERITY
Medical education and training aim to produce physicians who are com­
petent to perform the tasks relevant to their professional roles. All clinical 
physicians must be competent to evaluate patients’ problems and act appro­
priately for the patients’ benefit. Board examinations at all levels of educa­
tion and training are designed to ensure adequacy of requisite knowledge, 
that is, to ensure cognitive competence. Surgeons, however, require a range of 
skills beyond those required of nonsurgeons, namely, skills related to manual 
dexterity. During their training, surgeons spend thousands of hours in oper­
ating rooms for the purpose of acquiring those skills; acquiring and refin­
ing manual skills remain important tasks throughout the years of practice. 
Learning new and better maneuvers while performing operations is a process 
that virtually never ends for the conscientious surgeon.
Evaluating cognitive competence is a matter of asking relevant questions 
and measuring the correctness of the physician’s responses (viz., the board 
examinations that are familiar to all physicians). Measuring manual dexter­
ity is much more difficult; a variety of such measures have been developed, 
but none has been widely utilized. Determination of readiness of surgical 
trainees to move to the next stage of graded operative responsibility is gen­
erally subjectively determined by faculty members’ observations when they 
operate with trainees. This places ethical responsibilities on both the evalu­
ator and the trainee. For example, because relatively rigid work schedules 
depend on the availability of trainees, faculty may be tempted to advance 
residents to the next level despite misgivings about their technical readiness 
to move on. Trainees must do their utmost to learn the necessary skills to 
evolve into competent surgeons.
 

	
Introduction	
7
A difficulty that most training programs occasionally face is dealing with 
the recognition that the readiness of a resident to enter independent practice 
is questionable. Alternative responses may include requiring an additional 
year or more of training, recommending (in egregious cases) that the resident 
enter a field of medicine other than surgery, or taking an optimistic view by 
writing a letter of approval for independent practice. Deciding the proper 
course of action in such cases, which fortunately are not common, can be 
ethically challenging.
Additional ethical dilemmas may occur as a surgical career nears its 
end. Manual dexterity declines with age, and the rate of deterioration varies 
widely. Some surgeons no longer have sufficient manual dexterity to operate 
safely on patients by the time they are fifty-five or sixty years old, while others 
may not reach that point until they are in their mid-seventies. No good evalu­
ation tools are available to determine when the time to quit has arrived, and 
surgeons, like all human beings, can easily fail to recognize their own declin­
ing capacities because of the all-too-human defense mechanism of denial: I’m 
just as good as I ever was. We must rely on the advice and subjective judg­
ments of colleagues regarding deteriorating operative outcomes, increasing 
complication rates, and softer signs that the end of a career is approaching 
or has arrived. Deciding to end one’s career on the basis of declining com­
petence is perhaps the most difficult decision a surgeon faces and too often 
evades.
DRUGS AND DEVICES
Dr. William Silen, former surgeon-in-chief at Boston’s Beth Israel Hospital, 
used to quip, “A surgeon is an internist who has completed his education.” 
Surgeons must have broad knowledge of general medicine in order to make 
correct diagnoses and accurately manage patients before and after operations. 
We use the same drugs in managing various illnesses and surgical complica­
tions as internists and pediatricians, but we also use a large variety of arti­
ficial devices in repairing body parts. Surgeons interact with drug-company 
representatives as do nonsurgeons, but we also interact with personnel of 
device companies—detail representatives and technical experts—which adds 
a layer of complexity to surgeons’ relations with industry.
Some of these multifaceted interactions are similar to those seen in medi­
cine, such as conflicts of interest involving exchanges of sums of money for 
using or promoting a company’s products, including drugs and devices. But 
some interactions are unique to surgery. For example, the use of innovative 
devices such as cardiac-assist pumps and robotic-surgery technologies have 
been utilized for marketing rather than primarily for the benefit of patients. 
Innovation generates ethical questions of when and how new technologies 
should be incorporated into surgical practice.
 

	
8	
The Ethics of Surgery
Many surgical technologies and devices are expensive. For example, 
implantation of a left ventricular assist device intended to permanently 
replace the function of the heart in a patient with severe cardiac failure gen­
erally costs about $250,000 for the device, procedure, hospitalization, and 
management for the first postoperative year. More than $150,000 is required 
each year thereafter for managing the patient and his or her artificial heart. 
Because of the uncertain but probably shortened life expectancy after 
implantation of these devices, such large expenses raise substantial questions 
of resource allocation.
SURGICAL RESEARCH ETHICS
Ethical issues are present at every step of the research process, from concep­
tion to publication.
Conception and Design
At the stage of conception and design, proper methodology must be followed. 
In clinical studies, for example, in order to test a new drug or device in a ran­
domized controlled trial (RCT), clinical equipoise must exist. The concept of 
equipoise was adopted as the resolution of a fundamental conflict: the goals of 
clinical medicine versus the goals of research, that is, the conflict between hold­
ing the patient’s interests as paramount versus the search for truth as paramount. 
In order to enter patients into a clinical study, clinical equipoise must exist; there 
is an ethical requirement for uncertainty as to whether the study treatment is 
better than or at least as good as standard treatment or no treatment.8
Recruitment
In the recruitment phase of a study, inclusion and exclusion criteria must 
be followed closely in order to ensure the integrity of the study results. The 
informed-consent process is critically important in recruiting subjects. 
Although the informed-consent document is carefully written and thor­
oughly reviewed by an institutional review board to ensure that the benefits 
of the investigation outweigh the risks to subjects, informed consent does not 
exist on a form but comprises conversations with the potential subjects to 
ensure that they understand what is being proposed in the study so they have 
sufficient information to decide whether to participate.
Execution
During the execution of a study, the protocol must be followed precisely; 
otherwise the study’s data cannot support valid conclusions. As data accu­
mulate, they are reviewed by a data safety and monitoring board, which fur­
ther ensures the safety of subjects in the study and integrity of the process. 
Changes in the balance of benefits and risks that become apparent during a 
 
 
 
 
 

	
Introduction	
9
study must be conveyed to the subjects so that they can decide whether to 
continue to participate.
Analysis
Ethical difficulties often arise during the analysis of the data. Because of 
pressures to produce grants and publications, there are many temptations 
to manipulate data to produce results that are clearer or more positive than 
prima facie interpretation.6 Some of the most sensational scandals in the past 
two decades have come from fabrication and falsification of data that led to 
the destruction of careers of eminent scientists.9 The same kinds of pressures 
may lead to inflation of the conclusions that are reached or the inferences that 
are drawn from the results.
Presentation
As research studies are being prepared for presentation at meetings, bias can 
result from similar pressures to produce positive results that will lead to grants 
and publications. In addition, however, funding sources such as industry or foun­
dations can provide undue influence motivated by the desire for certain results. 
To deal with these issues, the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education has created a series of guidelines for presentations at continuing 
medical education events, such as review of the presentation in advance by a 
third party who is responsible for detecting bias; if any is found, the sponsoring 
organization must manage the conflict of interest in an appropriate manner.10
Publication
During the publication process, additional ethical difficulties appear. 
Who should be listed as an author? Guidelines have been created by the 
International Council of Medical Editors that are followed by many jour­
nals.11 Some publications require a signed statement that discloses any con­
flicts of interest and, in some cases, a signed statement that the investigator 
had freedom of investigation, that is, had complete access to the data and 
freedom from outside influences to decide what information to include in the 
publication and when it should be published.
These problems apply to the entire range of clinical-research ethics, but 
surgical research has distinctive characteristics that single it out for special 
concern. For example, the gold standard of research methodology is the RCT. 
Patients are randomized into one of two or more arms of a research project in 
order to discover whether a new treatment is as good as or better than existing 
treatments. RCTs are carried out far less frequently in surgery than in other 
fields of medicine, for which surgeons have been criticized, but there are good 
reasons for this discrepancy. A well-designed RCT requires that neither the 
patient nor the physician knows what treatment the patient is receiving; in 
 
 
 

	
10	
The Ethics of Surgery
other words, the trial should be double-blinded. This is clearly not possible in 
surgery because the surgeon always must know what he is doing. Moreover, 
RCTs require a large enough cohort of subjects to avoid statistical errors 
associated with inadequate numbers. Many surgical conditions do not occur 
frequently enough to supply a sufficient number of subjects to avoid such 
errors. This difficulty can be overcome by doing multi-institutional studies, 
but this introduces a different kind of error: nonstandard treatment because 
of differences in surgical methods at different institutions and among differ­
ent surgeons.
Furthermore, a medication of a certain dose is constant no matter who 
prescribes it, but a surgical procedure is executed differently by different 
surgeons. Moreover, the same surgeon is unlikely to do an operation the 
same way twice, because it is in the nature of surgery that its practitioners 
continuously make small adjustments of technique. In this way, surgeons 
improve a particular operation incrementally, resulting in greater benefit to 
present and future patients. As a result, surgical operations are moving tar­
gets, unlikely to satisfy the requirement of treatment standardization that is 
necessary for RCTs.
Although many ethical dilemmas facing surgeons are similar to those 
confronting other physicians, the differences of surgical practice from other 
medical disciplines lead to ethical issues that are largely confined to surgi­
cal practice. For this reason, surgical ethics is worthy of consideration apart 
from other categories of health-care ethics, and understanding the reasoning 
underlying the special ethical issues in surgery can be of considerable value to 
practicing surgeons, surgical trainees, and medical students.
HOW THIS BOOK CAME ABOUT
Ethics discussions have historically taken place far less frequently in the 
surgical literature than in the medical literature,12 so in 2000 a group of 
cardiothoracic surgeons who were interested in surgical ethics decided to 
introduce more discussion of ethical issues into national meetings of car­
diothoracic surgical societies and to publish these presentations in surgical 
journals. The topics for discussion are chosen for their currency and inten­
sity of controversy by the Ethics Forum (the Forum), a joint committee of 
the American Association for Thoracic Surgery and the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons.
The Forum’s chosen topics generally do not address the grand, 
high-profile, sometimes sensational issues commonly explored in the print 
and electronic communication media, such as human cloning, genetic 
enhancement, and the role of health professionals in prisoner abuse; rather, 
they focus on controversial issues selected from the day-to-day experiences 
 

	
Introduction	
11
of the surgeons who comprise the Forum. Thus the topics are of immediate 
interest to those who are actively involved in caring for surgical patients.
All of the essayists in these sessions are professionals, but most are not 
professional ethicists or philosophers—they are, for the most part, practic­
ing surgeons, with an admixture of philosophers, social scientists, and attor­
neys, among others. Along with the common ethical dilemmas that have been 
the foci of the presentations, the predominance of surgeons as essayists has 
grounded the oral presentations and the associated publications in the real 
world of surgery.
The proceedings of sessions presented orally at annual meetings have 
been published in one of two major peer-review surgical journals, the Annals 
of Thoracic Surgery and the Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. 
Though the discussions are situated in cardiothoracic surgery, the topics are 
not specific to that field—they are relevant and of interest to practicing sur­
geons, surgical trainees, and students in every surgical field.
Most of the papers selected for this book take the form of debates or 
point–counterpoint discussions, but a few of them are free-standing pieces 
such as editorials. I have organized and moderated all of the oral debates 
and have authored or coauthored all of the corresponding articles that are 
included in this collection.
We chose the debate format for addressing ethical issues not only for 
identification and discussion of important ethical issues in surgery but also 
for enabling the reader to understand varying viewpoints. Much of the bio­
ethics literature gives the impression that important questions in ethics have 
been settled, but this view is far from accurate. The broad field of biomedical 
ethics is riddled with controversy. The diversity of viewpoints and analyti­
cal methods of bioethics have produced deep rifts in the field of bioethics, 
amply illustrated by the wide divergence of views published by President Bill 
Clinton’s left-leaning National Bioethics Advisory Commission, President 
George W.  Bush’s right-leaning President’s Council on Bioethics, and 
President Barack Obama’s left-leaning Presidential Commission for the 
Study of Bioethical Issues.13 No doubt future presidents will appoint ethics 
panels that reflect their own political positions and Weltanschauungen. The 
debate format has at least two purposes: By eluding prescriptive solutions 
to ethical dilemmas, this structure may help readers understand that there 
is often more than one good answer to vexing ethical dilemmas, and it may 
enable them to explore and better understand their own views.
The previously published papers in this book, which have been desig­
nated chapters, have their own introductions, arguments, and conclusions, 
but I have added a small amount of introductory material to each section to 
provide background, identify important ethical areas, and highlight key posi­
tions and arguments. I have deleted redundant or superfluous material from 
most of the papers, and have denoted deletions with bracketed ellipses [. . .]. 

	
12	
The Ethics of Surgery
I have also deleted some of the literature citations, retaining those that are 
most germane to the discussion. The full articles, of course, are available 
from their original sources in the surgical literature.
The twenty-eight chapters in the book are divided into seven thematic sec­
tions: The Problem of Surgical Ethics, Professional Integrity, Relationships 
with Patients—Autonomy and Consent, Innovation and Uses of Technology, 
Organ Donation and Transplantation, Conflicts of Interest in Surgery, and 
Ethical Issues in Health-Care Policy. Each section contains several chapters, 
which are expository papers that make important points regarding ethical 
issues in surgery. The chapters that are in the debate format generally, with 
a few exceptions, have a specific structure: an introduction of the issue to be 
debated, the positive viewpoint, the negative viewpoint, and closing commen­
tary pointing to strong and weak aspects of the discussions, as well as points 
that may have been understated, misstated, or missed by the essayists.
Many different, often competing methods of ethical analysis have been 
developed over centuries. The ancient form of ethical analysis, teleological 
or virtue ethics, is exemplified by the works of Plato and Aristotle and is still 
widely used.14 Deontology, best embodied in the works of Immanuel Kant, 
judges ethical actions based on their adherence to certain rules describing 
duties or obligations.15 Consequentialism bases ethical judgments on a cal­
culus of benefits and harms, judging those actions best that will maximize 
human welfare; this approach is perhaps best exemplified by the utilitarian­
ism of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill.16 A widely used contemporary 
method of ethical analysis is the principlism of Tom Beauchamp and James 
Childress, introduced in 1979, based on four principles: respect for autonomy, 
beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice.17 Many other contemporary forms 
of ethical analysis are less widely used. The least acceptable form of ethical 
discourse, in general, is argument from authority. Quoting persons whose 
underlying philosophy is well known, such as “Kant asserts that X is true” 
or “Bentham argued Y,” is usually a reasonable strategy. It is less acceptable 
to use isolated quotes, such as, “John Doe said Z,” from persons whose views 
are not well known, without an additional basis or explanation. Most of the 
discussions in the papers presented in this book use one or more of the tra­
ditional methods of analysis, but occasionally arguments from authority will 
be found; these should be viewed with skepticism.
This book—indeed, any book on ethics—cannot be considered definitive 
or authoritative because there are no truly authoritative sources of secular 
ethical wisdom. Nevertheless, it contains much thoughtful consideration of 
ethical issues that are important and of daily concern to surgeons. It should 
prove useful and instructive to practitioners, trainees, and students in all sur­
gical fields.

	
Introduction	
13
References
	 1.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Opinion 8.021, Ethical obligations of medi­
cal directors. Code of Medical Ethics, 2012–2013 ed. Chicago: American Medical 
Association; 2012:218–9.
	 2.	 Loren DJ. Risk Managers, Physicians, and Disclosure of Harmful Medical Errors. 
Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety. March 2010;36(3): 102–8.
	 3.	 Sade RM. Deceiving insurance companies: new expression of an ancient tradition. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72(5):1449–53.
	 4.	 Association of American Medical Colleges. Medical School Graduation 
Questionnaire, 2012. https://www.aamc.org/download/300448/data. Accessed May 
19, 2014.
	 5.	 Volpe M.  Dr. Charles Nemeroff and Emory University’s culture of corruption. 
The Provocateur. July 10, 2009. http://theeprovocateur.blogspot.com/2009/07/
dr-charles-nemeroff-and-emorys-culture.html. Accessed May 19, 2014.
	 6.	 Martinson BC, Anderson MS, de Vries R. Scientists behaving badly. Nature. 
2005;435(7043):737–8.
	 7.	 Bosk CL. Forgive and Remember: Managing Medical Failure. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press; 1979.
	 8.	 Djulbegovic B. Uncertainty and equipoise: an interplay between epistemology, deci­
sion making and ethics. Am J Med Sci. 2011;342(4):282–9.
	 9.	 Kumar G, Ryan J. Embattled Professor Marc Hauser will resign from Harvard. 
Harvard Crimson. July 19, 2011.
	10.	 Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education. Standards for 
Commercial Support:  Standards to Ensure Independence in CME Activities. 
http://www.accme.org/requirements/accreditation-requirements-cme-providers/
standards-for-commercial-support. Accessed April 2, 2014.
	11.	 International Council of Medical Editors. Defining the role of authors and contrib­
utors. 
http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/roles-and-responsibilities/
defining-the-role-of-authors-and-contributors.html. Accessed May 17, 2014.
	12.	 Sade RM, Williams T, Haney C, Perlman D, Stroud M. The ethics gap in surgery. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(2):326–9.
	13.	 Eckenweiler LA, Cohn FG, eds. The Ethics of Bioethics:  Mapping the Moral 
Landscape. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2007.
	14.	 Kuczewski MG, Polansky R. Bioethics:  Ancient Themes in Contemporary Issues. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2000.
	15.	 Kant I. Critique of Pure Reason, In: Guyer P and Wood AW, ed. The Cambridge 
Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant. New York: Cambridge University Press; 
1998.
	16.	 Bentham J, Mill JS. Utilitarianism and Other Essays (Classics). Ed. Ryan A. 
New York: Penguin Putnam; 2004.
	17.	 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 7th ed. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 2012.
 


SECTION 1
The Problem of Surgical Ethics
Robert M. Sade
The difference between surgeons and internists is that 
surgeons practice ethics, while internists mainly talk about it.
—Ward O. Griffen, Jr., MD, PhD
The very idea of surgical ethics is problematic. Surgeons are often seen as 
technical experts who do not expend a great deal of effort understanding 
issues that are deeper than identifying a surgical problem and doing 
whatever is needed to fix it. So surgery has an image problem: the surgeon 
as unthinking automaton or shallow technician. The problem goes deeper 
than image, however, because nonsurgical physicians do not understand 
how surgeons approach clinical problems and what is required of a surgeon 
to evaluate a patient’s illness, convey information to the patient, reach 
a mutual decision on the best therapeutic option, execute the required 
procedure, and manage the postoperative course.
This lack of understanding originates and is intensified by important 
differences in the way surgical and medical physicians go about 
their business, at least in an academic environment, which is where 
physicians-in-training develop their professional modi operandi and their 
attitudes toward other specialists. Medical residents generally make their 
working/teaching team rounds on patients in the early morning followed by 
teaching rounds with the attending physician and conferences that last to 
or through lunch. Most of the afternoon is spent getting clinical work done 
before late afternoon team rounds on patients.
Routines on the surgical services are entirely different. The operating 
schedule starts early, often around 7:00 AM, so early morning rounds at 
5:30 to 6:00 are mainly working rounds, finished in an hour to an hour and 
 
 

	
16	
The Ethics of Surgery
a half, then off to the operating room. The junior residents are left on the 
wards to get the work done, and those efforts continue until late afternoon 
rounds, which occur after most of the operating schedule has been 
completed. Teaching on surgical services is generally more diffuse than 
on medical services, taking place ad hoc at the bedside, in the operating 
room, and at early morning or late afternoon teaching conferences. 
The paucity of the daily formal group teaching rounds and conferences 
that characterize medical services gives the impression of relatively 
superficial routines in caring for surgical patients, but this is far from the 
truth. Surgical training does not suffer from less thoughtful teaching and 
learning—it is simply organized differently.
Chapters
There might actually be a problem of surgical ethics beyond perception: a 
relative dearth of open discussion of ethics in surgical journal articles has 
been documented. Chapter 1 is the report of a pilot study we designed to 
uncover the reasons for this discrepancy.1 The study surveyed a medical 
school faculty with two clinical vignettes that posed a dilemma: Given 
four possible answers, respondents were asked to choose the one they 
considered to be ethically best and the one they thought legally most 
acceptable. Analysis of the responses stratified by medical, pediatric, and 
surgical specialties showed no difference between the ethical choices of 
the three groups; minor differences were found among legal choices. The 
proportion of faculty who chose legally and ethically unacceptable options, 
however, was surprisingly high.
Although this small study did not answer the question of why the ethics 
gap existed, it led to the creation of an educational program, developed 
by the Ethics Forum, that has produced ethics discussions at annual 
meetings of surgical societies and numerous publications on ethical issues 
in surgical journals. After several years of producing these programs and 
publications, we wondered whether they had any effect on surgical practice. 
We sought an answer to this question with another survey, this one directed 
to the membership of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons and the American 
Association for Thoracic Surgery. The survey described in ­chapter 2 explores 
surgeons’ views about the value of ethics education in clinical practice 
and the usefulness of including ethics questions on surgery certification 
and recertification board examinations.2 The results are encouraging. Most 
respondents agreed that better understanding of ethical issues would 
improve their own practices and those of surgeons in general. They also 
believed that demonstration of adequate understanding of ethical issues 
should be part of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery certification 
and maintenance of certification processes. Fully 79% of the respondents 
 

	
Section 1	
17
believed the debate format to be an effective educational structure, and 
only 4% of those who attended ethics presentations at annual meetings 
believed that the sessions did not improve their understanding of complex 
ethical issues. Ten percent believed that the sessions did not affect their 
surgical practices.
Taken together, these two studies demonstrate that ethics education 
for surgeons in the form of debates and other presentations at annual 
meetings and in journal publications is both relevant to clinical practice and 
effective in improving the care of patients. The implications of these studies 
and the educational efforts resulting from them motivated the production of 
this book.
References
	1.	 Sade RM, Williams TH, Perlman DJ, Haney CL, Stroud M. Ethics gap in sur­
gery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69:326–9.
	2.	 D’Amico TA, McKneally MF, Sade RM. Ethics in cardiothoracic surgery: a sur­
vey of surgeons’ views. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(1):11–13.
 
 


19
1
Ethics Gap in Surgery
Robert M. Sade, Timothy H. Williams, David J. Perlman, 
Cynthia L. Haney, and Martha R. Stroud*
Introduction
Over the last few decades, new technologies have made possible levels of life 
support that were previously unavailable. Renal dialysis, organ transplanta­
tion, ventilators for respiratory support, and cardiac support devices have con­
tributed to longer and better quality of survival than was previously possible 
for many patients suffering from vital organ failure. For many others, however, 
these technologies have led to survival with a poor quality of life, particularly 
in patients with brain injury or inadequacy of other major organs. Quandaries 
involving the way in which decisions are made led to a growing emphasis on 
the notion of autonomy: namely, the moral and legal right of patients to make 
decisions regarding their own bodies and their own healthcare. The idea of 
informed consent and informed refusal of care is relatively new, having grown 
from case law early in this century, then from the dialogue between ethicists, 
policymakers, physicians, and others over the past few decades.
Clinicians have also paid increasing attention in recent years to many other 
ethical issues, such as privacy and confidentially, truth telling and disclosure, 
and surrogate decision making. This attention has been reflected in medical peri­
odicals and books, but the extent to which such discussions take place has var­
ied among medical specialities. Surgeons in particular have been singled out as 
participating in discussion of ethical issues less frequently than other specialists.
A recent survey compared the surgical literature with the medical litera­
ture over a 1-year period, the 1992 publication year.1 The authors carried out 
a detailed Medline search using key words related to ethics and bioethics in 
* Sade RM, Williams TH, Perlman DJ, Haney CL, Stroud M. Ethics gap in surgery. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2000;69:326–9. Copyright the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with 
permission.
 
 
 

	
20	
The Ethics of Surgery
12 surgical and 15 medical journals. The authors found that discussions of 
bioethical issues occurred much less frequently in the surgical literature than 
in the medical literature. Of 2,645 articles identified in 12 surgical journals, 17 
(0.6%) contained substantive discussion of an ethical issue. Of 11,239 articles 
identified in 15 medical journals, 307 (2.7%) had ethics commentary. Thus, 
the medical literature contained over four times the frequency of ethics dis­
cussions than the surgical literature. This has been referred to as the “ethics 
gap” in surgery.
The reasons for the ethics gap are unclear, but several possibilities have 
been suggested1:  (1)  Surgeons may ascribe less importance to ethical con­
siderations than internists do, so talk about them less. (2) The traditional 
beneficence model of medical ethics (doing what is best for the patient), a 
fundamental surgical principle, sometimes conflicts with the contemporary 
autonomy model (patient self-determination, which may include refusing 
medically indicated treatment). For this reason, surgeons may feel alienated 
from contemporary bioethical discourse1,2 (3) There is evidence that surgeons 
are more authoritarian than other physicians, perhaps because of their pro­
fessional training and the nature of surgical practice.3,4 If this is true, surgeons 
may be more likely than other physicians to make paternalistic decisions and 
fail to recognize ethical problems when they appear. (4) Ethical principles 
may be so deeply ingrained in surgeons through training and practice that 
discussion of the principles may seem redundant.5 One surgical educator has 
explained the ethics gap in this way: “The difference between surgeons and 
internists is that surgeons practice ethics, while internists mainly talk about 
it” (Griffen WO, personal communication).
We have observed that a type of case that seemed particularly subject to 
potential conflict and to differing perceptions among specialties was patient 
incapacity requiring surrogate decision making. We therefore undertook a 
small pilot study using two cases of this type to try to elucidate reasons for 
the ethics gap, as well as to investigate physicians’ understanding of their 
legal obligations in such circumstances.
Material and Methods
We surveyed our academic medical center faculty by soliciting their views of 
ethical and legal options available to the physician in each of two cases of sur­
rogate decision making. The standard for ethical acceptability was derived 
from published guidelines for surrogate decision making from six medical 
organizations, only one of which was surgical.6–11
Finding a standard for legal acceptability was not as straightforward, 
because the outcome for any particular legal challenge is not predict­
able. Rather than labeling the options as legal or illegal, we used the terms 
 

	
Ethics Gap in Surgery	
21
“acceptable-unacceptable” or “prudent-imprudent,” based on whether a 
reasonable attorney would be likely to advise that a particular option had 
a greater or lesser likelihood of being upheld in a court of law. We solic­
ited legal opinion regarding which of the options would be legally prudent or 
imprudent on grounds of liability risk.
Case 1 was that of a young woman suffering from severe brain injury 
with potential for only minimal recovery at best, whose parents wanted to 
withdraw feeding, based on comments made by their daughter in the past. 
Case 2 was that of a newborn infant with hypoplastic left heart syndrome and 
Down syndrome, whose parents asked that prostaglandin be discontinued.
Four options for responses by the physician were provided for each case. 
Three were ethically acceptable options in both cases: accede to the parents’ 
wishes, withdraw from the case and transfer the care of the patient to another 
physician, and seek a court order to continue life support. The fourth option was 
the only one that was ethically unacceptable; continue treatment despite objec­
tion by the surrogate decision maker. The published opinions or policies regard­
ing surrogate decision making of nearly all six organizations explicitly supported 
this classification of options; none expressed an opinion at variance with it.
The legal status of the four options, according to our legal counsel, was 
exactly parallel to their ethical acceptability:  the first three options were 
deemed to be legally prudent, while the fourth was legally imprudent.
The survey requested that each option be rated as either ethically accept­
able or unacceptable, and that the options be ranked in order of ethical prefer­
ability. It also requested that each option be rated as either legally acceptable 
or unacceptable, and that the options be ranked in order of legal preferability.
In case 2, we also asked whether the respondent would have changed their 
ratings or rankings of the options if the child did not have Down syndrome.
We searched our data for evidence to support the several possible expla­
nations for the ethics gap cited above. If surgeons ascribe less importance to 
ethical considerations than internists do, or feel alienated from contemporary 
biomedical discourse, they perhaps would have not responded to the survey 
as frequently as others, so we measured the response rate to the survey. If sur­
geons fail to recognize ethical problems because they are more paternalistic 
than other physicians, then their responses should reflect more authoritarian 
attitudes than those of other physicians. We, therefore, combined two options 
as authoritarian (willingness to treat over parents’ objections, and seeking 
a court order to override the parents) and two options as nonauthoritarian 
(willingness to accept parents’ decision to withdraw treatment or transfer­
ring the patient to another physician who was willing to withdraw treatment). 
We then compared the most highly ranked options of surgeons with those of 
other physicians to determine their relative levels of authoritarian and non­
authoritarian choices. Finally, if ethical principles are so deeply ingrained 
in surgeons that their discussion seems redundant, there should be more 

	
22	
The Ethics of Surgery
agreement in choice of options among surgeons than among other specialty 
groups. We measured this by recording the proportion of physicians in each 
specialty who agreed on the acceptability of each ethical option. [. . .]
Results
The survey was mailed to 407 faculty physicians, and 133 (33%) responded. 
Responses were grouped into surgery (including all surgical specialties), 
internal medicine (including all medical specialties), pediatrics, and oth­
ers (eg, pathologists, radiologists). For interspecialty comparisons, only the 
surgeons, internists, and pediatricians had sufficient numbers for statistical 
comparison. The response rates for those groups were: surgeons, 31 of 74 
(42%); pediatricians, 18 of 44 (41%); and internists, 51 of 173 (29%); surgeons’ 
response rate was significantly higher than that of internists (p < 0.05).
ETHICAL RESPONSES
Many faculty members mistakenly believed it to be ethically acceptable 
to override the wishes of the parents (case 1, 88 of 132, 67%; case 2, 57 of 
132, 42%). That ethically unacceptable option was ranked as the first choice 
among all options by 33 of 133 (26%) of faculty members. Every commentator 
on ethical standards for treatment of disabled individuals has held that dis­
ability, including mental disability, should not be the sole grounds for making 
treatment withdrawal decisions. Nevertheless, 44 of 115 (38%) faculty mem­
bers would have made a different treatment decision if Down syndrome had 
not been present in case 2.
When we compared the specialties for their ethical choices, surgeons did 
not either rate or rank any ethical option differently from either internists or 
pediatricians.
Authoritarian responses were ranked the first choice more often by pedi­
atricians (9 of 18, 50%) than by surgeons (3 of 28, 11%) or internists (11 of 51, 
22%) (p < 0.05). The survey revealed uniformity of ethical views among the 
three groups: no differences were detected in the proportion of identical rat­
ings of options by surgeons (76%), internists (74%), and pediatricians (71%).
LEGAL RESPONSES
Among the general faculty, the only legally imprudent response, to continue 
treatment over the objections of the parents, was mistakenly believed to be 
legally prudent in case 1 by 73% of our faculty, and, in case 2, by 39%. It is 
legally unacceptable to treat children with Down syndrome differently from 
other children, yet 44 of 115 (38%) of our faculty would have treated case 2 
 
 
 
 

	
Ethics Gap in Surgery	
23
differently if Down syndrome had not been present; there were no differences 
among specialties.
Several differences appeared when comparing the legal responses of spe­
cialty groups. Pediatricians (61%) were less likely than surgeons (84%) and 
internists (85%) to recognize that it was legally acceptable to discontinue 
feeding at the parents’ request in case 1 (p < 0.05). Pediatricians (78%) were 
also less likely than surgeons (92%) and internists (98%) to recognize in case 
2 that challenging the parents in court was legally acceptable (p < 0.05). 
Surgeons (19 of 31, 62%), however, were more likely than internists (18 of 51, 
35%) or pediatricians (4 of 18, 22%) to believe, mistakenly, that operating on 
the baby in case 2 without parental consent was legally acceptable (p < 0.05).
AGE AND GENDER
Univariate and multivariate analyses showed no difference in any ethical or 
legal measure by gender (male 5 = 98, female 5 = 25) and only two differences 
by seniority. By multivariate analysis, senior faculty members were more 
likely than junior faculty members to mistakenly rate discontinuing feeding 
in case 1 as ethically unacceptable (10 of 51 [20%] vs. 9 of 82 [11%], respec­
tively, p < 0.05). Senior faculty members were also ethically more authoritar­
ian than junior faculty members (23 of 51 [45%] vs 21 of 82 [26%] in case 1, and 
17 of 51 [34%] vs 14 of 82 [17%] in case 2, respectively, both p < 0.05).
Comment
The surgical literature contains fewer discussions of ethical issues than the 
medical literature. Moreover, in searching for official positions taken by a 
wide range of medical organizations on surrogate decision making, we found 
only one by a surgical society, the American Academy of Otolaryngology, 
and five by other medical organizations. These facts speak to a paucity of eth­
ical discourse among surgeons. We chose to limit this pilot study to a single 
type of ethical issue, surrogate decision making, because we have observed 
substantial differences and vehemently held positions on this topic in our 
institution.
Our main objective was to elucidate the reasons for the surgery ethics 
gap. Several authors have speculated on causes of the gap, but no specula­
tion was confirmed by this survey. Within the limits of our study, the high 
rate of response to the survey by surgeons suggests that they consider ethical 
deliberation to be as important as do other specialists, and that they are not 
alienated from ethical discourse. Surgeons may be no more paternalistic than 
others, because they chose authoritarian options no more often; in fact, pedi­
atricians gave priority ranking to authoritarian options more often than did 
 
 

	
24	
The Ethics of Surgery
either surgeons or internists. The speculation that discussion of ethics may 
seem redundant to surgeons because ethical principles are deeply ingrained 
in surgeons through training and practice seems undermined by our finding 
that surgeons do not agree with each other on rating of options any more 
often than do other specialists. Thus, we are left with no clear explanation of 
the ethics gap in surgery.
Comparisons of the specialists for their ratings of legal acceptability of 
the options revealed an interesting finding. Pediatricians were less likely than 
either internists or surgeons to recognize the legal acceptability of discon­
tinuing feeding the newborn at the parents’ request, and the acceptability 
of challenging the parents’ decision to discontinue feeding their daughter. 
Perhaps most surprising, however, was the finding that surgeons were the 
most likely, by a large margin, to believe that operating on the baby without 
parental consent was legally prudent. This observation may flag an impor­
tant educational problem for all faculty, particularly surgeons.
The survey provides interesting insights into the way our general fac­
ulty understands ethical and legal issues in surrogate decision making. 
Surprisingly often, faculty members mistakenly rated as acceptable the ethi­
cally unacceptable and legally imprudent option to override the wishes of 
the parents in both cases. Indeed, this unacceptable option was ranked as 
the first choice of more than a quarter of the responding faculty. Finally, it 
is clear that using mental disability as a factor in clinical decision making is 
both ethically and legally unacceptable; yet, a third of our faculty would have 
changed their choices among the options if the newborn did not have Down 
syndrome. These observations may flag additional educational needs for all 
faculty members.
It was interesting, though perhaps not surprising, that senior faculty 
were more authoritarian in their choices than junior faculty. This may be a 
reflection of the trend in recent decades toward increasing recognition of the 
importance of patients’ exercise of autonomy in making clinical decisions. 
The training of older physicians took place before 1978, when physician 
authority over most clinical decisions was only beginning to wane. Younger 
physicians were trained in an era when patient autonomy had taken hold 
more securely in clinical decision making.
This pilot study has several shortcomings. The population we studied was 
small, and the 33% of our faculty who responded may not have been represen­
tative of the entire group. Moreover, the cases we presented narrowly focused 
on a single area of bioethics, decisions for incapacitated patients. Other areas 
of potential ethical conflict may have produced greater differences in choices 
by specialty groups. The precise form of the cases we presented and the ques­
tions we asked may have had some ambiguities, lending uncertainty to some 
responses. Finally, the study was a pilot, so the format was not designed to 

	
Ethics Gap in Surgery	
25
elicit the respondents’ reasoning underlying their choices, which might have 
helped to explain our findings better.
We suggest, however, that more detailed studies that avoid these short­
comings are needed, because it is incumbent on us to understand the reasons 
for the ethics gap. Surgeons have a strong sense of personal responsibility 
for patients’ welfare, and it is important that this ethic be transmitted to 
medical students and residents. This goal can be addressed in many ways, 
but one route certainly is to discuss and write about ethics more than we 
do. Moreover, our analysis of the legal aspects of the survey suggests that 
physicians have important lapses in their understanding of legal obligations. 
Perhaps more importantly, the results suggest that a significant gap may also 
exist between surgeons and other physicians in understanding health law.
References
	 1.	 Paola F, Barton SS. An “ethics gap” in writing about bioethics: a quantitative com­
parison of the medical and surgical literature. J Med Ethics. 1995;21:84–8.
	 2.	 Jonsen AR, Siegler M, Winslade WJ. Clinical Ethics, 3rd ed. New  York:   
McGraw-Hill;1992:37–84.
	 3.	 Schenk WG, Jr. Is there a surgical personality? Curr Surg. 1988;45:1.
	 4.	 Zimny GH, Thale TR. Specialty choice and attitudes toward medical specialties. 
Soc Sci Med. 1970;4:257–64.
	 5.	 Lytle G. Surgical education—an ethics gap? Focus on Surg Educ. 1996;13:22.
	 6.	 American Thoracic Society Bioethics Task Force. Withholding and withdrawing 
life-sustaining therapy. Am Rev Resp Dis. 1991;144:726–31.
	 7.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Code of Medical Ethics: current opinions 
with annotations. Chicago: American Medical Association; 1997.
	 8.	 American College of Physicians. American College of Physicians Ethics Manual, 
Third Edition. Ann Intern Med. 1992; 117:947–60.
	 9.	 Ethics Committee of the Society of Critical Care Medicine. Consensus statement of 
the Society of Critical Care Medicine’s Ethics Committee regarding futile and other 
possibly inadvisable treatments. Crit Care Med. 1997;25:887–91.
	10.	 Ethics Committee of the American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck 
Surgery. Chapter  2:  Patient rights and surrogacy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1996;115:186–90.
	11.	 Committee on Bioethics, American Academy of Pediatrics. Ethics and the care of 
critically ill infants and children. Pediatrics. 1996;98:149–52.
 

26
2
Ethics in Cardiothoracic Surgery
A SURVEY OF SURGEONS’ VIEWS
Thomas A. D’Amico, Martin F. McKneally, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Before 2000, topics in medical ethics were discussed or mentioned far less often 
in the surgical than in the medical literature and appeared less often in surgical 
than in medical meeting programs.1 The source of this difference was not clear, 
but it seemed reasonable to conclude that increasing the frequency of ethics 
discourse among cardiothoracic surgeons could add value to the overall educa­
tional efforts of our cardiothoracic organizations. [. . .]
The Ethics Forum’s [. . .] educational efforts have taken the form of debates 
and other presentations at annual meetings and publication of the presenta­
tions as well as editorial commentaries in the official journals of the two orga­
nizations, The Annals of Thoracic Surgery (ATS) and the Journal of Thoracic 
and Cardiovascular Surgery (JTCVS). The effectiveness of these various efforts 
has been unknown, yet understanding their effects on cardiothoracic surgeons 
and their practices would be helpful in determining how valuable they have 
been and how they might be improved in the future. A survey of the views of 
cardiothoracic surgeons was therefore undertaken.
Material and Methods
A 17-question survey was developed to assess the effects of the Ethics Forum’s 
educational agenda on its target audience, cardiothoracic surgeons, and to 
seek guidance in developing future projects for ethics education. The survey 
* D’Amico TA, McKneally MF, Sade RM. Ethics in cardiothoracic surgery: a survey of sur­
geons’ views. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(1):11–3. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, repub­
lished here with permission.
 
 
 
 

	
Ethics in Cardiothoracic Surgery	
27
contained questions related to ethics presentations at annual meetings and 
publications in ATS (32 articles in the last 5 years) and JTCVS (14 articles 
in the last 5 years). In addition, the survey sought views on inclusion of eth­
ics education in training programs, board certification, and maintenance of 
certification. The membership of the STS and the AATS, including senior and 
international members, was contacted by sending the survey by electronic mail 
to the STS membership list (3,705 cardiothoracic surgeons), which includes 
nearly all members of the AATS. Three weeks after the initial distribution of 
the survey, we sent a second request for response to the survey instrument.
Results
Responses to the survey were returned by 578 of 3,705 surgeons (15.6%). 
The distribution of time in practice ranged from 16% in practice less than 
10 years to 34% in practice 25 years or more. Among the respondents, 92% 
were in clinical practice (academic 55%, and private 37%). Most respondents 
endorsed the importance of ethics education and improved understanding 
of complex ethical issues in cardiothoracic surgery; 69% agreed that their 
own practices would be improved by such education, and 83% believed that 
cardiothoracic surgeons in general would benefit. In addition, 61% of respon­
dents believed that demonstration of an adequate understanding of ethical 
issues should be part of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) 
initial certification process, and 60% believed that it should also be included 
in the ABTS maintenance of certification process.
In the last 5 years, 66% of respondents attended at least two STS annual 
meetings and 68% attended at least one AATS annual meeting. Of those 
who attended national meetings, 51% attended at least one cardiothoracic 
surgery-related ethics session. Among those who attended none of the ses­
sions the reasons for not attending were scheduling conflicts (46%) and not 
knowing that the sessions were available (29%). Among those who attended 
one or more of the ethics sessions, 64% agreed or strongly agreed that the 
sessions improved their understanding of ethical issues in cardiothoracic sur­
gery, 32% were neutral, and only 4% disagreed. In addition, 79% confirmed 
that the debate format is an effective educational format, and only 10% stated 
that the sessions did not affect their practices.
Of the 32 ethics-related articles that have been published in ATS since 
2004, 88% of the respondents read at least one and 33% read eight or more. 
Of the 14 ethics articles that have been published in JTCVS since 2004, 74% 
read at least one and 17% read six or more.
The final survey item requested suggestions for topics to be presented or 
discussed at ethics sessions at meetings or journal articles—159 individual 
suggestions were provided.
 

	
28	
The Ethics of Surgery
Comment
Ethics education for physicians has attracted considerable attention in 
recent years:  curricula in medical schools focus increasingly on ethi­
cal issues, and the number of medical schools offering formal education 
in medical ethics grows.2 However, the content, method and timing vary 
substantially, suggesting a lack of consensus about the optimal educational 
process.3 Including surgery-specific ethics modules within the medical stu­
dent surgery rotation has been reported, but adding ethics education to an 
already crowded and demanding curriculum might be difficult to general­
ize to other programs.4 In addition, a recent review of the literature found 
that ethics education for surgical residents is valuable, but that the timing, 
methods and content of ethics education and training for residents is still a 
matter of debate.5
The role of ethics education specifically in cardiothoracic surgery has not 
been studied, to our knowledge. Ethics topics are not included in the weekly 
curriculum established by the Thoracic Surgical Directors Association 
(TSDA), an 88-week comprehensive teaching schedule that constitutes 
the didactic framework for many training programs in thoracic surgery.6 
Moreover, demonstration of an adequate fund of knowledge regarding com­
plex ethical issues is not required on the ABTS qualifying examination, certi­
fying examination, or maintenance of certification process.
The practice of cardiothoracic surgery, however, requires a sound fund 
of knowledge and judgment about ethical challenges. A substantial number 
of such challenges arise in cardiothoracic surgical practice, a pattern that 
was not well represented in the surgical literature before 2000. The Ethics 
Forum identified numerous contentious issues for debate or discussion at car­
diothoracic meetings and in cardiothoracic journals every year over the last 
10 years. There have been 34 such sessions at meetings from November 1999 
through November 2009, and 48 ethics-related papers have been published in 
ATS and JTCVS from 2000 through 2009. (There is a link to lists of oral ses­
sions and papers in the online version of this article.) The present survey was 
conducted to evaluate the effect of these educational efforts, but the survey 
was limited to recollections about the last 5 years because of concerns about 
diminishing reliability of memory with increasing chronologic distance from 
an event.
The distribution of practice duration among respondents corresponds 
roughly to the age distribution of cardiothoracic surgeons in the most recent 
cardiothoracic surgical manpower report,7 so the responding sample of the 
survey appears to be fairly representative of cardiothoracic surgeons as a 
whole with respect to time in practice and age.
A majority of respondents endorsed the importance of education and 
improved understanding of complex ethical issues in cardiothoracic surgery. 
 

	
Ethics in Cardiothoracic Surgery	
29
This finding may be flawed by selection bias, however, because surgeons who 
are interested in ethics may be more likely to respond to an ethics survey 
than those who are less interested. The discrepancy between the number of 
surgeons who thought their own practices would be improved by ethics edu­
cation (69%) and the number who believed that cardiothoracic surgeons in 
general would benefit (83%) suggests that some surgeons are either unaware 
of their own deficiencies or underestimate the knowledge base of others.
The ABTS certification and maintenance of certification processes have 
not included formal evaluation of knowledge or understanding of concepts in 
ethics, yet a substantial majority of respondents asserted that both processes 
should require demonstration of an adequate understanding of ethical issues 
in cardiothoracic surgery. Perhaps the ABTS should consider adding such an 
evaluation to certification processes.
The Ethics Forum sessions at the STS annual meeting have taken place 
at a consistent time for the past 4 years: the lunch break on Tuesday of the 
meeting. Because lunch is available for a fee of $25, registration for the ses­
sion has been required, so numbers of registrants for those sessions are avail­
able: 94, 106, 86, and 147 attended in 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, respectively. 
The majority of respondents have attended at least one of the previous 5 STS 
and AATS annual meetings, and 51% of those who attended these meetings 
attended a cardiothoracic surgery-related ethics session. Of those, a clear 
majority agreed that the sessions improved their understanding of ethical 
issues; nearly 80% confirmed that the debate format is a valuable educational 
format, and only 10% believed that the sessions did not affect their practices. 
The ethics presentations at annual meetings seem to be perceived as educa­
tionally effective.
Of those who attended no ethics sessions, 46% cited scheduling conflicts 
as the reason they did not attend. The ethics debates at STS meetings are held 
during lunch, so it may be difficult to find an hour that is more convenient. 
However, because 29% did not know that the sessions were available and in 
view of the generally positive response to the value of the sessions, it seems 
reasonable to increase the publicity about ethics sessions in communications 
regarding meeting programs.
A large majority of respondents read one or more of the articles in ATS 
and one or more of the articles in JTCVS, and a significant minority read 
most of the articles in both journals. This suggests that published articles 
on ethical topics can provide an enduring educational experience, especially 
because the articles in ATS and JTCVS are available to all the members of the 
STS and AATS, respectively.
The most serious flaw of this survey is the relatively low response rate 
(15.6%). This rate is consistent with response rates to previous surveys of 
the STS membership, but generalization of the survey findings is neverthe­
less questionable. Still, the Ethics Forum has reason to be encouraged by the 

	
30	
The Ethics of Surgery
results, because they provide some indication that its efforts to bring contro­
versial topics from the domain of medical ethics to the attention of cardiotho­
racic surgeons have had at least some beneficial effect and at best substantial 
influence on improving cardiothoracic surgical practice. [. . .]
References
	 1.	 Sade RM, Williams T, Haney C, Perlman D, Stroud M. The ethics gap in surgery. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69:326–9.
	 2.	 Lehman LS, Kassoff WS, Koch P, Federman DD. A survey of medical ethics educa­
tion at U.S. and Canadian medical schools. Acad Med. 2004;79:682–9.
	 3.	 Eckles RE, Meslin EM, Gaffney M, Helft PR. Medical ethics education: Where are 
we? Where should be going? A review. Acad Med. 2005;80:1143–52.
	 4.	 Giligorov N, Newell P, Altilio J, et al. Dilemmas in surgery: medical ethics educa­
tion in surgery rotation. Mt Sinai J Med. 2009;76:297–302.
	 5.	 Helft PR, Eckles RE, Torbeck L. Ethics education in surgical residency: a review of 
the literature. J Surg Educ. 2009;66:35–42.
	 6.	 TSDA weekly curricula. Chicago: Thoracic Surgery Directors Association. http://
www.tsda.org/documents/PDF/weekly_curricula/Curricula%20Docs/88_Week_
Curriculum_Topics.09-1. Accessed September 20, 2009.
	 7.	 Shemin RJ, Dziuban SW, Kaiser LR, et al. Thoracic surgery workforce: snapshot 
at the end of the twentieth century and implications for the new millennium. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2002; 73:2014–32.
 

SECTION 2
Professional Integrity
Robert M. Sade
It’s not what we eat but what we digest that makes us strong; 
not what we gain but what we save that makes us rich; not what 
we read but what we remember that makes us learned; and not 
what we profess but what we practice that gives us integrity.
—Francis Bacon (1561–1626)
Most people believe that integrity is synonymous with honesty—
indeed, some dictionaries list the two words as synonyms. They are not 
synonymous, however. Consider the individual who is caught shoplifting and 
who readily admits that he took the product simply because he needed it 
and could not afford to pay for it, even though he knew and believed that 
shoplifting is wrong. That person certainly is honest, but does he have 
integrity? Clearly, he does not, so how are we to understand the meaning of 
this word?
The root of the word is from the Latin adjective integer, meaning whole 
or complete. In the context of ethics, the wholeness referred to is the single 
nature of one’s beliefs and one’s actions.
Consider the meaning of an antonym of integrity, hypocrisy, which 
generally denotes behavior that is inconsistent with one’s beliefs. Our 
shoplifter is honest, but he is hypocritical because his beliefs and his 
actions are contradictory. Integrity is the opposite of this—it means acting 
in ways that are consistent with one’s beliefs. This idea defines personal 
integrity, but how might it be related to professional integrity?
In medicine, the term “professional integrity” refers to physicians 
making choices and acting in a manner that is consistent with medicine’s 
professed principles.
 
 

	
32	
The Ethics of Surgery
A profession is a vocation that requires a certain degree of special 
knowledge and skill, and professionals are those who pursue that vocation 
while “professing” commitment to the ideals and principles developed by 
the profession itself. The classical professions from ancient times are 
medicine, theology, and jurisprudence, each of which has its own standards 
of acceptable activities that are often expressed in a code of ethics. In 
contemporary medicine, many medical societies, including many surgical 
specialty societies, have adopted codes of ethics, and the one most widely 
cited by state licensure boards and courts of law in determining standards 
for ethical behavior of physicians is the American Medical Association’s 
Code of Medical Ethics. The Code’s Principles are encapsulated on a single 
page,1 while the interpretation and practical application of those principles 
require a 500-page book.2 In describing professional behavior, the Principles 
identify such characteristics as honesty, respect for human dignity and 
rights, maintaining competence, safeguarding confidences and privacy, 
commitment to lifelong education and training, and respect for the law.
The Ethics Forum has addressed several topics related to professional 
integrity, including various aspects of honesty in dealing with patients 
and colleagues, such as honest assessment of personal limitations, 
responsibility to society, and responsibilities to the legal system. The 
papers in this section address issues related to honesty as the paramount 
characteristic of professional integrity, obligations to patients when 
temporarily impaired, responsibilities for personal wellness, and obligations 
within the legal system.
Chapters
Chapter 3 is an essay rather than a debate. In it, I describe the history of 
honesty in medicine, starting with the Hippocratic instruction to physicians 
(deceive patients by withholding information that might be harmful to them) 
progressing to the relatively recent adoption of standards of honesty in all 
dealings with patients.3 The newest form of dishonesty among physicians is 
a practice that has become widely accepted since the advent of managed 
care three decades ago: deceiving insurance companies in order to 
benefit patients. In this essay, I suggest that the motivation driving these 
deceptions is not purely the benefit of patients but also the benefit of 
physicians and the institutions in which they work. Indeed, lying to insurance 
companies is associated with several problems, including harms to the 
patient, the insurance industry, society, and, not least, the physicians 
themselves.
The vignette associated with ­chapter 4 describes a resident who 
innocently acquires infection with hepatitis C virus.4 He spends a year in 
treatment and recovery, and ultimately the infectious diseases consultants 
 

	
Section 2	
33
declare that his viral titer is so low that he poses no more risk to patients 
than uninfected surgeons. He fully resumes his clinical responsibilities. 
When he finishes his training program, he applies for positions as a 
surgeon, placing his program director in a difficult position. He must write 
letters of recommendation that could include mention of the resident’s year-
long leave of absence and the reason for it; however, the stigma of HCV 
infection could sharply limit willingness to hire him. Does honesty require 
the director to report this aspect of his resident’s background?
Competition between medical centers has intensified in recent 
decades, leading to ethical dilemmas around the requirements for 
disclosure during the informed-consent process. The question of how 
much to disclose to a patient always arises in consent discussions, but 
an increasingly common problem is whether to tell a patient about a 
new technology that might be his or her best option but is available only 
at a competitor’s institution. Is a surgeon ethically required to disclose 
the existence of the technology and, if requested, refer the patient to a 
competitor? That is the dilemma facing the surgeon in ­chapter 5, when a 
new device for percutaneous repair of a mitral valve is not available in his 
own practice.5
Chapter 6 addresses the imposition of the eighty-hour work week on 
graduate medical education over a decade ago; since then, controversy 
has surrounded the question of whether this limitation is appropriate for 
surgeons in training. Convincing arguments are made that the lives of all 
physicians, including surgeons, would be improved if a better balance were 
reached between work and leisure. It is argued to the contrary, however, 
that the special nature of surgery renders imposing time constraints on the 
availability of surgeons for their patients inappropriate; such constraints are 
counterproductive in the long run.7
Fatigue from lack of sleep impairs performance; this has been well 
documented in laboratory and clinical studies and was an important 
reason for the introduction of the eighty-hour work week for house officers. 
The facts of sleep-induced impairment recently have been marshaled to 
propose that attending surgeons be mandated to report lack of sleep 
and the possibility of impairment to patients who are about to undergo 
an operation. After a new informed-consent process, the patient must 
decide whether the surgeon should go ahead with the operation, cancel 
the operation, or ask another surgeon to do the procedure. Chapter 7 
presents a debate about the wisdom of this proposal.8 The essayists 
are the sleep physiologist-neurologist who proposed the process and a 
senior officer of the American College of Surgeons who opposes it. In 
response to the neurologist’s position, the surgeon does not challenge the 
data but argues that consent of the patient is the wrong solution to the 
problems of sleep deprivation. Many factors in addition to sleep influence a 

	
34	
The Ethics of Surgery
surgeon’s performance, and it would be impractical and unwise to attempt 
reporting them all to patients. It should be left to the surgeon, as a matter 
of professional integrity and responsibility, to weigh the advisability of 
operating rather than burdening the patient with such a decision at a time 
when he or she is highly vulnerable, immediately prior to an operation.
Chapter 8 addresses a distinguishing feature of American medicine: the 
profound influence of malpractice litigation on medical practice.9 Physicians 
who are sued for negligence face great expense and emotional turmoil in 
defending themselves and their reputations in a legal process that is likely 
to extend over several years. The threat of lawsuits has resulted, among 
other things, in defensive medicine, which is very costly and inappropriate, 
exposing patients to risks of diagnostic procedures they may not need. An 
outcome of this national litigious atmosphere is great antipathy by many 
physicians toward the trial bar—the attorneys who pursue malpractice 
suits against physicians. Physicians are generally willing to testify as expert 
witnesses in malpractice litigation, but because of antagonism toward 
plaintiff’s attorneys, many of them feel strongly that they will testify only 
in the defense of physicians who are sued. Yet substantial ethical opinion 
suggests that physicians who are willing to testify for defendants should 
be equally willing to testify for plaintiffs. Two surgeons who have special 
interest and backgrounds in legal issues debate the question of whether 
there is an ethical obligation to testify for plaintiffs as well as defendants.
References
	1.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Principles of medical ethics. Code 
of Medical Ethics of the American Medical Association, 2014–2015 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 2014:xv.
	2.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Principles of medical ethics. Code 
of Medical Ethics of the American Medical Association, 2014–2015 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 2014.
	3.	 Sade RM. Deceiving insurance companies: New expression of an ancient tra­
dition. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72:1449–53.
	4.	 Dresler CM, Kent MS, Whyte R, Sade RM. HCV infected resident: end of resi­
dency, end of career? Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(3):779–86.
	5.	 Skipper ER, Accola KD, Sade RM. Must surgeons tell mitral valve repair can­
didates about a new percutaneous repair device that is only available else­
where? Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92(4):1163–9.
	6.	 Kouchoukos NT, Cohn LH, Sade RM. Are surgeons ethically obligated to refer 
patients to other surgeons who achieve better results? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;77:757–60.
	7.	 Dickey J, Ungerleider RM, Coselli JS, Conklin LD, Sade RM. The surgeon’s 
work ethic in transition: should surgeons spend more time outside the hospi­
tal? Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:1145–51.
 
 

	
Section 2	
35
	8.	 Czeisler CA, Pellegrini CA, Sade RM. Should sleep-deprived surgeons be 
prohibited from operating without patients’ consent? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95(2):757–66.
	9.	 Watson DC, Jr, Robicsek F, Sade RM. Are thoracic surgeons ethically obli­
gated to serve as expert witnesses for the plaintiff? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;78:1137–41.


37
3
Deceiving Insurance Companies
NEW EXPRESSION OF AN ANCIENT TRADITION
Robert M. Sade*
Perform these duties calmly and adroitly, concealing most 
things from the patient while you are attending to him  . . . 
revealing nothing of the patient’s future or present condition.
—Hippocrates of Cos (460–377 BC)
Two divergent threads of thought regarding truth telling have persisted since 
ancient times. Examples taken from Plato and Aristotle may illustrate this 
dichotomy, although ideas from elsewhere in their writings suggest that their 
views were not as opposed as these excerpts suggest. Plato held that lying in 
general is to be avoided, but with certain exceptions. “The lie in words is in 
certain cases useful and not hateful, in dealing with enemies—that would be 
an instance, or again when those who we call our friends in a fit of madness or 
illusion are going to do some harm, then it is useful and is a sort of medicine 
or preventive.”1 In fact, the ideal society Plato describes in the Republic is a 
fabric woven from lies told to ordinary citizens by philosopher-kings, who 
alone are capable of understanding truth.
Aristotle, however, is most concerned with the effects of lying on per­
sonal character:
[The truthful person] is truthful both in what he says and how he lives 
simply because that is his state of character. Someone with this charac­
ter seems to be a decent person. For a lover of the truth, who is truthful 
even when nothing is at stake will be still keener to tell the truth when 
something is at stake, since he will avoid falsehood as shameful when 
something is at stake, having already avoided it in itself when nothing 
was at stake. And this sort of person is praiseworthy.2
* Sade RM. Deceiving insurance companies:  new expression of an ancient tradition. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2001;72:1449–53. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with 
permission.
 
 
 

	
38	
The Ethics of Surgery
According to Aristotle, lying undermines character and, in the long 
term, makes achievement of the good life more difficult.
Over the centuries since ancient times, these two approaches—Platonic 
justification of some deception for short-term gain and Aristotelian insis­
tence on honesty to make possible long-term goals—have each had advocates 
among philosophers and theologians. Nearly all have generally supported 
telling the truth, but a dichotomy has persisted between those who maintain 
that deception and lying are always or nearly always wrong and those who 
find frequent exceptions to this requirement. This dichotomy persists today 
in the debate over how best to respond to denial of payment by insurance 
companies in contemporary health care.
Deception in Medicine, Recent Shift to Honesty
For purposes of this discussion, I distinguish between deceiving and lying, 
after Sissela Bok: To deceive is to communicate messages intended to make 
others believe something the deceiver does not believe to be true, including 
omission of relevant information. To lie is to speak or write an intentionally 
deceptive message. Thus, lying is a subtype of deception.3
The use of deception by physicians has deep roots. The tradition of 
deceiving patients “for their own good” was well established in ancient 
times, as noted above, and remained integral to medical practice until the 
latter part of the 20th century. Gradually over the last several decades, 
traditional practices of deceiving patients with the intent to reduce their 
suffering has given way to attitudes of truth telling to facilitate patients’ 
self-determination. New emphasis on respect for patient self-determination 
in this country has led to a level of truthfulness not seen before in dealing 
with patients.
This trend is reflected in the American Medical Association (AMA) 
code of medical ethics. When the code was first written in 1847, based 
largely on Thomas Percival’s earlier writing (1803), deception was generally 
accepted: “The life of a sick person can be shortened not only by the act, but 
also by the words or manner of a physician. It is, therefore, a sacred duty to 
guard himself carefully in this respect, and to avoid all things which have 
tendency to discourage the patient and depress his spirits.”4 This exhortation 
to avoid the harmful effect of words on patients in the AMA’s first ethical 
code, reminiscent of the Hippocratic view expressed in the epigraph above, is 
absent from the current strongly worded principles of medical ethics, adopted 
by the AMA in 1980: “A physician shall deal honestly with patients and col­
leagues. . . .”5 This principle is developed further in opinion 8.12:  “Patients 
have a right to know their past and present medical status and to be free 
of any mistaken beliefs concerning their conditions.”6 This opinion also 
 

	
Deceiving Insurance Companies	
39
contains a specific warning that acting for personal protection should not 
override honesty: “Concern regarding legal liability . . . should not affect the 
physician’s honesty with the patient.” This view is a considerable departure 
from the Hippocratic and early AMA view of deception.
These guidelines reflect, to some extent, the realities of recent medical 
practice. For example, a survey in 1961 asked physicians whether cancer 
patients should or should not be told that they have cancer; 88% thought they 
should not be told.7 By 1979, a striking shift had occurred: a survey using 
questions nearly identical to those of the earlier study found that 98% of phy­
sicians believed patients should be told they have cancer.8
The New Deception: Lying to Insurance Companies
Despite this recent apparent change in attitude toward telling patients the 
truth, a new manifestation of deceit in medicine has appeared recently: mis­
representation of patient information to insurance companies. Consider the 
following case:
A 60-year-old man has severe emphysema for which no treatment other 
than an operation for lung volume reduction is beneficial. This rela­
tively new operation is considered experimental, is being studied under a 
National Institutes of Health protocol, and is not covered by the patient’s 
private insurance policy. The attending surgeon completes the required 
operation, and asks the surgical resident who assisted during the opera­
tion to dictate the operative note. The surgeon asks the resident not to 
use the term “lung volume reduction,” but to stress the few blebs seen on 
the surface of the lung, naming the operation “resection of emphysema­
tous blebs.” The resident initially hesitates, and the attending surgeon 
angrily states, “Well, then, I’ll dictate it myself!” On discussing this inci­
dent with colleagues, the resident is surprised to learn that some attend­
ing surgeons usually dictate their own operative notes in order to assure 
that no statements are made or operative procedures recorded that might 
result in denial of insurance coverage. On occasion, the resident is told, 
some surgeons alter an admission diagnosis to gain insurance coverage 
for their patients. The resident wonders how long it will take to learn all 
these tricks of the trade.
The practice of lying to insurance companies appears to be widespread 
among physicians. A  recent survey asked internists whether they would 
support a fellow physician who deceived a third-party payor to secure cov­
erage for a specified group of services. The physician would not gain from 
the transaction. The proportion of physicians who approved of such decep­
tion varied according to the perceived severity of threat to the patient if a 
 

	
40	
The Ethics of Surgery
service were denied: for example, coronary bypass operation (58%), arte­
rial revascularization (56%), mammography (48%), emergency psychiatric 
referral (32%), and cosmetic rhinoplasty (3%).9 In another study, 70% of 
physicians admitted that they would choose to misrepresent a patient’s 
symptoms in order to convince an insurance company to fund a rou­
tine mammogram, if the company would otherwise refuse to pay for the 
procedure.10
In a third study, when asked why they miscode, many physicians reported 
that they consider doing so is necessary to “provide high-quality health care 
today.”11 Participants in these studies were most likely to approve of decep­
tion when the condition was life threatening, and approval was related to the 
clinical severity of the condition. This finding suggests that study participants 
were not likely to choose miscoding as a first option, but that they would do 
so if they believed that serious harm would result to the patient if coverage 
were denied. Rates of willingness to miscode decline for palliative care and 
sink even lower for diagnostic procedures. In each of these situations, there 
are more options for care, less urgency to provide the care immediately, and 
more time available to pursue an appeal. Few physicians were willing to mis­
code to secure cosmetic procedures for their patients, suggesting that their 
willingness to deceive does not extend to serving a patient’s vanity. Most phy­
sicians who advocated miscoding in at least one of the vignettes also reported 
feeling torn between their professional obligation to act as an advocate for 
their patients, and their contractual obligations to preserve the integrity of 
the insurance system.
The data from these studies are consistent with the view that physicians 
miscode because they are committed to acting as advocates for their patients. 
On this view, miscoding only manipulates a tool, insurance coverage, to pro­
mote the well-being of patients.
The Insurance Company as the Enemy
The AMA code of medical ethics advocates dealing honestly with patients 
and colleagues, as noted above. The code, however, goes further than 
this, extending the principle of honesty to dealing with insurance compa­
nies: “Physicians shall make no intentional misrepresentation to increase the 
level of payment they receive or to secure noncovered health benefits for their 
patients.”12 Truth telling is clearly held in high regard by many ethicists. Why, 
then, as pointed out in the studies cited previously, are physicians generally so 
willing to deceive insurance companies? For Plato, some lies are justified for 
their immediate practical benefits. He gave the example of the utility of lying 
to an enemy. In Platonic terms, many believe that insurance companies of 
modern times have become the enemy, so, according to this line of reasoning, 
 

	
Deceiving Insurance Companies	
41
deceiving them is fully warranted. They are the enemy because they prevent 
the patient from receiving needed care, which the physician is morally obli­
gated to ensure the patient will receive.
Is the insurance company truly the enemy? The flaws, inefficiencies, 
and perversities of our current health care financing system make this belief 
appear to be true.13 Health insurance for most residents of the United States 
is obtained through their employers, largely because of public policy devel­
oped over the last several decades. Health insurance is tax deductible, and 
therefore substantially less expensive when purchased by an employer than 
when purchased by an individual. The employer, however, is acting as the 
patient’s agent. When a health insurance policy is purchased, patients or 
their agents (the employers) choose a policy based in part on higher or lower 
cost. Lower premiums are generally associated with fewer or less costly ben­
efits. Employers tend to choose policies that are less expensive because of the 
financial savings to them. Employees are free to buy a more comprehensive 
health insurance policy on their own, but seldom do so because of the large 
additional financial burden. They almost always choose instead to accept the 
insurance selected and purchased for them by their employer. Thus, when an 
insurance company denies payment for a procedure because it is not covered, 
patients are getting what they (or their agent) have paid for.
Some argue that insurance companies use deceptive practices in sell­
ing policies or keep details of coverage purposely vague, so purchasers do 
not really know the precise terms of their insurance coverage. On this view, 
patients should not be held rigidly to seemingly arbitrary decisions of their 
insurance companies, and lying to the companies is justifiable as an antidote 
to their deceptions. There is no doubt that many companies do not reveal the 
details of covered illnesses and procedures, sometimes defending this practice 
as protecting proprietary competitive information (much as Coca-Cola keeps 
secret its formula for Coke). Some may even engage in corporately sanctioned 
deceptive sales practices. But when an insurance company deceives purchas­
ers, there are legal remedies for fraud. When a company protects informa­
tion as proprietary, we may not like that practice, but the company is legally 
entitled to do so. We can, and do, decry such practices as reprehensible. 
Employers and employees are free to take their business elsewhere to more 
reliable companies, or to make efforts to change the insurance laws. Lying to 
the insurance company, however, does little to rectify the problem the com­
pany has created for its policy holders.
Deception Serving Self-Interest
Some kinds of deception are clearly self-serving and unrelated to benefiting 
patients, such as upcoding removal of a sternal wire to “sternal debridement,” 
 

	
42	
The Ethics of Surgery
or embellishing an incidental single suture closure of a patent foramen ovale 
by naming it “repair of atrial septal defect.” I confine my discussion here, 
however, to the morally more ambiguous case of miscoding ostensibly for the 
benefit of the patient.
It is not altogether clear when a surgeon lies to an insurance company for 
the benefit of a patient that it is his or her only motivation. The surgeon also 
stands to benefit himself or herself and his or her organizations in several 
ways. By obtaining insurance coverage for the patient, the surgeon and others 
(eg, practice partners, hospitals of affiliation) secure payment that otherwise 
would have been uncertain. Time and energy do not have to be expended in 
appealing to an insurance company. When a surgeon deceives a third party, 
the motivation may be partly to serve the interests of the patient, but also may 
be partly to serve the surgeon’s financial self-interest.
An interesting illustration of deception serving self-interest can be seen 
in the case of the resident physician being asked to dictate an operative note 
in a deceptive manner, cited above. That case was hypothetical, and I have 
used it in teaching exercises with surgery residents and attending surgeons. 
When asked if the sort of deception the case describes is acceptable, all but a 
small minority respond affirmatively. I then point out that the operation has 
already taken place, so nearly all of the benefits from the lie will accrue to 
the surgeon and the hospital, in the form of assuring payment of their bills. 
No medical benefit accrues to the patient, who has already had his operation 
(though the patient may be spared the bother of negotiating payment of the 
bill). On a second showing of hands, the consensus among the physicians 
hearing the case does not change: they still believe the deception to be accept­
able. This poll suggests that no bright line separates the perception of moral­
ity in actions that benefit patients from those that benefit physicians, at least 
for the dictation of operative notes.
Benefits and Harms of Deception
The paramount ethical consideration in the practice of clinical medicine tra­
ditionally is balancing benefits and harms.14 In evaluating a proposed action, 
benefits should outweigh harms. How does this balance play out in consider­
ing lying to insurance companies? Both short and long-term effects of decep­
tion must be considered.
In the short term, when surgeons lie to insurance companies, benefits 
accrue to both the patient and the surgeon. The patient receives an opera­
tion or service he or she might not have received if insurance coverage were 
denied, for example, if the hospital would not allow the patient to be admit­
ted without assurance of payment, which the patient cannot afford. If the 
patient would have received the operation even without coverage, he or she 
 

	
Deceiving Insurance Companies	
43
is spared the necessity of negotiating with providers to pay the bills. The sur­
geon benefits by being paid a fee, which might not have occurred without 
insurance coverage. The surgeon also avoids the inconvenience and loss of 
time an appeal to the insurance company would consume. Moreover, the sur­
geon avoids the discomfort and anger he or she might feel at having to deal 
with an adversarial insurance company. There seem to be little immediate 
harm. In the short term, benefits to both patient and surgeon appear to out­
weigh substantially the harms of lying to the insurance company. Deception 
is expedient.
But what of the long term? Does the balance of benefits and harms 
change? Long-term benefits of misrepresenting patient information include 
the patient being appropriately cared for, and the surgeon being financially 
better off. There are noteworthy long-term harms as well, however. There 
is a practical risk to the surgeon that the deception will be detected and 
therefore he or she is vulnerable to the charge of fraud (which may, in fact, 
be true), with all its social and legal consequences. Moreover, by practicing 
deception routinely, the physician undermines his or her own character and 
future wellbeing. David Hume, the 18th century philosopher, made the point 
in this way:
Honesty, fidelity, truth are praised for their immediate tendency to pro­
mote the interest of society; but after those virtues are once established 
on this foundation, they are also considered as advantageous to the per­
son himself, and as the source of that trust and confidence, which can 
alone give a human any consideration in life. One becomes contemptible, 
no less than odious, when he forgets the duty, which, in this particular, he 
owes to himself, as well as to society.15
If a physician lies for a patient, how is the patient to know that the same 
physician is not willing also to lie to him or her? Mutual trust and confidence 
inevitably may be eroded when deception enters the relationship, even if it is 
directed externally. Loss of trust is a critically important harm because trust 
comprises the very foundation of the physician–patient relationship.16
Deception may lead directly to harming the patient in the long term, 
because of the potential for future confusion and misdiagnosis.17 This con­
cern may be particularly pertinent for the most socially and economically 
vulnerable, because they have the least access to health care insurance, and 
are the most likely to switch insurance providers and to lose health care 
coverage. Each of these outcomes compromises continuity of care. One can 
readily imagine how miscoding could be undetected by the future physi­
cians of these patients, and how such miscoding could easily lead to mis­
diagnosis. In such a situation, a well-intentioned earlier decision to assist a 
patient might lead to harmful future consequences that the surgeon cannot 
predict. [. . .]

	
44	
The Ethics of Surgery
Another long-term harm is systematic:  whereas miscoding might 
serve an individual patient in a given situation, it does nothing to change 
a flawed health care system, miscoding serves only to perpetuate the prob­
lem. Moreover, miscoding is arbitrary and capricious, insofar as it best serves 
patients who have a personal relationship with their surgeons—those patients 
for whom one cares about enough to undertake risks. This might exclude sub­
stantial portion of a surgeon’s patient population, including the very patients 
who could benefit most from health care reform.
Beyond its harmful effects on individual surgeons and patients, when 
deception of insurance companies becomes as widespread as it is now known 
to be, the entire profession suffers from undermining of the trust that is 
essential to the physician–patient relationship. This will especially be the 
case when the media bring to light, as is ultimately likely, the extent to which 
surgeons personally benefit from deceiving third parties under the cloak of 
protecting the patient’s interests.
Society as a whole is harmed as well. The dishonesty of surgeons who 
assist patients to gain what does not rightfully belong to them undermines 
the actuarial foundation of the insurance industry, making it more difficult 
for patients, their employers, and insurance companies to control the cost of 
health care. Also, in helping one patient by lying to an insurance company, 
the surgeon harms large numbers of others, specifically, other policyholders 
who pay premiums.
By dealing dishonestly with insurance companies, surgeons fail to put 
the real problem squarely on the table for open consideration by the insur­
ance company, the employer, and society. The problems related to denial of 
needed care remain hidden and unresolved. It would be better for surgeons 
to try to obtain coverage by advocating openly and honestly for the patient, 
requesting coverage by the insurance company through the appeal mecha­
nisms many companies have in place. This course may be the best way to 
preserve the trusting relationship of individual patients with their physicians 
and of all patients with the medical profession.
Undoubtedly, surgeons are in the difficult position of wanting to serve 
the patient’s best interest, but being unable to do so because of an agree­
ment the patient (or the patient’s agent) has made with an insurance company. 
The remedy for this situation, however, is not for the surgeon to deceive the 
insurance company, but rather, to work toward changing the system so that 
such deception is not needed. There are a number of ways to achieve reform, 
ranging from creating a single-payor, nationalized health insurance system 
to creating a competitive insurance market through tax reforms that would 
encourage patients to choose, purchase, and own their own insurance poli­
cies. I do not intend to enter that debate at this point, having done so in the 
past.13 My intention is only to point out that dishonesty may not be the best 
solution to the difficulties surgeons face daily in caring for patients. Indeed, 

	
Deceiving Insurance Companies	
45
dishonesty may contribute to the perpetuation of a profoundly unsatisfactory 
health care financing system.
Conclusion
Surgeons have many motivations to deceive insurance companies. Some of 
them serve the patient’s interests, whereas some serve the surgeon’s inter­
ests. Clearly defining the relative power of the several motivations is difficult. 
Personal conversations with colleagues have persuaded me that many believe 
their only motivation in misrepresenting patient information to an insurance 
company is to help the patient. Often, they believe this in the face of clear 
evidence to the contrary (e.g., when lying is the only way they will receive 
payment for their services).
Many physicians not only find it to be acceptable to deceive insurance 
companies, but do so with a feeling of pride, believing it to be a praiseworthy 
act. The loss of a sense of wrongdoing when lying is perhaps the most baleful 
consequence of deceiving insurance companies. It may sometimes be necessary 
to deceive in order to achieve a good or prevent an evil so great that it overrides 
the harmful effects of deception on trustworthiness and trusting relationships. 
In my view, however, such lies should be necessary rarely, if ever, and should 
never be a cause for rejoicing or complacency. This point was stated well by 
Dorotheus of Gaza in the fifth century: “If one does not lie with fear and sor­
row, then one does wrong even when one lies for good and necessary cause.”18
References
	1.	Plato. The Republic, II:382, translated by B. Jowett. The dialogues of Plato: Vol. 1. 
New York: Random House; 1937:646.
	2.	Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics, iv:4.93, translated by T. Irwin. Indianapolis, 
IN: Hackett Publishing; 1985:110–1.
	3.	Bok S. Lying. Moral choice in public and private life. New York: Vintage Books; 
1999:13–16.
	4.	Baker R, Emanuel L. The efficacy of personal ethics: the AMA code of ethics in his­
torical and current perceptive. Hastings Cent Rep. 2000;30(Suppl.):S13–7.
	5.	Council on Ethical, and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. Code of 
Medical Ethics: current opinions with annotations, 2000–2001 ed. Chicago: American 
Medical Association; 2000:xiv.
	6.	Council on Ethical, and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. Opinion 
8.12, Code of Medical Ethics:  current opinions with annotations, 2000–2001 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 2000:174–5.
	7.	Oken D. What to tell cancer patients:  a study of medical attitudes. JAMA. 
1961;175:120–8.
 
 

	
46	
The Ethics of Surgery
	 8.	 Novack DH, Plumer R, Smith RL, Ochitill H, Morrow GR, Bennett JM. Changes in 
physicians’ attitudes toward telling the cancer patient. JAMA. 1979;241:897–900.
	 9.	 Freeman VG, Rathore SS, Weinfurt KP, Schulman KA, Sulmasy DP. Lying 
for patients:  physician deception of third party payors. Arch Intern Med. 
1999;159:2263–70.
	10.	 Novack DH, Detering BJ, Arnold RM, Forrow L, Ladinsky M, Pezzullo JC. 
Physicians’ attitudes toward using deception to resolve difficult ethical problems. 
JAMA. 1989;26:2980–5.
	11.	 Wynia MK, Cummins DS, VanGeest JB, Wilson IB. Physician manipulation 
of reimbursement rules for patients:  between a rock and a hard place. JAMA. 
2000;283:1858–65.
	12.	 Council on Ethical, and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. Opinion 
9.132(2), Code of Medical Ethics: current opinions with annotations, 2000–2001 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 2000:229–30.
	13.	 Sade RM. Health care reform: implications for clinical medicine. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1994;57:792–6.
	14.	 Fletcher JC, Miller FG, Spencer EM. Clinical ethics: history, content, and resources. 
In: Fletcher JC, Lombardo PA, Marshall MF, Miller FG, eds. Introduction to clinical 
ethics, 2nd ed. Frederick, MD: University Publishing Group; 1997:13.
	15.	 Hume D. Enquiries concerning the human understanding and concerning the principles 
of morals, 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press; 1957:238.
	16.	 Pellegrino E. The commodification of medical and health care: the moral conse­
quences of a paradigm shift from a professional to a market ethic. J Med Philos. 
1999;24:243–66.
	17.	 Morreim EH. Gaming the system, dodging the rules, ruling the dodgers. Arch Intern 
Med. 1991;151:443–7.
	18.	 Dorotheus of Gaza. Instructions, 9.96–103. Cited in B. Ramsey, Two traditions on 
lying and deception in the ancient church. The Thomist. 1985;49:504–33.

47
4
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident
END OF RESIDENCY, END OF CAREER?
Carolyn M. Dresler, Michael S. Kent, 
Richard I. Whyte, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Every surgeon faces the possibility of becoming infected by a bloodborne 
pathogen during the course of an operation. Cardiothoracic surgeons are 
among those with the highest risk because of the confined, deep spaces in 
which we operate. The possibility of cross-infection between surgeon and 
patient has been recognized since the existence of bloodborne viruses has 
been known, but came into high relief in the early days of the human immu­
nosuppressive virus epidemic of the 1980s.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the most common such infection, affecting 
2.7 to 3.9 million Americans (approximately 1% to 1.5% of the US popu­
lation).1 The number of cardiothoracic operations carried out annually is 
well over 300,000, suggesting that cardiothoracic surgeons face roughly 
3,000 potential exposures every year. The number of surgeons who become 
infected is unknown, is probably low, but definitely occurs.2 The Centers for 
Disease Control (CDC) has no guidelines for surgeons who become infected 
with HCV, but recommends standard precautions for all health care per­
sonnel—this would seem especially important in the operating room where 
the risk of transmission is particularly high. Once infected, a surgeon can 
transmit the virus to a patient during surgery, but this risk is apparently 
very low.
* Dresler CM, Kent MS, Whyte R, Sade RM. HCV infected resident: end of residency, end of 
career? Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(3):779–86. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished 
here with permission.
 
 
 

	
48	
The Ethics of Surgery
The consequences of infection with a bloodborne pathogen are most 
notably worrisome when the infected surgeon is a resident in training, because 
the stigma of such an infection may affect the chances of the resident finding 
a position when his training is completed. We present a case of an infected 
resident and a difficulty faced by his residency director: he must write a let­
ter of recommendation (LOR) to accompany the resident’s job applications.
THE CASE OF THE UNLUCKY RESIDENT 
AND THE PERPLEXED DIRECTOR
A resident becomes infected with HCV, probably from an incidental sharp 
injury during a routine cardiac surgery operation. He is later found to have 
high HCV RNA titers and cannot participate in the training program for a 
year while being treated with interferon. His titers fall over the course of the 
year to a level that the infectious diseases consultants declare to be compat­
ible with the resident resuming his place on the cardiothoracic surgery team, 
including in the operating room.
The well-liked and respected resident completes his residency success­
fully, and the cardiothoracic faculty believes he is clinically well-prepared 
and technically competent to start working independently in either private 
practice or an academic setting. He still has a low HCV titer, and is deemed 
by the infectious diseases consultants to be able to operate safely, posing min­
imal risk to his patients.
His residency director is writing a LOR for job applications. The director 
believes that anyone who learns that the applicant is HCV positive is unlikely 
to hire him, perhaps to the point that he cannot get a job at all as a cardiotho­
racic surgeon. He also believes that the information about the resident’s HCV 
status is relevant to his job application, so perhaps should be disclosed in the 
letter he is writing. Should the director disclose the resident’s HCV status?
Pro
Carolyn Dresler, MD, MPA
I was 14 years old when I decided that I wanted to find the cure for lung cancer—
as a result of a strong family history and heavy smoking. After medical school, 
I trained for 10 years to develop the expertise to address the research, clinical, 
and surgical treatment of lung cancer. I had high expectations of my thoracic 
surgical career. Somewhere during my chief residency in general surgery and the 
surgical oncology fellowship, before my cardiothoracic training, my liver func­
tion tests became asymptomatically elevated. I had been vaccinated for hepati­
tis B (HBV) and had been tested for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—I 
 
 

	
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident	
49
was glad that I had made it through training without these acquired diseases, 
but had no idea why the liver function tests were elevated in 1987.
Seven years into my real career in academia, which I thought was pro­
gressing well, I had blood tests performed for an insurance application. My 
world fell apart when I received the blood test results in the mail that said 
“HCV” and positive. This was the end of 1997—the HCV antibody test first 
became clinically available in 1991, about 2 years after I had finished my clini­
cal training.
I did not know what to do or who to talk to or how to be treated. Of 
course I was worried about my health and prognosis, but I was petrified of 
what it meant to my career. I had trained for over 10 years, and I was just 
beginning my eighth year of practice. This was very unfair. I  thoroughly 
researched the basic and clinical science, and searched for the best clinician 
to treat me. I decided I needed legal advice and sought a referral—without 
disclosing the reason why. I did not tell my employer. The legal advice stated 
unequivocally that I was required to disclose my HCV status to my employer 
and patients and that I must not operate. They said they would not represent 
me further if I did not agree. They also said that they could no longer repre­
sent me anyway, as their law firm also represented the Cancer Center in which 
I was employed, and the Cancer Center had a prior claim to their services. It 
was a disastrous time for me.
However, what guided my decisions reflected more my personal eth­
ics than the legal opinion. I had decided from early in my surgical educa­
tion, that I would always strive to treat patients how I personally wanted to 
be treated. In this case, it meant full disclosure of my HCV status, with an 
understandable explanation (exceedingly low risk of transmission, but pos­
sible, as anything in medicine is possible), and the decision would be mine (or 
my patient’s) on whether to proceed based on my (their) values or assessment. 
With this personal opinion of what I believed was most ethical, I decided 
that my realistic options were to leave surgery in the United States or move 
to another country that did not have the surfeit of thoracic surgeons as was 
available in the United States who did not have a potentially transmissible 
infectious disease.
Thus, I enter this ethical discussion today with a strong personal opin­
ion. Now, let us review some of the bioethical opinions from experts in the 
literature that would support the disclosure of the viral status of the cardio­
thoracic resident in the director’s LOR. There are many bioethical models of 
ethics that can be drawn upon to support this recommendation.
“First do no harm” or, more precisely, “I will do no harm or injustice to 
them,” derives from the Hippocratic Oath. This oath translates into the con­
cept of nonmaleficence, meaning that physicians will not provide the patient 
any treatment or intervention that is intended to harm or injure them. Related 
to nonmaleficence is the concept of beneficence: One ought to prevent evil or 

	
50	
The Ethics of Surgery
harm. One ought to remove evil or harm. One ought to do or promote 
good. [. . .]
However, two other concepts within biomedical ethics must be con­
sidered:  the balance between autonomy and paternalism. The importance 
of autonomy is best illustrated by the progressively focused attention on 
informed consent over the past decades. [. . .] Informed consent has become 
much more complicated and longer over the years. As a result, there is much 
interest and research into the understandability, literacy, competency, com­
plexity, and so forth, that occur with the intent to obtain a valid informed 
consent.
Contrary to the idea of autonomous informed consent, and more perva­
sive historically and culturally, is the concept of paternalism. Basically, with 
a paternalistic approach, the physician makes the decision concerning the 
appropriate intervention for the patient [. . .]. Traditionally, paternalistic deci­
sions were made because it was felt that the physician knew what was the best 
course of action for each patient and the concepts or issues might be too diffi­
cult, confusing, alarming, or not understandable by the patient. [. . .] It is criti­
cal to remember that the entire spectrum of decision making is to provide the 
most beneficent outcome for the patient—there is no intent of maleficence.
To understand the question of autonomy versus paternalism concern­
ing disclosure of viral status, a national survey in 2000 queried 2,353 adults 
in the United States.3 To the statement “It should be mandatory for doctors 
and dentists who are infected with HBV or HCV to tell their patients before 
they provide medical care,” 82% of adults responded that they either strongly 
agree or agree. Americans want to know if their health care providers have 
a potentially communicable disease (89% wanted the HIV information). [. . .]
Next to consider in this bioethical discussion, is the approach to the com­
promised physician, whether by mental health diagnosis, alcohol or other 
substance abuse, or other diagnosis, such as a communicable infectious dis­
ease. [. . .] For communicable diseases, there are guidelines and recommenda­
tions for physicians with such diagnoses as HBV, HCV, or HIV. The Society 
for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) in 2011 provided a com­
prehensive summary of such guidelines that should be considered within the 
context of all impaired physicians.4 [. . .] To briefly summarize background 
information [. . .]:
¤	 The prevalence of HCV is still rising.
¤	 There is no vaccine for HCV.
¤	 Provider to patient transmission is very uncommon (rate estimated at 
0.13%).
¤	 Rate of transmission of HCV is intermediate between HBV (higher) 
and HIV (lower).
¤	 The rate “may be complicated by low rate of voluntary reporting.”

	
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident	
51
¤	 Of the known providers transmitting the disease to patients, 3 of 7 
were cardiothoracic surgeons.
¤	 There is no known level of HCV viral titer that predicts higher or 
lower rates of transmission. (There are such levels in HBV and HIV.)
¤	 United Kingdom and European Consortium state that HCV-infected 
providers cannot perform exposure-prone procedures.
[. . .] Of pertinence to this discussion of the HCV-infected resident, if 
the viral load is 104 or less genome equivalents per milliliter, it is permis­
sible for the surgeon to perform category I, II, and III (III being the most 
invasive, encompassing cardiac and thoracic procedures) with double glove 
technique and frequent glove changes. Five other recommendations to fol­
low are similarly made, and include (1) not detected as having transmitted 
infection to patients; (2) advice from expert review panel about continued 
practice; (3) twice annual assessment of viral burden to confirm 104 or less 
genome equivalents per milliliter; (4) follow-up by expert personal physician; 
and (5) compliant with written contract concerning responsibilities. If the 
surgeon does have HCV viral titers above 104, he or she is not to perform 
category III (standard cardiothoracic procedures), despite usual infection 
control measures.
More recently, the CDC published their recommendations for 
HBV-infected health care providers.5 This document [. . .] reverses the 1991 
recommendation that patients are informed of their health care provider’s 
viral status, but reaffirms that viral positivity should not disqualify the health 
care provider from the practice of their profession. [. . .]
What do these recommendations mean for our cardiothoracic resident 
completing his training and searching for a job? The resident underwent 
treatment and although the viral titers are not provided, his infectious dis­
ease program said that they were “low” and he was “deemed to be able to 
operate safely, posing minimal risk to his patients.” [. . .] Arguably, the direc­
tor and the training program have not fully complied with the current rec­
ommendations—or the brief case presentation has not delineated them. [. . .] 
Appropriate oversight and review of the adequacy of the mental health, 
addiction—or viral status—is critical. Per the concern in the SHEA guide­
lines, many physicians choose to not volunteer their positive viral status, 
owing to the very real concern over their viability to continue their practice, 
similar to the concerns from impairment from mental health or substance 
abuse. The director has a duty to fully represent the qualifications and limi­
tations of the resident under his purview for conditions that may impact 
patient care, whether it is drug abuse or a communicable disease. This duty 
to disclose the resident’s HCV status is based on a higher principle than a 
legal responsibility. Rather, it is an issue of honesty and transparency with 
an eye toward the director’s fiduciary responsibility to both the resident and 

	
52	
The Ethics of Surgery
future patients—to train not only a technically facile surgeon but an ethical 
one as well. [. . .] The director needs to disclose in his letter of recommenda­
tion that the resident is HCV positive and delineate how the program has 
instituted measures to ensure patient safety.
This answers the question posed by the case study. However, to go fur­
ther, the resident has a duty to provide beneficent treatment in the context of 
an autonomous, namely, fully informed consent, which includes disclosure 
of his HCV viral status to his patients. This disclosure is not supported by 
the SHEA or CDC recommendations. However, as discussed above, the sur­
geon undertaking the highest category of exposure-prone procedures has a 
duty to fully inform his patients of the risks, inclusive of the information of 
the extremely low risk of transmission of the virus, despite its low risk. This 
“deliberative model” of surgeon-patient decision making is therefore a col­
laborative effort, fully exploring the patient’s fears and concerns not only of 
the significant surgical procedure but also of the surgeon’s transmission risk, 
and is based on trust. The surgeon does not have the right to make the pater­
nalistic decision that she or he knows the values and judgments of the patient 
better than the patient does. To decide otherwise denigrates the competency 
of the patient and is destructive to the fiduciary relationship that is so critical 
to physician-patient relationships. Profound empathy for the resident should 
not cloud the bioethical path of disclosure.
Con
Michael S. Kent, MD, and Richard Whyte, MD
Approximately 180  million people worldwide are infected with HCV. The 
sequelae of chronic infection are significant: end-stage liver disease, hepato­
cellular carcinoma, and death. As a result, HCV infection is the most com­
mon indication for liver transplantation in the United States and Europe.
The most common pathway for transmission of HCV is intravenous drug 
use, followed by sexual contact. However, iatrogenic transmission of HCV is 
well recognized, specifically through blood transfusion or in dialysis centers. 
Transmission from infected patients to health care workers, and from health 
care workers to patients, as described in this case, are distinctly uncommon. 
However, so-called exposure-prone procedures, defined as invasive proce­
dures in which the blood of patient and health care worker may come into 
contact, are a well-recognized pathway for transmission of HCV.
Cardiac surgery is the prime example of an exposure-prone proce­
dure, and several case reports have documented transmission of HCV from 
patients to surgeons, and from the infected surgeon to subsequent patients.6 
Given the high prevalence of blood-splash and needle stick injuries during 
open-heart surgery, it is no surprise that cardiothoracic surgeons are more 
 
 

	
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident	
53
likely to transmit HCV to patients than other health care workers. Indeed, in 
a retrospective investigation of a HCV-infected cardiac surgeon, the risk of 
transmission to a patient during open-heart surgery was 6%.6 In contrast, the 
risk of a health care worker having infection after percutaneous exposure to 
HIV-infected blood is only 0.3%.7
The risk of transmission of HCV from a cardiothoracic surgeon to a 
patient need not, however, be this high. For example, the rate of needle-stick 
injuries is known to be higher among less-experienced surgeons. In addition, 
the risk of transmission will depend on the specific operation in question. [. . .]
Two other issues are relevant to the current case. The first regards the 
significant recent advances in treatment for HCV. For years, the standard 
treatment involved the use of interferon alpha in combination with ribavarin. 
Standard treatment led to cure rates in treatment naive patients of 40% to 
50%.8 Treatment time was lengthy (48 weeks) and associated with significant 
toxicity and low rates of compliance. However, in 2011, two new drugs (tela­
previr and boceprevir) were approved for HCV patients. These agents impair 
viral replication and are associated with a sustained virologic response (i.e., 
cure) in as many as 75% of patients treated.9 [. . .] Several other agents are 
expected to be available for commercial use within the next few years, with 
early studies indicating cure rates approaching 100%.
The final issue concerns the official policy of health care workers infected 
with HCV. In Europe, guidelines vary widely. [. . .] In the United States, the 
CDC website states “There are no CDC recommendations to restrict a health 
care worker who is infected with HCV. The risk of transmission from an 
infected health care worker to a patient appears to be very low. All health care 
personnel, including those who are HCV positive, should follow strict aseptic 
technique and standard precautions, including appropriate hand hygiene, use 
of protective barriers, and safe injection practices.”10 In the United States, 
therefore, there is no mandate that a HCV-infected surgeon limit his or her 
practice, or inform patients of their health status.
THE PRESENT CASE
In the present case, we are asked to determine whether the residency director 
should disclose the HCV status of a highly regarded cardiothoracic resident 
in a LOR. It is clear that disclosure of this information will likely result in the 
resident becoming unemployable as a cardiothoracic surgeon.
We strongly believe that this information should not be disclosed in a 
LOR. It is important to note that we are not being asked to render an opin­
ion on the national policy for health care workers infected with HCV. [. . .] 
The question in this case revolves around the specific obligations of the resi­
dency director in writing a letter, and whether confidential health informa­
tion should be disclosed.
 

	
54	
The Ethics of Surgery
There are no official guidelines regarding LORs for surgeons conclud­
ing their training and seeking employment. However, guidelines do exist for 
medical school dean’s letters,11 and for applicants to emergency medicine resi­
dencies.12 These guidelines indicate that a writer of such a letter has an ethi­
cal duty to be honest and accurate, and to limit and acknowledge bias. The 
writer does not have an obligation to write a flattering letter, although that 
may be the expectation of the resident. However, the writer clearly has an 
obligation to his or her profession, and to the institution to which the resident 
is applying. In this particular case, the residency director will surely wonder 
whether writing a LOR that allows the resident to begin a cardiothoracic 
practice will put future patients at risk for HCV infection.
The resident in this case is both a physician seeking employment and 
a patient. As a patient, his HCV status is private health information and is 
protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. It is 
reasonable to assume that the resident would not want this information dis­
closed, and as a patient he has every right to expect this.
However the residency director is not the resident’s health care provider, 
and he is asked to write a letter regarding the resident’s capacity to prac­
tice cardiothoracic surgery. Given the obligations of letter writers discussed 
above, we would argue that in certain circumstances confidential health 
information should be disclosed in a LOR. For example, if the resident con­
tracted HCV by illicit drug use, or was noncompliant with antiviral therapy, 
the residency director would be ethically bound to discuss this. These health 
issues reflect on the professionalism of the resident, and have a direct impact 
on patient safety.
But in this case, there are no issues that would put patients at risk. 
The resident is widely regarded as professional and technically competent, 
and contracted HCV while providing patient care. In fact, the resident was 
deemed safe to operate on patients at the institution of the program direc­
tor. Given this, it seems inconsistent, if not hypocritical, that the resident 
would be allowed to care for other physicians’ patients while in training, 
but not his own.
Furthermore, there is no national policy regarding health care work­
ers infected with HCV. Surgeons with HCV infection are not restricted 
from practicing, nor do they need to disclose their health status to patients. 
In general, private health information should not be disclosed in a LOR, 
unless there is a compelling reason to do so. In this case there is no such 
compelling reason.
There is a reason why health information is protected by law. Patients 
may be denied rights or face discrimination as a result of such disclosures. 
In this case, the HCV resident is likely to be rendered permanently unem­
ployable as a cardiothoracic surgeon. And the reason for this is the person 

	
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident	
55
reviewing the resident’s letter, whether it be a physician or an administrator, 
is likely to know very little about HCV infection, its treatment, or policies 
regarding infected health care workers. [. . .]
It is important to note that the resident also has a responsibility to dis­
close his HCV status, when appropriate. Hopefully this well-trained resident 
will find employment, and this information will be disclosed to the occu­
pational health office at his new institution. [. . .] Those in the occupational 
health office will know the policies regarding HCV-infected health care work­
ers, and in specific that infected physicians are not proscribed from engag­
ing in exposure-prone procedures. Appropriate precautions, whether this be 
periodic surveillance serology or some other measure, will certainly be taken.
Given the advances in treatment for HCV, there is a high likelihood that 
the resident either has been cured, or will be, with new agents now available. 
There is no reason to think that patients cared for by the resident will be 
placed at unnecessary risk. Inappropriate disclosure of his HCV status in a 
LOR will preclude the resident from finding employment, even though he was 
considered safe to operate while in training. The residency director should 
understand the consequences of such disclosure, and respect the resident’s 
right to privacy.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
The central issue of this debate is whether the director of the residency pro­
gram should report the resident’s HCV status to potential employers. A sub­
stantial part of both discussions concerns ethical and scientific issues that are 
not directly relevant to this point; rather, they are related to the reasons why 
the patient should or should not know of the surgeons HCV status, the obliga­
tions of the resident to his present and future patients, and recent improve­
ments in the treatment of HCV infections. [. . .]
The essayists miss some important points, however. Dresler does not 
mention the stigma attached to HCV infection and the likelihood that future 
employers will consider the opportunity cost of learning the implications of 
a surgeon’s HCV infection to be too high so will simply reject the applica­
tion. More importantly, however, she does not consider an important limi­
tation of her argument: viral infections are known to be transmitted from 
patients to surgeons and from surgeons to patients, the rates of which have 
been estimated to be very low but are not known accurately. Moreover, the 
incidence of HCV infection is estimated to be 1% to 1.5% in the U.S. popula­
tion,1 so it seems likely that 1 or 2 of the approximately 125 cardiothoracic 
residents finishing their training each year (not to mention many attending 
 

	
56	
The Ethics of Surgery
surgeons) are HCV positive and do not know it. The likelihood that a sur­
geon is unknowingly HCV positive and therefore poses a risk to his patients 
is unknown; it is quite possible that the resident in this case poses no greater 
risk to his patients than is posed by other residents who have cryptic infec­
tions—both risks are extremely small. If Dresler’s arguments are correct, 
we could protect patients more fully by identifying the surgeons who are 
HCV (and HBV and HIV) positive, accomplished by requiring blood tests 
on all residents who are about to finish their training (or, by extension, 
on all practicing surgeons); that would be overly intrusive, however, with 
low cost-benefit balance. The CDC has considered such questions and has 
decided not to address them because of the paucity of reliable data upon 
which to base recommendations.
Kent and Whyte argue that the opportunity cost of seeking information 
about the implications of a surgeon’s HCV infection is likely to be avoided 
by future employers, resulting in immediate rejection of the resident’s job 
application, and therefore is a reason not to mention the resident’s viral sta­
tus. They do not, however, consider the possibility of disclosing the resident’s 
HCV status in the LOR, in the interest of honesty and transparency, and 
explaining that the resident, on the advice of infectious diseases consultants, 
safely operates without limitation (save perhaps oversight by an expert review 
committee) on patients in his training institution’s cardiothoracic surgical 
service. Given that information, some might reject the resident’s application 
out of hand, but it seems likely that some would not, considerably reducing 
the likelihood that the resident would be unable to find a job. The authors 
also do not consider a practical implication of withholding information: the 
possibility that the reputation of both the director and his program will be 
damaged if the resident’s HCV status is not disclosed and is later discovered 
by the program that hires him. Reputations for honesty and reliability have 
suffered because of similar situations.
Unfortunately, the data that could settle some of these questions are not 
available, and we are left with the need to strike a balance between risks of 
viral transmission to patients that are very low and the risk of joblessness 
for the resident that is not certain but seems far from zero. Surgeons have 
many obligations, but caring for their patients is their paramount (though not 
absolute) responsibility. They also have a responsibility, albeit a lesser one, 
to ensure that years of training of the persons under their purview are not 
wasted and that a well-trained surgeon is not lost to the domain of surgical 
manpower. It seems that neither side in this debate has won decisively—the 
director must weigh the many factors supporting both horns of the dilemma 
and make his decision.

	
Hepatitis C Virus–Infected Resident	
57
References
	 1.	 CDC. Recommendations for the identification of chronic hepatitis C virus infec­
tion among persons born during 1945–1965. MMWR Morbid Mortal Weekly Rep. 
2012;61(RR04):1–18.
	 2.	 Thorburn D, Roy K, Cameron SO, Johnston J, et al. Risk of hepatitis C virus trans­
mission from patients to surgeons: model based on an unlinked anonymous study of 
hepatitis C virus prevalence in hospital patients in Glasgow. Gut. 2003;52:1333–8.
	 3.	 Tuboku-Metzher J, Chiarello L, Sinkowitz-Cochran RL, Casano-Dickerson A, 
Cardo D. Public attitudes and opinions toward physicians and dentists infected with 
bloodborne viruses: results of a national survey. Am J Infect Cont. 2005;33:299–303.
	 4.	 Henderson DK, Dembry L, Fishman NO, Sepkowitz KA, Weber DJ. SHEA guide­
line for management of healthcare workers who are infected with hepatitis B virus, 
hepatitis C virus and/or human immunodeficiency virus. Infect Cont Hosp Epi. 
2010;31:203–32.
	 5.	 Holmberg SC, Suryaprasad A, Ward JW. Updated CDC recommendations for 
the management of hepatitis B virus-infected health-care providers and students. 
MMWR Morbid Mortal Weekly Rep. 2012;61(RR03):1–12.
	 6.	 Olsen K, Dahl PE, Paulssen EJ, et al. Increased risk of transmission of hepatitis C 
in open heart surgery compared with vascular and pulmonary surgery. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2010;90:1425–31.
	 7.	 Ippolito G, Puro V, Heptonstall J, et al. Occupational human immunodeficiency 
virus infections in health-care workers: worldwide cases through September 1997. 
An overview. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;28:365–83.
	 8.	 Fried MW, Shiffman ML, Reddy KR, et al. Peginterferon alfa-2a plus ribavarin for 
chronic hepatitis C infection. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:975–82.
	 9.	 Jacobson IM, McHutchinson JG, Dusheiko G, et  al. Telaprevir for previously 
untreated chronic hepatitis C infection. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2405–16.
	10.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/
hcv/hcvfaq.htm#f4. Accessed August 4, 2012.
	11.	 Hunt DD, Maclaren CF, Scott CS, et al. Characteristics of dean’s letters in 1981 and 
1992. Acad Med. 1993;68:905–11.
	12.	 Larkin GL, Marco CA. Ethics seminars: beyond authorship requirements: ethical 
considerations in writing letters of recommendation. Acad Emerg Med. 2001;8:70–3.
 

58
5
Must Surgeons Tell Mitral Valve Repair 
Candidates About a New Percutaneous Repair 
Device That Is Only Available Elsewhere?
Eric R. Skipper, Kevin D. Accola, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
One of the persistent problems in achieving informed consent for surgi­
cal patients is the question of what should be covered in the disclosure 
component of the consent process. Certainly, one need not tell patients 
about every conceivable complication or about every possible alternative 
therapy that might be available for their specific illnesses. So what must be 
included? In particular, what alternative therapies should be described or 
must be described to patients? The problem has become a bit more com­
plicated in recent years as the competitive aspects of cardiothoracic surgi­
cal practice have become more prominent and as some new technologies 
have been used as much for marketing surgical programs as for addressing 
patients’ needs.
This issue was explored at the annual Ethics Forum session of the 
Southern Thoracic Surgical Association meeting in 2010. A case was built 
around an actual new device that was still investigational at the time of the 
meeting, but set in the future (November 2011) at a time when Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approval is presumed to have occurred. [Editor’s 
note: The FDA approved the device in October 2013.]
* Skipper ER, Accola KD, Sade RM. Must surgeons tell mitral valve repair candidates 
about a new percutaneous repair device that is only available elsewhere? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2011;92(4):1163–9. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Referring Patients to Other Surgeons	
59
CASE
Richard Bishop, 60 years of age, has been known to have mitral insufficiency 
for 5 years, has recently developed shortness of breath, and his cardiologist 
at Lourdes Heart Center has found left ventricular dysfunction: ejection frac­
tion 50%, end-systolic diameter 52 mm. He has referred Mr Bishop to his 
longtime colleague, Dr John Crowne, a cardiothoracic surgeon who has had 
excellent results with open mitral valve repair for more than 15 years.
A competing institution, St. Bernadette Medical Center, on the other 
side of town recently participated in a multi-center trial of a new device, 
the Evalve MitraClip, which is deployed percutaneously for mitral valve 
repair. It was approved for clinical use by the FDA 3 months ago, in August 
2011. St. Bernadette has been using the device with considerable success 
for 3 years. Published studies indicate that the device is 98% successful in 
reducing moderately severe (3+) or severe (4+) regurgitation to mild or none 
at 30 days after than procedure, but there is no information about long-term 
durability. Many heart centers want to use MitraClip and are training per­
sonnel in the technique, but only the original investigating institutions are 
up and running with experience in use of the device, so Lourdes Heart 
Center does not yet have clinical access to it.
During his initial discussion with Mr Bishop, Dr Crowne realizes that 
no one in the cardiology department has mentioned the MitraClip to the 
patient, so he does not know what the patient’s preferences might be. He has 
read the limited number of published papers about the device and knows 
that its early success rate is excellent, no long-term results are available, and 
the FDA believes it is safe enough for clinical use. He wonders whether he is 
ethically obligated to tell the patient about the MitraClip and to offer refer­
ral to St. Bernadette as a treatment alternative.
Pro
Eric Skipper, MD
The surgeon should inform his patient and offer referral. The impact of 
health care technology has generally been positive, with new and simplified 
procedures entering the medical field on an almost daily basis. All inno­
vations come with “issues.”1 Early adoption of new technologies can be a 
double-edged sword, with beneficence pitted against nonmaleficence in the 
name of progress, thus creating conflict between physicians’ most fundamen­
tal values.
This debate, however, is not about new technologies nor about their 
appropriateness. It is about full disclosure and, more generally, informed 
consent.
 
 
 

	
60	
The Ethics of Surgery
What exactly is informed consent? Certainly, it is more than a mere 
signed piece of paper. It is a process founded in ethical principles, and of 
paramount importance in the practice of medicine. In 1847, the American 
Medical Association (AMA) adopted the first national code of professional 
ethics in medicine. This was renamed “The Principles of Medical Ethics” 
in 1903. In 1985, the Judicial Council of the AMA became the Council on 
Ethical and Judicial Affairs (CEJA). The first Ethics Conference of the AMA 
was held in Philadelphia, the city of the AMA’s founding, in 1997, thus estab­
lishing the AMA’s Institute of Ethics.
The AMA’s Code of Medical Ethics describes informed consent as a 
patient-physician communication that results in the patient’s authorization 
or agreement to undergo a specific medical intervention. To obtain informed 
consent, the physician should disclose and discuss the diagnosis, nature, and 
purpose of a proposed treatment or procedure, risks and benefits thereof, 
alternatives, and risks/benefits of not receiving or undergoing a treatment or 
procedure.2 This communication process is both an ethical obligation and a 
legal requirement spelled out in statutes and case law in all 50 states.
The AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs 2006 report states that 
with respect to informed consent, the physician’s obligation is to accurately 
present the medical facts, make recommendations for management in accor­
dance with good medical practice, and help make choices from among the 
therapeutic alternatives consistent with good medical practice.3 [. . .]
The Code of Professional Conduct from the American College of 
Surgeons Statement on Principles states that informed consent is more than a 
legal requirement.4 It is a standard of ethical surgical practice that enhances 
the surgeon-patient relationship, and a mechanism for presenting informa­
tion fairly, clearly, accurately, and compassionately. The discussion con­
ducted by the surgeon should include the nature of the illness and the natural 
consequences of no treatment. It should include the nature of the proposed 
operation, including estimated risks of mortality and morbidity. Common 
complications and benefits of the proposed operation should be disclosed. 
Alternative forms of treatment including nonoperative techniques should be 
divulged. A freedom of choice clause states that an ethical surgeon should not 
participate in a system that denies serving the best interest of the patient by 
refusing referral out of the system. Moreover, the doctor-patient relationship 
requires that the patient’s interests supersede all other interests, including the 
personal and financial interests of the surgeon.
The Hippocratic Oath states, “I will prescribe regimens for the good 
of my patients according to my ability and judgment and never do harm 
to anyone.” Historically the “Hippocratic tradition” fostered paternalism 
in which physicians were ethically obligated to promote the patient’s wel­
fare by providing care in accordance with their own judgment regarding the 
most appropriate course of treatment. They could opt not to share medical 

	
Referring Patients to Other Surgeons	
61
information with the patient if they believed that disclosure might prove 
detrimental to the patient’s well-being.5 Paternalism has long since been 
replaced with the contemporary concepts of patient autonomy and shared 
decision making.3
The lack of adequate information can preclude patients from receiv­
ing necessary medical attention or making optimal life decisions on the 
basis of their individual needs and personal values. The patient-physician 
relationship is founded on trust. The lack of candid disclosure can com­
promise this relationship. Thus, an act of deception intended to be benev­
olent can risk undermining both confidence and trust in the medical 
profession.6
CONCLUSION
The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, in its position statement regarding the 
off-label use of coronary artery stents states, “. . . patients must be better 
informed of treatment options and the relative risks and benefits of medical 
therapy, percutaneous coronary interventions and coronary artery bypass 
grafting (CABG).” Their recommendations to the FDA included, “. . . ade­
quate informed consent to be given to patients regarding treatment options . . . 
before catheter intervention is performed. . . .”7 As surgeons, we cannot have it 
both ways. One cannot argue successfully against full disclosure in this case; 
quite the contrary, full disclosure is the only right decision.
Con
Kevin Accola, MD
“Men in general are quick to believe that which they wish to be true.” 
—Gaius Julius Caesar
“When you have a new hammer, choose your nails wisely.”
—Meredith L. Scott, MD
The surgeon has no obligation to inform or refer the patient. The simple 
and obvious answer to the central question of this debate is, no—Dr Crowne 
is not ethically required to discuss this new treatment option with the patient 
or to offer referral. Dr Crowne should proceed with conventional mitral 
valve repair surgery, as he is not obligated to discuss with the patient this 
new technology for mitral valve insufficiency, because the data are suspect, 
with few short- or long-term results upon which to make judgments, unless 
the patient is an inappropriate candidate for conventional surgery. Granted, 
if the patient asks Dr Crowne about alternative approaches, the surgeon is 
 
 
 

	
62	
The Ethics of Surgery
obligated to present the data that are available in an objective manner, before 
proceeding with open repair.
In my opinion, ethical concerns about new technologies should be more 
focused on the innovative institutions and individuals who pursue new treat­
ment modalities than on the practicing surgeon. [. . .] The ethical course of 
action should be evidence based, using data and results obtained from orga­
nized trials of a particular treatment modality or investigational device. 
Many of the procedures or technologies that have come and gone were mar­
keted as procedures that would end conventional surgery as we know it, and 
now are merely curiosities that are of historical value only. [. . .]
These considerations should lead us to ask a series of questions[, which 
I  will address in detail below]. First, what is the surgeon’s responsibility 
regarding new technologies as they relate to clinical standards of care? If 
we surgeons do not responsibly monitor innovative procedures or technolo­
gies with strict oversight, someone else will, and we can almost guarantee 
it will not be a cardiothoracic surgeon. A second question is how surgeons 
adopt new procedures and technologies—when does an innovative procedure 
or technology become accepted as a standard practice? A third question is 
about industry—what is industry’s perspective and behavior relative to new 
technologies, and how do companies interact with cardiothoracic surgeons? 
Finally, how do Internet-based information and televised infomercials influ­
ence surgeons’ responses to patient requests for “new technologies” in this 
Internet age? Patients are much better informed on medical matters than 
they were only a few years ago because of ready access to large amounts 
of information from self-help books, magazines, newspaper columns, and, 
most notably, the Internet. Much of this information, however, is not peer 
reviewed and is processed through an institutional marketing filter. Have we 
allowed patient-driven pursuit of new technology spawned by institutional 
marketing to displace our ethical responsibility to guide the patient through 
an evidence-based discussion of what procedure serves their best short-term 
and long-term interests?
SURGEONS’ RESPONSIBILITY
What is the surgeon’s responsibility to new technologies as these procedures 
or devices relate to clinical standards? Evidence-based medicine recommen­
dations and protocols give us some guidance while these devices and proce­
dures are becoming accepted. Evidence-based medicine seeks to assess the 
strength of evidence of the risks and benefits of treatments, including lack 
of treatment and diagnostic tests.8 Evidence-based medicine aims to apply 
the best available evidence gained from the scientific method to diagnostic 
and therapeutic decisions. Evaluation of evidence can be challenging, but it 
remains the foundation of clinical decision making. [. . .]
 

	
Referring Patients to Other Surgeons	
63
Patients have become much better educated about health matters over the 
past 10 to 15 years, and rightly so. One major flaw and troublesome issue, how­
ever, is that this public information on technologies and procedures is not peer 
reviewed, has bias that may be subtle or obvious, and often is compromised by 
glaring conflicts of interest. Many cardiothoracic surgeons have been asked 
by patients if they perform procedures like “Institution X,” or asked why are 
they not candidates for particular treatment modalities or new technologies. 
Physicians come under significant pressure from hospital systems to provide 
new technologies to keep pace with the major institutions or with competing 
hospital systems. Where this will eventually lead is somewhat problematic. It is 
clear, however, that we surgeons must take the responsibility to do our best for 
our patients by making decisions based on clinical data and resisting institu­
tional pressures. If we do not accept this responsibility, someone else will, and 
we will be held accountable. The paucity of evidence about the efficacy (and 
perhaps safety) of the Evalve MitraClip makes it optional for Dr Crowne to 
include it among the alternative therapies he describes to Mr Bishop.
HOW SURGEONS COME TO ACCEPT NEW PROCEDURES 
OR TECHNOLOGIES
Most surgeons are cautiously optimistic in considering the uses of new tech­
nologies. The science behind behavioral patterns exhibited by purchasers of 
consumer products can be applied to the behavior of surgeons in using new 
technologies. The Law of Diffusion of Innovation describes a behavioral 
spectrum from “innovators/early adaptors” to “laggers”9 (Figure 5.1). This 
law applies to a wide range of consumer products, such as the cell phone, for 
example. The innovators stand in line waiting to be the first to have a cell 
phone, and the early adapters quickly follow because they simply must have 
one as well. Once a product reaches a “tipping point” of 15% to 18% market 
penetration, the early and late acceptors adopt it because they have seen data 
Early
Tipping point (15–18%)
16%
2%
Late
Laggers
Innovators
14%
34%
34%
Acceptors
Early
Adaptors
FIGURE 5.1  Law of diffusion of innovation.
 

	
64	
The Ethics of Surgery
and now believe that cell phones work and are dependable. The laggers are 
the few who no longer use rotary phones only because they cannot find any 
to buy. Once the tipping point of consumer acceptance is reached, the prod­
uct gains the interest and acceptance of the early and late acceptors, market 
penetration escalates, and it becomes a household product (Figure 5.2). [. . .]
Many cardiothoracic procedures and technologies illustrate the accu­
racy of the Law of Diffusion of Innovation. For instance, HeartPort was a 
good idea, but because of an inappropriate launch and other factors, it was 
unsuccessful in changing the way heart surgery is done—the tipping point 
was never reached.10 Another example is off-pump coronary artery bypass 
surgery, which some suggested should be applied to all coronary revascular­
izations.11 It nearly reached a tipping point, but the early and late Acceptors 
wanted more proof of the efficacy and advantages of the procedure, and the 
proof never appeared, so the rate of off-pump bypass surgery increased from 
15% early after its introduction12 to only 20% 10 years later.13
An important point about the procedures mentioned above is that some 
are very beneficial for selected patients, but have not been widely accepted. 
That leads us to the next topic, the industry perspective.
INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE
Cardiothoracic surgeons’ collegial and collaborative relationship with 
industry has generated much industry funding and engineering expertise in 
Innovators
2.5%
Early
Adopters
13.5%
Early
Majority
34%
Late
Majority
34%
100
75
50
25
Market Share %
0
Laggards
16%
FIGURE 5.2  Once the tipping point of consumer acceptance is reached, the product gains the 
interest and acceptance of the early and late acceptors, market penetration escalates, and 
it becomes a household product.
 

	
Referring Patients to Other Surgeons	
65
support of research and development of new technologies. Without indus­
try involvement, cardiothoracic surgical innovation could not occur at the 
levels achieved in the past. A corollary of this, however, is that marketing or 
promotion of these technologies is sometimes overwhelming and conflicting. 
Certainly, the need for promotion can be understood in the context of the 
huge economic impact on industry related to research and development, as 
well as launching new products.
In my experience, cardiothoracic surgeons are often approached with 
promotional pressures such as, “better do this before the other group in town 
or you will miss out,” and “this procedure is sure to increase your referrals.” 
Another inducement to use a new product is, “there is a CPT code for this, so 
you can bill for it.”
A number of well-organized controlled clinical trials investigating new 
technologies are scientifically designed to document efficacy and safety with 
reliable data. Trials such as these may be persuasive to early and late acceptors, 
allowing these technologies to reach a tipping point that will result in wide­
spread use, expanding our armamentarium of treatment modalities. Again, we 
as surgeons must take a responsible role in this process with objective oversight.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, Dr Crowne is acting ethically and responsibly by proceed­
ing with conventional mitral valve repair surgery without mentioning the 
Evalve MitraClip to the patient. The limited amount of information about 
this device does not satisfy the standards of evidence-based medicine, and the 
lack of peer-reviewed data along with his personal experience and surgical 
results support such a decision. Because Dr Crowne is under no obligation to 
discuss with Mr Bishop a new technique with such a sparse track record, he is 
also not ethically or morally obligated to refer the patient to another institu­
tion for amelioration of his mitral valve insufficiency.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
The three informational requirements to ensure that consent is informed are 
these: preconditions (the patient’s competence and voluntariness), informa­
tional disclosure, and consent to undergo the chosen treatment. At issue in 
the case at hand is the second element, informational disclosure—how much 
information Dr Crowne is required to provide to the patient.
Dr Skipper has provided convincing evidence that providing informa­
tion to the patient is necessary, but he has placed no upper or lower limit on 
the amount of information required. If Mr Bishop must be told about the 
 
 
 

	
66	
The Ethics of Surgery
Evalve MitraClip, must he also be told about each of the dozen or so rings 
and annulus suture techniques, the many distinct methods of mitral valve 
repair, and the dozen or more types of valve prostheses that are currently 
available to treat mitral valve insufficiency? What boundaries, if any, delimit 
the information required for adequately informed consent? Skipper has not 
made as strong a case as perhaps he might.
Dr Accola has provided persuasive reasons for the surgeon to discount 
the importance of disclosing the existence and availability of the Evalve 
MitraClip, but we may ask whether the patient is truly incapable of process­
ing the available information himself. Is the surgeon’s skeptical interpretation 
of the data sufficient reason to withhold that information from the patient?
The informational requirements for informed consent are more complex than 
the discussants have appreciated. The concept of informed consent as we know it 
today has developed over more than 2 centuries. The evolution of informed con­
sent, as is true of much else in the field of bioethics, has been driven more by law­
yers and courts of law than by thoughtful analysis by philosophers. [. . .]
The law (and consequently ethics) has also seen evolution of the kinds 
of information that must be disclosed to the patient to ensure that con­
sent is adequately informed. In 1957, the professional or “reasonable phy­
sician” standard of disclosure was established: a physician must disclose 
the amount of information that other reasonable physicians would disclose 
(also known as the Bolam principle, after the legal case).14 The “reason­
able patient” standard was established in 1972, in yet another legal case: all 
the risks and alternatives that a reasonable person would want to know 
must be disclosed.15 A 1980 court decision established that the risks of not 
accepting a recommended course of treatment also must be disclosed to 
the patient.16
At this time, the predominant standard for informational disclosure 
is the reasonable patient standard, modified to include what the particular 
patient facing a decision would want to know. The latter, of course, requires 
that physicians gauge what they believe the patient wants to know, and also 
that they ask the patient whether he or she desires any additional informa­
tion. The professional standard has not entirely disappeared; it is still used in 
some jurisdictions.
APPLYING INFORMATIONAL STANDARDS TO THE BISHOP CASE
Making the case for or against requiring Dr Crowne to disclose to 
Mr Bishop the availability elsewhere of a less invasive procedure to treat 
his mitral valve insufficiency requires exploring the question of whether 
a reasonable person would want to have that information, and whether 
Mr Bishop in particular would want it. From the vignette as presented, 
 

	
Referring Patients to Other Surgeons	
67
we do not have enough information to know what the patient would want, 
information that might have been gleaned from the details of communica­
tion, spoken and unspoken, during the disclosure conversation, but those 
details were not given to us.
We are left with the reasonable person standard—what information 
would a hypothetical reasonable person want? Would such a person want 
to know about a treatment for his problem that has the benefit of avoid­
ing open-heart surgery, but also the uncertainties accompanying a sparse 
number of short-to medium-term studies and no long-term data? The sur­
geon could tell the patient that the device in question is safe and effective 
enough to have gained approval for clinical use by a federal regulatory 
agency, and provide such information as already exists about the results 
of the investigational studies, while carefully placing those results in the 
context of the well-established safety and effectiveness of the open proce­
dure. It is perfectly acceptable, even laudable, for the surgeon to give the 
patient his opinion about the balance of benefits and harms associated with 
the two differing approaches, whether he believes that balance favors the 
open-heart operation or the newer transcatheter procedure. With all of the 
information laid out before him, the patient could then make an informed 
decision.
Certainly, the sheer volume of information might be confusing, but a 
carefully planned discussion, using language consistent with the patient’s 
level of education and capability of comprehension, can help the patient to 
make a decision that is consistent with his own values and beliefs.
WHAT IS THE CORRECT CHOICE FOR THE PATIENT?
It would be wrong to assume that Mr Bishop will choose the less invasive 
procedure, no matter how appealing it seems at first glance. An open, honest 
relationship with a patient, reinforced by full disclosure of reasonable thera­
peutic alternatives in terms the patient can understand, establishes a level of 
trust that is not easily fractured. Most patients in a trusting relationship with 
their physicians will follow their doctors’ advice.
The open-heart techniques and the transcatheter device both seem to be 
reasonable options. The patient’s ultimate decision is likely to be substan­
tially influenced by the degree of trust he has in his surgeon. If Mr Bishop 
had been referred to Dr Accola, after a frank and open discussion, the patient 
probably would choose open repair of his deformed valve. If he had been 
referred to Dr Skipper, he probably would choose the MitraClip and accept 
referral to another center that has access to that device. The patient will have 
made his decision based on his understanding of both options, and no matter 
which alternative he selects, it will have been the right choice for him.
 

	
68	
The Ethics of Surgery
References
	 1.	 McMahon K, McCarthy J, Goodson R, Stein J, O’Donnell D, Zyck K. Health care 
technology’s impact on medical malpractice. Paper presented at the Crittenden 
Medical Insurance Conference, May 5–6, 2005. www.kfplegal.com/articles/
InsuranceJournalArticle.pdf.
	 2.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. E-8.08 informed consent. American 
Medical Association Code of Medical Ethics: current opinions with annotations, 
2010–2011 ed. Chicago, American Medical Association; 2010:260–1.:  http://www.
ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-ethics/code-medical-ethics/
opinion808.shtml. Accessed January 8, 1011.
	 3.	 American Medical Association report of the Council on Ethical and Judicial 
Affairs. CEJA report 2-A-06. Chicago:  American Medical Association; 2006. 
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/about-ama/our-people/ama-councils/
council-ethical-judicial-affairs/ceja-reports.shtml. Accessed October 26, 2010. 
Cited with permission.
	 4.	 American College of Surgeons statements on principles. Relation of the surgeon 
to the patient. Chicago: American College of Surgeons, 2008. http://www.facs.org/
fellows_info/statements/stonprin.html#top. Accessed October 26, 2010.
	 5.	 Meisel A. The “exceptions” to the informed consent doctrine: striking a balance 
between competing values in medical decision making. Wisc Law Rev. 1979;413:460.
	 6.	 Bok S. Lies to the sick and dying. In: Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life. 
New York: Vintage Books; 1979:28.
	 7.	 Grover FL. The bright future of cardiothoracic surgery in the era of changing health 
care delivery: an update. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85:8–24.
	 8.	 Elstein AS. On the origins and development of evidence-based medicine and medi­
cal decision making. Am Res. 2004;53(Suppl. 2):5184–9.
	 9.	 Sinek SO. Start with Why:  How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action. 
New York: Penguin Group; 2009.
	10.	 King RT. Keyhole heart surgery arrived with fanfare, but was it premature? Wall 
Street Journal. May 5, 1999:A1.
	11.	 Bergsland J, D’Ancona G, Karamanoukian H, et al. Technical tips and pitfalls in 
OPCAB surgery: the Buffalo experience. Heart Surg Forum. 2000;3:189–93.
	12.	 Mack MJ. Coronary surgery:  off-pump and port access. Surg Clin North Am. 
2000;80:1575–91.
	13.	 Sellke FW, Chu LM, Cohn WE. Current state of surgical myocardial revasculariza­
tion. Circ J. 2010;74:1031–7.
	14.	 WLR Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee, 1957 (1 WLR 583).
	15.	 Canterbury v. Spence, 1972 (464 F.2d 772 [d.c. 1972]).
	16.	 Truman v. Thomas, 1980 (611 P.2d 902 [Cal 1980]).
 

69
6
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition
SHOULD SURGEONS SPEND MORE TIME OUTSIDE 
THE HOSPITAL?
Jamie Dickey, Ross M. Ungerleider, Joseph S. Coselli, 
Lori D. Conklin, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Libby Zion was an 18-year-old college student who died in a New York City 
emergency room in 1984. Her father, a newspaper columnist and former fed­
eral prosecutor, sued the hospital and campaigned against long working hours 
for residents. As a result, New York State passed the “Libby Zion Law” in 1989, 
limiting work hours for house officers.1 Ever since then, events have moved 
steadily, albeit in fits and starts, toward a conclusion that now seems to have 
been inevitable. The national 80-hour workweek mandated for house officers 
by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education has begun, and 
the disruption of traditional work schedules will be dealt with more or less 
effectively in medical graduate training programs around the country.2
We do not know what effect these changes will have on the profession of 
surgery, but most of us strongly suspect that it will not be good. At the very 
least, surgeons of the future are likely to have a work ethic that is different 
from the one we acquired during and after our training. In fact, a shift in 
attitude toward work seems to be well underway already. [. . .] It appears that 
the era of the “24/7” availability of surgeons and 16 to 18 hour workdays (only 
4 to 8 hours on weekend days with an occasional weekend off) may be ending 
and slowly fading into oblivion.
* Dickey J, Ungerleider RM, Coselli JS, Conklin LD, Sade RM. The surgeon’s work ethic in 
transition: should surgeons spend more time outside the hospital? Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:1145–
51. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
70	
The Ethics of Surgery
Assuming that this scenario of surgery’s future is accurate, does it con­
tain lessons for those of us still caught up in the old paradigm? Is there some­
thing to be said for or, perhaps, something to be gained from cardiothoracic 
surgeons joining the trend by adopting a more friendly family or personal 
lifestyle attitude toward the distribution of our waking hours?
The question of more time for surgeons outside the hospital was debated 
at the Southern Thoracic Surgical Association Annual Meeting in November 
2002. The topic of the debate was “The surgeon’s work in transition: surgeons 
should cut back on time in the hospital to spend more time with family and 
personal interests.” [. . .]
Pro
Jamie Dickey, PhD, Ross M. Ungerleider, MD
Steve White was on vacation with his wife. They had left the cold, windblown 
climate of their upper Midwest town very early that morning. Steve always 
told his wife that thoracic surgeons do not mind getting up early. She always 
preferred to keep the blinds drawn so as not to awaken from the first light of 
dawn. However, when they traveled together he invariably booked them on 
the first fight out of town, thus requiring them both to wake up shortly after 
she, a night person, would ordinarily be going to bed. Steve had begun his 
practice 18 months ago after 9 grueling years of training. He and Meg met, 
courted, married, and had 2 children during his residency. Although Meg 
quit her job after their son was born, she remained occupied with raising the 
family, but Steve continued to spend time at the hospital. If they could just 
make it through Steve’s residency, his nights on call, and the constant pres­
sures to do things right for his attendings, then life would get better. They 
would find a job in a town where they could raise their children and have a 
more normal family lifestyle.
This was more than a year ago and as far as Meg could tell, there had not 
been much of a change. Steve now toiled for his partners, in order to uphold his 
share of the responsibility. He kept reminding his wife that life would improve 
once he was more established with his partners and they knew he was not a 
slacker. He always seemed to say “yes” to work, which according to her per­
spective meant he was saying “no” to her and the children. Just getting Steve to 
agree to this vacation was huge. He was, of course, delayed at the hospital the 
night before, so Meg had to go to the dry cleaners and the bank, which were 
the errands that he was supposed to handle on his way home. Ironically, she 
planned on that occurring, because Steve was always detained. [. . .]
This was Steve’s first vacation since he had joined the practice. His role 
models in residency training at the university rarely seemed to take vacation 
time. [. . .] During his first year of practice he worked as though he were still a 
 

	
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition	
71
resident. He covered the practice whenever he was needed. He was, after all, 
the junior partner, and he had dues to pay. [. . .] For the first time that he could 
remember in months, they had fun together. They flew first class. They drank 
wine and talked about all the things they could do together without the kids. 
When they got off the plane it was sticky warm. After hours of being confined 
to a seat in an airplane, the tropical air relaxed them like it was a drug. The 
hotel had a driver waiting for them. [. . .] It was when they were checking into 
the hotel that he got the message.
“Dr. and Mrs White, welcome to our beautiful island paradise. We will 
do everything we can to make your stay wonderful. I noticed that there is a 
message for you. Let me retrieve it. It will only take a moment.” [. . .]
The manager handed Steve an envelope addressed to Dr. Steven White. 
He opened it and read it: “Please call ASAP.” The note was from his senior 
partner, Preston, and it included his cell phone number. Now all of the con­
nection between Steve and Meg dissipated. He reached into his pocket for his 
cell phone.
Damn! No service on the island. Steve needed a phone. He found one in 
the lobby. Meg went to check into their room.
It was the mayor. He was unstable and needing urgent surgery for acute 
aortic insufficiency from endocarditis. Steve’s partner was going to perform 
the operation, but he wanted Steve’s help. Preston thought the mayor would 
benefit from a Ross procedure, an operation that Steve had acquired a lot 
of experience with when he was in his residency. Preston was still learning 
the Ross procedure, and with Steve’s help, he was getting pretty good at it. 
However, he did not want to do this one alone, because this was the mayor 
for God’s sake! This would be hugely important to their practice. Television 
and the Press would be following this story closely. Everything had to go well. 
He hated to ask, but this was so important. Besides, Steve had said he could 
come back if things got out of hand. Meg could enjoy the island for a few days 
and Steve could be back the day after surgery.
“Sure,” Steve said numbly. It was not what he meant, not what he wanted, 
but it was what he said. “I will look into the flights back. I need to tell Meg. 
I will call you when I have some information.” [. . .]
When he got to bungalow 15, he was not finished thinking. He was not 
sure what to say to Meg. He was not really sure what to say to himself. If it 
were not for Meg being here with him, he would have no problem with going 
back. [. . .] Meg would, once again, understand. She would understand. She 
would be disappointed, but she would understand. How many times could 
he disappoint Meg? She was incredible, but she was human. Listen to her 
in there singing. She is so happy to be here. I will not be asking her to leave. 
I will be back in a few days after I do the professional, dutiful thing. I will be 
proud of myself. [. . .] Meg will understand. I can suck it up. The air feels so 
good here. I want to take a walk on the beach and hold Meg’s hand [. . .].

	
72	
The Ethics of Surgery
We will leave Steve here at the threshold of his bungalow, struggling with 
a no-win dilemma. In some form, we have all dealt with this dilemma. We have 
been “enculturated” to put our profession first before ourselves, our family, 
our being human. During training, thoracic surgeons are never taught bal­
ance. Can you be professional as a dutiful thoracic surgeon and be balanced?
How does Steve make the correct decision? In fact, is there a correct 
decision?
What is required of Steve is to create a life of balance and fluid move­
ment among three important conceptual aspects in his personal system. For 
example, he must learn the importance of valuing and respecting himself, his 
relationship with Meg (family, or others), and his medical practice (partners, 
patients, and media, which are the context of his job). To ignore or consis­
tently choose one system ingredient (self, other, or context) over another will 
create an unbalanced and rigid lifestyle, putting Steve, his wife, and his medi­
cal practice in jeopardy. It may be possible for one aspect in Steve’s system 
to grow and thrive temporarily, if it is consistently being chosen over other 
aspects in the system; however, even the chosen aspect will eventually suffer 
if one or both of the other aspects is destroyed.
What is the price to us of not having balance? Steve makes the well-traveled 
decision and returns to work. Once again, Meg understands. The statistics 
are grim. If Steve continues to make the decision that work comes first before 
his needs, including his relationship with Meg and their children, he may end 
up chronically depressed or with a substance abuse problem, which has been 
recorded as high as 8% to 12% among physicians, or he may even end up with 
both problems. With a little additional stress, such as his health or finances, 
he could become suicidal. The risk of suicide is higher in physicians than in 
the non-medical population. Each year it would take the equivalent of one to 
two average-size graduating classes of medical school to replace the physi­
cians who commit suicide. The risk seems especially high for those who are 
driven, ambitious, individualistic, and compulsive. The previous description 
represents the profile of a thoracic surgeon.3,4 [. . .]
Perhaps Steve makes the decision that Meg will not understand and that 
if his marriage is to survive, he just cannot return to work. After a while, 
making decisions to placate Meg, Steve begins to resent her. She is holding 
him back. She used to understand and support him. If it were not for her 
demands, he would be happy. How did this happen—this gradual slide into 
unhappiness? He just cannot keep everybody happy anymore. When did this 
become his responsibility?
What about his happiness? Why is life so hard? What would Steve do 
for Steve if there were only Steve to satisfy? The unsettling reality is he has 
no idea. He has spent so long in a culture that has taught him to take care of 
others, often demanded him to take care of others, to the point that he has no 
idea of how to take care of himself. He has derived his happiness from serving 

	
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition	
73
the needs and demands of others. When his pager goes off, he has ambiva­
lence. He hates to be bothered, but at least it creates something important 
and meaningful and he knows he has to respond. This is why he has not taken 
a vacation. During his years of training, he has lost his existence. No wonder 
he is out of balance.
We do not have solutions for Steve’s current dilemma. There is prob­
ably not a single correct decision. Steve has a “schema” that he has learned 
very well from his training and from his mentors in thoracic surgery. His 
training has defined the rules and code of conduct for him as a surgeon, 
and he has embraced it so that it feels comfortable and familiar to him. For 
Steve, to break the patterned responses of this schema would make him 
feel uncomfortable and unfamiliar. He has learned to work hard, take his 
responsibilities of being a surgeon seriously, and put his need for self-care 
and his need to spend time with his family last. [. . .] [W]‌e could propose 
a schema that may be more helpful to Steve, a schema that emphasizes 
the importance of valuing one’s self, others, and the context for making 
choices. Adoption of this schema would create a dynamic, fluid, and bal­
anced process for living.
Virginia Satir5 described this process of choice, which requires flexibility, 
balance and the ability to value one’s self, others, and the context as “system 
congruence” or “system-esteem.” It becomes possible to create stability in 
one’s life when the triadic components of self, other, and context are kept in 
balance over time and there is fluid movement among these elements in rela­
tionship to choice and value.
[. . .] [The] important discussion is to identify the learned (patterned) 
responses to which an individual continually chooses: (1) self, and ignores 
the needs of others and the context; (2) others, and continually puts his or 
her own needs last; (3) context, in which work is consistently chosen over the 
needs of one’s family and self; or (4) self and others, by completely ignoring 
the validity of the context. [. . .] Life becomes unbalanced when individuals 
repeatedly choose one or two aspects of the triad (self, other, or context) and 
ignore the others. System congruence and system-esteem are present when 
an individual (as well as the other members of the system) wholeheartedly 
choose to value and respect all three system components. [. . .]
It is unlikely that Steve would do too much damage to his relationship 
with Meg by decreasing their time together in the Caribbean, if she frequently 
(over the course of time) felt chosen and valued in her relationship with Steve. 
It is the repetition of never being chosen that creates the discord. Steve’s 
schema of putting context first is more of a problem than the ethics of this 
one situation. [. . .]
Just as Steve’s culture (surgical training and mentoring) produced and 
reinforced this schema, it may also have to change for Steve to be able to 
function comfortably within it. The possibility for change to this culture 

	
74	
The Ethics of Surgery
may have been handed to us by the Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education (ACGME) in the form of the 80-hour workweek for 
residents and the core competencies for education [. . .]. Rather than view 
these as obstacles for training competent thoracic surgeons, we can try to 
embrace them as an opportunity to begin emphasizing balance in the way 
our residents are trained. At the same time, we can begin examining how 
well we can make these changes for ourselves as we become the role models 
for the future.
Con
Joseph S. Coselli, MD, Lori D. Conklin, MD
In recent years, a number of substantive changes have occurred in the 
training and practice of medicine and surgery. The pace of change is always 
accelerating. As surgeons, we initially believed that we were immune to 
many of the evolving issues and concerns regarding resident work hours 
and lifestyle debates. However, now that has all changed and we find our­
selves in transition, trying to balance our professional lives with personal 
and professional responsibilities. This essay will provide opinions on the 
direction that our profession is heading and why we should remain con­
cerned and engaged.
In his 1963 presidential address to the Thirteenth Annual Student 
American Medical Association Convention, Dr.  Michael E DeBakey pro­
claimed that “the demands of a physician’s practice are so rigorous, requir­
ing such exclusiveness on the part of the doctor that he must forego almost 
all other aspects of life”6. Four decades later, this philosophy continues to 
exist within organizations such as the American College of Surgeons whose 
members pledge “to pursue the practice of general surgery with honesty and 
to place the welfare and the rights of [the] patient above all else. . . .”7 However, 
healthcare within the United States has become a multibillion-dollar indus­
try, and it is estimated that by the year 2007, American healthcare will cost 
more than 2 trillion dollars and will require 20% of the gross domestic prod­
uct.8 Jones pointed out that in order to function effectively in today’s health­
care system we need guidelines to sustain a focus on the welfare of sick people 
and “to navigate in a trillion dollar industry, we need a compass: medical 
ethics.”9
As surgeons, we are being forced to justify and balance three distinct 
areas of responsibility encompassing ethical, moral, and personal obligations 
in the face of escalating patient-care requirements. It is inarguable that sur­
geons should be able to spend more time with their families and pursue out­
side interests; however, the caveat lies within the word “should” and between 
“the devil and the details.”
 
 

	
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition	
75
ETHICAL OBLIGATIONS
Ethical decision-making involves personal sacrifice and an unwavering con­
science. As surgeons, our ethical obligations transcend self-interest, personal 
emergency, and social, political, and economic forces. We chose surgery as a 
profession for a myriad of different reasons; however, by doing so, we all agreed 
to function in a capacity that would be beneficial and helpful to our patients.
Developing an inner ethical being requires (1) a fundamental belief and 
a total and permanent commitment to an ideal; and (2) full dedication to the 
good of others and to help people who are in need.
MORAL OBLIGATIONS
Moral development involves personal sacrifice, effort, resolution, work, and 
discipline, leaving little room for incompetence, selfishness, or even legitimate 
personal concerns like fatigue, lack of time, or demands by the family. In his 
2001 presidential address to the Western Surgical Association, Dr. J David 
Richardson reminded us that “unlike other disciplines able to rely upon alter­
native caregivers, surgery does not lend itself to care by proxy.”10 One cannot 
discharge moral responsibility by giving it to someone else; it is nontransfer­
able, that is, “you can delegate authority, but not responsibility.”11
PERSONAL OBLIGATIONS
Satisfying our daily personal obligations with surgical responsibilities rep­
resents one of the most difficult aspects of the surgical lifestyle, as we are 
often criticized for not spending enough time taking care of our families or 
ourselves. However, we believe the surgical profession offers a service of high 
significant personal value. To accomplish this goal, we must (1) reinstate the 
principle of “just doing what is right”; (2) work without ulterior motives; and 
(3) display commitment and availability with no questions asked.
Alexis Carrel once wrote, “To accomplish our destiny, it is not enough 
to merely guard prudently against road accidents. We must also cover before 
nightfall the distance assigned to each of us.”12 Winston Churchill said, “It is 
no use saying, ‘we are doing our best.’ You have got to succeed in doing what is 
necessary.”13 General Dwight D. Eisenhower very eloquently stated, “We suc­
ceed only as we identify in life, or in war, or in anything else, a single overrid­
ing objective, and make all other considerations bend to that one objective.”14
COMMENT
Advocating these concepts represents a difficult challenge. It seems as though 
putting our patients first has become something of an archaic concept, even 
 
 
 
 

	
76	
The Ethics of Surgery
though, we have an ethical obligation to the patient and society to provide 
good care, which is referred to as the “social contract.” Society moves in 
the direction in which needs exist, and as physicians we not only must meet 
the needs, but we must also preserve certain basic principles essential to the 
proper provision of medical care. The surgical profession must be allowed to 
return to its original mission and renegotiate the social contract in order to 
become more balanced, because as we all know, “good medical care is rarely 
cheap and cheap medical care is rarely good.”3
From both theoretical and practical standpoints, surgical training and 
practice go beyond the realm of simple commitment and reside firmly in hard 
work. In observing current medical students and residents, many have noted 
that there is a political incorrectness to the hard work that is so necessary to 
fulfill the commitment. Even with the current resident work hour restrictions, 
the number of unfilled general surgery residency programs in the United States 
increased from 5 in 1997 to 41 in 2001.15 Prior studies have noted that lifestyle, 
especially a “controllable lifestyle,” is a major contributing factor in specialty 
choice by students. We are not arguing that a balance between purposeful hard 
work and personal responsibilities should be overlooked; however, many sur­
gical problems demand immediate attention. We agree with Dr. Richardson 
when he stated that “lifestyle as a buzzword cannot be allowed to be a ‘cop-out’ 
for failure to have adequate surgeons and other physicians to meet societal 
needs”10 or eventually, our society will be “served” by a medical community 
that is less talented and definitely less interested in providing medical services 
in the tradition of its predecessors. Great care must be taken to support and 
refresh those aspects of American medicine that have sustained it as the most 
noble of vocations, that have enriched our professional lives, and that have set 
us apart as the steadfast protector for the interests of our patients.
In conclusion, as surgeons we continue to work through the night, long 
past the time when our colleagues have gone home, because that is how we 
have been trained. Attitudes such as this should not be changed, but rather 
embraced, because to our patients, we represent “hope.” In the words of 
Stephen Paget,Í “We serve three masters: our profession, our patients, and 
our own people. For if a doctor’s life may not be a divine vocation, then no 
life is a vocation, and nothing is divine.”16
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Should surgeons spend more time with family and personal interests and less 
time in hospitals? Drs. Coselli and Conklin and Drs. Dickey and Ungerleider 
have provided conflicting answers in their respective essays. Their views, 
 

	
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition	
77
taken together, however, do not exhaust all possibilities. Additional insights 
may be gained by considering fundamental aspects of human behavior as 
understood by ancient philosophers. To them, Aristotle in particular, the 
most important of the virtues was phronesis, which has been roughly trans­
lated as “prudence” or “practical wisdom,” though neither term captures 
its essence. Phronesis is the wisdom that helps us recognize those particular 
goals and virtues, both professional and personal, that are of greatest value 
to us as individuals. By applying this wisdom, we can choose a path that 
will correctly align our personal goals and virtues so that our individual and 
unique human potentials can be most fully realized.17 [. . .]
These two essays cover a great deal of territory. Yet we wonder whether 
either viewpoint identifies the right way for a surgeon to achieve a truly ful­
filling life. As human beings we all share certain needs, such as nutrition, 
friendships, and health, yet each of us has a one-of-a-kind blend of specific 
needs, desires, talents, interests, and tastes. Therefore we each have a unique 
path to follow if we are to achieve full realization of our individual potentials 
as human beings, including both our professional and personal lives.
How should we interact with our patients, colleagues, hospitals, spouses, 
children, friends, and others? How much time should we spend on solitary 
activities or with others? How much time should we spend on our profession 
or personal interests? In other words, how should we best utilize our limited 
time, energy, and resources? Dr. Coselli’s answer may be right for him, or not. 
Dr. Ungerleider’s answer may be right for him, or not. We cannot make that 
judgment; only they individually have access to personal information and 
insights that make such judgments possible. [. . .]
As for the future of the surgical ethic, crystal balls are notoriously cloudy 
by nature, and mine is no more revealing than anyone else’s. The trend toward 
shorter work schedules and a bigger share of our time for personal activities 
is evidenced by medical students’ attitudes toward lifestyle18 and mandatory 
work limitations for residents,19 as well as advice such as that offered by Drs. 
Dickey and Ungerleider. The evidence for an imminent transition to a per­
sonal lifestyle-friendly surgical profession seems compelling. Yet, although 
the ghastly vision (ghastly for many of us at any rate) of a 40-hour work­
week for surgeons may seem just around the corner, it may not come to pass, 
at least not in our lifetimes. It is not that the nature of surgery necessarily 
demands workaholic surgeons; surgeons in other countries and other cultures 
have well-controlled schedules and a work ethic that accommodates a life 
outside of surgery. It is more that dedication to the well-being of our patients, 
the intensely personal nature of surgery (e.g., how many internists or pedia­
tricians have talked to a patient at dawn, held her heart in his hands in the 
morning, and talked to her again in the afternoon to tell her that her problem 
has been fixed), and our deeply embedded work ethic may combine to make 

	
78	
The Ethics of Surgery
the “24/7” surgeon a thing of the future, as well as the past. Drs. Coselli and 
Conklin’s contribution suggests the possibility of continuing survival of the 
traditional surgical work ethic and also provides us with reasons to believe 
that it may even be a good idea.
What will the practice of surgery look like in the future? This is not clear, 
but there is one certainty: change is inevitable. We need to prepare for what­
ever shifts occur as best we can. We may even hope to guide the process of 
change, perhaps in our profession but certainly in ourselves. Drs. Dickey, 
Ungerleider, Coselli, and Conklin have helped us to imagine how we may be 
better surgeons and better human beings, and for that we are grateful.
References
	 1.	 Robins N. The Girl Who Died Twice: Every Patient’s Nightmare: The Libby Zion 
Case and the Hidden Hazards of Hospitals. New York: Delacorte Press; 1995.
	 2.	 Lowenstein J. Where have all the giants gone? Reconciling medical education and 
the traditions of patient care with limitations on resident work hours. Perspect Biol 
Med. 2003; 46(2):273–82.
	 3.	 Gundersen L. Physician burnout. Ann Int Med. 2001;135: 145–8.
	 4.	 Miller MN, McGowen KR. The painful truth: physicians are not invincible. South 
Med J. 2000;93:966–74.
	 5.	 Satir V, et al. The Satir Model. Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc.; 1991.
	 6.	 DeBakey ME. The role of the physician in our changing society. The New Physician. 
1963;12:443–8.
	 7.	 American College of Surgeons Fellowship Pledge. www.facs.org. Chicago: American 
College of Surgeons. Accessed November 4, 2002.
	 8.	 Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, Institute of Medicine. Crossing 
the Quality Chasm:  A  New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
	 9.	 Jones RS. Medicine, government, and capitalism. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;194(2):111–20.
	10.	 Richardson JD. Workforce and lifestyle issues in general surgery training and prac­
tice. Arch Surg. 2002;137:515–20.
	11.	 Comisky SJ. Forever and ever. In: A good lawyer: secrets good lawyers (and their best 
clients) already know. McLean, VA: Chaos; 1997. http://www.agoodlawyer.com.
	12.	 Carrel A. The rules of conduct. In: Reflections on Life. New York: Hawthorn Books, 
Inc.; 1952:102–9.
	13.	 Churchill W. In: Tsouras PG, ed. The Greenhill Dictionary of Military Quotations. 
London: Greenhill Books; 2000.
	14.	 Royle T. In: Dictionary of Military Quotations. New York: Simon & Schuster; 1990.
	15.	 Gelfand DV, Podnos YD, Wilson SE, Cooke J, Williams RA. Choosing gen­
eral surgery: insights into career choices of current medical students. Arch Surg. 
2002;137:941–7.
	16.	 Paget S. Confessio Medici. London: MacMillan & Co.; 1909.
 

	
The Surgeon’s Work in Transition	
79
	17.	 Den Uyl DJ. The Virtue of Prudence. New York: Peter Lang; 1991:55–83.
	18.	 Lowenstein J. Where have all the giants gone? Reconciling medical education and 
the traditions of patient care with limitations on resident work hours. Perspect Biol 
Med. 2003; 46(2):273–82.
	19.	 Bland KI, Isaacs G. Contemporary trends in student selection of medical special­
ties: the potential impact on general surgery. Arch Surg. 2002;137(3):259–67.

80
7
Should Sleep-Deprived Surgeons Be Prohibited 
from Operating Without Patients’ Consent?
Charles A. Czeisler, Carlos A. Pellegrini, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
The effects of sleep deprivation on performance of physicians has been widely 
studied ever since the death of Libby Zion in 1984, the subsequent campaign 
by her parents and others to regulate physician work hours, and the passage of 
the so-called Libby Zion Law by New York State in 1989.1 Impetus was added 
to investigations of the effects of sleep deprivation when the Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) adopted similar stan­
dards for accreditation of residency programs in the United States in 2003.2 
While sleep deprivation clearly affects mental and physical functioning, 
results of investigations of clinical outcomes have been mixed—some finding 
adverse effects on patient care, others finding no such effects.
The arguments for regulating work hours of residents have been extended 
to apply in a more limited way to attending surgeons. In a recent issue of the 
New England Journal of Medicine,3 two medical ethicists and a sleep special­
ist published a paper that opened with this scenario: “A surgeon on overnight 
call responds to an 11 pm call from the hospital, where a patient has presented 
with an acute abdomen. After working up the patient for several hours, the 
surgeon decides to . . . perform a bowel resection. By the time the procedure 
is completed . . . it is time for morning rounds. The surgeon has not slept all 
night and is scheduled to perform an elective colostomy at 9 am.”
* Czeisler CA, Pellegrini CA, Sade RM. Should sleep-deprived surgeons be prohibited from 
operating without patients’ consent? Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(2):757–66. Copyright Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
81
The sleep specialists followed the vignette with a series of questions:3 
Does the surgeon have an obligation to disclose to the patient the lack of 
sleep during the past 24 hours and obtain new informed consent? Should the 
surgeon give the patient the option of postponing the operation or requesting 
a different surgeon? Should the hospital have allowed the surgeon to schedule 
an elective procedure following a night he was scheduled to be on call? Should 
it allow a surgeon to perform elective surgery after having been awake for 
more than 24 hours? After discussion of the effects of sleep deprivation (fewer 
than 2 hours of sleep in the previous 24 hours), the researchers answered 
these questions in the affirmative, with these statements:  “Patients await­
ing a scheduled elective surgery should be explicitly informed about possible 
impairments induced by sleep deprivation and the increased risk of compli­
cations.” “They should then be given the choice of proceeding with the sur­
gery, rescheduling it, or proceeding with a different physician.” “If patients 
decide to proceed, they should explicitly consent to do so—in writing, on the 
day of the procedure, in front of a witness, and ideally on a standardized form 
designed for this purpose.”
In the same issue of the [journal], three leaders of the American College 
of Surgeons responded to that paper in a letter to the Editor,4 agreeing that 
sleep deprivation could be a problem for surgeons, but disputing the necessity 
or wisdom of mandating a signed informed consent document. They argued 
that, instead, surgeons should be better educated about the effects of sleep 
deprivation as well as other factors that may affect performance, enabling 
them to weigh all issues to provide the best patient care. “A call for manda­
tory disclosure,” they stated, “essentially eliminates the necessary judgmen­
tal latitude surgeons should possess to determine their fitness for providing 
optimal patient care.”
In the essays that follow, two authors of those publications, Dr Charles 
Czeisler and Dr Carlos Pellegrini, present arguments on either side of the 
question of whether sleep-deprived surgeons should be required to obtain 
informed consent from patients before elective surgery.
Pro
Charles A. Czeisler, PhD, MD
More than 40 years ago, Drs Richard Friedman, Thomas Bigger, and Donald 
Kornfield from Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons 
in New York published a landmark paper as a Special Article in the New 
England Journal of Medicine.5 In it, Friedman and colleagues reported that 
sleep deprivation—which was first reported to adversely affect human per­
formance in a classic 1896 study of Patrick and Gilbert from the University of 
Iowa6 and had already been documented to impair cognitive and emotional 
 
 

	
82	
The Ethics of Surgery
brain functioning in healthy human participants more than fifty years ago—
also adversely affected clinical task performance of physicians during their 
first postgraduate year of training in internal medicine. [. . .]
Publication of the Friedman study [. . .] precipitated a major change in the 
scheduling of physicians in training—although ironically not the elimination 
of the routinely scheduled extended duration (24-hour) work shifts that the 
investigators found degraded the performance of physicians. Moreover, the 
publication did not precipitate the elimination of the 60- to 84-hour work 
shifts that resident physicians routinely worked, until at least 2003, on week­
ends at many institutions nationwide.7 [. . .] Simply put, the main rationale 
used to justify more than 24-hour shifts at the time—which was later for­
mally tested and disproven in a randomized controlled trial8—was that it was 
better for a patient to be cared for by a tired physician who has followed his or 
her care since admission to the hospital than by a more rested physician who 
may be less familiar with the course of the patient’s most recent illness. Yet no 
such rationale can be invoked to justify beginning an elective surgical proce­
dure on a new patient when a surgeon’s performance is impaired by sleep loss. 
Moreover, surgeons are required by law to obtain informed consent before 
elective surgery, after having disclosed what a reasonable patient would con­
sider to be the “material risks” associated with the procedure. To evaluate the 
premise that sleep-deprived surgeons should thus be required to disclose such 
sleep deprivation and then obtain a patient’s informed consent before operat­
ing, it is important to consider the current evidence linking sleep deprivation 
to human performance in the context of the ethical and legal principles of 
informed consent for elective surgery. [. . .]
SLEEP LOSS AND PERFORMANCE IMPAIRMENT
A great deal of evidence links sleep loss with performance impairment. Many 
factors influence the ability of healthy persons to sustain effective waking 
neurocognitive performance: biological time of day (i.e., circadian phase), 
length of prior wakefulness, nightly sleep duration, and proximity of the last 
sleep episode.9 While the effects of these circadian and homeostatic sleep 
regulatory processes can be modified by environmental conditions, physi­
cal activity, and pharmacologic agents (i.e., caffeine or nicotine during night 
wakefulness or hypnotics during day sleep), they cannot consistently over­
come the impact of adverse circadian phase and sleep deprivation on perfor­
mance. Repeated interruptions of sleep, such as is experienced by physicians 
when they are on call, can lead to sleep deficiency by degrading the restor­
ative quality of sleep. [. . .]
Without sleep, alertness and neurocognitive performance exhibit a 
steady deterioration attributable to sleep loss, onto which a rhythmic cir­
cadian variation is superimposed.10 During sustained wakefulness, 24 hours 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
83
of sleep deprivation has been shown to greatly impair neurobehavioral per­
formance and judgment,11 to an extent that is comparable to a level of 0.10% 
blood alcohol concentration.12 [. . .] As with alcohol intoxication, chronically 
sleep deprived persons tend to underestimate the extent to which their per­
formance is impaired, despite increasing impairment evident in objective 
recordings of the rate of lapses of attention. Thus, it would be just as inap­
propriate to ask a sleep-deprived surgeon whether he or she is able to operate 
safely as it would be to ask an intoxicated patron whether she or he is able to 
drive home from a bar safely.
ATTENTIONAL FAILURES AND AUTOMATIC BEHAVIOR
Importantly, persons struggling to stay awake in the face of elevated sleep 
pressure—whether due to acute total sleep deprivation, chronic sleep restric­
tion, or repeated interruption of sleep (due to external interruptions or the 
presence of a sleep disorder)—are not always able to do so. The instabil­
ity of the waking state due to sleep loss is associated with the occurrence 
of so-called microsleep episodes (i.e., involuntary sleep episodes <15 s long) 
and sleep attacks (i.e., involuntary sleep episodes >15 s long),13 both of which 
can be classified as attentional failures. [. . .] Of course, once a person has 
lost the struggle to stay awake and makes the transition from wakefulness 
to sleep, however briefly, driving performance is much worse than that of a 
drunk driver, as the person is unresponsive to the environment throughout 
the duration of the micro-sleep episode or the sleep attack.
[. . .] Sleep deprivation degrades reaction time, impairs judgment, memory 
and vigilance, reduces attention span, increases distractibility, and raises the 
risk of attentional failures, automatic behavior, falling asleep at the wheel, 
and motor vehicle crashes, with drowsy driving accounting for an estimated 
20% of motor vehicle crashes and serious crash injuries.14
Cognitive performance is markedly degraded during the transition from 
sleep to wakefulness.15 The extent to which this phenomenon, which is called 
sleep inertia, interferes with neurobehavioral performance is related to the 
depth of the prior sleep episode. Thus, agents that interfere with sleep, such 
as caffeine, can mute the effect of sleep inertia. The adverse impact of sleep 
inertia on performance can exceed the impact of total sleep deprivation. [. . .] 
Sleep inertia can greatly degrade the performance of on-call physicians or 
surgeons when they are called upon to perform clinical tasks immediately 
upon awakening.15
Young physicians in training who were randomized to work extended 
duration (>24-hour) shifts experienced twice as many attentional failures,16 
and on average made 36% more serious errors caring for patients in inten­
sive care units, including 55% more serious medical errors that reached the 
patient and 468% more serious diagnostic mistakes, as compared with the 
 

	
84	
The Ethics of Surgery
same physicians when they were scheduled to have many more handovers in 
care while working no more than 16 consecutive hours in intensive care units. 
[. . .] When performing procedures during the daytime, these young physi­
cians had a 73% increased risk of a percutaneous injury after their 20th hour 
of work than during shifts that averaged less than 12 hours in duration.17 In 
another study, the impairment of physicians on schedules in which sleep was 
restricted to an average of 2 to 3 hours in the prior 24 hours was comparable 
to the effects of elevated blood alcohol concentrations.18
[. . .] Faculty attending surgeons performing elective procedures during 
the daytime who had a sleep opportunity of less than 6 hours between cases 
during the prior on-call night had a significantly increased rate (+170%) of 
procedural complications (i.e., adverse events occurring as a result of care 
during an operation and likely attributable to the performance of the attend­
ing surgeon).19
INFORMED CONSENT AND DISCLOSURE
The standard of risk disclosure is based on the principle of patient autonomy, 
which has been stated in this way: “Physicians must have respect for patient 
autonomy. Physicians must be honest with their patients and empower them 
to make informed decisions about their treatment. Patients’ decisions about 
their care must be paramount, as long as those decisions are in keeping with 
ethical practice and do not lead to demands for inappropriate care.”20
In most jurisdictions, over the past 30 years, the standard of risk dis­
closure regarding informed consent has shifted from what a reasonable 
physician would expect to know (the “reasonable physician” standard) to 
what a reasonable patient would expect to know (the “reasonable patient” 
standard).21 The principle of patient autonomy is a fundamental principle 
underlying informed consent, and it requires that physicians respect the 
right of the patient to make voluntary and informed health care decisions. 
The patient-centered standard for informed consent “emphasizes patient 
autonomy by requiring that risk disclosure be conducted to satisfy what an 
ordinary reasonable person in the patient’s particular position would want to 
know. . . . [this precedent] ‘marks the rejection of the paternalistic approach to 
determining how much information should be given to patients’.”21
Legally, physicians must disclose “material risks,” which include impair­
ment of the physician caused by any use of drugs, disease, or alcohol that 
increase the risk of an operation—such risks must be disclosed to the patient. 
In the past, most deliberations regarding informed consent have focused on 
whether or not the informed consent adequately described the risks inherent 
in the surgical procedure itself and have not focused on the risks associated 
with the procedure being done in the hands of that particular health care 
provider at that time. Surgeons are understandably resistant to attempts to 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
85
change the standard of informed consent from the published risks associated 
with various procedures to surgeon-specific and site-specific risks, for fear 
that it would open up a Pandora’s box, including the issue of violating the 
privacy rights of a surgeon to protect information about his or her own medi­
cal history.22 Evidence is accumulating, however, that many factors, includ­
ing prior experience of the surgeon, whether the hospital has a high or low 
volume of similar cases, and the availability of electronic medical records, 
affect the risk of operative complications and adverse events during hospi­
talization.21 It is within this context that we must view the premise that is the 
subject of today’s debate, namely, that sleep-deprived surgeons should not be 
allowed to operate without the patient’s consent.
Given the principle of autonomy and the patient-centered standard of 
disclosure, physicians have a duty to disclose to the patient any condition 
of the treating physician that an ordinary reasonable person in the patient’s 
particular position would likely consider a material risk (i.e., would likely 
consider to be significant) and therefore want to know. [. . .] The key question 
is whether an ordinary reasonable person in the patient’s particular position 
would likely consider extended duration work hours and consequent sleep 
deficiency to be a material risk and whether the patient would therefore want 
to know if his or her surgeon had been working for 24, 48, or 72 hours straight 
before undertaking an elective surgical procedure.
Several national polls have indicated what patients want to know. For 
example, one poll asked about the subjects’ response if they learned that the 
doctor who is about to perform their surgery has been on duty for 24 con­
secutive hours.23 Respondents reported that they would be very likely (65%) 
or somewhat likely (21%) to feel anxious about their safety; moreover, 60% of 
respondents reported that they would assume that it was very unlikely (31%) 
or somewhat unlikely (29%) that the surgical procedure would go well. Thus, 
6 of 7 Americans would likely consider the status of a surgeon who has been 
on duty for 24 consecutive hours to be a material risk, and 6 of 10 believe that 
this would likely adversely affect the outcome of their surgery. Therefore, it is 
the surgeon’s duty to disclose that condition and seek the patient’s consent to 
operate in that condition before proceeding with the operation. Furthermore, 
respondents reported that they would be very likely (45%) or somewhat likely 
(25%) to ask for a different surgeon if they learned that the doctor who was 
about to perform their surgery had been on duty for 24 hours. So, 70% of 
Americans indicate that knowing that a surgeon who was about to perform 
their surgery had been on duty for 24 consecutive hours would influence their 
medical care decisions: it is the surgeon’s duty to disclose that condition and 
seek the patient’s consent to operate in that condition before proceeding with 
the operation.
The Boards of Directors of the Sleep Research Society and the National 
Sleep Foundation endorsed model legislation in 2005 that would establish 

	
86	
The Ethics of Surgery
“a requirement for physicians who have been awake for more than 22 of the 
prior 24 hours to inform their patients of the extent and potential safety 
impact of their sleep deprivation and to obtain consent from such patients 
before providing clinical care or performing any medical or surgical proce­
dures.” Given the extensive evidence that various aspects of neurobehavioral 
performance, including judgment regarding one’s impairment, are degraded 
to a degree that is, on average, comparable to a blood alcohol concentration 
of 0.05–0.10 g/dL when persons are awake for 24 hours,24 and that the average 
physician-in-training is impaired by an amount equivalent to a blood alcohol 
concentration of 0.05 g/dL when working frequent extended duration shifts, 
patients have a right to be informed if their physician has been on duty for 
24 hours or more and the right to decide whether to take the risk of receiving 
care from that provider.
Con
Carlos A. Pellegrini, MD
Should a surgeon who has been awake for 22 of the previous 24 hours not be 
allowed to operate without the patient’s written informed consent? My posi­
tion is that informed consent is not the right solution.
The rationale for obtaining informed consent from this patient under 
the circumstances described above is as follows: The operation performed by 
a surgeon who has not slept for 22 hours imposes a higher risk. The patient 
has a right to know that there is an increased risk of complications (patient’s 
autonomy). The patient’s knowledge of an increased risk will result in actions 
that mitigate the risk.
Let us examine each of these three assumptions.
DOES AN OPERATION PERFORMED BY A SURGEON WHO 
HAS NOT SLEPT FOR 22 HOURS IMPOSE A HIGHER RISK?
The issue of sleep deprivation and fatigue and its effects on medical care 
came to a head in the 1980s after the death of Libby Zion, a patient who 
had been admitted to a New York hospital and was treated by a resident 
who eventually claimed that fatigue caused by lack of sleep had impaired his 
decision-making abilities. [. . .]
This case fueled interest in the impact of sleep deprivation leading to a 
considerable number of studies. Those studies can be divided into two general 
types: those conducted in laboratories under controlled situations, and those 
conducted by physicians (surgeons in our case) examining the effect of differ­
ent work patterns on the outcomes of operations. The majority of the studies 
performed in controlled situations showed that vigilance, decision-making, 
 
 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
87
and other attributes are affected progressively by acute sleep deprivation of 
the type under consideration in our case. A few experimental and controlled 
studies, however, have shown that while sleep deprivation manifested itself in 
sleepiness scales and increased overall cognitive workload, the subjects were 
able to perform technical tasks and to learn new tasks after nearly 24 hours 
of sleep deprivation—something also pertinent to our discussion.25
Conversely, studies that measured the relationship of sleep deprivation 
to outcomes of surgery have had varying results. On one extreme is the obser­
vation of Rothschild and colleagues26 that in a subset of surgeons who had 
had less than 6 hours of “sleep opportunity” before an elective case (mea­
sured between the end of an emergency case while on call and the initiation 
of an elective case), the complication rate rose from 3.4% to 6.2% when com­
pared with cases the surgeons had performed when they had not been on call 
or operated during the night. Of interest, however, is that, even in this study, 
when all cases and all surgeons are considered, there were no significant dif­
ferences in the outcomes of elective operations whether the surgeon had or 
had not been operating the night before the elective case. The authors them­
selves acknowledge that they did not know whether or not the surgeons had 
slept the entire night before the “control” cases when they were not on call, 
and that there were potential confounders created by the retrospective nature 
of the study. On the other extreme are the findings of a more recent paper by 
Chu and colleagues27 in which the researchers evaluated the effects of sleep 
deprivation on the outcome of more than 4,000 consecutive cardiac surgical 
procedures and found no difference at all in the results with sleep deprivation 
of the kind we are discussing today. In between these two extremes there are 
other studies that have focused on the effect of reduction of resident work 
hours and workload of surgeons, and so forth, with varying results and many 
of these studies showing no effect on the outcome of patients.
At the end of the day, well-controlled studies are impossible to do, and 
many studies that have looked at physicians’ working hours and compared 
them to outcomes have failed to show an association. It is clear that while 
controlled studies show a progressive deterioration in our ability to do certain 
tasks, the failures of the studies to demonstrate influence on the outcome may 
be related to the fact that those involved use a number of fatigue mitigation 
techniques (such as physical fitness, periods of short naps, use of coffee, and 
others), to actually mitigate tiredness. The same has been true for the studies 
that have examined the effects of the implementation (in 2003) of an 80-hour 
work week for residents and mandatory periods of rest.28 Examination of 
patient outcomes has shown varying results, and the largest cohort examined 
comprising all admissions to the VA failed to show any difference between 
the before and after 80-hour eras.
The argument above is not intended to defy logic; acute and chronic sleep 
deprivation by logic should impact on the surgeon’s performance. However, 

	
88	
The Ethics of Surgery
the [clinical] studies have shown that there is no clear, measurable, reproduc­
ible relationship between the number of hours a surgeon has been working 
and the outcomes of an elective procedure.
THE PATIENT HAS THE RIGHT TO KNOW—BUT WHAT?
There is no question that the patient has a right to know everything that 
may affect the outcome of a procedure that he or she is about to undergo. 
However, mandating that the surgeon disclose to the patient the amount of 
sleep that the surgeon had over the preceding 24 hours without a clear mea­
surable effect on the patient’s outcome is not indicated. Furthermore, doing 
so just before an operation, at the time of maximum vulnerability on the part 
of the patient, is inhumane. Even further, if surgeons believe that they are 
tired and may not be offering the patient the best operation, surgeons’ ethics 
would insist that the surgeons excuse themselves from doing it. Therefore, 
asking a surgeon to discuss with the patient the potential for sleep depriva­
tion to affect outcome (assuming the surgeon believed that to be true) at the 
same time that we ask the surgeon to behave professionally (and therefore 
abstain from doing the operation) makes no sense to me.
It is not only that this becomes impractical, but if surgeons were to be 
obligated to disclose whether they were on call and did not sleep, should 
they also disclose whether they were able to sleep well? Whether they were 
awake part of the night at home? Whether there are issues of health among 
family members that kept a surgeon awake or worried? And what about 
financial worries, marital problems, and so many other issues that are 
known to affect the ability of humans to concentrate. How far is this disclo­
sure supposed to go?29
I understand that it is “convenient” to take something as objective as 
having been on call versus not having been on call or having performed an 
operation the night before versus not having performed an operation the 
night before as elements that can be easily determined and easily measured 
and put them in the consent. But why do that in the face of a lack of demon­
stration of a clear effect on outcomes? And if it was clear that it affected out­
comes, wouldn’t it then be an obligation of the system to protect the patient 
and the surgeon by prohibiting the performance of the operation? Why would 
informing the patient be the best solution in this case? What if the patient 
agrees? Can a system—assuming the information was clear on the effect of 
complications—accept the patient’s wish? [. . .]
MITIGATING THE RISK
I believe there are many ways to mitigate the potential risks associated with 
excessive workloads, night call, and sleep deprivation. First, the solutions 
 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
89
start with the surgeon. Appealing to professionalism and arming the sur­
geons with enough information about the effects of sleep deprivation and 
fatigue would result in the development of strategies by the surgeon. I am 
not talking about the “last line of defense,” namely, the surgeon noting that 
he or she is fatigued and deciding not to do an operation. I am talking about 
the adequate planning of the surgeon’s life in terms of overall fitness, hours 
worked, how to accommodate the unpredictability of surgery, and how to 
best position himself or herself for work. Informed consent is the ultimate 
expression of professionalism between a surgeon and a patient. Everything 
that the surgeon believes [. . .] may bear on the outcome should be discussed 
with the patient in the most transparent fashion well before the operation 
is decided upon. A mechanical disclosure of duty hours, while the patient 
is awaiting surgery, while asking that the patient sign a “specially designed 
form” as has been proposed, is the antithesis of informed consent and places 
the patient in an unfathomable position, choosing between a surgeon who is 
trusted and a totally new person who may not be known to the patient or the 
family.
The second layer that I see as a solution is the immediate environment in 
which surgeons performs their work. Groups of surgical divisions or sections 
in the academic world and surgical partners in private practice in the outside 
world should be looking out for one another, and they should make their rules 
as to whether or not elective procedures are allowed to be performed after a 
night on call. In those cases, local rules for groups and for teams may have 
much more relevance. For example, if the calls are normally ones that are 
extremely demanding, then there should be no room for surgeons to schedule 
elective cases the next day. Conversely, in situations where the call may not be 
very demanding and where most of the time the surgeon can obtain a good 
night’s sleep, then the scheduling of elective cases maybe more permissive.
Developing high-performing teams, emphasis is placed within a team on 
the need to have persons that are fit for duty. In this environment, persons are 
familiar with the concept of “mutual support,” situational awareness, and 
mutual monitoring, and the ability of any member of the team to “stop the 
line” just before or even during the operation represents another layer of pro­
tection and mitigates the risk.
The fourth element is the institution itself—and here is where I believe 
the bulk of the responsibility ultimately will lie. Yes, it will require giving up 
part of the autonomy that surgeons have had over the years, but ultimately, 
making use of modern technology, the institution should assure by its rules 
(eventually applied through the teams) that everyone is “fit for duty.”
Systems must change to respond to current knowledge in terms of cogni­
tive workloads and the effect of fatigue on performance. When discussing 
safety in medicine, we frequently turn to aviation, an industry known for 
its devotion to safety. Most recently, the Federal Aviation Administration 

	
90	
The Ethics of Surgery
introduced regulations further addressing pilot fatigue. It did so in a multi­
faceted way that takes into consideration specific factors that affect perfor­
mance.30 Extending our comparison of the informed consent, perhaps those 
who defend that theory would consider it appropriate for the crew to disclose 
to passengers the number of hours worked, the number of sectors flown, and 
the degree to which they may be sleep deprived. Instead, the system simply 
sets rules that precludes crews from flying those planes. Our rules should 
mandate that hospitals develop system changes to protect patients and sur­
geons alike that are not based on informed consent but on internal rules 
founded in the type of work that a given hospital carries on. Every surgeon 
should take fatigue management courses, and the systems should incorporate 
fatigue mitigation techniques that are known to work. [. . .]
Thus, the idea of obtaining informed consent is, in my opinion, an easy 
way out. It deflects a responsibility to patients that should be shared by the 
system, the team, and the surgeons; and it asks the patients to provide, with 
their signatures, permission to proceed to do something that may not be in 
their best interest. I believe it is the surgeon, and ultimately the system, who 
must rise to this occasion and accept the responsibility for the delivery of the 
best possible surgical care.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Czeisler [. . .] and Pellegrini agree on several points: lack of sleep compro­
mises neurobehavioral performance, and the ethical and legal standards for 
informed consent require that surgeons disclose to patients all material issues 
that can affect the outcome of a planned operation. Their main disagree­
ments focus on the nature of the material risks posed by a surgeon’s sleep 
deprivation and who should bear the burden of deciding whether an opera­
tion should go forward.
A critical issue in this debate is the real-world question of whether and 
to what degree attending surgeons’ lack of sleep affects the outcomes of their 
surgical procedures. Czeisler cites a single study of practicing surgeons—his 
group’s recent paper found that complications after procedures were higher 
when surgeons were on call the night before than when they were not. Their 
study had several serious flaws; most important was absence of any data on the 
surgeons’ actual time of sleep when on or off call—being on call does not nec­
essarily mean lack of sleep, nor does off call necessarily mean a full night’s rest. 
In response, Pellegrini cites several other studies that have shown no difference 
in surgical outcomes performed by sleep-deprived versus well-rested surgeons.
None of the available studies has been well controlled. Such studies are 
needed, but it seems unlikely that we will ever have a randomized controlled 
 

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
91
trial evaluating the effects on surgical outcomes of various degrees of practic­
ing surgeons’ sleep deprivation. In the absence of reliable data, what should 
be done in the interest of patient safety? That question lies at the heart of this 
debate.
In the face of uncertainty about the presence or degree of elevated risk 
to patients, we might wonder whether it is premature to mandate a consent 
process that is likely to confuse and frighten patients immediately before an 
operation, a time when they are not well situated to receive new information 
and make a thoughtful, deliberate decision. Perhaps the weight of making 
decisions about surgical procedures in the face of the surgeon’s suboptimal 
sleep would best be borne by the institution and the surgical team, as well as 
by the surgeon. Mandated disclosure and written consent of the patient seem 
too blunt an instrument to advance the goal of patient safety. The mitigation 
strategies outlined by Pellegrini might better serve the interests of patients 
without violating their autonomy and informational needs.
What will policy makers do with the facts, assertions, and beliefs pre­
sented in this debate, in this era of increasing regulation of the health care 
system? The policy of mandated work hours for physicians-in-training has 
been solidly entrenched for several years—such regulation may lie on the 
road ahead for practicing surgeons as well.
References
	1.	Section 405.4. Medical staff. New York Comp Codes R & Reg. Title 10 § 405 (1989). 
http://w3.health.state.ny.us/dbspace/nycrr10.nsf/11fb5c7998a73bcc852565a1004
e9f87/bc8961f6b14230318525677e00726457?opendocument. Accessed September 4, 
2012.
	2.	Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. The ACGME’s approach 
to limit resident duty hours 12 months after implementation: a summary of achieve­
ments. Chicago:  Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. http://
www.acgme.org/acwebsite/dutyHours/dh_dutyhoursummary2003-04.pdf. Accessed 
September 4, 2012.
	3.	Nurok M, Czeisler CA, Lehmann LS. Sleep deprivation, elective surgical procedures, 
and informed consent. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2577–9.
	4.	Pellegrini CA, Britt LD, Hoyt DB. Sleep deprivation and elective surgery. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;363:2578–9.
	5.	Friedman RC, Bigger JT, Kornfield DS. The intern and sleep loss. N Engl J Med. 
1971;285:201–3.
	6.	Patrick GTW, Gilbert JA. Studies from the Psychological Laboratory of the University 
of Iowa. Psychol Rev. 1896;III: 468–83.
	7.	Barger LK, Cade BE, Ayas NT, et al. Extended work shifts and the risk of motor 
vehicle crashes among interns. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:125–34.
	8.	Czeisler CA. The Gordon Wilson Lecture: Work hours, sleep and patient safety in 
residency training. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 2006;117:159–89.
 

	
92	
The Ethics of Surgery
	 9.	 Czeisler CA, Buxton OM. The human circadian timing system and sleep-wake regu­
lation. In: Kryger MH, Roth T, Dement WC, eds. Principles and Practices of Sleep 
Medicine. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:402–19.
	10.	 Czeisler CA, Gooley JJ. Sleep and circadian rhythms in humans. Cold Spring Harb 
Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:579–97.
	11.	 Venkatraman V, Chuah YM, Huettel SA, Chee MW. Sleep deprivation elevates 
expectation of gains and attenuates response to losses following risky decisions. 
Sleep. 2007;30: 603–9.
	12.	 Roehrs T, Burduvali E, Bonahoom A, Drake C, Roth T. Ethanol and sleep loss: a 
“dose” comparison of impairing effects. Sleep. 2003;26:981–5.
	13.	 Lim J, Dinges DF. Sleep deprivation and vigilant attention. Ann NY Acad Sci. 
2008;1129:305–22.
	14.	 Anderson C, Horne JA. Sleepiness enhances distraction during a monotonous task. 
Sleep. 2006;29:573–6.
	15.	 Wertz AT, Ronda JM, Czeisler CA, Wright KP. Effects of sleep inertia on cognition. 
JAMA. 2006;295:163–4.
	16.	 Lockley SW, Cronin JW, Evans BE, et al. Effect of reducing interns’ weekly work 
hours on sleep and attentional failures. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1829–37.
	17.	 Ayas NT, Barger LK, Cade BE, et  al. Extended work duration and the risk of 
self-reported percutaneous injuries in interns. JAMA. 2006;296:1055–62.
	18.	 Arnedt JT, Owens J, Crouch M, Stahl J, Carskadon MA. Neurobehavioral per­
formance of residents after heavy night call vs. after alcohol ingestion. JAMA. 
2005;294:1025–33.
	19.	 Rothschild JM, Keohane CA, Rogers S, et al. Risks of complications by attending 
physicians after performing nighttime procedures. JAMA. 2009;302:1565–1572.
	20.	 Sox HC, ed. Medical professionalism in the new millennium: a physician charter. 
Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:243–6.
	21.	 Veerapen RJ. Informed consent:  physician inexperience is a material risk for 
patients. J Law Med Ethics. 2007;35:478–85.
	22.	 Heinz C. How much is enough? Patients’ right-to-know v privacy rights of health­
care providers. Law Govern. 2004;7: 1–21.
	23.	 National Sleep Foundation. 2002  “Sleep in America” poll. Washington, 
DC:  National Sleep Foundation. http://www.sleepfoundation.org/sites/default/
files/2002sleepinamericapoll.pdf. Accessed September 19, 2012.
	24.	 Falleti MG, Maruff P, Collie A, Darby DG, McStephen M. Qualitative similarities 
in cognitive impairment associated with 24 hours of sustained wakefulness and a 
blood alcohol concentration of 0.05%. J Sleep Res. 2003;12:265–74.
	25.	 Tomasko JM, Pauli EM, Kunselman AR, Haluck RS. Sleep deprivation increases 
cognitive workload during simulated surgical tasks. Am J Surg. 2012;203:37–43.
	26.	 Rothschild JM, Keohane CA, Rogers S, et al. Risks of complications by attending 
physicians after performing night-time procedures. JAMA. 2009;302:1565–72.
	27.	 Chu MW, Stitt LW, Fox SA, et al. Prospective evaluation of consultant surgeon sleep 
deprivation and outcomes in more than 4000 consecutive cardiac surgical proce­
dures. Arch Surg. 2011;146:1080–5.
	28.	 Hegar MV, Truitt MS, Mangram AJ, Dunn E. Resident fatigue in 2010: where is the 
beef? Am J Surg. 2011;202:727–32.

	
Sleep-Deprivation in Surgery	
93
	29.	 Keune JD, Kodner IJ, Healy GB. Disclosing sleep: an ethical challenge. Bull Am Coll 
Surg. 2011;96:20–1.
	30.	 Federal Aviation Administration. Fact sheet—Pilot fatigue rule comparison. 
Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administration. http://wwwnew.faa.gov/news/
fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?newsid=13273&omnirss=fact_sheetsaoc&cid=103_f_s. 
Accessed September 19, 2012.

94
8
Are Thoracic Surgeons Ethically Obligated to 
Serve as Expert Witnesses for the Plaintiff?
Donald C. Watson, Jr., Francis Robicsek, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Medical negligence lawsuits have been growing in both number and size of 
awards to plaintiffs for many years. In the last few years, however, the effect 
on physicians, especially surgeons, has become noxious, and record numbers 
of surgeons are choosing early retirement or abandoning medicine to work in 
other fields. Tort reform is high on the agenda of nearly every medical asso­
ciation and specialty society.
The villain of this piece is generally believed to be trial lawyers, who 
profit greatly from huge awards in malpractice cases, often far beyond their 
injured clients’ share of the bounty. The anger of many if not most physicians 
is directed at the plaintiff’s bar, to the extent that they refuse to testify for the 
plaintiff in any malpractice suit, especially when the defendant is a member 
of their own specialty.
Yet, there may be problems with this viscerally held position. In providing 
legal testimony, a physician’s primary ethical obligation is to tell the truth as he 
sees it without bias that favors one side or the other. That may make irrelevant 
the side of a lawsuit for which a physician testifies. There are many other con­
siderations of course, but there is an underlying vexing question: if a thoracic 
surgeon regularly testifies in medical negligence lawsuits, does he have an ethi­
cal obligation to serve as expert witness for plaintiffs as well as defendants?
* Watson DC Jr, Robicsek F, Sade RM. Are thoracic surgeons ethically obligated to serve as 
expert witnesses for the plaintiff? Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78:1137–41. Copyright Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Surgeons as Expert Witnesses for Plaintiffs	
95
This question was debated at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Southern 
Thoracic Surgical Association by two of our most esteemed colleagues, both 
former presidents of the Association and both possessing special expertise 
in legal issues: Donald Watson and Francis Robicsek. They present their 
adversarial positions after the presentation of this case, which served to 
focus the debate.
CASE
Doctor Loyall is a cardiothoracic surgeon with a large experience and excel­
lent results in aortic surgery. He has been sued several times by patients who 
had complications of surgery, usually paraplegia, but also false aneurysms 
and other problems. He has lost a case only once when, contrary to the merits 
of the case, a jury was emotionally swayed by the appearance of the plaintiff, 
an attractive young woman whose right leg was amputated because of a com­
plication after aortic surgery.
Doctor Loyall testifies in negligence cases two to three times a year in 
defense of other surgeons who have been sued, usually for complications of 
aortic surgery. He receives a telephone call from an attorney in another state. 
He hears the story of a 55-year-old man who is now paraplegic after removal 
of a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm extending into the distal aortic 
arch. The operation in question was done with a clamp-and-sew technique, 
with a cross-clamp time of 67 minutes. It was done by a thoracic surgeon who 
has been in practice for 5 years, after finishing his training at a program that 
is now on probation for inadequate operative experiences for their trainees. 
The surgeon is not yet board certified.
It then becomes clear to Dr. Loyall that the lawyer represents the plain­
tiff. He has a personal policy of never testifying for plaintiffs, so he ends the 
conversation, declining to be involved, despite the strong likelihood of sub­
standard judgment or technique or both.
Was Dr. Loyall wrong in refusing to testify for the plaintiff in this case, 
on the grounds that physicians have an ethical obligation to testify for plain­
tiffs as well as for defendants in medical liability cases?
Pro
Donald C. Watson, Jr, MD
The principle question is important: are thoracic surgeons ethically obligated 
to serve as expert witnesses for the plaintiff? Two ethical arguments follow 
showing that absent other disqualifying factors, thoracic surgeons are obli­
gated to serve as expert witnesses for the plaintiff or the defense. That of 
 
 

	
96	
The Ethics of Surgery
course assumes that the surgeon is able to offer testimony and that the merits 
of the case justify such testimony. Doctor Loyall was wrong in refusing on 
only ethical grounds to testify for the plaintiff.
Ethics discussions help us decide the bases upon which we pursue the 
things we value and the ultimate criteria for what we do. However, they 
serve only as advisory. The specifics of each situation vary. Conclusions are 
often subjective and almost always involve judgment. Differences in opinion 
between competent people can and do exist on many important ethical issues. 
We must be respectful of and take into consideration others’ points of view. 
These ethical considerations, as suggested by Pellegrino,1 are also undergoing 
a metamorphosis. The ethical framework of medicine is changing.
Two cautions should be acknowledged. We must beware of politi­
cally correct actions that have shaky ethical foundations. Armey suggests, 
“Politics sooner or later makes a fool of everyone.”2 In the long run, actions 
supported by sound ethical principles should prevail. Additionally, although 
used in a different context, a political activist suggested, “If we don’t stand 
for something, we may fall for anything.” Thoracic surgeons must stand for 
moral principles and use professional standards or we are likely to fall for the 
antithesis.
Two concepts of “ethical” are expanded upon. The first involves moral, 
that is, right behavior standards. The second demands conforming to 
accepted professional standards of conduct. All other criteria being met, 
each line of reasoning forms an independent ethical justification for the posi­
tion that thoracic surgeons are obligated to serve as expert witnesses for the 
plaintiff or the defense.
A brief summary of five foundations of ethical thought, in idealized 
societies, is in order.3 [. . .] Plato described the common good in a society of 
individuals. Opining that one’s own good is firmly linked to the good of the 
community, he concluded that individuals are ethically bound by the pursuit 
of common values and goals. Subsequently Aristotle expressed the fairness 
and justice approach by noting that equals should be treated equally. In our 
judicial system, the plaintiff and the defendant are equals, thus requiring 
equal treatment for the plaintiff and the defendant. As this notion was later 
pursued in ethics discussions, favoritism and discrimination were considered 
unjust and wrong. Additionally, the virtue approach maintains the existence 
of certain ideals toward which we should all strive. Relevant virtues include 
compassion, generosity, integrity, fairness, self-control, and prudence. Then, 
in the 18th century Kant suggested a rights approach focusing on an indi­
vidual’s right to choose. When living in a community, the individual’s rights 
include truth, privacy, freedom from harm, and what is promised by a con­
senting individual. Finally, the utilitarian approach, a 19th century concep­
tion of Bentham and Mill, suggested that actions are ethical only when they 
provide the greatest balance of good over evil.

	
Surgeons as Expert Witnesses for Plaintiffs	
97
Four medical moral principles of behavior have evolved with these foun­
dations in ethics. The Hippocratic Oath suggests that we do no harm and 
help others, principles of nonmaleficence and beneficence. Patient autonomy, 
the third principle, has recently risen in importance but is not germane to 
the question posed. The fourth principle of justice insists that we do the right 
thing for patients and be fair in those actions. Justice is, more often than not, 
the most difficult to resolve.
These foundational principles of ethics and medicine, that is, right 
behavior standards, force us to ask what implications naturally follow when 
applying them to the question posed? These implications are that Dr. Loyall 
was (1) not serving the common good, (2) treating equals unequally, (3) fail­
ing to reach for virtuous goals, (4) ignoring the rights of individuals to truth 
and freedom from harm, (5) failing to tip the societal balance of good over 
evil, (6) failing to help future patients, (7) potentially allowing harm to future 
patients, and (8) failing to provide expert information available for the best 
possible evaluation of what was just. It is reasonable to conclude that by 
refusing, on only ethical grounds, to testify for the plaintiff, Dr. Loyall was 
wrong.
A second independent concept of ethical actions demands conformity 
to accepted professional standards of conduct. [. . .] Our profession has stan­
dards and is guided by major organizations with established principles of 
behavior. As a matter of ethical behavior, thoracic surgeons are obligated 
to comply with them in their actions. The American Medical Association 
(AMA) suggests that as citizens and professionals, physicians have an ethical 
obligation to assist in the administration of justice.4 The American College 
of Surgeons (ACS) Code of Conduct5,6 suggests that surgeons, in part, must 
accept responsibilities to serve as effective advocates for patients’ needs, to 
provide the highest quality of surgical care, and to participate in self regula­
tion by setting, maintaining, and enforcing practice standards. By refusing 
on purely ethical grounds to testify, Dr. Loyall was wrong by not fulfilling 
this ethical obligation to conform to accepted standards of physician con­
duct. Doctor Loyall would not be assisting in the administration of justice, 
would not accept responsibilities to advocate for patients, and would not help 
to calibrate and improve the quality of surgical care, or setting, maintaining, 
and enforcing standards of practice.
In general, when considering two ethical alternatives it is helpful to ask 
five questions namely, which alternative (1) best respects the moral rights of 
those affected, (2) leads to the best overall consequence, (3) treats, in process, 
the parties equally, (4) advances the common good, and (5) develops moral 
virtues? In balance, greater good over evil is achieved when physician experts 
provide the best possible information and advice to a system adjudicating a 
dispute. Physicians are ethically obligated to testify for the plaintiff or the 
defendant depending on their ability and the merits of the case. We must 

	
98	
The Ethics of Surgery
stand for moral principles of behavior. Professional standards define those 
principles.
A few caveats are in order. First, this issue is emotionally charged. 
Emotional reactions about colleagues testifying against colleagues are 
intense. Thoracic surgeons are not exempt from these most human reactions. 
This response often interferes with our collective ability to objectively engage 
the question posed.
Second, many other important issues are related to this ethics question, 
distracting us from the principle at hand. These distractions include but are 
not limited to disordered, even chaotic, medical-legal systems, qualifications 
of experts, legal requirements of experts, adversarial nature of legal proceed­
ings, differences between medical truth and legal truth, specific case circum­
stances, and practicality of testifying. [. . .]
Third, in our daily actions, we must consider practical consequences. 
Politically correct actions, which may be in opposition to moral obligations, 
allow us to get along within our community and to survive with less stress. 
The penalty for violating a strictly moral obligation is primarily personal. 
The penalty for adhering to a moral principle, in violation of loyalty, can be 
steep. Some surgeons, in all subspecialties, have stood on moral principle 
only to have their lives adversely affected because the community viewed that 
moral stance as not loyal.
Fourth, if one is to testify, one should adhere to established standards. 
The ACS5 and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS)7 have described qualifi­
cations and standards of behavior for expert witnesses. [. . .] The ACS and STS 
suggest there is an obligation to testify when appropriate. [. . .] The AMA also 
suggests that expert witnesses, irrespective of being called by either the plain­
tiff or the defense, must not become advocates and must remain nonpartisan.8
In conclusion, based on fundamental ethical principles for behavior of 
individuals living within a community and professional code of conduct stan­
dards, Dr. Loyall was wrong in refusing on purely ethical grounds to testify 
as an expert witness for the plaintiff. The reality of medical-legal proceed­
ings in our society, however, presents a number of confounding issues making 
adherence to this ideal practice difficult.
Con
Francis Robicsek, MD, PhD
Society has its way of dealing with important issues. One way is to make them 
laws. The treating physician is a “factual” witness who has a legal obligation 
to testify to the treatment his patient received. In contrast, just as an unin­
volved physician does not have any legal obligation to accept an unknown 
patient, a medical expert may testify voluntarily, albeit paid. While he is 
 

	
Surgeons as Expert Witnesses for Plaintiffs	
99
supposed to render an unbiased opinion in our peculiar medico-legal system, 
his involvement is called upon only if it promotes the invoking party. If it does 
not, his testimony will neither be given nor heard.
Whenever a physician is asked to render an expert opinion, he may 
legally, as well as ethically, decide not to get involved. He may feel unprepared 
and unwilling to be interrogated for hours, have his credentials questioned, 
his family life scrutinized, and his character assassinated by an overzealous 
attorney.
Or he may be a conscientious objector who believes that our tort system 
is wrong and does not help the injured; it does not punish the negligent but 
often hurts the innocent physician and provides a windfall for the attorney. 
He may think the only way to change it is not to participate, but he might be 
willing to assist a colleague innocently accused and does not consider it his 
duty to get involved in procedures against fellow physicians.
Or he can say the “public trust,” which goes with his medical license, 
obliges him to try to make the best of the system, to cooperate with it, and 
make choices on a daily basis.
Any of the above may be fitting to one’s own ethical choice and should 
be respected. It is not unethical. What is unethical is for someone to render 
inappropriate testimony for any reason, for any party. That is today’s main 
ethical problem and the reason why some physicians are reluctant to testify. 
They simply do not want to be identified with the readily available group of 
dubious witnesses who fill our courtrooms with pseudoscience and are will­
ing to testify “for or against” depending upon who pays their fee.
To believe that obliging our profession to testify may clean up the situ­
ation is naïve. While some attorneys indeed seek an honest reliable opinion, 
others are looking for a witness who says what they want to hear. They will go 
from one potential witness to the other until one is found who is either naïve 
or loose enough to serve their purpose.
The Trial Bar wants us to actively support the tort system by providing 
a readily available list of witnesses. Our answer is this: we are ready if you 
are ready! Give us a process that fairly and speedily compensates the injured 
patient, punishes the negligent physician, protects from frivolous, costly liti­
gation—and they will not find a more cooperative partner than we are. We 
are ready to sit down tomorrow to discuss no-fault insurance, review panels, 
mandatory mediation, free, impartial witnesses to the court—whatever.
There is indeed a problem with medical experts—not with those who do 
not testify, but with some of those who do. While some of them, be it motiva­
tion by either economic or by intent, do provide a fair and honest testimony, 
others are less than truthful. For our professional organizations to open 
the floodgates of “readily available” witnesses without any quality control 
of their testimony would be highly counterproductive. Before we accept the 
concept that it is everybody’s ethical duty to testify, and we provide a list of 

	 100	
The Ethics of Surgery
experts obliged to testify, we should fulfill our already existing ethical duty to 
clean up expert testifying. Ten years ago I recommended to the Council of the 
STS that medical expert testimony should be reorganized as a professional 
activity and thus subject to peer review, and that a grievance process should 
be made available to both parties. By this mechanism, improper testimony 
can be readily exposed and false witnesses censored and hence removed from 
the system.
This process has now been applied by the American Association of 
Neurological Surgeons (AANS), which found that one of their members pro­
vided “inappropriate and unprofessional” testimony and they suspended his 
membership.9 The member countersued. The case in which the American 
Medical Association, the American College of Surgeons, and the Illinois 
State Medical Society filed a joint “friend of the court” brief supporting the 
AANS was reviewed by the Seventh Circuit US Court of Appeals and decided 
in favor of the AANS. The US Supreme Court declined to review the case.10 
However, the event was labeled by some trial lawyers as an “unacceptable 
intrusion and egregious assault by an overly anxious, embittered group of 
physicians who are willing to do anything to pressure their colleagues not to 
testify.”
Until we make significant strides in this regard, or even thereafter, medi­
cal experts testifying should remain an issue of personal conscience. I may 
have testified in the case in question, either for the defendant or the plain­
tiff, depending upon additional information, but I do not castigate those who 
exercised their First Amendment right by keeping their mouth shut. My feel­
ings are best expressed by the words of Dr. Mark Gorney11 published in the 
Bulletin of the American College of Surgeons: “The moment of truth is at 
hand when you must elect all circumstances considered whether to act as an 
expert witness against a colleague. Only you, in the loneliness of your mind, 
can decide which road to follow, because in one direction the circumstances 
may be overwhelming for it, whereas in the other, something inside is saying, 
‘There but for the grace of God go I.’ ”
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Few topics stoke a surgeon’s fire as much as malpractice litigation. Watson 
and Robicsek have presented starkly contrasting views of how Dr.  Loyall 
should have responded to the plaintiff’s attorney who was soliciting his opin­
ion. The essayists agree on the central ethical imperatives of medical testi­
mony: all testimony should be truthful, as the surgeon understands the truth, 
and the witness should have expertise in the area under litigation. After that, 
their points of view and reasoning sharply diverge. [. . .]
 

	
Surgeons as Expert Witnesses for Plaintiffs	
101
The case itself removes most of the issues that usually complicate 
medical-legal discussions. Disdain for the tort system is not, for Dr. Loyall, 
a barrier to testifying because he regularly testifies in lawsuits. His quali­
fications as an expert witness in this case are not in doubt. The adversarial 
environment of negligence lawsuits and the wide chasm between medical 
(scientific) and legal (authoritative) standards of truth have not bothered 
him in the past, as he has not rejected testifying as an expert. We are left 
with a single reason for his consistent refusal to testify for plaintiffs and 
their attorneys, based in emotion: he was once deeply stung by the arbitrary 
injustice of the medical-legal judicial system. There are undoubtedly addi­
tional questions of fact related to the patient’s injury in the case at hand, 
but Dr.  Loyall has summarily dismissed them as irrelevant. The central 
question—whether Dr. Loyall was wrong in refusing to testify for the plain­
tiff—is stark.
Watson’s conclusion that Dr. Loyall was wrong not to testify is based on 
a nexus of ethical reasoning that stretches across several centuries of ethical 
thought that would now fall under the rubric of professionalism. Robicsek’s 
finding that Dr. Loyall did nothing wrong is based on the narrow grounds of 
the right of every American to speak or to remain silent. At issue here is the 
nature of professional ethics: are the professional decisions and actions of 
physicians bound only by the laws governing society in general or do physi­
cians bear additional legitimate extralegal obligations (that is, ethical obliga­
tions) by virtue of the special circumstances inherent in the patient-physician 
relationship?
Ethics and law are closely related, overlapping to some extent, but essen­
tially separate. To say, as Watson does, that Dr. Loyall has an ethical obliga­
tion to testify for the plaintiff if the facts justify such testimony is not to say 
that he should be hauled into court unwillingly or lose his medical license if 
he refuses to testify. He has a legal right not to testify, just as Robicsek says. 
But if Watson’s view of professional ethics is correct, then Dr. Loyall was 
nevertheless wrong in refusing to testify.
Robicsek’s commitment to a legalistic view of Dr.  Loyall’s obligation 
to testify does not require that he reject professional ethics as Watson has 
described it. He could have it both ways, asserting both the right not to tes­
tify and the importance of professional ethics, by arguing, as some have, that 
legal testimony is not part of professional practice so should not be subject 
to the usual ethical standards of the practice of medicine, to peer review, or 
to oversight by medical licensing boards. He did not make that argument, 
however, so we cannot be certain where he stands, but I suspect that he is as 
deeply committed to professional ethics as any of us.
Our essayists have persuasively argued distinct visions of professional 
decision making. Each of us is likely to face similar decisions in the future, 
unless there is an early resolution of the malpractice crisis, which seems 

	 102	
The Ethics of Surgery
unlikely. If and when that time comes, our decision to say yes or no will 
embody the particular view of professionalism we have embraced.
References
	 1.	 Pellegrino ED. The metamorphosis of medical ethics. JAMA. 1993;269:1158–62.
	 2.	 Armey D. Armey’s axioms. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2003.
	 3.	 Markkula Center for Applied Ethics. Thinking ethically: a framework for moral 
decision making. Santa Clara, CA: Santa Clara University. http://www.scu.edu/eth­
ics/practicing/decision/thinking.html. Accessed October 24, 2003.
	 4.	 American Medical Association. E-9.07 Medical testimony. Chicago: American Medical 
Association. http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/8539.html. Accessed October 
18, 2003.
	 5.	 Gruen RL, Arya J, Cosgrove EM, et al. Professionalism in surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 
2003;197:605–10.
	 6.	 Spencer FC, Guice KS. The expert medical witness: concerns, limits, and remedies. 
Bull Am Coll Surg. 2000;85:22–5.
	 7.	 Society of Thoracic Surgeons Board of Directors. Statement on the physician expert 
witness. STS News. 2003;9:6–7.
	 8.	 American Medical Association. Board of Trustees Report 5-A-98. Chicago: American 
Medical Association. http://www.thruthinjustice.org/amareport.htm. Accessed 
October 18, 2003.
	 9.	 Rice B. Malpractice experts:  the penalty for bearing false witness. Med Econ. 
2002;15:36–9.
	10.	 Hollowell EE, Zaremski MJ, Wecht CH. Expert testimony in medical malprac­
tice cases—new hazards. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Academy of Forensic Sciences, February 21, 2003, Chicago.
	11.	 Gorney M. Expert witnesses caught in a moral dilemma. Bull Am Coll Surg. 
2003;88:11–14.
 

SECTION 3
Relationships with Patients—
Autonomy and Consent
Robert M. Sade
A physician shall, while caring for a patient, regard 
responsibility to the patient as paramount.
—Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, American Medical 
Association, Code of Medical Ethics
Questions of how physicians should relate to patients lie at the core 
of medical ethics. In the practice of medicine, the first responsibility of 
physicians is to the patients they treat. Out of respect for patients’ right 
of self-determination, physicians must transmit to patients sufficient 
information about their illnesses to allow them to understand what is 
happening to them and to be able to make reasonable decisions about 
their health care. Patients must be respected as persons, and their medical 
needs must receive timely attention. All information about the patient’s life 
and medical condition must be held in strict confidence, and the patient’s 
privacy must be respected.
Because the practice of surgery usually involves physical invasion of 
the body, the process of informed consent is especially important in the 
relationship between surgeons and patients. The fundamentals of informed 
consent—its precondition and conditions—are fairly straightforward and 
well known to surgical residents and practicing surgeons. The precondition 
must be met before the consent process can continue: The patient must 
have the capacity to make decisions. If the patient lacks capacity, then a 
proxy (an agent appointed by the patient) or surrogate (a person authorized 
by law to make decisions on the patient’s behalf) makes decisions in 
 
 

	 104	
The Ethics of Surgery
place of and for the patient. The basic conditions of informed consent are 
disclosure and consent. Patients must be given information about their 
illness and reasonable treatment alternatives, transmitted in a form that 
they can understand in sufficient detail to make a reasoned decision. 
Finally, patients must authorize execution of diagnostic tests or treatments.1
The process of informed consent occurs every day, so it seems 
familiar and straightforward. Yet the process is more complex than it 
seems because of the intricate interplay between the details of the illness, 
the range of possible interventions, the surgeon’s beliefs about what is 
medically best, and the patient’s capacity to understand the information 
and come to a decision. How much information should be conveyed? What 
methods of presentation optimize the patient’s understanding? How can 
one ensure that the patient actually understands the information? How 
can one measure the depth of understanding? How should the surgeon 
respond if the patient doesn’t want to listen to explanations and asks 
the surgeon to do whatever the surgeon thinks is best? When if ever can 
a procedure be carried out without the patient’s consent? What can be 
done if a patient is competent and rational but still refuses treatment 
of a life-threatening condition? How much decision-making authority do 
surrogate decision-makers have, especially if the surgeon disagrees with 
their choices? These are just a few items on the long list of complicated 
questions that pertain to informed consent. Excellent discussions of the 
ethics of informed consent are available for medicine in general2 and for 
surgery in particular.3
Given these complexities, it is not surprising that serious conflicts can 
arise within the patient–surgeon relationship, many of which are difficult 
to resolve. Several such conflicts and controversies have been debated in 
Ethics Forum sessions.
Chapters
Chapter 9 addresses one of the fundamental principles of patient care, the 
requirement for the physician to respect the patient’s autonomy.4 The idea 
of autonomy has many implications; for example, in cases of disagreement 
between physician and patient, the patient’s choice is ultimately decisive. 
An extensive body of law and ethical deliberation has indicated that 
a patient has the right to determine what happens to his own body. If 
the patient lacks decision-making capacity, a proxy or surrogate makes 
decisions in his stead. When a patient is anesthetized, he clearly no longer 
has the capacity to make decisions, but his previous instructions during the 
informed-consent process or in the form of an advance directive continue 
to control what happens to his body. A particularly difficult situation is 
that of the Jehovah’s Witness, whose religious beliefs prohibit the use of 
 

	
Section 3	
105
blood transfusions, even when required to save the patient’s life. Are there 
circumstances under which a patient’s refusal of life-saving transfusions 
can be overridden by a surrogate?
The case in ­chapter 10 describes a situation that reverses the conflict 
in the previous case.5 The patient has a limited prognosis due to lung 
cancer. After lobectomy, he has a complicated postoperative course leading 
to multisystem failure. The surgeon believes the patient has a reasonable 
chance of good-quality survival and insists on moving forward with dialysis 
for renal failure. The patient’s wife, his surrogate decision-maker, demands 
that dialysis not be instituted on grounds that her husband would not have 
wanted it. The surgeon is faced with a decision: doing what the patient’s 
wife wants or overriding her decision by seeking a court order to continue 
treatment.
Disclosure of medical errors to patients and their families has been 
a major area of contention ever since the 1999 report of the Institute of 
Medicine, To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System, which brought 
the problem of hospital deaths due to medical errors to the public 
consciousness. In the vignette that focuses the debate in ­chapter 11, a 
surgeon mistakenly ligates a branch pulmonary artery during an intended 
pulmonary lobectomy, necessitating an extension of the operation to include 
the entire lung. Ultimately this complication leads to the patient’s death.6 
Does the surgeon have an ethical obligation to inform the patient and his 
family about the mistake he made, or do the potential dire consequences of 
disclosure to himself justify concealing the truth?
A different problem regarding disclosure of a surgical error occurs when 
the error is not the surgeon’s but is the mistake of another surgeon who 
operated on the patient previously. Chapter 12 introduces the case of a 
patient who has a bronchopleural fistula subsequent to a pneumonectomy 
ten days previously.7 The first surgeon failed to do a lymph node biopsy 
that would have aborted the procedure that led to the pneumonectomy. 
The second surgeon approaches the first surgeon, describes the error that 
was made, and suggests that the first surgeon talk to the patient about it. 
Concerned about litigation, the first surgeon refuses. Is the second surgeon 
obligated to tell the patient about the error?
In providing information to patients regarding a current illness, 
physicians must disclose alternative courses that are consistent with good 
medical judgment. Occasionally, however, a patient may ask for treatment 
that is outside acceptable medical standards for what the patient believes 
is good reason. In ­chapter 13, a young man with Marfan syndrome has 
an aortic aneurysm that is not yet ripe for operation, but intervention is 
nearly inevitable within a relatively few years.8 He is about to lose insurance 
coverage and asks the surgeon to go ahead with the operation, even though 
the aneurysm is not large enough to justify intervention by strictly medical 

	 106	
The Ethics of Surgery
criteria. Is it reasonable for the surgeon to do what the patient wants, or 
should he steadfastly remain within the limits of standard surgical practice?
Much of the disease burden in this country—as much as 50% by 
some estimates—is caused by lifestyle choices made by the patient, such 
as drinking too much alcohol, eating too much food, driving too fast, or 
engaging in otherwise dangerous activities. Some self-inflicted diseases 
can lead to expensive interventions, raising the question of the extent to 
which surgeons are obligated to provide such operations after the patient 
repeatedly fails to refrain from self-damaging behavior. Chapter 14 presents 
the vignette of a patient who abuses cocaine intravenously, undergoes 
aortic-valve replacement for native-valve endocarditis, and subsequently 
develops prosthetic-valve endocarditis after he relapses to intravenous 
cocaine abuse.9 What is the surgeon’s obligation to replace the infected 
prosthesis after repeated episodes of drug abuse?
References
	1.	 Faden RR, Beauchamp TL, Nancy M. P. King NMP. A History and Theory of 
Informed Consent. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.
	2.	 Miller F, Wertheimer A. The Ethics of Consent: Theory and Practice. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 2010.
	3.	 Jones JW, McCullough LB, Richman BW. Informed consent and disclo­
sure. In: The Ethics of Surgical Practice. New York: Oxford University Press; 
2008:12–51.
	4.	 Naunheim K, Bridges C, Sade RM. A Jehovah’s Witness patient who 
faces imminent exsanguination should be transfused. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2011;92(5):1559–64.
	5.	 D’Amico TA, Krasna MJ, Sade RM. No heroic measures—how soon is too 
soon to stop? Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:11–18.
	6.	 Mavroudis C, Mavroudis CD, Naunheim K, Sade R. Should surgical errors 
always be disclosed to the patient? Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(2):399–408.
	7.	 Moffatt-Bruce S, Denlinger C, Sade RM. Another surgeon’s error: must you 
tell the patient? Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98(2):396–401.
	8.	 Estrera AL, Ikonomidis S, Ikonomidis JS, Sade RM. Impending loss of insur­
ance coverage is an indication to proceed with complex, expensive surgery. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(6):1709–16.
	9.	 DiMaio JM, Salerno TA, Bernstein R, Araujo K, Ricci M, Sade RM. Ethical 
obligation of surgeons to non-compliant patients: can a surgeon refuse to 
operate on an intravenous drug-abusing patient with recurrent aortic valve 
prosthesis infection? Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88(1):1–8.
 
 

107
9
Should a Jehovah’s Witness Patient Who Faces 
Imminent Exsanguination Be Transfused?
Keith S. Naunheim, Charles R. Bridges, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
The right of every person to reject unwanted medical therapies, whether or 
not the choice is consistent with good clinical practice or medical judgment, 
is well established in ethics and law. The right to reject treatment can be exer­
cised directly by the patient or indirectly by the patient’s surrogate or proxy 
decision maker. Generally speaking, first-person directives take precedence 
over surrogate/proxy decisions; that is, a valid directive by a patient, such as 
a living will or an organ donor card, cannot ordinarily be overridden by a 
surrogate/proxy unless the patient has given that person specific authority 
to do so.
A Jehovah’s Witness signature on a Jehovah’s Witness card refus­
ing blood transfusion and on the operative permission form repeating her 
refusal ordinarily allows no wiggle room: the surgeon is obligated to honor 
her refusal, even in the face of life-threatening hemorrhage. But what if her 
Jehovah’s Witness husband demands that her life be saved with blood trans­
fusions, claiming that she is currently incapacitated and unable to change her 
mind about transfusion, which he, as the person who knows her best and the 
one she has designated as her health care agent, is certain she would do if she 
were able to do so. Drs Keith Naunheim and Charles Bridges reach differing 
conclusions about what is the right thing to do under such circumstances.
* Naunheim K, Bridges C, Sade RM. A Jehovah’s Witness patient who faces imminent 
exsanguination should be transfused. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92(5):1559–64. Copyright Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 108	
The Ethics of Surgery
CASE
A 59-year-old Jehovah’s Witness with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis 
and insufficiency, Josephine Rutherford, has an advance directive nam­
ing her husband, Frank, who is also a Jehovah’s Witness, as her health 
care agent. She has a preprinted Jehovah’s Witness card that she signed 
2 years previously, refusing blood transfusions. On the operative permis­
sion form, she signs the clause refusing transfusion and her husband signs 
as witness.
She undergoes mitral valve replacement, and unexpectedly suffers the 
rare complication of posterior perforation of the left ventricle with exsan­
guinating hemorrhage. The surgeon, Dr. Percy Thomas, tells the family she 
is going to die without transfusions. Her Jehovah’s Witness husband states 
that his wife does not have the opportunity to change her mind, and, as her 
health care agent, he must make the decision for her. He is sure she would 
change her mind if she knew death from blood loss is now a certainty—she 
has often expressed to him how much she has to live for. The patient’s two 
adult children, a 25-year-old pregnant daughter (who is a Jehovah’s Witness) 
and 29-year-old son support the request to give the patient the blood she 
needs to survive.
Dr Thomas urgently calls the hospital attorney, who tells him that the 
state’s Uniform Health Care Decisions Act (UHCDA) provides protections 
that allow for a strong case to be made for legal immunity from civil or crimi­
nal liability, no matter what decision the surgeon makes.1 He should make 
his determination, the attorney says, on ethical grounds. What should the 
surgeon do?
Pro
Keith S. Naunheim, MD
This Jehovah’s Witness patient should be transfused. The problems sur­
rounding transfusion in Jehovah’s Witness patients are some of the most con­
troversial ethical issues faced in medicine. The Jehovah’s Witness religion was 
initially instituted under the name the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society 
founded in 1884 by Charles Taze Russell in Western Pennsylvania. In 1931, 
the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society was reincorporated by a society 
of international Bible students, and the name of the religion was changed 
to Jehovah’s Witnesses. The religion is based primarily on the “end of the 
world” prophecy as interpreted from Bible readings. Teachings from this reli­
gion specify that Jehovah’s Witnesses are the only “true” Christians, and that 
only such true believers will be saved at the time of Armageddon and the 
second coming of Christ. At that time, all those who are not true believers 
 
 
 

	
Transfusion of a Jehovah’s Witness	
109
will be destroyed. Mr Russell first suggested Armageddon would occur in 
1914 but it had not yet arrived at the time of his death in 1916. His succes­
sor, Joseph Franklin Rutherford, rewrote the doctrine and subsequently 
predicted Armageddon would occur in 1918, 1920, and 1925. The doctrine 
of this religion also specifies that only the Jehovah’s Witness leadership can 
provide a true interpretation of the Bible, and this must be followed strictly 
by all believers; individualism is strongly discouraged. Also, any members of 
the religion who openly criticize the leadership or their teachings are consid­
ered to be apostates and disloyal to God and thus subject to penalties such 
as excommunication and expulsion from the community. This latter pun­
ishment suggests the apostate will be shunned, not only by the society as a 
whole, but by family members as well.
The Jehovah’s Witness leadership has held many controversial views 
regarding medical issues, views that have gradually evolved over the last few 
decades. There was a time in which the Jehovah’s Witness leadership consid­
ered the American Medical Association to be representatives of Satan and 
“tricksters” who tried to mislead the population into inappropriate medicines 
and surgical procedures. There had been prohibitions against the utilization 
of aluminum cookware, which was reported to cause cancer and insanity. 
Vaccinations were characterized as “pus cocktails,” and organ transplanta­
tion was equated with “cannibalism.” Over the last several decades, these lat­
ter two treatment modalities have become accepted by the Jehovah’s Witness 
leadership and are now “matters of conscience” for all of the Jehovah’s 
Witness membership.
The prohibition for utilization of blood was first announced in 1945, and 
has been based on at least three citations from the Bible: (1) Genesis 9:4 “But 
you must not eat meat that has its life blood still in it.” (2) Leviticus 17:2 “None 
of you may eat blood, nor may any foreigner residing among you eat blood.” 
(3) Acts 15:29 “You are to abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, 
from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality.”
The transfusion of blood products is interpreted by the Jehovah’s Witness 
leadership as equivalent of “eating blood” because the patient receiving a 
transfusion is the one who consumes the blood product. Even this prohibi­
tion has evolved somewhat over the past 2 decades. Originally, all forms of 
blood products were banned, including specific clotting factors (as adminis­
tered to hemophiliacs), immunoglobulin, and even albumin. Consumption 
of any these or the more standard types of transfusions (whole blood, packed 
red blood cells, platelets, or fresh frozen plasma, whether heterologous or 
autologous) were thought to warrant excommunication from the religion 
and eternal damnation at the time of judgment. However, at present, the 
Jehovah’s Witness leadership believes that albumin, immunoglobulin, and 
specific clotting factors can be administered if the individual practitioner’s 
conscience allows.

	 110	
The Ethics of Surgery
Many critics have attacked the transfusion prohibition as being “an irra­
tional belief” and thus an inappropriate foundation for making any medi­
cal decision regarding receiving blood products. However, Jehovah’s Witness 
religious dogma does not appear any more “irrational” than the belief of 
many other religions. [. . .] Arguing against the transfusion prohibition on the 
basis of “irrational beliefs” appears somewhat hypocritical for any practitio­
ner of religion whose basic tenets require faith, for example, the blind belief 
in a non-provable entity or practice.
I believe there are three important issues pertaining to the admin­
istration of blood in Mrs Rutherford’s case and questions that must be 
answered: (1) Was the consent voluntary or was it given under duress? (2) Did 
the patient fully grasp the gravity and scope of the operation? (3) Can the 
family supersede the decision of the patient?
WAS THE CONSENT GIVEN UNDER DURESS?
With regard to voluntary consent, the patient did sign the consent outlining 
the prohibition of transfusion and also carried a card in her wallet document­
ing same. The question of duress, however, is a more subtle one. There can be 
a little doubt that the religious practices of Jehovah’s Witnesses can be con­
sidered somewhat coercive. The prospect of being expelled from one’s com­
munity and even from one’s family can be frightening; such a concept will 
exert great emotional pressure upon the patient making decisions regarding 
blood products. In many instances, a pastor or church member will accom­
pany the patient and his or her family to make certain that “the whole truth” 
is revealed to the patient and the physician involved does not “mislead” or 
“trick” them into accepting transfusions. There have even been instances 
in which hospital employees who are Jehovah’s Witness practitioners have 
reported on other Jehovah’s Witnesses who have agreed to receive transfu­
sions, thus condemning them to harsh punishment within their community. 
Is this type of peer pressure not duress? Can one confidently assume that the 
consent was entirely voluntary? At the very least, some doubt exists regarding 
the voluntary nature of such consent.
DID THE PATIENT GRASP THE GRAVITY AND SCOPE 
OF THE OPERATION?
A complete informed consent includes a thorough discussion of the proce­
dure. That entails an outlining of the nature of the intervention, all reason­
able alternatives to the treatment, and recommendations as well as the risks 
and potential benefits of the procedure. The complication outlined in the 
above clinical scenario (posterior perforation of the left ventricle) is both 
exceedingly rare and remarkably complex. It is very difficult to believe that 
 
 

	
Transfusion of a Jehovah’s Witness	
111
the patient actually could comprehend that a complication with a less than 
1% incidence could eventually endanger her to the point where her survival 
chances were less than 50/50 even with the benefit of transfusion. [. . .] Many 
patients cannot recount what they were told even within the hour after the 
informed consent process. Because of this, I believe the best guide regard­
ing the level of comprehension for this patient would come from the family. 
Indeed, both the husband and the daughters stated that the patient did not 
fully grasp the ramifications of her transfusion decision and insisted that, 
had she truly understood the possibilities, she would want to be transfused. 
I, for one, would not suggest my judgment regarding the patient’s state of 
mind was more accurate than that of the family with whom she lived. The 
family’s insistence that she did not understand in this case is critical; thus, 
I cannot be certain that her consent was fully informed considering their 
attestation to the contrary.
CAN THE FAMILY’S DECISION REGARDING TRANSFUSION SUPERSEDE 
THE PREVIOUS DECISION OF THE PATIENT?
In 1993, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws 
drafted and approved the UHCDA. This act has been ratified by several 
states and defines the specific powers of health care agents during the time of 
incapacity on the part of a patient. It was in effect at the time of this clinical 
scenario. The act specifically states that an appointed “surrogate shall make 
the decision in accordance with the surrogate’s determination of the patient’s 
best interest.” In this case, the husband and daughters [sic] all agreed that 
transfusion was in the patient’s best interest, and the hospital attorney con­
firmed that such a decision was arguably legal and appropriate. Thus, under 
the dictates of this act, it is wholly appropriate for the family’s decision to 
supersede that of the patient.
In summary, there is nothing clean and certain about the ethical issue 
within the scenario. The basic ethical values that are usually referred to in 
such clinical situations include the following:  autonomy—the patient has 
the right to refuse or accept offered treatments; beneficence—a practitioner 
should act in the best interest of the patient; nonmaleficence—“first do no 
harm” (primum non nocere); justice—fair and equal distribution of treatment 
and health care resources; dignity—the patient and the doctor both have the 
right to dignity; and truthfulness—patients must be informed regarding all 
options and ramifications.
While it is sad, it is also true that in difficult situations such as the clini­
cal scenario above, not all the ethical values can be fulfilled simultaneously. 
Transfusing the patient to save her life fulfills the value of beneficence while 
at the same time potentially violating the value of autonomy. However, the 
decision by the husband and daughter [sic] on behalf of the incapacitated 
 

	 112	
The Ethics of Surgery
patient certainly fulfills the legal definition of appropriate practice and, in 
my opinion, fulfills the ethical value of autonomy as well. I believe that, in 
this case, transfusion of this Jehovah’s Witness patient is both justifiable 
and correct.
Con
Charles R. Bridges, MD, ScD
This Jehovah’s Witness patient should not be transfused. The Jehovah’s 
Witness faith has grown remarkably since its inception in 1869, now including 
more than 7 million followers in 236 countries.2 The Watchtower Society is the 
governing body of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, and in 1945, this body introduced 
a ban on accepting blood transfusions. As a result, Jehovah’s Witnesses nearly 
universally refuse to receive blood products. In fact, most are quite dogmatic 
about the fact that they would rather die than receive a transfusion.3 Their 
refusal to accept blood products is based on a literal interpretation of the pas­
sages in the Old Testament that forbid them to do so. In fact, even the option 
of preoperative autodonation and banking of blood for perioperative use is 
excluded as once the blood has been disconnected from the body’s circula­
tion, it is no longer acceptable. These restrictions notwithstanding, innova­
tive blood conservation techniques4 including meticulous surgical technique, 
use of miniature heart-lung circuits, retrograde and antegrade autologous 
priming, autologous normovolumic hemodilution, and use of an in-line cell 
saving device for red cell salvage during cardiopulmonary bypass, can be 
utilized with excellent results even in complex cardiac surgical procedures 
in these patients.5 Moreover, the Watchtower Society has left the decision to 
accept fractions of the primary components (i.e., cryoprecipitate, albumin) 
to the individual Jehovah’s Witness, while forbidding the acceptance of the 
“primary components” of blood, defined as red blood cells, white blood cells, 
platelets, and plasma.6 Some would argue that the Jehovah’s Witness refusal 
to accept blood products represents a form of irrational religious zealotry. 
However, unlike many other arguably less than scientifically rational reli­
gious beliefs, the most recent data suggest overwhelmingly that blood trans­
fusions are associated with an increase in mortality and morbidity that is 
a direct consequence of the transfusions themselves and not due to uncor­
rected confounding issues. This point is best illustrated by the observation 
that there is a direct relationship between the age of the blood transfused and 
its negative impact on mortality and other complications, hence implicating 
the blood rather than the condition of the patient receiving it.7 Thus, rather 
than representing irrational religious zeal, it is perhaps more appropriate to 
describe the Jehovah’s Witness’s aversion to blood transfusions as emblem­
atic of divine scientific insight!
 
 

	
Transfusion of a Jehovah’s Witness	
113
INFORMED CONSENT TO SURGERY
In 1914, Judge Benjamin Cardozo wrote a landmark opinion in the case 
Schloendorff v The Society of New York Hospital, which legally defined 
simple consent and changed the history of American medical ethics. 
Cardozo wrote: “Every human being of adult years and sound mind has 
a right to determine what shall be done with his body; and a surgeon who 
performs an operation without his patient’s consent commits an assault, 
for which he is liable in damages . . . except in cases of emergency, where the 
patient is unconscious, and where it is necessary to operate before consent 
can be obtained.”8
Clearly, in this case, although the patient is indeed unconscious, it was 
the surgeon’s duty to discuss the precise scenario presented, namely, intraop­
erative life-threatening hemorrhage, with the patient and the patient’s family 
before the procedure. One might argue that, for a minor surgical procedure, it 
would not be necessary to discuss life-threatening bleeding but for a cardiac 
surgical case, it should always be discussed as a possibility.
Furthermore, it is the surgeon’s duty to provide sufficient information to 
the patient and the patient’s family in advance of the case so that the patient 
can anticipate how he or she would be expected to react to situations that are 
likely to occur. Thus, although ventricular perforation is itself a rare com­
plication of mitral valve replacement, potentially life-threatening bleeding 
is not an uncommon occurrence during cardiac surgery. Failure to discuss 
this scenario is a failure to provide adequate information for true informed 
consent. Moreover, it is the surgeon’s duty to accept the patient’s religious 
beliefs, values, and morals, independent of whether the surgeon finds these 
beliefs to be rational.
COGNITIVE UNDERSTANDING
The surgeon’s duty is to help the patient to develop “cognitive understanding” 
of the procedure. Cognitive understanding requires that patients appreciate 
their present condition, the procedure proposed, and that their decisions will 
have consequences. These consequences are best understood as a series of 
probabilities attached to a group of potential outcomes, each of which may 
be associated with either an improvement or a worsening of the patient’s con­
dition and possibly even in the patient’s demise. Only when fully apprised of 
these probabilities and outcomes, each a function of the patient’s decision, 
can the patient make an informed decision. It is the surgeon’s charge to cor­
rect any misunderstanding the patient may have, to improve their fund of 
knowledge, and to help them to understand both the nature and the conse­
quences of the options available to them. Throughout this process, the sur­
geon must respect the patient’s autonomy.
 
 

	 114	
The Ethics of Surgery
PREVENTIVE ETHICS
This case represents a failure of “preventive ethics.” Here, it is the surgeon’s 
responsibility to ascertain that the patient fully understands her condition 
and the probable impact of her refusal to accept blood products on the 
expected outcome. Because some Jehovah’s Witnesses fear that they will be 
shunned by their community if they were to accept blood products, the sur­
geon must explore whether the patient’s understanding has been clouded by 
emotional factors, anxiety, financial obligations, and the like. Only if such 
factors can be excluded or managed through counseling can informed con­
sent be obtained. Having established true evaluative understanding, the 
surgeon should acknowledge value conflicts that exist and develop a man­
agement plan (including all likely eventualities) and make sure the plan is in 
accord with the patient’s values and beliefs. These are the tenets of preventive 
ethics. Adequate preventive ethics in this case would have obviated the need 
to address this issue of life-threatening hemorrhage after the surgery had 
commenced. It arguably should have been discussed before the procedure to 
prevent the ethical dilemma. The surgeon’s first response to refusal of blood 
transfusion should have been to review with the patient her understanding of 
the condition and its benefits and risks.
SUMMARY
In the case presented, the surrogate decision makers for Josephine Rutherford 
(the patient’s husband and two daughters [sic]) have been asked to provide 
“substituted judgment” for the patient since she is unconscious. In this case, 
the surrogates believe that the patient would want to be transfused if she 
knew that she would otherwise die. However, Dr Thomas has every right and 
indeed a duty to ignore the wishes of these surrogates if he has a reason­
able degree of certainty that the surrogates are mistaken, regardless of their 
views. In this case, there should be a reasonable degree of certainty that the 
patient would not want to be transfused, given that she has both signed a card 
refusing transfusions 2 years ago and again signed a consent form before the 
procedure refusing transfusions. There should be no doubt. As alluded to 
above, the principles of preventive ethics and cognitive understanding imply 
that in the context of true informed consent the surgeon should already know 
exactly what the patient would want under these circumstances. However, in 
the absence of such absolute knowledge, given the patient’s written refusal to 
accept blood products, given that bleeding is common during cardiac surgery, 
and given that consent for cardiac surgery necessarily implies that the patient 
understands that death is a possibility, the principles of transitive logic (eg, if 
A implies B, and B implies C, and C implies D, then A implies D) dictate that 
the patient must have known that her refusal to accept blood products might 
 
 

	
Transfusion of a Jehovah’s Witness	
115
lead to her death. Therefore, in keeping with her written expressed wishes, 
the patient must be allowed to die without a transfusion.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
For the purpose of this debate, we accept the hospital attorney’s opinion that 
the UHCDA provides immunity from civil or criminal liability to the sur­
geon, whether he chooses to transfuse or not to transfuse. [. . .] So Dr Thomas’s 
decision should be made on ethical grounds, that is, what is the right thing to 
do: transfuse in an attempt to save the patient’s life, or withhold transfusion 
and allow the patient to die? Both essayists present their cases clearly and 
logically. Both base their analyses on the principle of respect for autonomy. 
The nature of autonomy has been understood in many different ways, but 
generally, most analysts accept the minimal components of an autonomous 
decision as a choice that is made intentionally, with understanding of the rel­
evant information, and with freedom from controlling influences.9
Intentionality is generally taken to be binary, whereas understanding and 
voluntariness can be matters of degree. For example, a professor of biology 
and an illiterate grade school dropout lie at opposite ends of a spectrum of 
ability to comprehend medical information. Similarly, a range of influences 
can have greater or lesser impact on a patient’s decision-making freedom—
persuasion, manipulation, and coercion are different kinds of influences. 
Persuasion is not a controlling influence if a physician’s balanced presenta­
tion of facts and honest reasoning moves a patient to a choice recommended 
by the physician, but could be controlling if the physician’s balanced and 
honest discussion produces an emotional reaction that drives the patient’s 
decision. Manipulation impels a patient toward a certain choice when the 
physician presents information in a biased manner, misrepresents facts, or 
withholds information; manipulation is always a controlling influence that 
compromises autonomous decision making. Coercion—the use of force or 
the threat of force or harm—also undermines autonomy.
Protecting autonomous decision making is the primary purpose of 
informed consent. The process of informed consent requires the presence 
of several elements that signal the centrality of respect for autonomy. These 
elements are generally understood to be competence, disclosure of relevant 
information, understanding of that information, voluntariness of decision 
making, and consent that both chooses an option and authorizes the chosen 
procedure.10 [. . .]
The patient’s husband, who is also her health care agent, asserts that 
the patient would have changed her mind and accepted transfusions if she 
had known that death were imminent. The most commonly used standard 
 

	 116	
The Ethics of Surgery
by which agents make decisions for a patient is substituted judgment: in the 
absence of a relevant and specific advance directive, the agent must choose the 
option that the patient would have chosen had she not lacked decision-making 
capacity. But in this case, Mrs Rutherford has made a first-person decision 
not to have blood transfusions, a decision that generally cannot be overridden 
by others. There are situations, however, in which overriding a first-person 
directive may be justified. In clinical settings, as the severity of risk of harm 
to the patient increases, there is a parallel increase in justification for overrid­
ing an advance directive.11 The dilemma in this case is the clash between the 
patient’s clear directive and the most severe of risks, death by exsanguination. 
To her husband and children, overriding Mrs Rutherford’s directive does not 
undermine her true beliefs and values, rather, it respects and restores her 
autonomy, a position that Dr Thomas could find plausible.
Under the circumstances of this case, there seems to be no clearly right or 
wrong answer. The precise nature of autonomy and of its protector, the pro­
cess of informed consent, has not been decisively resolved in the biomedical 
ethics literature, and the courts still find difficult cases at the edges of settled 
law. Both Naunheim and Bridges have made cogent arguments in support of 
their positions. Under the UHCDA, they both seem to have made a legally 
defensible case and, in my view, they both have presented positions that are 
reasonable and ethically acceptable.
I close with a caveat:  the UHCDA was adopted by only a few states, 
and the statutes and case law governing informed consent in the remaining 
states display great variation. A surgeon who faces a similar case would be 
on ethically defensible grounds to choose either to provide or to withhold 
transfusion, but legally, would be prudent to consult the health care institu­
tion’s legal staff before reaching any conclusion about the most appropriate 
course of action.
References
	1.	Uniform Health Care Decisions Act. National Conference of Commissioners of 
Uniform State Laws. Chicago:  Uniform Law Commission; 1993. http://www.law.
upenn.edu/bll/archives/ulc/fnact99/1990s/uhcda93.pdf. Accessed April 15, 2011.
	2.	About Jehovah’s Witnesses. Brooklyn, NY: Jehovah’s Witnesses; 2010. http://www.
watchtower.org/e/statistics/worldwide_report.htm. Accessed July 11, 2011.
	3.	Hughes DB, Ullery BW, Barie PS. The contemporary approach to the care of Jehovah’s 
Witnesses. J Trauma. 2008;65:237–47.
	4.	Sniecinski R, Levy JH. What is blood and what is not? Caring for the Jehovah’s 
Witness patient undergoing cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:753–4.
	5.	Ferraris VA, Ferraris SP, Saha SP, et al. Perioperative blood transfusion and blood 
conservation in cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:27–86.
 

	
Transfusion of a Jehovah’s Witness	
117
	 6.	 Dandolu BR, Parmet J, Isidro A, et al. Reoperative cardiac surgery in Jehovah’s 
Witness patients with patent internal thoracic artery grafts: how far can we push the 
envelope? Heart Surg Forum. 2008;11:E32–3.
	 7.	 Koch CG, Li L, Sessler DI, et al. Duration of red-cell storage and complications 
after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1229–41.
	 8.	 Jones JW, McCullough LB, Richman BW. A comprehensive primer of surgical 
informed consent. Surg Clin North Am. 2007;87:903–18.
	 9.	 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Respect for autonomy. In: Principles of Biomedical 
Ethics, 6th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2009:99–149.
	10.	 Meisel A, Roth L. What we know and do not know about informed consent. JAMA. 
1981;246:2473–77.
	11.	 Kleinig J. Paternalism. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allanheld; 1983:76.

118
10
No Heroic Measures
HOW SOON IS TOO SOON TO STOP?
Thomas A. D’Amico, Mark J. Krasna, 
Diane M. Krasna, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
As cardiothoracic surgeons, we face many difficult problems in our profes­
sional lives, and base most decisions on clinical judgment developed and 
honed during many years of training and experience. Some decisions, how­
ever, are based on more than weighing scientific evidence and outcome prob­
abilities, and they require value judgments on such matters as the desirability 
of alternative outcomes. Among the most difficult judgments we make are 
those that conflict with the views of the patient or the patient’s proxy (i.e., 
agent appointed in advance by the patient) or surrogate (i.e., agent authorized 
by law) decision maker. [. . .] The case below illustrates just such a difficult 
surgeon–family conflict and it is the focus of the debate that follows.
THE CASE OF THE RESOLUTE WIFE
John Cooper is a 40-year-old restaurant owner, who has a wife and two chil­
dren, 20 and 22 years old. He is a 45-pack/year smoker and complains of chest 
pain, located in the right chest wall. A chest roentgenogram shows a mass in 
the right upper lung field. Diagnostic workup discloses squamous cell carci­
noma of the lung, stage IIB (T3N0M0), invading the chest wall. His surgeon, 
* D’Amico TA, Krasna MJ, Sade RM. No heroic measures—how soon is too soon to stop? 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:11–8. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with 
permission.
 
 
 
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
119
Dr. William Ashley, performs a difficult right upper lobectomy with chest 
wall resection. The pathology report confirms the histology and stage of the 
cancer; the margins of the surgical specimen have no residual tumor and the 
lymph nodes contain no malignant cells.
The patient does well initially, but on postoperative day (POD) 2, [. . .] a 
chest roentgenogram shows pneumonia. Increasing distress requires reintu­
bation and transfer back to the cardiothoracic intensive care unit. On POD 4, 
the chest roentgenogram shows early signs of a bilateral fluffy infiltrate [. . .]. 
By POD 6, it is clear that the patient has adult respiratory distress syndrome. 
Dr. Ashley has excellent rapport with the family, which seems to be cohesive 
and is devoted to their husband and father, respectively. The surgeon informs 
the family of the patient’s steadily worsening prognosis.
By POD 8, the lung problem is worse and signs of renal failure have 
appeared. Dr.  Ashley spends considerable time with the patient’s wife 
explaining her husband’s clinical condition, including the likelihood that he 
will soon require hemodialysis. For the first time, she mentions that she and 
her husband have talked about the use of “heroic measures” if one of them 
should develop a serious or terminal illness from which full recovery was 
unlikely, and he did not want such measures. The patient’s wife determines 
that dialysis should not be used.
Dr. Ashley explains that the patient’s chance of recovery is not high, but 
is not zero, and dialysis might successfully manage his renal failure, allowing 
his lungs time to recover. The patient’s wife is unconvinced. The surgeon sug­
gests that they wait over the weekend, and see what happens, as the decision 
can be delayed for a few days. The patient’s wife agrees; she is also willing to 
talk with the hospital ethics committee. Committee members meet with her 
several times over the weekend.
On POD 11, the need for dialysis is imminent; the potassium level now 
is 5.9 mg/dL and rising. Managing the adult respiratory distress syndrome is 
still difficult, but it has not become worse over the weekend, and no cardio­
tonic drugs have been required. Dr. Ashley discusses the situation again with 
the patient’s wife, also with the ethics committee representatives present. The 
surgeon again expresses his belief that it is in the patient’s best interest not 
to withhold dialysis. He has a reasonable chance of surviving his pulmonary 
and renal problems (with the surgeon’s guess of perhaps a 20% probability of 
leaving the hospital alive with a good quality of life) and a fairly good chance 
of surviving his cancer (published data suggest a 50% chance of being alive 
in 5 years). Moreover, in this day and age, dialysis and artificial ventilation 
cannot be considered heroic treatment. The ethics committee scrupulously 
carries out its role as educator and mediator. In the end, the patient’s wife still 
insists on withholding dialysis.
Dr.  Ashley now sees two options. He can follow the decision of the 
patient’s wife and allow his patient, with a potentially treatable organ failure, 

	 120	
The Ethics of Surgery
to die soon from progressive renal failure. Alternatively, the other option 
based on the grounds of doing what is in the patient’s best interest, he can ask 
the hospital attorney to seek a court order to continue treatment. He wants to 
do the right thing for his patient, but he is not sure which course is best. He 
decides to ask two of his colleagues for their thoughts.
Pro
Thomas A. D’Amico, MD
[. . .] The need for physicians, patients, and families to confront the issues 
of withdrawal of support and medical futility, as highlighted in this hypo­
thetical case, is important and unfortunately familiar to cardiac and tho­
racic surgeons. Decisions regarding the use, withdrawal, or withholding of 
life-sustaining care are usually not difficult to make. When there is uncer­
tainty about prognosis and the rights of others to make decisions for the 
patient, medical, ethical, and potentially medical/legal controversies may be 
difficult to manage.
Although conflicts have arisen in several reported cases in which a patient 
was competent to make a decision about end-of-life care,1 conflicts regard­
ing withdrawal of support more commonly occur when the patient lacks the 
capacity to express his or her wishes regarding a specific decision.2 One study 
demonstrated that physicians and families are responsible for the majority of 
the decisions about life support in intensive care units, because fewer than 5% 
of patients are able to communicate with clinicians at the time the decision is 
made.3 Conflicts commonly arise when a physician recognizes medical futil­
ity and the family does not.4 Less commonly, the family expresses the desire 
to withhold or withdraw support, against the physician’s judgment, as in this 
case. In addition, this case is complicated by the lack of a living will or writ­
ten advance directive, and the issue of a surrogate’s right to decision making 
is an element of the conflict.
The intended peripheral role of law when end-of-life dilemmas arise is 
often forgotten in debates such as this. The law prohibits active killing, and 
clear advance directives must be followed if they have been properly executed. 
But within these bounds, end-of-life questions are almost always resolved pri­
vately, by patients, their physicians, and their family members, working with 
nurses, social workers, and members of the clergy. Within wide boundaries, 
we must honor the wishes clearly stated by the patients. This commitment 
not only safeguards the liberty and dignity of the patient, but it also protects 
against family strife when a patient’s intentions are clear.
Regarding the primary question posed by this scenario of whether 
Dr. Ashley should ask the hospital attorney to seek a court order to continue 
treatment, the only possible answer is no. First, based on precedents, it is 
 
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
121
unlikely to be successful. Second, there are other options. This summary, 
however, does not do justice to the difficult decision-making process entailed 
in this case and others like it. To fully address the complex issues that define 
this case, Dr.  Ashley must answer the following questions:  What are the 
chances of the patient surviving this critical illness with a reasonable qual­
ity of life outside the hospital? What measures must be taken to accomplish 
his recovery? How much suffering will further care impose on the patient’s 
wife and his family? What resources would be expended in that care? In the 
absence of a written advance directive, how can the patient’s wishes best be 
expressed? If the patient’s wife is not justified in being allowed to make this 
decision to withdraw support, what decisions would she be capable of mak­
ing? I will address these questions sequentially.
What are the chances of the patient surviving this critical illness with 
a reasonable quality of life outside the hospital? Evaluation of prognosis 
requires assessing age, cancer stage, severity of illness, presence of organ dys­
function, reversibility of ongoing processes, and chance of cognitive function 
beyond the intensive care unit.
At 40 years of age, the patient is relatively young, which improves his 
chance of recovery and also supports an aggressive strategy. [. . .] As he bat­
tles postoperative pneumonia, sepsis, adult respiratory distress syndrome, 
high ventilatory support, and renal failure imminently requiring dialysis, the 
severity of illness is best described as high, and the possibility of complete 
recovery as relatively low. [. . .]
What measures must be taken to accomplish his recovery? Further efforts 
to achieve recovery would include acute and possibly chronic dialysis, trache­
ostomy, and prolonged ventilatory support, gastrostomy, and rehabilitation. 
[. . .] Although all of these measures are offered routinely in the intensive care 
unit, are they reasonable to apply to a man with a poor prognosis if he would 
be likely to decline if he was capable?
How much suffering will further care impose on the patient and his fam­
ily? Although the suffering imposed on the patient difficult to assess, the suf­
fering imposed on the patient’s wife would likely be high. It certainly seems 
that she has given the decision to withhold dialysis careful consideration. She 
has involved her husband’s surgeon and the hospital ethics committee for 
advice, and she has stated specifically that she and her husband had discussed 
this difficult decision, and that he would refuse further care. Thus, one would 
conclude that the imposition of further (unwanted) care would be traumatic 
and injurious to the family.
What resources would be expended in that care? Although a surgeon’s 
primary responsibility is to optimize the outcome of the patient’s care, it is 
irresponsible to ignore the issues of cost and resource utilization. [. . .] In this 
case, resource expenditure could be justified if consent for its use (i.e., specifi­
cally dialysis) were to be obtained.

	 122	
The Ethics of Surgery
In the absence of a written advance directive, how can the patient’s 
wishes best be expressed? [. . .] [The surgeon must] address the issues of critical 
illness and the patient’s wishes regarding decisions in the informed consent 
process. Although this issue is not specified in the hypothetical scenario, one 
can only assume that either the topic was not discussed or that the patient’s 
wife is correctly representing her husband’s wishes, because Dr. Ashley does 
not dispute the point. Thus, in the absence of a written advance directive, 
decision-making for a patient at the end-of-life is made by the next of kin, or 
the patient’s wife. She articulates that she and her husband have addressed 
this issue previously, and there is no reason to doubt her. Therefore, decisions 
regarding consent for further care are clearly hers to make.
If the patient’s wife [. . .] is capable and empowered to make decisions con­
senting to the care to the current stage of care, she is equally capable and 
empowered to make decisions declining care (assuming effective communica­
tion with Dr. Ashley).
RECOMMENDATIONS
In considering these questions, one can make the following recommendations 
for Dr. Ashley:
	1.	Do not take the case to court, but consider other options.
	2.	Talk to the entire family about what the patient would want in this 
situation. [. . .] Remember that family members often do not under­
stand information regarding diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment, 
and physicians often miss important opportunities to allow patients 
and family members to discuss their personal values and goals of 
therapy.5
	3.	Delay urgent dialysis with other clinical alternatives to allow further 
dialogue. Hyperkalemia could be temporarily managed with calcium, 
glucose, and insulin. [. . .] [T]‌he option of peritoneal dialysis could be 
discussed as well.
	4.	Propose a negotiated approach in regard to reaching specific clinical 
goals and using these goals in the decision making in regard to con­
tinuing or withdrawing care. One option would be to set a goal for a 
specific time limit for dialysis, to allow recovery of the lungs and the 
kidneys.
It would not be wrong to proceed with dialysis if the family supported 
it. If further support is withheld, that decision could not be criticized if the 
family believes that it represents the patient’s wishes. If the family refuses, 
it would be inappropriate to insist on dialysis based on what is known now 
about the patient’s preferences and his chance of survival.
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
123
CONCLUSION
Surgeons should strive to understand clearly the ethical and legal issues 
involved in end-of-life care, including the function of an advance directive, 
healthcare power of attorney, individual state medical futility acts, and 
American Medical Association policy on these issues.6 Unfortunately, only 
20% to 30% of adults are estimated to have advance directives, and in 35% 
of those, the directives cannot be found when needed. Utilize consults from 
ethics committees or palliative care services to improve end-of-life care. 
Address impending issues before a decision must be made urgently or emer­
gently. Negotiate decisions based on clear, easily understandable goals and 
milestones. The overarching goal of courts, clinicians, and others with a say 
in end-of-life disputes should be to pursue private, family-based decisions 
within the wide limits set by law. Practice medicine in the hospital, not the 
courtroom [. . .].
Con
Mark J. Krasna, MD, and Diane M. Krasna, CRNA
[. . .] We strongly believe that unless treatment causes unneeded pain or suffer­
ing to no avail, it is incumbent on a physician to act in the patient’s best interest 
to provide care and treatment with every resource available. We believe this is a 
moral and ethical obligation based on the principles of beneficence and nonma­
leficence (i.e., being of benefit to the patient and doing no harm). Hippocrates 
suggested three major goals of medicine: “cure, relief of suffering, and refusal 
to treat those who are overmastered by their diseases.”7 Some might use these 
words to advocate stopping treatment, but we will explain the smokescreen 
that has been inappropriately promoted and continues to be advocated by 
those who argue for cessation of all curative treatment with very loose bound­
aries. We also hope to demonstrate how to distinguish between futile, “heroic” 
care and what is realistic, supportive care during an acute postoperative cri­
sis. Good communication with patients and their families preoperatively and 
postoperatively is imperative. An operative consent covering postoperative 
situations and giving the surgeon the latitude necessary to act in the patient’s 
best interest is needed. We must educate patients, their families, and collabora­
tive healthcare workers to fully understand the difference between medically 
appropriate, supportive care, and end-of-life palliative care.
CONSENT
Informed consent is a central legal and ethical concept for this discussion. 
Legally speaking, consent is explicit or implied. The patient entered into an 
 
 
 
 

	 124	
The Ethics of Surgery
explicit contract with Dr. Ashley when he came to his office and consented to 
surgery. The patient expressed his desire for surgery, fully knowing its pos­
sible life-threatening complications and potential long postoperative course. 
Dr. Ashley assured the patient of his commitment to steer him through all of 
that just previously mentioned as his surgeon, to the best of his ability, as per 
the operative permit and Dr. Ashley’s explanations before surgery.
The World Medical Association Declaration on the Rights of the Patient 
states: “The patient has the right to self-determination, to make free deci­
sions regarding himself/herself. The physician will inform the patient of the 
consequences of his/her decisions. A mentally competent adult patient has 
the right to give or withhold consent to any diagnostic procedure or therapy. 
The patient has the right to the information necessary to make his/her deci­
sions.”8 Good communication between physician and patient is essential for 
truly informed consent. This involves explaining complex diagnoses, treat­
ments, and prognoses in simple language, ensuring the patient’s grasp of the 
information, answering questions, and explaining advantages and disadvan­
tages of the options. [. . .]
ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
While we are told that the patient gave an oral advance directive, we do not 
believe that it “holds water” postoperatively. [. . .] A clear distinction must be 
made between patients facing unexpected, futile, long-term care and the cur­
rent scenario; what is being proposed by Dr. Ashley in this case is appropriate, 
supportive care with a reasonably hopeful outcome. Professional responsibil­
ity of a physician to do no harm also implies the moral authority to judge the 
benefits of medical interventions. Arrogance aside, who knows better than 
the physician, from his experience with similar cases and scenarios as to what 
can work and what should be tried.
We are told that the proposed treatment plan for dialysis has been 
explained to the patient’s wife and she had refused on the grounds that she 
and her husband had “talked” about the use of “heroic measures” if one of 
them should develop a terminal illness from which recovery was unlikely. 
Dr.  Ashley repeatedly expresses his feelings that it is in the patient’s best 
interest for the wife not to withhold dialysis; today, dialysis and mechanical 
ventilation cannot be considered “heroic treatment.”
ETHICS COMMITTEE
The ethics committee educates and mediates, but in the end the patient’s wife 
still insists on withholding dialysis. Dr. Ashley is left with two options: (1) allow 
the patient’s wife to decide to let his patient with potentially treatable organ 
failure to die unnecessarily soon from progressive renal failure, or (2) on the 
 
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
125
grounds of doing what is in the patient’s best interest and what the doctor has 
been contractually engaged to do, he must ask the hospital attorney to seek a 
court order to continue treatment.
Here we will emphasize Dr. Ashley’s obligation both morally and ethi­
cally to act on his patient’s best interests. We will look at the implementation 
of the ethics committees, their limitations, and possible risks of coercion, 
unintended or intended, and the appropriateness or inappropriateness of 
empowering a body of perhaps less medically knowledgeable people to advo­
cate for the patient.
It is incumbent on physicians operating on advanced lung cancer to have 
excellent communication skills. They must explain the difficulties antici­
pated and sometimes dreaded, and the steps that will be taken to correct 
postoperative complications and actually prepare an explicit, informed con­
sent stipulating postoperative treatments that would or could be interpreted 
or misinterpreted as heroic, life saving, and possibly misconstrued as futile. 
Legally, consent may be given orally or in writing. Consent is implied when 
the patient indicates a willingness to undergo a procedure or treatment by 
his behavior. For treatments that entail risk or discomfort, it is preferable to 
obtain explicit written consent. Situations in which the patient voluntarily 
gives decision-making authority to a physician or third party are exceptions 
to the requirement for informed consent. This is implied with postoperative 
complications, and the surgeon is expected to do what is in the patient’s best 
interest. Does the informed consent supersede the advance directive? After 
thoracic procedures, the consent generally includes management of periop­
erative complications, such as bleeding that requires emergency surgery. [. . .]
EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
The patient’s wife has limited medical knowledge at best; the ethics commit­
tee in a perfect world would have profound understanding of the postopera­
tive care available and be able to articulate and convince the patient’s wife 
that the surgeon’s recommendation is appropriate and in the patient’s best 
interest. Too often, ethics committees are empowered to sign off on care or 
assume that they need to consider allocation of finite institutional resources 
and miss the conflict that the patient is being used as a means to the family’s 
or hospital’s ends.
A discussion on withholding and withdrawing life-sustaining therapy and 
the surrogate’s role and commitment to supporting the patient’s rights and 
best interests is detailed in the official statement of The American Thoracic 
Society adopted by their board of directors in March 1991. It supports the 
decision “to continue life-sustaining treatment when the patient no longer 
has decision-making capacity, based on the knowledge of the patient’s prefer­
ences, values, and goals, and their commitment to supporting the patient’s 
 

	 126	
The Ethics of Surgery
rights and best interests.”9 The surrogate should make the same decisions 
about the patient’s care as the patient would have made if capable of doing 
so, concerning the use of life-sustaining therapy [. . .]. [The policy] goes on to 
detail circumstances when a surrogate can’t make a decision, and it outlines 
a reasonable process for a patient’s physician and other healthcare provid­
ers to make decisions for the patient based on what is determined to be “in 
the patient’s best interest.” This process should be as reasonable and objec­
tive as possible, weighing the benefits for starting or continuing a certain 
life-sustaining therapy against its burdens on the patient. If the benefits of 
the therapy exceed the burden, the therapy should be administered. [. . .]
FUTILE CARE
The word “futile” is derived from Latin roots meaning, “that which easily 
pours out, is ineffective, or useless.” It is also defined as frivolous or lacking 
serious purpose, and implies a decision about outcome probability that we 
do not have, ignoring the wide range of treatments for a given diagnosis.10 
The ethical principles of beneficence and nonmaleficence underlie and define 
treatment goals, so the purpose of a life-sustaining intervention should be res­
toration or maintenance of a patient’s well being, not mere prolongation of 
biological life. On this basis, a life-sustaining intervention may be withheld 
or withdrawn from a patient without the consent of the patient or surrogate 
if the intervention is judged by the physician to be futile. A life-sustaining 
intervention is considered futile if reasoning and experience indicate that the 
intervention would be highly unlikely to result in meaningful survival for that 
patient.11 Here, meaningful survival specifically refers to a quality and dura­
tion of survival that would have value to that patient as an individual. [. . .]
Predictive models such as the APACHE III systems are useful in large 
populations, but they are not intended to predict an individual’s risk of death. 
There are no precise measurements to predict an individual’s outcome with 
comparable precision. Physician experience and intuition often serve the 
patient’s best interest.12
CONCLUSION
If the patient’s wife cannot be convinced by a step-by-step plan for appropri­
ate life-supporting measures intended to improve the patient’s outcome, it is 
incumbent on Dr. Ashley to seek a court order to continue treatment. This 
would not have been necessary if the doctor had adopted our current practice 
in which we discuss suspending specific aspects of any existing advance direc­
tive for a defined period of time during the preoperative informed consent 
conversation with the patient and those closest to him. Then we record the 
joint decision in the medical record.
 
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
127
The patient and physician and the physician and family relationships 
are most likely to be optimal with excellent communication from the outset 
with compassionate conversations, acknowledgment of an advance directive, 
agreement to suspend it for a specified time, and education about the mean­
ing of specific scenarios in the context of postoperative complications and 
their management. [. . .] Working well together would hopefully eliminate the 
need for judicial involvement to achieve what everyone’s goal should be (i.e., 
serving the patient’s best interest).
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
D’Amico and Krasna and Krasna provide an illuminating discussion, presenting 
discordant perspectives on this difficult problem. Two issues lie at the core of the 
quandary facing Dr. Ashley: (1) the distinction between the substituted judgment 
and best interest standards when making decisions for incapacitated patients and 
(2) the extent of decision-making authority of proxies (i.e., agents appointed by 
the patient) and surrogates (i.e., agents designated by law or the judicial system).
THE STANDARD FOR SURROGATE DECISION MAKING
Most state law and most commentators on medical ethics prioritize substi­
tuted judgment over best interest. This priority of the substituted judgment 
standard is plainly stated in Maryland law (where Dr. Krasna practices):
Any person authorized to make health care decisions for another under this 
section shall base those decisions on the wishes of the patient, and if the 
wishes of the patient are unknown or unclear, on the patient’s best interest.13 
The ethical distinction between substituted judgment and best interest is 
clearly described and the priority of substituted judgment is supported by 
the American Medical Association’s Code of Medical Ethics [. . .].14
Both discussants fail to identify this distinction. D’Amico does not men­
tion the best interest standard at all, even though circumstances in this case 
arguably might justify application of this standard. Krasna and Krasna state 
or imply that the surgeon’s primary concern must be the patient’s best interest 
(in a narrowly construed medical sense), but that position is contrary to both 
law and widely accepted medical ethics.
PROXY OR SURROGATE AUTHORITY TO MAKE DECISIONS
The authority vested in proxies and surrogates, according to both ethics and 
law, to make decisions on behalf of patients is stated clearly in the American 
 
 
 
 

	 128	
The Ethics of Surgery
Medical Association Code: “Physicians should recognize the proxy or sur­
rogate as an extension of the patient, entitled to the same respect as the com­
petent patient.” Those who would override a surrogate’s decision should ask 
themselves whether they would come to the same conclusion if the patient 
had made the same decision. [. . .]
In both ethics and law, surrogate decision makers have essentially the 
same authority as the patient would have, if capable. Therefore, the central 
dilemma in this case is not whether the family believes that withholding dial­
ysis represents the patient’s wishes, as D’Amico believes, nor whether provid­
ing dialysis is in the patient’s best interest, as Krasna and Krasna assert. The 
critical question is the validity of the patient’s wife’s decision and belief that 
her husband’s oral directive included the withholding of dialysis (i.e., whether 
her decision truly reflects the choice that her husband would have made if he 
were capable of making this decision). No evidence suggests that the patient’s 
wife has ulterior motives in her decision-making or that she is primarily serv­
ing her own interests rather than those of her husband; she is, for all intents 
and purposes, a competent, trustworthy surrogate decision maker.
In the end, we find that we cannot tell Dr. Ashley what is the right thing 
for him to do, because he failed to give his colleagues, Drs. D’Amico and 
Krasna, a critical piece of information. The patient’s wife judges that her 
husband would have considered dialysis “heroic” and would not want to con­
tinue treatment. To resolve the question of the right thing to do, Dr. Ashley 
must first put aside his personal beliefs about the meaning of “heroic,” about 
what course is medically indicated, and about the desirability of the quantity 
and quality of life in case of survival. Then he must decide, after weighing 
all the information at his disposal, whether the patient’s wife has correctly 
judged that her husband would have refused dialysis. If the preponderance 
of evidence indicates that her judgment is accurate, the surgeon is ethically 
bound to honor her substituted judgment and withhold dialysis. If the evi­
dence indicates that her judgment is mistaken, he is justified in seeking a 
court order to continue treatment and initiate dialysis.
At the end of the road, when all avenues for agreement have been explored 
and disagreement persists, the decisive factor is what the patient chooses. 
When the patient is incapable of choosing at the time of decision, the proxy 
or surrogate’s choice is decisive if it accurately reflects what the patient would 
have wanted. Fortunately, we do not often have to disentangle the skein that 
lies beneath that “if.”
References
	1.	Reynolds SR, Cooper AB, McKneally M. Withdrawing life-sustaining treatment: eth­
ical considerations. Thorac Surg Clin. 2005;15:469–80.
 

	
No Heroic Measures	
129
	 2.	 Burns JP, Truog RD. Futility: a concept in evolution. Chest. 2007;132:1987–93.
	 3.	 Way J, Back AL, Curtis JR. Withdrawing life support and resolution of conflict with 
families. BMJ. 2002;325:1342–5.
	 4.	 Lautrette A, Darmon M, Megarbane B, Joly LM, et al. A communication strategy and 
brochure for relatives of patients dying in the ICU. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:469–78.
	 5.	 Tulsky JA. Beyond advance directives: importance of communication skills at the 
end of life. JAMA. 2005;294:359–65.
	 6.	 Truog RD, Mitchell C. Futility: from hospital policies to state laws. Am J Bioeth. 
2006;6:19–21.
	 7.	 Fine RL, Mayo TW. Resolution of futility by due process: early experience with the 
Texas advance directives. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138:743–6.
	 8.	 Cotler MP, Gregory DR. Futility: is definition the problem? Part I. Camb Q Healthc 
Ethics. 1993;2:219–24.
	 9.	 American Thoracic Society. Withholding and withdrawing life-sustaining therapy. 
Am Rev Respir Dis. 1991;144:726–31.
	10.	 Truog RD. Tackling medical futility in Texas. N Engl J Med. 2007;357: 1–3.
	11.	 World Medical Association Declaration on the Rights of the Patient, revised at the 
171st Council Session, Santiago, Chile, October 2005:  http://www.wma.net/e/pol­
icy/14.htm.
	12.	 Knaus WA, Wagner DP, Draper EA, et  al. The APACHE III prognostic sys­
tem: risk prediction of hospital mortality for critically ill hospitalized adults. Chest. 
1991;100:1619–36.
	13.	 Code of Maryland. Health–General, Title 5, Subtitle 6. Section 5-605 (c)(1) http://
mlis.state.md.us/asp/web_statutes.asp?ghg&5-605. Accessed June 2, 2008.
	14.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. E-8.801 Surrogate decision-making. 
American Medical Association, Code of Medical Ethics:  current opinions with 
annotations, 2006–2007 ed. Chicago: American Medical Association. http://www.
ama-assn.org/apps/pf_new/pf_online?f_n.browse&doc.policy.les/HnE/E-8.081.

130
11
Should Surgical Errors Always Be 
Disclosed to the Patient?
Constantine Mavroudis, Constantine D. Mavroudis, 
Keith S. Naunheim, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Mistakes made in the care of patients, especially in the hospital setting, 
have drawn a great deal of attention since the 1999 report of the Institute 
of Medicine (IOM), To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System.1 The 
IOM famously cited an estimate of 44,000 to 98,000 deaths a year due to 
medical errors [. . .]. The highly intense, complex care required by most car­
diothoracic surgical patients might logically seem to provide rich substrate 
for the occurrence of mistakes. They undoubtedly occur, and surgeons, 
beginning early in the last century, have created a culture of openly admit­
ting and discussing their mistakes during routine morbidity and mortality 
conferences.
Open discussion of mistakes, however, has been mostly confined to those 
weekly conferences; full disclosure to patients has not been as universally 
practiced. Much of the ethics literature suggests that the best way to handle 
health care errors is to disclose them fully to patients. This policy is advised 
in the face of rising incidence and award levels of negligence lawsuits against 
physicians. Does a policy of disclosure make sense? If we follow such a policy, 
are we taking the high road or the road to self-destruction? Are we being 
saints or are we being martyrs? [. . .]
* Mavroudis C, Mavroudis CD, Naunheim K, Sade R. Should surgical errors always be 
disclosed to the patient? Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(2):399–408. Copyright Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Disclosure of Surgical Errors	
131
To focus the discussion, a case was presented in which a surgical error 
was committed under circumstances that allowed the surgeon the opportu­
nity safely to conceal it.
CASE
Mr. Sirius Lunger is 51 years old and has a history of smoking (80 pack-years), 
emphysema, and recent onset of hemoptysis. He is found to have a mass in 
his right upper lobe, and Dr Waffle, a thoracic surgeon, does a bronchoscopy, 
which reveals a mass in the right upper lobe bronchus. The biopsy demon­
strates squamous cell carcinoma. Doctor Waffle schedules Mr. Lunger to 
undergo right upper lobectomy, but tells the patient and his family (wife and 
three teenage children) that he may need to remove more than just the lower 
lobe, which he will decide when he visually inspects the cancer.
During the operation, Dr Waffle, assisted by an operating room nurse, 
identifies the pulmonary vessels in the hilum, then ligates and divides the 
anterior trunk to the upper lobe and a second upper lobe branch. As he com­
pletes the dissection and is preparing to ligate the pulmonary veins, he real­
izes that he has inadvertently ligated and divided both the anterior trunk and 
the ongoing pulmonary artery in the fissure; he has no other choice than to 
remove the right lung, despite the risks entailed by the patient’s chronic lung 
disease. He completes the dissection of the right pulmonary veins, ligates 
them, and finally dissects, divides, and oversews the right mainstem bron­
chus, completing a right pneumonectomy.
Postoperatively, Dr Waffle is uncertain what to tell the patient and 
his family. He believes that openness and full disclosure is generally the 
right thing to do, and that, if Mr. Lunger does not do well, a lawsuit is less 
likely if he tells the whole story. He realizes, however, that he has already 
mentioned to the patient and his family the possibility of a more extensive 
operation than lobectomy, and he was the only one in the operating room 
who knew of the misplaced ligature. He also believes that if disclosure of 
his mistake leads to lengthy malpractice litigation, which is a distinct pos­
sibility, it would be a major distraction from his practice and very bad 
publicity for himself, his partners, and his hospital. A jury would be likely 
to have great sympathy for Mr. Lunger’s young family, and this could well 
lead to an unjustified, emotionally based adverse verdict and financial ruin 
for his own family. Doctor Waffle tells the patient and the family that the 
more extensive resection was required, and does not mention inadvertent 
arterial ligation.
Because of the chronic lung disease in the remaining lung, Mr. Lunger 
cannot be removed from ventilator support, and ten days later, he devel­
ops antibiotic-resistant pneumonia. Three days later, still on the ventilator, 
 

	 132	
The Ethics of Surgery
he dies of respiratory insufficiency. Doctor Waffle, as is his usual practice, 
expresses his sympathy to the family, sends a note of condolence, and attends 
the funeral, all of which is much appreciated by the family.
Should Dr Waffle have disclosed his technical error?
Pro
Constantine Mavroudis, MD, and Constantine D. Mavroudis
Truth telling in medicine, as in the case in question, isn’t always as straight­
forward as it sounds. Disclosing an error to a patient is never easy and may 
have important adverse consequences for the doctor. It is not enough to sim­
ply state “that truth is always the best policy”; it is important to explore why 
this might be so.
So, what did Dr Waffle actually do? He performed a comprehensive 
diagnostic assessment of Mr. Lunger. He conducted an informed con­
sent interview with Mr. Lunger and his family, which included the pos­
sibility that he might have to perform a pneumonectomy if it were found 
that the tumor spread to adjacent parts of the lung. During the opera­
tion, Dr Waffle experienced unknown circumstances that led to errors 
in judgment-technique. This resulted in an unwanted pneumonectomy 
instead of the planned lobectomy. Mr. Lunger died from pulmonary insuf­
ficiency, which may or may not have been prevented, regardless of the 
extent of pulmonary resection.
What happened to Dr Waffle, who is a board-certified thoracic surgeon 
with excellent credentials? A root-cause analysis would have to consider the 
following questions. Were there anatomic anomalies such as distortion of the 
pulmonary artery due to the tumor that could have been overlooked or unap­
preciated? Was an informed assistant (senior resident or colleague) in the 
room during the operation? Were there environmental distractions that were 
not controlled (eg, loud talking, music playing, excess operating room traf­
fic)? Did Dr Waffle suffer a lapse in concentration due to some psychological 
or organic reason? The fact still remains that whatever the possible personal 
or system causes, the complication occurred.
If Dr Waffle (1) decides not to disclose the incident to the patient and 
family, (2) chooses to hide the incident from his colleagues, and (3) succeeds 
in his deception, he will have only to deal with his conscience [. . .]. If, on the 
other hand, Dr Waffle decides to disclose all the facts to the patient and fam­
ily and offers an apology, he still faces the reality of a litigious society with 
unjust laws that treats medical errors in a tort system where there is a milieu 
of punishment and financial devastation. There is, therefore, significant con­
flict between ethical considerations (do the right thing) and self-preservation 
(protect one’s self).
 

	
Disclosure of Surgical Errors	
133
HISTORICAL PHILOSOPHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Aristotle did not live in a time of medical litigation and we can only speculate 
what his thoughts would be concerning this modern day societal problem. 
His Nicomachean Ethics were based on the moral virtues of courage, tem­
perance, prudence, and justice.2 [. . .] Aristotle would argue that Dr Waffle 
and Mr. Lunger entered into an agreement, based on the moral virtue of 
justice. Doctor Waffle would treat Mr. Lunger in the same manner that he 
would want to be treated had he, in fact, been the patient. It would follow 
that Dr Waffle would be duty bound to disclose the truth in all aspects of 
care with Mr. Lunger based on this situation.
One would assume that Plato would agree with this scenario, except 
that Plato suggested that lying in certain circumstances is not immoral.3 For 
instance, lying or intentional deception to one’s enemy would not be immoral. 
Furthermore, intentional deception, when done in the patient’s best interests, 
is considered by him to be morally justified. [. . .]
Kant’s moral theory is considered by some to be the foundation of mod­
ern bioethics.4 His basic tenet is the primacy of autonomy and dignity of the 
individual (“the principle of humanity”). For Kant, morality can exist only 
by virtue of our autonomy as rational beings. The moral worth of an action is 
not related to the beneficial outcome that it may bring, but whether it is done 
from a sense of duty or obligation. Kant’s moral law or “categorical impera­
tive” states, “Act only on that maxim through which you can, at the same 
time, will that it should become a universal law of values.” Every act has to 
stand on its moral virtue and be judged as if it were to become a universal 
law of nature. Kant could not condone lying for any reason because to do so 
violates the principle of the “categorical imperative.” [. . .]
The English school of Utilitarianism based its moral theory on the “util­
ity” or outcome of an act rather than its motive. To act morally was to act in 
such a way that the amount of benefit or pleasure achieved was maximized 
and the harm or “pain” minimized—the “greatest good for the greatest 
number.” [. . .]
At first sight, it may be hard to imagine that much pleasure will be 
achieved by Dr Waffle telling his patient that he has made a serious error. 
However, consideration of Dr Waffle’s pain takes a far too narrow view of 
Utilitarianism, which is a doctrine not of personal expediency but a consider­
ation of the greater societal good. [. . .]
MODERN TRENDS
[. . .] So what should Dr Waffle do? The proper course of action for this ill-fated 
surgeon is to do the following: (1) disclose the entire incident as it occurred 
 
 

	 134	
The Ethics of Surgery
in a straight-forward fashion, indicating that it was an error, (2) try to give 
the best explanation possible as to why this happened, (3) tell the family what 
steps that he is taking to prevent such an occurrence from happening again, 
and (4) apologize. This line of thinking has been reported by multiple authors 
recently and has been supported by classic ethical thought.
Mazor and associates conducted a questionnaire survey, involving 1,500 
members of a New England-based health maintenance organization, which 
yielded a 66% response rate.5 [. . .] The results showed that full disclosure 
yielded better patient satisfaction, an enhanced trust between patient and 
physician, and a positive emotional response. [. . .]
Osmon and associates studied the reporting of medical errors in an 
intensive care unit experience.6 They concluded that medical errors are com­
mon among patients in the intensive care unit and that an error can result 
in the need for additional life-sustaining treatments, which can contribute 
to patient death. They urged the development of a nonpunitive reporting 
system, which could maximize the chance for analysis and improved patient 
care. Krizek reviewed the ethical issues of adverse events and identified five 
types of medical errors (judgmental, technical, expectations, systems, and 
mechanical).7 [. . .] He urged that we eliminate the culture of blame, insist on 
truth telling with full disclosure, and use these opportunities to improve all 
aspects of patient care. [. . .]
Gallagher and associates tested the patients’ and physicians’ attitudes 
on reporting medical errors in focus groups.8 Both groups had unmet needs 
following medical error events. Patients wanted full disclosure and an apol­
ogy. Physicians agreed with disclosure but wanted “to choose their words 
carefully.” Moreover, physicians worried that an apology could create legal 
liability which, in some states, it can. Krizek states, “delivering truth in an 
artful fashion does not have to be a lie,” by which he meant that he would find 
the correct words to be kind and thoughtful to his patient while disclosing the 
medical error. However, this raises the slippery slope argument that truths 
told in an “artful fashion” could shade into intentional deception.
The distinction between lying and intentional deception is discussed by 
Jackson [. . .].9 Jackson notes, “Doctors and nurses, like everyone else, have a 
prima facie duty not to lie—but again, like everyone else, they are not duty 
bound to avoid intentional deception, lying apart; except where it would 
involve a breach of trust.” [. . .] The “breach of trust” phrase is central to Dr 
Waffle’s dilemma and illustrates the difference between intentional deception 
to hide an error to fulfill Dr Waffle’s interests and intentional deception to 
hide the diagnosis of a fatal disease where the doctor is presumably trying 
to serve the patient’s interests (however misguidedly) rather than his own. It 
would appear that even in Jackson’s approach, Dr Waffle must disclose the 
error in a forthright manner in order to avoid violating the breach of trust 
covenant.

	
Disclosure of Surgical Errors	
135
Disclosing a medical error, especially when the physician feels person­
ally responsible, requires a great deal of moral courage. However, as most 
physicians come to recognize, the practice of medicine itself requires cour­
age, including the courage to honestly face and endure one’s mistakes. [. . .] 
Surgical training aims to instill in its future practitioners the habit of choos­
ing the right thing to do so good results will be achieved, even under pressure. 
The right thing includes an acknowledgement of error and a commitment 
to excellence. To commit an error may be blameworthy; to lie about it is 
cowardly.
In the end, it is Kantian ethical theory that best supports full disclosure 
of medical errors in a forthright and clear manner. A physician must respect 
the patient’s dignity and act with beneficence, sympathy, conscience, and 
without arrogance. He is duty bound to maintain the interests of his patients 
and his profession over his own. [. . .] The expected virtues of competence and 
compassion of the physician, together with the expected virtues of gratitude 
and compliance of the patient, will energize the process for an Aristotelian 
just end.10
Con
Keith S. Naunheim, MD
My opponent has utilized Kantian philosophy, Aristotelian logic, and 
Platonean ethics as the foundation for his argument. As intelligent and 
enlightened as these philosophers were, the principles they espoused do not 
necessarily provide adequate guidance for the 21st century thoracic surgery 
practitioner. [. . .]
First, I think it is important that we make some assumptions regard­
ing this vignette. Those assumptions would include that the practitioner 
involved, Dr Waffle, was a well-trained and competent thoracic surgeon. 
Further, I would make the assumption that on the day of the surgery he was 
unimpaired by drugs or alcohol. Finally, it seems appropriate to believe that 
the resulting injury was entirely unintentional and that the surgeon did the 
very best job he could on that given day. If these assumptions are agreed upon 
then I feel strongly that nondisclosure is an acceptable and preferable option.
There is an underlying ethical paradox in the practice of medicine in the 
21st century. Despite the fact that medical mistakes are inevitable, the stan­
dard for medical practice has evolved to the point at which only perfection is 
acceptable. This appears to be the opinion of the lay press as well as politi­
cians and the population at large. It is also true that this belief is inculcated 
into physicians and surgeons throughout their medical school and residency. 
During training, we are taught that human life is sacred and nothing less 
than perfection is acceptable when performing diagnosis and treatment. This 
 

	 136	
The Ethics of Surgery
goal, while laudable, is entirely unrealistic and ignores the preponderance of 
literature that demonstrates that human error is a fact of life.
The “science” of human error, which has been extensively studied within 
business and industry, is not taught during medical training. Rather, stu­
dents of medicine have been led to believe that error is avoidable and thus any 
mistake is “wrong.” Commonly, errors are treated as a failure of character. 
Perhaps the best example of this may be the morbidity and mortality confer­
ences attended by most thoracic surgeons during their training. The over­
whelming attitude was “how can there be an error without negligence?” By 
endorsing this attitude, we have become our own worst enemies. Mistakes in 
medical care are inevitable and this is now becoming widely recognized. [. . .]
One of the most important things to determine in this patient’s scenario 
is the assignation of “blame.” One question that must certainly be asked is 
whether the operative actions and the resulting mortality were indeed a cause 
and effect? During training, surgeons are taught that they are responsible for 
everything that happens to a patient and it logically follows that the surgeon 
will be responsible for any errors or bad results that occur. While the logic 
appears sound the conclusion is absurd. Surgeons do not have the power to 
control all outcomes. In the present case, the patient had serious underlying 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Such patients are at an increased risk 
for postoperative pneumonia and ventilator dependence, as occurred in this 
patient. Although the performance of a pneumonectomy in lieu of a lobec­
tomy may have increased the risk of respiratory insufficiency and pneumo­
nia, it is impossible to determine that those complications would not have 
arisen even in the face of a simple lobectomy.
Surgery is a risky business and during the process of informed consent 
Dr. Waffle certainly communicated that to the patient and his family. The 
patient accepted the risk for potential complications, including harm, which 
might come due to a difficult or problematic dissection as occurred. [. . .]
There are many ethical theories that might be applied to this particular 
clinical situation including Aristotelian ethics, ethical egoism, ethical rela­
tivism, deontology, and utilitarianism among others. The vast majority of 
thoracic surgeons are not experts in the ethical realm but most, I believe, can 
easily grasp the theory of consequentialism. [. . .] Consequentialism suggests 
that one ought to do that act which realizes the best overall net consequences 
when one considers both the harm and the benefit to all those involved.
In the scenario outlined, one must therefore consider the harm and the 
benefit to the patient and his family. In addition, however, it is appropriate to 
consider the harm and potential benefit to the surgeon. The decision that is 
made regarding disclosure should be the best one with regard to the overall 
net consequences to both the patient and his family as well as to the physi­
cian. It is often suggested that benefits and harms to the patient may carry 
greater weight than those to the physician.

	
Disclosure of Surgical Errors	
137
Thus, reasons to disclose the intraoperative misstep would include any sig­
nificant benefit to the patient and his family as well as any benefit to the doc­
tor that comes secondary to disclosure. Reasons not to disclose would be those 
things that cause patient or family harm as well as harm to the surgeon involved.
Theoretically, in many clinical situations acknowledging or disclosing 
such a mistake may benefit patients in several ways. [. . .] [T]‌he only “patient 
benefit” or goal that might be fulfilled is the potential for “fair” compensa­
tion via litigation. Somehow the words “fair” and “litigation” just don’t seem 
to belong in the same sentence in the 21st century medicolegal world.
There are yet other reasons that could potentially support the decision 
to disclose. These would be classified as “doctor benefit” and would include 
the fact that acknowledging a mistake may benefit the doctor in some situa­
tions. [. . .] It has been suggested that disclosure can potentially decrease the 
chance of a lawsuit. [. . .] There is but a single study that suggests disclosure 
may decrease the risk of a lawsuit but other literature and common sense sug­
gest otherwise.11
[. . .] Witman and associates performed a survey of patient attitude 
towards medical mistakes in the outpatient setting.12 [. . .] Based on their find­
ings, the arguments that disclosure can help avoid legal action seems naively 
optimistic and the likelihood of lawsuit avoidance highly improbable.
[. . .] In consequentialism, one must also consider the reasons why the 
physician should not disclose the error. The rationale for this approach would 
include issues of “patients/family harm” and “physician harm.” In general, 
acknowledging mistakes could potentially harm patients in a couple of ways. 
First, it might inhibit present or future patient/doctor relationships or patient 
family relationships. Secondly, it could incite greater anger or emotional dis­
tress in a patient who has been harmed or in the family of a patient who has 
been harmed. Of these two, only the latter would possibly come into play. The 
present and/or future patient/doctor relationship, as has been stated above, 
has no real role since the patient has expired and the relationship has dis­
appeared. However, there is certainly a chance that there could be greater 
anger, anxiety, and emotional distress on the part of the family if they were 
informed that surgical error may or may not have played a role in the death 
of their loved one.
“Physician harm” must also be considered in consequentialism when 
considering reasons not to disclose. The doctor could be harmed by inducing 
anxiety and severe emotional distress during and after disclosure. In addi­
tion, he runs the potential for the loss of respect, patient referrals, hospital 
privileges, and perhaps even contracts. Thus, there is a significant potential 
economic loss and almost certitude with regard to an increase in malpractice 
premiums. None of these potential harms to the doctor is obviated by the 
death of the patient and thus these must be considered when one thinks of 
valid reasons not to disclose. [. . .]

	 138	
The Ethics of Surgery
In summary, the issue can be looked at from a number of perspectives. 
From the medical perspective, no matter what the surgeon chooses to do, the 
patient will not “undie.” One cannot help the expired patient and there is no 
medical reason to disclose. From an emotional standpoint, the family will not 
grieve “better” and the surgeon is not likely to find a great deal of consolation 
following an act of contrition. The patient/doctor relationship, cited often as 
a reason to disclose, really does not come into play as the patient has expired. 
With regard to physician guilt, it is unlikely that unburdening one’s soul in 
and of itself would be beneficial. [. . .] Finally, it gets down, as it often does, 
to a question of money. Most surgeons I know would be happy if appropri­
ate compensation could be provided to patients and/or their families without 
resorting to the legal system. The current tort system is adversarial in nature 
and it has been demonstrated that monetary awards really bear little cor­
relation to the damage done. Looking to the current medical tort system for 
economic justice would be like asking a used car dealer for “fair price.” [. . .]
Like all physicians, we strive to provide fair and ethical treatment for 
all patients. But fairness and ethics should be a two-way street. Over the 
last decade, American medicine has been assaulted from many directions. 
Not only has society as a whole not stepped up to defend our profession, 
rather they are instigating and driving many of the negative changes. [. . .] The 
Platonean idea of virtue was meant to apply to the entire society, not just 
individuals. Requiring surgeons to be more virtuous than society as a whole, 
while idealistic, is neither fair nor reasonable.
In the above clinical scenario, the surgeon has no duty to disclose the 
intraoperative occurrences. The patient had a significant underlying disease 
and may very well have died no matter what occurred at the time of sur­
gery. Disclosure would provide no significant good or benefit other than sub­
jecting the surgeon to the likelihood of a bitter contentious and ultimately 
unfair malpractice suit. A disclosure would serve no real principle of justice 
or fairness. Just because one is a virtuous physician does not mean one must 
become a martyr.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
In analyzing Dr. Waffle’s error in the operating room, Mavroudis reviews 
a range of philosophical ethical systems, from the ancient era, through the 
Enlightenment, to contemporary times. By combining Aristotelian teleologi­
cal and Kantian deontological approaches, he reaches the conclusion that 
Dr. Waffle should disclose everything about the error to the patient and the 
patient’s family. Naunheim utilizes a different philosophic system, conse­
quentialism, to reach the opposite conclusion: Dr. Waffle should keep the 
 

	
Disclosure of Surgical Errors	
139
potentially damaging information to himself. Naunheim reaches this conclu­
sion after weighing the benefits and harms (pleasure and pain to a Utilitarian) 
that will occur to both the patient and the surgeon, depending on disclosure 
or nondisclosure.
While ethicists have relied on a wide range of philosophic reasoning in 
constructing ethical systems, the codes of behavior used by physicians for 
centuries have been based on certain principles that have found broad sup­
port within the medical profession. The most fundamental principle, found 
in virtually every contemporary code, is essentially this: “A physician shall, 
while caring for a patient, regard responsibility to the patient as paramount.”13 
All surgeons accept this principle and are guided by it every day. Yet, while 
the patient’s best interests are the most important considerations, they are not 
the only ones. Physicians also have obligations to others: family, colleagues, 
hospitals, and wider communities. Physicians are not required to place them­
selves in harm’s way to such an extent that their ability to continue to care for 
current and future patients is seriously jeopardized or their personal lives are 
gravely threatened. [. . .]
It is important for physicians, when faced with great uncertainty in 
threatening situations, to avoid acting on emotional reactions, such as anger 
toward society for failing to protect physicians adequately, outrage at trial 
attorneys for making life miserable for unfortunate physicians who come 
within their sights, or fear of patients who present real or apparent threats. 
Physicians faced with threatening situations should be guided by cool reason 
grounded in the principles of medical ethics. This means that they should 
give great weight to patients’ interests, allowing their own interests to over­
ride those of their patients only when the threat of harm is grave and the 
jeopardy it imposes is serious.
Making the right decision requires that physicians assess as accurately 
and objectively as possible the real threat to their own interests and to their 
ability to care for patients in the future. Availability of more complete data 
that document actual risks to physicians arising from full disclosure of sur­
gical errors to patients will help us to make better-informed decisions. Our 
deliberations should also include objective assessment of personal observa­
tions and experiences in similar situations.
Various philosophical traditions, as presented by our debaters, have 
not produced a definitive answer to the question of how Dr. Waffle should 
respond to his dilemma. In all probability, there is no single answer that 
would apply to all physicians in all situations. Broadly accepted principles 
of medical ethics can provide a helpful guideline; however, when deliberating 
on the many factors to be considered, the heaviest weight should be placed on 
doing what is best for the patient—in this case, disclosure of the facts and the 
trust such openness generates. At the end of the day, however, we must rely on 
judgments based on dispassionate interpretation of the inconclusive data that 

	 140	
The Ethics of Surgery
are available, in the context of personal observations, to determine just how 
much Dr. Waffle—and we, when our times come—should tell the patient.
References
	 1.	 Institute of Medicine. To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
	 2.	 Aristotle. The Nichomachean Ethics, Book III. Ross, D (trans). London:  Oxford 
University Press; 1954.
	 3.	 Plato. Republic, II:382. Jowett, B (trans). In:  The Dialogues of Plato, Vol. 1. 
New York: Random House; 1937.
	 4.	 Bernstein M, Brown B. Doctors’ duty to disclose error: a deontological or Kantian 
ethical analysis. Can J Neurol Sci. 2004;31:169–74.
	 5.	 Mazor KM, Simon SR, Yood RA, et al. Health plan members’ views about disclo­
sure of medical errors. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:409–18.
	 6.	 Osmon S, Harris CB, Dunagan WC, Prentice D, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. Reporting 
of medical errors: an intensive care unit experience. Crit Care Med. 2004;32:727–33.
	 7.	 Krizek TJ. Surgical error:  ethical issues of adverse events. Arch Surg. 
2000;135:1359–66.
	 8.	 Gallagher TH, Waterman AD, Ebers AG, Fraser VJ, Levinson W. Patients’ and phy­
sicians’ attitudes regarding the disclosure of medical errors. JAMA. 2003; 289:1001–7.
	 9.	 Jackson J. Telling the truth. J Med Ethics. 1991;17:5–9.
	10.	 Mavroudis C. Presidential address:  a partnership in courage. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2003;75:1366–71.
	11.	 Kachalia A, Shojania KG, Hofer TP, et al. Does full disclosure of medical errors 
affect malpractice liability? The jury is still out. Jt Comm J Qual Saf. 2003;29:503–11.
	12.	 Witman AB, Park DM, Hardin SB. How do patients want physicians to handle mis­
takes? Arch Intern Med. 1996;156: 2565–9.
	13.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Code of Medical Ethics: current opinions 
with annotations, 2004–2005 ed. Chicago: American Medical Association; 2004:xiv.
 

141
12
Another Surgeon’s Error
MUST YOU TELL THE PATIENT?
Susan D. Moffatt-Bruce, Chadrick E. Denlinger, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
The question of whether physicians should report medical errors to patients 
and their families has been the subject of much commentary ever since the 
1999 report of the Institute of Medicine, To Err is Human: Building a Safer 
Health System, which brought the problem of hospital deaths due to medical 
errors to public attention.1 A general consensus has been reached among bio­
ethicists and within the medical profession: physicians have an ethical obliga­
tion to patients to disclose errors made during their health care. Much less 
clear is a closely related but quite different problem: is a physician obligated 
to disclose errors made by others when those others will not personally dis­
close them? [. . .]
THE CASE OF THE MISSING BIOPSY
A 72-year-old man is referred to Dr. Paul Jones with the new diagnosis of 
bronchopleural fistula. He under went right pneumonectomy 10 days previ­
ously, performed by Dr. John Lapps, a cardiothoracic surgeon in another 
part of the state, after having under gone induction chemoradiation therapy 
for stage IIIA non-small cell lung cancer, clinically staged. This procedure 
* Moffatt-Bruce S, Denlinger C, Sade RM. Another surgeon’s error: must you tell the patient? 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98(2):396–401. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here 
with permission.
 
 
 
 

	 142	
The Ethics of Surgery
was complicated by hemorrhage. The final pathology report disclosed 
multi-station mediastinal lymph node disease.
A review of the operative note reveals that no frozen sections were sent. 
Dr. Jones is surprised that Dr. Lapps did not obtain a biopsy specimen of the 
mediastinal lymph nodes by a less invasive procedure than thoracotomy, or 
at least after thoracotomy but before pneumonectomy. If the patient had been 
his originally, he, like most thoracic surgeons, would have biopsied the nodes, 
and the patient would not have undergone pneumonectomy. Dr. Jones intends 
to describe to the patient and his family what he believes needs to be done 
now. Before he talks with the patient and his family, however, he contacts 
Dr. Lapps, describes the error Dr. Lapps made in not obtaining a lymph node 
biopsy specimen, and encourages him to report this to the patient. Worried 
about a possible lawsuit, Dr. Lapps refuses to do so. Dr. Jones will answer 
honestly any questions the patient and his family might ask, but wonders if he 
should tell them about Dr. Lapps’ omission.
Pro
Susan D. Moffatt-Bruce, MD, PhD
Dr. Jones must tell the patient and his family about Dr. Lapps’ omission. 
Several ethical principles support this stance. Before taking a pro or con 
stance, however, a preface must be made. This is a very challenging and per­
haps not unfamiliar scenario. With patient care becoming more complex and 
care teams being more diverse, this is likely to become a sadly familiar situa­
tion. Having said that, I will outline ethical principles, as well as expand on, 
what the benefits are in dispelling myths about care that may not be true and 
unveiling the reality of the clinical scenario presented here: Dr. Lapps’ omis­
sion likely did not meet the standard of care. Lastly, I will review what tactics 
and teaching must be part of the surgeon’s armamentarium to properly care 
for the patient and render this a very professional disclosure.
The ethical principles that support Dr. Jones telling the patient and his 
family that Dr. Lapps should have biopsied the mediastinal lymph nodes, 
thereby obviating the need for a pneumonectomy, include (1) the surgeon’s 
professional obligation; (2) the surgeon’s integrity; (3) the patient’s right to 
informed care and to be fully engaged in his care; and (4) the patient’s right to 
informed consent regarding further care he will require.
The American Medical Association Code of Medical Ethics helps ren­
der clarity to the surgeon’s professional obligation to tell the family that 
Dr. Lapps has made an error in judgment in completing the pneumonectomy. 
The Code states, “Situations occasionally occur in which a patient experi­
ences significant medical complications that may have resulted from the phy­
sician’s mistake or judgment. In these situations, the physician is ethically 
 

	
Disclosing Another Surgeon’s Error	
143
required to inform the patient of all the facts necessary to ensure understand­
ing of what has occurred.”2
Furthermore, the American College of Physicians Ethics Manual states 
“Physicians should disclose to patients information about procedural or 
judgment errors made during care, as long as such information is material to 
the patient’s well-being. Errors do not necessarily imply negligent or unethi­
cal behavior, but failure to disclose them may.”3 This statement leaves no 
ambiguity that surgeons, and in particular, Dr. Jones, are obligated and it 
is their professional duty to disclose an error of another surgeon once it has 
been discovered. Professional self-regulation requires sharing and acting on 
information collectively and should become our professional norm.
So, the professional codes of conduct under which we should ethically 
work support the disclosure of Dr. Lapps’ error by Dr. Jones. Where does the 
patient’s care and expectations come into this debate? Every patient is entitled 
to what is truly informed care. That is to say, patients are entitled to honest 
information. When asked, Dr. Jones must be truthful and answer to the best 
of his ability about what transpired to render such to the patient under his 
care. He may choose to not use words like “error” and “mistake” but rather 
choose more productive and less judgmental words such as “clinical opin­
ion” and “divergence from.” If he is not asked, Dr. Jones is still obliged to 
render an appropriate disclosure as it pertains to the patient’s clinical care. 
Patients and families should not have the burden of trying to discover “what 
happened” or how it should happen that, in this instance now, the patient is 
facing additional care by another surgeon.
Financial burden to the patient should be relieved. Often patients and 
families will need help after such a serious error that is now going to pro­
long their care, and they will have difficulty accessing compensation with­
out information about what really happened. Family must be kept informed 
along with the patient about the long-term care plan. The patient had initially 
consented to 5 to 7 days of hospitalization time, and now his care has likely 
turned into a prolonged stay. In addition, the patient may have been moved 
from his local environment and is now in an unfamiliar city with the family 
incurring additional costs. The patient’s needs are very real, and as profes­
sionals, we are expected to put the needs of the patient and the family above 
our own. Honest and expeditious disclosure will serve to move beyond blame 
to advocacy for the patient.
The patient is entitled to informed consent. This will be a particularly 
important component of this patient’s care because Dr.  Lapps’ omission 
has now required further intervention and care by Dr. Jones. For the patient 
and his family to give informed consent for additional therapy or surgical 
intervention, they must understand the clinical course thus far. This has the 
potential to be important for the patient as well as the surgeon and their 
own relationship, particularly if an additional operation is fraught with the 

	 144	
The Ethics of Surgery
potential for further complications or prolonged care. To be truly informed, a 
patient has to understand what care rendered to them resulted in the current 
state of their disease.
Although surgeons may be ethically obligated to disclose errors, pres­
sures from society and the medical profession itself make it very difficult for 
physicians and surgeons to rush to disclose in a timely and professional man­
ner. In one recent study, only approximately one-third of patients who had 
some experience with a medical error said that a health professional involved 
in the incident disclosed the error or apologized.4
Most physicians have trained in a culture that supports “shame-and-blame” 
approaches to medical errors. Shame, fears about blame, and worries about 
legal liability also play a role in the underreporting of medical errors. Most 
physicians have trained—and some continue to train—in poor working con­
ditions that include heavy workloads, inadequate supervision, and poor com­
munication. All those factors contribute to medical mistakes, which are often 
very difficult to take responsibility for. A balance must be found between 
“non-blame” and appropriate accountability.
In theory, there are many benefits to a timely and appropriate disclo­
sure. There are data [. . .] supporting that good, open, and honest commu­
nication improved patient satisfaction and, ultimately, outcomes. Improved 
surgeon-patient relationships and, ultimately, improved patient and family 
satisfaction results from open communication and honesty.5 Although the 
research suggests that good communication about adverse events may reduce 
litigation and malpractice payouts, I must concede that data are lacking from 
studies to indicate how to disclose other’s errors while minimizing the risk 
that a patient will initiate a claim.
There is also the well-being of the surgeon to consider after an error has 
been made. One study, for example, demonstrated that when house staff 
could no longer deny or discount a mistake, they were plagued by profound 
doubts and guilt. For many, “the case was never closed,” even when they fin­
ished their training.6 [. . .] Gallagher and colleagues recently published a very 
timely article in the New England Journal of Medicine whereby the tactics 
and teaching required to meet the patient’s needs were explored in depth.7 The 
authors speak to the concept of “explore, do not ignore” when a colleague’s 
possible error has occurred. The clinician’s first obligation is to obtain the 
facts; inaccurate or speculative information is damaging.
Only Dr.  Lapps will know exactly what happened during the care or 
operation. To engage with the surgeon to give him the opportunity to cor­
rect assumptions and join the disclosure process is the first step. This should 
ideally be a very professional surgeon-to-surgeon discussion so that it is pro­
ductive rather than disruptive. Approaching Dr. Lapps with curiosity rather 
than accusation will be much better received. The goal is to engage the prac­
titioner to help determine how to disclose an error, if together you decide 

	
Disclosing Another Surgeon’s Error	
145
there has indeed been one, as well as determine if there are others to which 
the disclosure must be made (i.e., institution, The Joint Commission). In fact, 
Gallagher and colleagues give us guidance on how best to proceed with the 
disclosure, in that sometimes additional people should be present, including 
medical directors or department chairs. If Dr. Lapps were to decline the invi­
tation, then disclosure must proceed, and when asked, Dr Jones is obliged to 
always tell the truth. [. . .]
Lastly, coaching and support for the surgeon who has to disclose an error 
of his own or another needs to be provided. This is never an easy or pleasant 
process but one that will turn the focus to patient-centered care as opposed 
to surgeon-centered protection. The earlier we start this training and setting 
expectations around appropriate accountability, apology, and disclosure the 
better; medical school is the ideal initial forum.
In conclusion, Dr. Jones is obligated to discuss the potential error with 
Dr. Lapps, thereby verifying the facts and determining whether an error was 
made or not. Dr Jones then must provide the surgeon the opportunity to dis­
close the error to the patient and family and to truly be part of the account­
ability process. Ultimately, the patient and family must be informed because 
it is a shared professional responsibility, of all surgeons, to provide transpar­
ent disclosure of errors that impact patient outcomes.
Con
Chadrick E. Denlinger, MD
Several recent statements provide guidance related to the disclosure of medi­
cal errors by physicians to the patients for whom they have been providing 
care. It is fair to conclude that a consensus has been reached regarding our 
ethical duty to inform patients of our own medical errors. In addition to 
being the ethically acceptable practice, disclosing ones’ own errors is critical 
for preserving trust between patients and physicians.
Arguments supporting nondisclosure because of concerns for provoking 
anxiety or confusion have largely been discredited. Therefore, most agree that 
medical errors should be disclosed to the patient by the physicians involved as 
soon as reasonably possible given their overall medical situation.
The situation of Dr. Jones disclosing an error involving Dr. Lapps, who 
practices at a different institution, is significantly different. Encountering 
medical errors involving other physicians is extremely common. In fact, a 
recent survey of practicing clinicians found that more than two-thirds of phy­
sicians had encountered a peer’s medical error within the prior 6 months, 
although 90% of them had received little or no prior training on how to man­
age this situation.8 Given the frequency in which analogous situations occur, 
it is instructive to think of our own situations and ask ourselves “how did 
 

	 146	
The Ethics of Surgery
I respond?” rather than to ask hypothetically “how would I respond?” As 
we reflect on prior situations, we should realize that our prior actions were 
guided by our own ethical code and sense of justice.
Several years ago, I  accepted a patient from another hospital and 
I quickly realized that the patient had, in my opinion, been mismanaged at 
the previous institution. As I treated the patient, I focused on the current 
situation and what treatments were necessary. We did not discuss the prior 
care at another hospital. Eventually the patient recovered and returned to a 
normal lifestyle, but this only came after an initial prolonged hospitalization 
and numerous subsequent admissions for minor procedures and a few signifi­
cant operations. Over the course of the following year, the patient and family 
began asking questions related to my opinion of what had occurred at the 
prior hospital and I answered openly and honestly.
In preparation for the discussion involving Drs. Jones and Lapps, I con­
ducted my own survey of 20 different colleagues scattered throughout the 
United States as well as several individuals at my own institution. Those sur­
veyed were provided a succinct review of the case and were asked, “should 
I have discussed with the patient regarding the previous care?” Those sur­
veyed were asked that in addition to treating the patients, should I have:
	A.	told the family that I agreed with the prior management;
	B.	offered no opinion regarding the prior management, but answer 
honestly if asked; or,
	C.	proactively told the family that I thought the prior management 
was inappropriate.
Everyone surveyed responded that that I should have answered questions 
honestly when asked, but that I should not have proactively informed the 
patient or family that the prior management was inappropriate.
The topic of disclosing medical errors involving a different physician has 
recently been addressed in other publications. The authors acknowledge that 
existing guidelines emphasize the importance of disclosing errors pertain­
ing to our own practice, but they offer little guidance on disclosing mistakes 
involving others. This lack of guidance heightens the clinician’s uncertainty 
about what to do.7 There are three primary challenges with disclosing anoth­
er’s mistakes. Most importantly, it is often difficult to determine exactly what 
happened when a physician was not directly involved in the event in question.
Second, it is difficult to understand what conversations occurred between 
the physician(s) involved and the patient regarding the risks and benefits of 
various treatment options. Furthermore, there is likely some uncertainty 
regarding the degree of patient involvement in selecting a given treatment 
pathway.
Finally, opinions differ about what constitutes a medical error. Potential 
errors exist on a spectrum ranging from “not what I would have done” but 

	
Disclosing Another Surgeon’s Error	
147
within the standard of care to blatant errors suggesting medical incompe­
tence. These three issues contribute the lack of clarity of the appropriate 
response when we encounter a peer’s medical error.
Several examples in the literature illustrate the difficulty with determining 
what defines a medical error. In 1991, the Harvard Medical Practice Study inves­
tigated the number of adverse outcomes and deaths that occurred as the result 
of negligent medical errors.9 For the purposes of that study, more than 30,000 
medical records from New York state were randomly selected and screened 
by nurses to identify patients with adverse outcomes. The screeners identified 
nearly 8,000 patient records as showing evidence of adverse outcomes.
Two physicians then independently reviewed each of these records. The 
vast majority of the reviewers were board-certified surgeons or board-certified 
internists. Each reviewer received specific training for the purpose of the study 
to educate him or her about what constituted an adverse outcome and what 
constituted medical negligence. The inter observer reliability of identifying 
adverse outcomes was good, with a k value of 0.61. Conversely, the physicians’ 
opinions regarding negligence were far less reliable, with a k value of only 0.24.
The authors acknowledge that judgments regarding the causes of adverse 
outcomes or negligent care are difficult and sometimes inaccurate. The fact 
that physicians had difficulty determining whether or not a standard of care 
had been met was really not surprising given the complexity of medical care. 
A  second similar study involved pairs of anesthesiologists independently 
reviewing the appropriateness of care in more than 100 actual malpractice 
claims.10 The 2 reviewers agreed on the appropriateness of care in 62% of the 
cases. Each reviewer thought the care was appropriate in 27%, and they both 
thought the care was inappropriate in 32%. Interestingly, the 2 reviewers dis­
agreed on whether or not the care was appropriate in 38% of cases (k = 0.37).
These two studies highlight the fact that physician medical record review­
ers who receive specific training that prepares them to properly identify neg­
ligent or inappropriate care have a substantial degree of disagreement. If this 
is true, it is unacceptable for each of us to assume that we are capable of 
correctly judging the appropriateness of care provided by other previously 
treating physicians and to inform patients of our opinion.
Given the degree of disagreement between expert reviewers, consider­
ation should be given to when the disclosures should end. In the current case, 
if Dr. Jones informs the patient that Dr. Lapps has provided negligent care, 
what are the ethical responsibilities of subsequent physicians taking care of 
the patient? Almost certainly, the patient will be transferred to an intensive 
care unit where care will be provided, in part, by intensivists. If one adopts the 
policy that we are all responsible to disclose medical errors involving other 
physicians, then we should also be responsible to share our opinion regarding 
reviews of care rendered other physicians. Therefore, the intensivist would be 
responsible to inform the patient of his or her opinion of Dr. Lapps’ care and 

	 148	
The Ethics of Surgery
would also be responsible for providing an opinion about the appropriateness 
of comments made to the family by Dr. Jones regarding Dr. Lapps’ care. This 
scenario would continue when the patient leaves the hospital and the primary 
physician involved in his care is the primary care physician.
Physicians have strong opinions about how they would like their col­
leagues to disclose information when their own care is thought to be neg­
ligent. A  recent survey presented physicians with clinical vignettes where 
adverse outcomes occurred.8 [. . .] Regardless of the severity of the outcome, 
approximately two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they would report 
their opinion to the original physician rather than report their opinion to 
the patient when they were the one observing the error. However, when the 
respondent was the physician responsible for the error, 93% of the respon­
dents expected their peers to report the error to them.
When encountering medical errors involving other physicians, the most 
appropriate response is to speak directly with those involved. This may clarify 
the rationale behind decisions that were made and will expound the discus­
sion that occurred with the patient before rendering treatment. After this dis­
cussion, the 2 physicians may agree that no Harmful error had occurred and 
therefore nothing needs to be disclosed. Alternatively, the physicians may agree 
that there was an error and they agree upon who should disclose the error to 
the patient and when this should occur. A third scenario is that the 2 physi­
cians disagree either on whether an error occurred or they disagree on how 
the information should be disclosed to the patient. Under these circumstances, 
institutional guidance should be sought given the frequent disagreements even 
among expert reviewers related to the appropriateness of previous care.
In conclusion, Dr.  Jones should not tell the patient that he believes 
Dr. Lapps made a medical error for several reasons: Medical errors involv­
ing other physicians must be first discussed with the physicians involved to 
fully understand the decisions that were made. Second, there is frequent lack 
of agreement regarding the appropriateness of care Previously provided. 
Entangling a patient and their family in the midst of differing medical opin­
ions would likely increase their anxiety beyond the stress already felt because 
of the illness itself. Therefore, only a collaborative approach to accountabil­
ity can fully meet the needs of patients after harmful medical errors have 
occurred and the physician involved is no longer taking care of the patient.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Both essayists make persuasive arguments to support their positions. A few 
of their arguments are less than convincing, however. Moffatt-Bruce, for 
example, claims that her citations of sections of the American Medical 
 

	
Disclosing Another Surgeon’s Error	
149
Association Code of Medical Ethics and the American College of Physicians 
Ethics Manual support the disclosure of Dr. Lapps’s error by Dr. Jones. The 
American Medical Association Code does not support disclosure of another 
physician’s error; it refers to a physician disclosing his own mistake.2 The 
American College of Physicians Manual is more ambiguous than she asserts; 
it does not mention reporting errors of others.3 Elsewhere, however, in sup­
port of her position, the American College of Physicians is much clearer 
about the obligation of a physician to report another physician’s error: “The 
patient has both an ethical and a legal right to the information [about another 
clinician’s mistake]”.11
Denlinger wants us to believe that a great deal of uncertainty surrounds 
the question of whether or not an error occurred, which is assumed by 
Moffatt-Bruce to be a fact. In the Jones-Lapps scenario, however, Dr. Jones 
talks with Dr. Lapps, and it is clear that Dr. Lapps’s refusal to disclose the 
omission of a lymph node biopsy is not based on denial that an error occurred 
but is based on fear of a lawsuit.
Moffatt-Bruce and Denlinger share many points of agreement. They both 
agree that Dr. Jones must discuss the omission of the biopsy with Dr. Lapps 
and that the 2 surgeons should jointly determine whether or not an error was 
made. They agree that Dr. Lapps should be offered an opportunity to dis­
close the omission to the patient and that a collaborative approach to resolu­
tion of the issue is needed.
Their major disagreement is on the final step of the process, after 
Dr. Lapps refuses to participate in disclosure of the omission. Moffatt-Bruce 
speaks of a “shared professional responsibility” to ensure disclosure of what 
happened to the patient, which is ethically necessary. Denlinger similarly 
speaks of a “collaborative approach to accountability” but stops at that point, 
leaving open the question of whether disclosure of the omission is obligatory.
Discussion of physicians’ responsibility to report their own mistakes to 
patients is extensive in the medical and the bioethics literature, but little com­
mentary can be found about disclosure of errors made by other clinicians. 
The best exploration of this subject is the recent report of Gallagher and 
coworkers,7 which was cited by both essayists. The article provides a closely 
reasoned analysis of how to deal with errors made by other clinicians. The 
general conclusion is that patients and their families should be informed of 
errors or deviations from standard practice, as a matter of openness, hon­
esty, and trust. The authors consider several different relationships between 
a clinician who makes an error and another clinician who discovers the error. 
One of those relationships involves a physician who discovers an error made 
by a physician at another institution, mirroring our scenario. In the situa­
tion of Drs. Jones and Lapps, the strategy they describe suggests that when 
Dr. Lapps refuses to participate in disclosing the misadventure to his former 
patient, Dr. Jones should seek assistance from the senior leadership at his 

	 150	
The Ethics of Surgery
own institution in deciding how to proceed, and in the best of circumstances, 
should be advised by a “disclosure coach” to ensure a well-considered, care­
fully planned discussion with the patient and his family—what Gallagher 
and colleagues describe as “skillfully executed disclosure conversations.”
Our essayists disagree about whether reporting the error to the patient 
and his family is ethically obligatory. They agree on one critical issue, how­
ever: when a possible error is reported to the patient, it must be done with 
careful attention to the words and manner of communication to minimize 
adverse emotional responses by the patient and the family and to avoid bur­
dening them unnecessarily.
References
	 1.	 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
	 2.	 AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Opinion 8.12, Patient informa­
tion. Code of Medical Ethics:  current opinions with annotations. 2012–2013 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 2012:290.
	 3.	 American College of Physicians. American College of Physicians ethics manual. 
Fourth ed. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:576–94.
	 4.	 Blendon R, DesRoches C, Brodie M, et al. View of practicing physicians and the 
public on medical errors. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1933–40.
	 5.	 Kachalia A, Kaufman SR, Boothman R, et al. Liability claims and costs before 
and after implementation of a medical error disclosure program. Ann Intern Med. 
2010;153:213–21.
	 6.	 Kachalia A. Improving patient safety through transparency. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369:1677–9.
	 7.	 Gallagher TH, Mello MM, Levinson W, et al. Talking with patients about other 
clinicians’ errors. N Engl J Med. 2013;369: 1752–7.
	 8.	 Asghari F, Fotouhi A, Jafarian A. Doctors’ views of attitudes toward peer medical 
error. Qual Saf Health Care. 2009;18: 209–12.
	 9.	 Brennan TA, Leape LL, Laird NM, et al. Incidence of adverse events and negligence 
in hospitalized patients. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:370–6.
	10.	 Posner KL, Caplan RA, Cheney FW. Variation in expert opinion in medical mal­
practice review. Anesthesiol. 1996;85:1049–54.
	11.	 Fato M, Herrin VE. Must you disclose mistakes made by other physicians? ACP 
Internist 2003 (November). http://www.acpinternist.org/archives/2003/11/mistakes.
htm. Accessed February 25, 2014.
 

151
13
Impending Loss of Insurance Coverage 
Is an Indication to Proceed with 
Complex, Expensive Surgery
Anthony L. Estrera, Sharon Ikonomidis, 
John S. Ikonomidis, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] The first principle of medical ethics relates to physicians’ fidelity to 
patients: “A physician shall, while caring for a patient, regard responsibility 
to the patient as paramount.”1 The principle of beneficence tells us that we 
should do what is best for the patient, but what do we mean by the phrase 
“best for the patient”? Do we mean what is medically best, a determination 
that is within the domain of the physician’s expertise, or do we mean what the 
patient believes is best? Usually, the patient gets to choose among available 
therapeutic alternatives, but some alternatives that are desired by a patient 
may not be available. For example, a patient who asks for a prescription for 
antibiotics in order to prevent the sniffles that just appeared from turning 
into a full-blown upper respiratory infection actually is requesting an irra­
tional therapy. The physician should not provide the desired prescription but 
instead should provide an explanation of why it is not indicated.
Similarly, when a patient faces loss of health insurance coverage, a car­
diothoracic surgeon could find himself flirting with the boundaries of ethical 
behavior. We describe below a patient with a known surgical disease who 
asks a cardiothoracic surgeon to repair the problem because he will soon lose 
* Estrera AL, Ikonomidis S, Ikonomidis JS, Sade RM. Impending loss of insurance coverage 
is an indication to proceed with complex, expensive surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(6):1709–16. 
Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 152	
The Ethics of Surgery
his health insurance coverage. The problem is that standard indications for 
surgery are not yet present, which raises the question of whether the surgeon 
should operate as the patient requested, on financial grounds. The surgeon 
wants to do what is best for the patient, but is the patient asking for something 
the surgeon should not provide?
THE CASE OF THE PREMATURE OPERATION
William Hochman, a 22-year-old college senior, will graduate in a few months. 
His health needs have always been covered by his father’s health insurance 
policy, which is a benefit of his work as a janitor in a local apartment build­
ing. The insurance has reimbursed most of the expenses associated with the 
diagnostic testing that led to the diagnosis of Marfan syndrome a few years 
ago. When his last computed tomographic scan and echocardiogram showed 
slowly expanding diameter of his ascending aorta and a leaking aortic valve, 
William asked his internist to refer him to a surgeon who has a great deal of 
experience with aortic surgery.
The surgeon, Dr. Karl Geschickt, has now reviewed William’s history, 
examined him, and thoroughly inspected his computed tomographic scans 
and echocardiograms. The surgeon tells William what he already knows: his 
ascending aorta has expanded from 3.6 cm two years ago to 4.0 on last week’s 
scan, and his echocardiograms demonstrate mild aortic regurgitation. He 
definitely does not need an operation now, but at this rate of progression, an 
operation almost certainly will be needed within a few years.
William explains that, as an art history major, he expects to have a hard 
time finding a full time job when he graduates, and on the day of his gradua­
tion from college, he will no longer be eligible for coverage under his father’s 
policy, and neither he nor his parents can afford to buy an individual health 
insurance policy. He tells the surgeon that he understands the nature of his 
disease and the future need for aortic surgery, but because of his insurance 
and financial situation, he needs to have the inevitable operation now rather 
than in a few years. Should Dr. Geschickt accommodate this young man’s 
need? Should he operate now?
Pro
Anthony L. Estrera, MD
We all know the ethical principles that guide our clinical decisions: auton­
omy, beneficence, nonmaleficence (do no harm), and justice.2 In carrying out 
our medical duties, we as clinicians identify maladies and plan treatments 
in order to improve the patient’s well being. At the same time, the treatment 
 
 

	
Surgery Before Loss of Insurance Coverage 	
153
applied must minimize the risk for complications and death for the patient, 
otherwise the treatment should not be undertaken. Prior to doing so, we 
establish a contractual agreement or informed consent with the patient for 
this service.
The decision to perform the procedure will generally depend on two 
factors: the medical indications for the procedure and patient preferences. 
Albert Jonsen and colleagues3 define medical indications as the “data about 
the patient’s physical and psychological condition that suggest diagnostic and 
therapeutic activities aimed at realizing the overall goals of medicine: preven­
tion, cure, and care of illness and injury.” Thus, “medical” facts justify the 
diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. Two critical questions regarding 
the “medical facts” are the following:
	1.	How are the medical facts determined?
	2.	Can the medical facts be affected by factors not traditionally 
considered medical?
Advocates of unrestricted advocacy, such as ethicists Albert Jonsen and 
Eric Cassell, suggest that these contextual factors should not be considered 
when determining clinical decisions. Cassell4 maintains that “the sick are sick 
not because of human agency and intent but overwhelmingly because of the 
actions of fate.” Jonsen and colleagues also note that factors external to the 
patient-physician relationship should never be decisive over patient welfare. 
In essence, supporters of unrestricted advocacy believe that only medical 
facts should determine clinical care.
In contrast, proponents of restricted advocacy note that considerations 
of justice do furnish a moral basis for individual action, because principles 
of professional ethics derive from roles specified by just institutions. Ethicist 
Norman Daniels, a proponent of restricted advocacy, points out that “dis­
pensing with justice is not an option, because justice inheres in our very con­
ception of the professional’s moral role.”5 In essence, contextual factors do 
influence our decisional capacity.
I believe that medical recommendations are based on clinical judgments, 
but these judgments may be influenced by contextual factors such as eco­
nomics. Our choices as physicians do have economic consequences on our 
patients and will ultimately influence ours and the patients’ decisions. What 
happens if one does not consider, at least in part, economic factors in the 
clinical decision?
Generally, we have assumed that “medical” facts were what we tradi­
tionally accepted as the physiological, pathological, and psychological events 
related to the patient. Although this is what we were taught in medical school, 
the “medical” facts are not the only factors that contribute to the patient’s 
wellbeing. I submit to you that just as important, and critical to the patient’s 
well-being, are the social and economic issues immediately at hand.

	 154	
The Ethics of Surgery
It is often impossible for us to be completely empathetic with our 
patients, especially this patient, Mr Hochman, who has Marfan syndrome. 
It is likely he has learned as much as he could regarding his condition and 
realizes that although his aorta is not enlarged enough to indicate surgery 
(so he is told), his aortic root has enlarged from 3.6 cm to 4.0 cm. Knowing 
that his aorta has enlarged must be an overwhelming concern for him. In 
addition, he has also learned that having his abnormally enlarged aortic 
root places him at risk for rupture and early death. Although Dr. Geschickt 
cannot tell him with any certainty what these risks are, he is informed that 
future surgery will be needed within a few years. He further realizes that 
even if his aorta does not rupture, he may still suffer an aortic dissection 
and that if this occurs, his long-term prognosis worsens. He further realizes 
that the rest of his aorta may be at risk for further aneurysmal degenera­
tion and that he will most likely require further interventions to replace the 
remainder of his aorta. He lives in fear. How can one say that this fear does 
not affect his well-being?
Medical “indications” are driven by the “fear” of the unknown. There is 
no way we can predict the future, but as clinicians we attempt to do this every 
day. It is the anticipation of what may happen in the future that often dictates 
what we do in the present. This is the nature of our profession. [. . .]
In thoracic surgery, a solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) in a 50-year-old 
patient has up to a 50% chance of harboring a malignancy.6 A patient who 
smokes is sent to your office with a new SPN, with results of a needle biopsy, 
and positron emission tomography/computed tomographic scans that are 
negative for malignancy. The patient asks you to resect the SPN. Would you? 
Again the emotion of fear (of cancer) drives your decision.
For this same patient, it is December 21, 2009. You have seen him and 
offer him surgery (you are an expert in thoracoscopic techniques) and he 
understands the potential need for a thoracoscopic lobectomy—a complex, 
expensive procedure—on January 4, 2010. But . . . He asked you to perform the 
procedure as soon as possible; i.e., before the end of the year. This is because 
he has already paid his deductible ($250), and his out-of-pocket expenses 
($1,250) for the year have been covered; if the procedure is performed before 
the new year he will not incur any added expenses. Would you accommo­
date him? How does this differ from impending loss of insurance coverage? 
Economic issues do influence our decisions and thus should be considered 
when deciding to operate. Impending loss of insurance coverage may be of 
great importance to some patients. [. . .]
Lack of health insurance might kill up to 45,000 Americans per year. 
Wilper and colleagues7 analyzed 9,000 surveys from 1986 to 1994, then fol­
lowed through 2000 and identified that the uninsured had a 40% higher risk 
of death than those with health insurance. Extrapolated to 2005 census data, 
this accounted for 44,789 deaths. The authors speculated that these deaths 

	
Surgery Before Loss of Insurance Coverage 	
155
occurred because uninsured patients did not seek medical attention for fear 
of not being able to pay for it.
In another study, Himmelstein and his colleagues8 found that 62.1% of all 
bankruptcies in the US have a medical cause, which had risen 50% since 2001. 
Because of the fear of death, and the fear of bankruptcy (economic devasta­
tion), impending loss of health insurance becomes very important and cannot 
be ignored when deciding to perform surgery.
In summary, the moral argument that impending loss of insurance cover­
age is an indication to proceed with complex, expensive surgery is valid, and 
is consistent with these principles of medical ethics:
	1.	 Beneficence: Loss of insurance coverage as one of the indications 
for surgery will provide a benefit for Mr Hochman and eliminate 
the risk for proximal aortic dissection and rupture.
	2.	 Nonmaleficence: In the hands of a skilled surgeon (Dr. Geschickt), 
the procedures can be performed safely.
	3.	 Justice: Performing surgery prior to loss of insurance is fair because 
the patient (or his father) has already paid for surgical benefits.
	4.	 Autonomy: In my opinion this is the most important principle in this 
case, and it is exercised by both Dr. Geschickt and Mr Hochman.
Thus, impending loss of insurance coverage is an indication to proceed 
with complex, expensive surgery.
Con
Sharon Ikonomidis, MS, PhD, John S. Ikonomidis, MD, PhD
“The delivery of medical care is to do as much nothing as possible.”
— Samuel Shem, The House of God, 1978
The ethical dilemma presented in the case of William Hochman is whether 
or not the patient should be offered preemptive (and costly) cardiovascular 
surgery while he has medical insurance coverage, to avoid future possibility 
of needing surgery and not being able to pay for it, even though the surgeon 
deems the operation to be not medically indicated.
We argue that a patient should not receive preemptive cardiovascular 
surgery that is not medically indicated because such an act would violate 
basic tenets essential to the appropriate practice of medicine. Brett succinctly 
states the issue in this way: “It is important to recognize that the structure 
and regulation of medical practice in the United States clearly reflect a broad 
social mandate for clinicians to exercise independent professional judgment 
and to resist the patient’s requests for harmful or non-beneficial interven­
tions.”9 Accordingly, the proper role of the surgeon is to do what is best, both 
 
 

	 156	
The Ethics of Surgery
from a medical and moral point of view, for the health of the patient. This 
is based on the fundamental principle of beneficence or nonmaleficence as 
repeated in our medical oaths which express promises made by the medical 
profession to the members of societies in which they practice. The principles 
of beneficence and nonmaleficence date back to the Hippocratic oath (4th 
century BC) and resurface in the American Medical Association Code of 
Medical Ethics (1847 to 2010), the American College of Surgeons Fellowship 
Pledge (1913), and the World Medical Association’s Declarations of Geneva 
(1947) and Helsinki (1964), to name a few.10
The cardiac surgeon, upon consideration of the patient’s suitability for 
surgery, must determine the risk-to-benefit ratio of the procedure. Surgery 
is not medically indicated if it is determined that the risk(s) of undergoing 
surgery outweighs the potential benefits of such treatment for the patient’s 
health. Thus, to recommend or proceed with such surgery would constitute a 
violation of the commitment to nonmaleficence. Surely it is always safer (and 
thus of optimal nonmaleficence) to not perform surgery that is not absolutely 
necessary!
The obligation of the cardiac surgeon to promote the patient’s cardiac 
health is paramount over non-health related considerations. When a requested 
procedure is unacceptable by current standards, as in Mr Hochman’s case, 
non-health related considerations become entirely irrelevant. In addition, we 
maintain that it is inappropriate for someone whose expertise lies in a spe­
cific clinical application to make value judgments about another’s economic 
condition; especially when such judgments impact the physical health of 
that person. The poor economic state-of-affairs which exists in this country 
does indeed affect individuals’ access to health care. However, this is a social 
problem to be addressed by society as a whole; the burden should not lie 
on the shoulders of individual physicians to fix our socioeconomic problems 
whether they affect access to health care or not. Such considerations are sec­
ondary at best and are not strictly speaking within the scope of the individual 
surgeon’s duties.
The risk-to-benefit ratio factored into a decision of whether or not to 
proceed with surgery is arguably the most relevant piece of information the 
patient will receive from the surgeon in terms of making this choice. If the 
risks clearly outweigh the potential benefits of having a major operation when 
it is not indicated, as they do in this case, it is doubtful that the patient would 
choose to proceed. The surgeon may deflate the importance of this informa­
tion by giving serious weight to (irrelevant) nonmedical risks or benefits, but 
doing so constitutes a violation of the fundamental (Kantian) duty of respect 
for persons because the patient’s autonomous decision-making capacity has 
been biased by irrelevant information. For Kant11, autonomous persons are 
“ends in themselves” who determine their own futures and thus are never 
to be treated merely as means to the ends of others. Respect for autonomy 

	
Surgery Before Loss of Insurance Coverage 	
157
is a very important ethical principle, perhaps the most important in the 
surgeon-patient relationship. We honor it by not accepting as germane and 
important irrelevant facts that bias the patient’s decision-making process.
[. . .] In the present case, with an ascending aortic diameter of 4.0 cm, 
the patient in question does not satisfy the “accepted” criteria for surgical 
aneurysm repair. The probability that this patient’s ascending aorta will ever 
reach 5.0 cm in diameter is unknown but likely is less than 100%. As such, 
the possibility exists that the patient is an “anomaly” and does not experi­
ence sufficient additional aortic dilatation so as to require surgery. Also, it is 
currently unknown exactly how long it would take for the aneurysm to reach 
5.0 cm in diameter and (or) what the patient’s risk of dissection would be over 
this time period. Moreover, during this indeterminate period of time, new 
advances in medical therapy may become available which could reduce or 
halt the tendency toward aneurysm formation and hence prevent the require­
ment for surgical intervention. [. . .]
Also, who can say with certainty that the patient will not be able to afford 
surgery after his medical insurance has expired? The patient may win the lot­
tery or receive an inheritance or have a friend or family member who offers 
to pay the costs. Though perhaps unlikely, the point is that the decision to 
have surgery should not be based on future uncertainties (whether medical or 
financial) but rather must be based on what is presently known to be medi­
cally indicated.
Another major ethical concern arising from this case, in which the patient 
receives preemptive surgery due to present affordability and future financial 
uncertainty, is one of social justice. Here we are concerned specifically with a 
principle of distributive justice defined as “a matter of the comparative treat­
ment of individuals’ characteristic of modern democratic theory.”12 Justice 
is providing access to treatment for all patients who need it (or for whom 
surgery is medically indicated). Injustice is sometimes providing access to 
treatment for patients on the basis of need (or for whom surgery is medically 
indicated) and sometimes providing access to treatment for patients on the 
basis of something other than need (or for whom surgery is not medically 
indicated). We contend that allowing for the impending loss of insurance cov­
erage to be an indication for surgery poses a clear injustice as it allows for a 
qualification for surgery that is not applied equally across the patient popula­
tion. [. . .]
In terms of health care distribution within the broader social commu­
nity, if cardiac surgeries that are not medically indicated are allowed (like 
cosmetic surgeries), then cardiac surgery allocation becomes morally prob­
lematic because a system would be created in which society’s members who 
need surgery but cannot afford it are bumped by those who can afford (albeit 
temporarily in this case) but do not really need it! If the primary goal of medi­
cal practice is to heal the sick then surely the allocation of life-saving medical 

	 158	
The Ethics of Surgery
resources to those who do not require them is an unjust form of distribution, 
not to mention a financial waste.
Consider the converse possible outcome in which the patient undergoes 
surgery and does not fare well. Choosing to operate on patients when not 
medically indicated may place the surgeon on very unstable ground from a 
medico-legal standpoint where the law chooses to define this operation as 
failing to meet an appropriate standard of care. If the patient (even though he 
requested the surgery in the first place) or the family decides to sue for medi­
cal malpractice it is likely that, in a court of law, “expert” witnesses, presum­
ably experienced thoracic aortic surgeons, will not agree with the decision to 
proceed with a nonmedically indicated operation based on pending loss of 
insurance.
What this would mean for our medical insurance companies is also 
important. There is the possibility that insurance rates would escalate dras­
tically if cardiac surgeons make a practice of operating on patients who 
request surgeries before their insurance policy terms expire. This would 
present a social injustice to those who have worked hard for years to pay for 
decent medical coverage but have been fortunate enough not to have needed 
major surgery and hence the coverage to pay for it. Why should their rates 
go up? Preemptive surgery may end up costing society more with respect to 
medical insurance premiums. Conversely, from the standpoint of physician 
reimbursement, while it is clear that expanding the scope of operative indi­
cations to patients proven to not require surgery has the potential to benefit 
the surgeon financially, the long-term consequences may be dire. It is highly 
likely that this practice will be detected and could lead to charge of fraud 
with the potential for loss of the right to care for patients altogether. It is also 
possible that the payor, upon review of the case, may deny payment on the 
basis of breech of the standard of care. Because many institutions submit 
billings on behalf of the surgeon, the institution, in addition to the surgeon, 
may assume culpability for fraudulent billing practices should an audit be 
conducted.
CONCLUSION
Although fiscal matters must dictate much of how the medical system 
functions, it is not in accordance with our medical ethical principles that 
such matters dominate decisions at the cardiac surgeon-patient level. In 
the case considered herein, concern for Mr. Hochman’s present ability to 
pay for his operation must not precede or occlude concerns for his cardio­
vascular health. Patients should not receive cardiovascular surgery that is 
not medically indicated. We conclude, then, that impending loss of insur­
ance coverage does not serve as an indication to proceed with cardiovas­
cular surgery.
 

	
Surgery Before Loss of Insurance Coverage 	
159
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
THE ARGUMENTS
The Belmont Report of 197913 [. . .] identified three ethical principles relevant 
to research: respect for persons (respect for autonomy), beneficence, and jus­
tice. In the same year, Tom Beauchamp and James Childress14 split off from 
beneficence a fourth principle, nonmaleficence. These four principles, often 
referred to as the Georgetown Mantra, are commonly used in ethical analy­
sis. Both discussions of the William Hochman case are based on these prin­
ciples, but they reach very different conclusions. [. . .]
One of the difficulties of using a prescriptive analysis of ethical issues, 
such as the Beauchamp-Childress formulation, is illustrated by the discus­
sions above; the defining terms are open to many different interpretations, 
sometimes diametrically opposed. Nevertheless, such discussions provide 
a useful starting place for analysis. The opposing authors disagree on the 
points noted above, but they agree on at least two issues: standard indications 
for operating on Mr. Hochman are not present at this time, and nonmedical 
factors should generally be considered in treatment deliberations. [. . .]
The disagreement between the two positions can be attributed in part to 
language, namely, the meaning or usage of terms such as benefit, unnecessary 
surgery, and standard of care. The ambiguity of those terms allows divergent 
usages, leading to critical questions. Whose valuation of benefits versus risk 
counts? If the indications for operation are outside current standards, should 
non-medical factors be excluded? Is an operation that does not meet stan­
dard indications unnecessary, and are unnecessary operations automatically 
unsafe? We might also ask how the risks borne by the surgeon and society at 
large should be weighed in the deliberations.
WHOSE VALUATION OF BENEFITS VERSUS RISK COUNTS?
A widely accepted method of making decisions in medicine is “shared deci­
sion making.” Different interpretations of how this method should work 
have been described; in general, it means that the physician and the patient 
exchange information and reach agreement on the best treatment option. 
The physician supplies information based on his expertise and the patient 
supplies information about his values and preferences. Applying this model 
to the current case, Mr. Hochman’s values and preferences seem clear—he 
wants the operation—and if Dr. Geschickt agrees with the patient, he will 
do it. If Dr. Geschickt disagrees with the patient, believing instead that an 
operation at this time would be wrong, he can, as Ikonomidis and Ikonomidis 
suggest, try to persuade the patient to abandon the idea of an operation now. 
If the patient is persuaded, there is agreement and no operation is done.
 
 
 

	 160	
The Ethics of Surgery
If, however, the patient is not persuaded and still wants the operation, 
Dr.  Geschickt has the option of agreeing to operate or of refusing. If he 
chooses the first option, they agree, but if he chooses the second, the patient 
is left with two choices: not having the operation or finding another surgeon. 
Both the patient and the physician are autonomous individuals and, while 
they seek consensus, which is usually achieved, agreement might not be pos­
sible. The surgeon might be correct in his belief that the risk-benefit balance 
weighs more heavily on the side of risk, but the patient might be willing to 
take that risk because the benefit, in this case, avoiding the need for paying 
out-of-pocket for surgery in the future, carries much more weight for him 
than for the surgeon. If Dr. Geschickt refuses to do the surgery, he does so 
on the basis of his own value system, not the patient’s; that is, he exercises his 
own professional autonomy.
IF THE INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION ARE NONSTANDARD, SHOULD 
NONMEDICAL FACTORS BE EXCLUDED?
Estrera and Ikonomidis and Ikonomidis agree that non-medical factors 
such as the patient’s preferences should be weighed when there is more 
than one acceptable surgical option, but they disagree when the surgery 
being requested is “not absolutely necessary.” Estrera still weighs those fac­
tors, but Ikonomidis and Ikonomidis discount them entirely on grounds of 
safety: “Surely it is always safer (and thus the optimal nonmaleficence) to not 
perform surgery that is not absolutely necessary!”
An enduring difficulty with this position has been the meaning of the 
words “necessary” and “unnecessary.” [. . .] There seems to be no solid 
ground for asserting that an operation indicated by parameters outside stan­
dard limits is ipso facto unnecessary. Underlying the question of whether 
Mr. Hochman’s operation should be considered unnecessary is the ques­
tion of whose values weigh more heavily, the patient’s personal values or the 
physician’s medical standards. Unnecessary to whom and by what measure? 
This question circles back to the discussion of shared decision making, leav­
ing us with the quandary of adjudicating firmly held opposing view of physi­
cian and patient. [. . .]
HOW SHOULD THE RISKS BORNE BY THE SURGEON AND SOCIETY 
AT LARGE BE WEIGHED?
My discussion thus far has focused on the risks and benefits confronting the 
patient, but at least two other parties have a stake in this decision to oper­
ate or not: the surgeon and society at large. Doing this operation exposes 
Dr.  Geschickt to certain potential harms, according to Ikonomidis and 
Ikonomidis. If the procedure is determined to be below the standard of care, 
 
 

	
Surgery Before Loss of Insurance Coverage 	
161
he could face a charge of fraud by the insurance company when he submits 
his bill. If the operation results in serious complications, unlikely though this 
is, he could face a lawsuit for malpractice. Society could be harmed by viola­
tions of social justice through unjust allocation of resources if the rich can 
satisfy their desires for unneeded procedures and preempt the use of those 
resources by patients who are less well off, according to Ikonomidis and 
Ikonomidis. [. . .]
CONCLUSION
The persistently indeterminate meanings of several terms (e.g., unneces­
sary surgery, benefit, standard of care) leave us with no clear solution to 
Dr. Geschickt’s dilemma [. . .]. We can advise him to follow the primary prin­
ciple of medical ethics, do what is best for the patient, but that would be 
begging the question, for what is best for the patient is precisely the disputed 
issue. [. . .]
The informed consent that is so familiar to us is not a signed piece of paper, 
as many residents seem to believe, but is a process grounded in two ethical 
principles: respect for the patient as an independent moral agent and beneficent 
guidance of the patient toward choices that are right for him. As surgeons, we 
also are moral agents, guided by our own values, knowledge, and professional 
judgment in dealing with our patients. Out of respect for one another, neither 
patient nor physician should attempt to impose unwanted options on the other. 
That is why Dr. Geschickt could rightfully choose either of the two options that 
are open to him and also why he should listen to the advice of both Estrera and 
Ikonomidis and Ikonomidis before making his decision.
References
	1.	Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. Principles 
of medical ethics, VIII. Code of Medical Ethics: current opinions with annotations, 
2008–2009 ed. Chicago: American Medical Association; 2008:xv.
	2.	Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 5th ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 2001.
	3.	Jonsen A, Siegler M, Winslade W. Clinical Ethics: A Practical Approach to Ethical 
Decisions in Clinical Medicine. 6th ed. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
	4.	Cassell EJ. The Nature of Suffering. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2003.
	5.	Daniels N. Justice, health and health care. Am J Bioethics. 2001;1:2–16.
	6.	Smythe WR, Reznik SI, Putnam JB Jr. Lung. In:  Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp 
RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 18th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008:ch. 59.
	7.	Wilper AP, Woolhandler S, Lasser KE, McCormick D, Bor DH, Himmelstein DU. 
Health insurance and mortality in US adults. Am J Public Health. 2009;99:2289–95.
 
 

	 162	
The Ethics of Surgery
	 8.	 Himmelstein DU, Thorne D, Warren E, Woolhandler S. Medical bankruptcy in the 
United States, 2007: results of a national study. Am J Med. 2009;122:741–6.
	 9.	 Brett AS. Inappropriate requests for treatments and tests. In: Sugarman J, ed. Ethics 
in Primary Care. New York: McGraw-Hill Health Professions Division; 2000:6.
	10.	 Tung T, Organ CH. Ethics in surgery:  historical perspectives. Arch Surg. 
2000;135:10–13.
	11.	 Kant I. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. Lewis White Beck (trans.) 
New York: Liberal Arts Press; 1959:408.
	12.	 Frankena William K. Ethics. 2nd ed. Foundations of Philosophy Series. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1973:49.
	13.	 Subjects of biological and behavioral research. The Belmont report. Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare Pub. No. (OS) 78-0012, Appendix I, Pub. No. (OS) 
78-0013, Appendix II, Pub. No. (OS) 78-0014. Washington, DC: US Government 
Printing Office; 1978.
	14.	 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1979.

163
14
Ethical Obligation of Surgeons 
to Noncompliant Patients
CAN A SURGEON REFUSE TO OPERATE ON AN INTRAVENOUS 
DRUG–ABUSING PATIENT WITH RECURRENT AORTIC VALVE 
PROSTHESIS INFECTION?
J. Michael DiMaio, Tomas A. Salerno, Ron Bernstein, 
Katia Araujo, Marco Ricci, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
One of the most frustrating situations confronting a physician is a noncom­
pliant patient. When a patient receives clear instructions, acknowledges those 
instructions, fails to follow them, and then slips into even worse difficulty 
than he had before, we sometimes want to throw up our hands and retreat. 
Surgeons have a special difficulty in this area when, for example, a patient 
with peripheral vascular disease in need of a bypass operation finds himself 
unable to stop smoking and therefore unlikely to gain durable benefit from 
the operation.
Cardiothoracic surgeons are in a parallel situation when a patient who 
abuses drugs has an operation and then will not or cannot stop using drugs. 
Personal lifestyles are very difficult to change, whether or not a patient’s 
addiction is involved. Intravenous drug abusers find it particularly difficult 
to stop using, but resources are available to help those who wish to break an 
unwanted habit. Particularly nettlesome is the problem of the patient who 
* DiMaio JM, Salerno TA, Bernstein R, Araujo K, Ricci M, Sade RM. Ethical obligation of 
surgeons to non-compliant patients: can a surgeon refuse to operate on an intravenous drug-abusing 
patient with recurrent aortic valve prosthesis infection? Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88(1):1–8. Copyright 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 164	
The Ethics of Surgery
abuses drugs intravenously, develops endocarditis, has a valve replacement, 
and then, after a drug-free period, reverts to drug use. Two experienced sur­
geons who have opposing views of what should be done in such a situation 
consider the following case.
THE CASE OF JAMES SMITH
James Smith is 29 years old and married with 2 children who are 2 and 4 years 
old. He is frequently absent from home for extended periods and works odd 
jobs to support himself. He used marijuana when a teenager, and by his early 
20s was regularly using cocaine, including intravenously. He is seen in the 
emergency department with a febrile illness, and is found to have severe aor­
tic insufficiency due to an aortic valve infection.
The chief of cardiothoracic surgery, Dr. William Jones, replaces the aor­
tic valve with a St. Jude Medical prosthesis. Mr. Smith does well postopera­
tively and is discharged with a warning about the possibility that the infection 
might come back if he ever uses intravenous drugs again. He understands 
that he might not be given a second valve if the infection recurs while he is 
using intravenous drugs. He signs an agreement to this effect.
Mr. Smith is seen intermittently thereafter in the cardiology clinic, where 
he is found to be doing well, free of intravenous drug abuse. Several months 
after his last visit, which was 2 years after his valve replacement, he reappears in 
the emergency department with fever and shaking chills. He has signs of intra­
venous drug use and admits to using again, starting about 6 months earlier. 
On the cardiology service, echocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging 
show severe paravalvular aortic insufficiency, with several small extramural 
abscesses. The cardiology service’s discussions of the case reveal disagreement 
about whether or not the operation should be done. They send a consultation 
request to Dr. Jones with the details of Mr. Smith’s current condition and labo­
ratory results. Their consult note asks Dr. Jones whether he thinks urgent aor­
tic valve replacement should be done, given the patient’s history.
Pro
J. Michael DiMaio, MD
Mr. Smith reinfected his prosthetic aortic valve upon returning to his habit 
of intravenous drug abuse. He is 29 years old, and he was warned that this 
might occur. One might think that a surgeon is obligated to operate due to 
some ethical standard requiring him to do so. But, in fact, there is no such 
standard. There are plenty of ethical, logical, and moral reasons that allow a 
surgeon the right to say no.
 
 
 

	
Obligation to Noncompliant Patients	
165
Some might say that the Hippocratic Oath obligates us to operate. 
However, careful reading of the oath, which most medical schools have aban­
doned, at least in its original form, may provide guidance: “I will prescribe 
regimens for the good of my patients according to my ability and judgment 
and never do harm to anyone.” In this case, a surgeon who offers an opera­
tion may be missing the point entirely and may be doing harm to Mr. Smith, 
himself, his team, and certainly society.
Should all of society’s problems be up to the medical profession to repair? 
Ivan Illich wrote that classifying all the troubles of humanity as medical 
problems is actually antithetical to true health, in that it limits the ability of 
people to learn to cope with pain, sickness, and death as integral parts of life.1 
These adversities are natural components of the continuum of life to death. 
Physicians should not fool themselves into thinking that all problems can and 
should be fixed. This is not to say that one should never try. Health, he main­
tains, is not freedom from death, disease, unhappiness, and stress, which are 
inevitable, but rather the ability to cope with them competently. If this is 
true, then the more medicine and society direct individual behavior, the less 
autonomous and, therefore, the less healthy the individual may become.
In 1974, Faith Fitzgerald wrote about social responsibility:
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, if a person fell ill, had alcoholism 
or tuberculosis, or abused a spouse or child, it was a pity, but it was a 
pity for the person and a sadness for his or her family; it was their busi­
ness. Over the past several decades, however, both the existence of these 
imperfections and the remedies for them have become society’s business, 
particularly since society began to accept the responsibility to pay for 
the consequences of the imperfections. Now treatment of drug addiction, 
prevention of domestic violence, handgun control, and the use of seat 
belts and helmets are society’s responsibility. Concurrently, however, 
because the imperfections are unhealthy, they are also the responsibil­
ity of doctors and nurses. Both health care providers and the common­
weal now have a vested interest in certain forms of behavior, previously 
considered a person’s private business, if the behavior impairs a person’s 
“health.” Certain failures of self-care have become, in a sense, crimes 
against society, because society has to pay for their consequences. Society 
increasingly looks to health care providers for leadership in eliminating 
behavior that leads to disease.2
Individuals need to accept responsibility for their own health and not 
look to physicians and nurses to relieve them of their duty.
A distinguished professor with whom I discussed this case stated, “You’re 
not fixing the problem, you are fixing the heart!” Ludicrous though it might 
seem to surgeons who have been trained to fix the heart, Mr. Smith’ primary 
problem is not his heart at all. It is his substance abuse. His destiny was sealed 

	 166	
The Ethics of Surgery
by this problem, which is as lethal as any metastatic cancer. Many longitudi­
nal studies have documented this fact.
DRUG ABUSE MORTALITY
Robert Frater reviewed 57 known drug addicts with endocarditis who were 
operated on at Montefiore Medical Center from 1977 to 1989.3 The most com­
mon lesion was aortic endocarditis. The 30-day in-hospital mortality rate was 
9%, yet during 5 to 10 years of follow-up, the mortality rate was about 90%.
A 33-year follow-up of 471 heroin addicts who had been admitted to a 
drug addiction program identified three clinical trajectories for these indi­
viduals: stable high-level heroine users, late decelerators, and early quitters.4 
A literature review showed mortality rates for the three groups of 50%, 38%, 
and 25%, respectively. Only 44% of the 471 addicts were early quitters; most 
continued to use drugs. A  separate study of the same cohort showed the 
addicts lost an average of 18.3 years of life: 22.3% of the years were lost due 
to heroin overdose, 14% to chronic disease, and 10% to accidents.5 The aver­
age future life expectancy of the addicts was 19 years vs 33 years for compa­
rable men. The estimated monetary value of lost productivity was more than 
$174 million.
A study of 4200 intravenous drug users in Italy found increased mortal­
ity from cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal disease as well as 
violence, overdose, and AIDS. Although most deaths were due to endocar­
ditis, a significant number were due to cirrhosis in men and pneumonia in 
women.6 [. . .]
In a London study of a cohort of 128 addicts, 43 died during a 22-year 
period. Most deaths were drug related, 18 specifically of drug overdose.7 
Review of the United Kingdom heart valve registry found that the 1-, 5-, and 
10-year survival rates after operations for prosthetic valve endocarditis were 
only 67%, 55%, and 37%, respectively; a dismal prognosis. [. . .]
PROTECTING THE TEAM
What about the team? Should a surgeon place 10 or more persons at risk, 
including nurses, perfusionists, and anesthesiologists? Few of them have the 
right or ability to protest the decision made by a surgeon who feels an obliga­
tion to help someone who fails to care for himself.
The risk of infection to health care workers is real. [. . .]
THE GOOD OF SOCIETY
What about society? Utilitarianism is the idea that the moral worth of an 
action is determined solely by its contribution to its overall utility: that is, its 
 
 
 

	
Obligation to Noncompliant Patients	
167
contribution to happiness or pleasure as summed among all persons, some­
times described by the phrase “the greatest good for the greatest number.” 
According to utilitarian theory, the collective risk of harming many persons 
shifts the equation to the greatest amount of good to the greatest number of 
people. Spending time, energy, and resources, which are not unlimited, on 
one patient who has chosen to do himself harm does not serve the greater 
good. Although a surgeon might think that he operates simply within a 
one-on-one relationship with a patient, he denies the good of many others 
within such a narrow framework.
Allocation of resources in society is also an issue. Time is not unlimited. 
This is true for the surgeon, but it is equally true for all the members of the 
operating and care teams. Expending this limited resource on Mr. Smith is 
wasteful.
What about money? This would certainly be a very costly operation, its 
reoperative nature potentially including renal failure requiring dialysis and 
other complications. As surgeons, we can argue that saving money is not our 
job, but I would strongly argue that it is. We all have a sense of what things 
cost. We may substitute a less expensive suture or stapler if we believe that 
it will save money and not cause any difference in patient care. We allocate 
scarce organs for transplantation because we try to watch out for the greater 
good of society. Mr. Smith’s case is not different. Even if the number of valves 
is theoretically unlimited, other resources are not. Certainly, if we do not 
begin to understand how to allocate health care resources more wisely, others 
will force it upon us.
We do not have an obligation to treat this patient if he is a poor steward 
of the gifts he has received. Mr. Smith is not unlike someone who has, for 
example, received a kidney or heart transplant and has stopped taking his 
graft-preserving medications. We are not obligated to endlessly supply new 
operations, valves, or organs if the person is a poor steward of the resources 
charged to his care.
Where does one draw the line? The only principled response is to do the 
first operation. By that, we mean that there is no principled reason to do more 
than one operation. One may argue that it is fair to give him one more chance, 
but that same argument can be made for two, three, or four operations, and 
there is no end. This is not a slippery slope argument, it merely suggests that 
a surgeon is obligated to do something once; if it is done right, the obligation 
falls to the patient to care for his gift.
THE SURGEON AS A PROFESSIONAL
Finally, a surgeon is a professional with professional obligations. He has the 
right and responsibility to assess the situation, circumstances, probabilities, 
and likely outcomes and to determine whether he believes an operation is 
 

	 168	
The Ethics of Surgery
futile. Just because the patient wants a procedure does not require a surgeon 
to perform it. [. . .] In this case, Mr. Smith and society would not receive ben­
efit from an operation. Therefore, Dr. Jones has every right to say no!
Con
Tomas A. Salerno, MD, Ron Bernstein, JD, Katia Araujo, PsyD, Marco Ricci, MD
Valve endocarditis represents one of the leading causes of operative mortal­
ity in cardiac surgery, ranging from 8% to 37%.8 Poor outcomes are related 
to drug resistance, delay in surgical treatment, presence of concomitant 
risk factors and multiple end-organ dysfunction, acute congestive heart fail­
ure, prosthetic valve reinfection, and severity of valve injury.9 Surgeons are 
frequently asked to operate on patients who have acquired endocarditis of 
a native or prosthetic valve resulting from intravenous drug use. Without 
surgery, the prognosis of this condition is poor, especially when vegeta­
tions, annular abscesses, intracardiac fistulas, and severe valve insufficiency 
develop. [. . .]
When surgeons face the scenario of a patient with endocarditis related 
to drug use, what often comes to mind is that all efforts at salvaging the 
patient’s life could be futile should the patient return to drug use. Such is the 
case of the hypothetical patient, James Smith, discussed in this article. [. . .] 
The question [is]: Should the surgeon operate again on this patient? To answer 
this question, it is important to understand not only the disease process but 
also the medical issues related to drug addiction and its treatment options. 
Furthermore, the points of view of a psychologist and a lawyer, in addition to 
that of a surgeon, may provide further insight into this complex issue.
DEFINITION OF DRUG ADDICTION
In 2001, the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the American Pain Society, 
and the American Society of Addiction Medicine jointly defined addiction:
Addiction is a primary, chronic, neurobiologic disease, with genetic, psy­
chosocial, and environmental factors influencing its development and 
manifestations. It is characterized by behaviors that include one or more 
of the following: impaired control over drug use, compulsive use, contin­
ued use despite harm, and craving.10
Drug addiction is a complex but treatable disease, characterized by com­
pulsive drug craving and drug usage that persists despite serious conse­
quences. It may become chronic, with relapses after prolonged periods 
of abstinence. For this reason, it may require ongoing surveillance and 
repeated treatments.
 
 
 

	
Obligation to Noncompliant Patients	
169
PSYCHOLOGIST’S VIEW [KATIA ARAUJO, PSYD]
Mr. Smith did not receive the benefits of an appropriate treatment plan that 
would target detoxification and relapse prevention and ensure that the patient 
had an adequate support system for his problem. The physicians involved 
in the care of this patient should have sought the expertise of a psychiatrist 
and a clinical psychologist specializing in drug rehabilitation. He should have 
been treated as a dual-diagnosis patient. Comprehensive alcohol and drug 
addiction treatment centers provide dual-diagnosis programs specializing in 
detoxification and relapse prevention. Mental health professionals work with 
the patient to provide him with emotional tools and psychopharmacology 
treatments to help him achieve abstinence and prevent relapse.
Many times, due to lack of insight and judgment, addict patients delay 
medical assistance until their medical conditions reach high levels of sever­
ity. [. . .] In recovery, an addict patient cannot do it alone, so the agreement or 
demands made of this patient is akin to punishment.
Other issues may also arise: Some professionals may tend to be omnipo­
tent caretakers, and end up deluding themselves into believing that they can 
do it all, rarely asking for help from other professionals. That might have 
happened in this case.
LAWYER’S VIEW [RON BERNSTEIN, JD]
One of the greatest risk factors for developing endocarditis is a previous 
heart operation for endocarditis, along with many other factors, such as poor 
dental hygiene. Therefore, recurrent endocarditis may result from a prob­
lem unrelated to the addiction, even if the patient remains engaged in drug 
use. Should physicians require lifestyle agreements and contracts or refuse 
to treat a patient if a condition arises that could be potentially linked to a 
lifestyle violation or to some other cause? Furthermore, who should decide 
which lifestyle habits constitute a violation and which do not? In the end, 
the patient would pay, perhaps with his life, adding to the suffering of his 2 
innocent children!
In some medical circumstances, such as that of an alcoholic liver trans­
plant patient, clinicians may have a keen interest in making sure that scarce 
replacement organs go to those who will care for them the best. Performance 
contracts are used, and prospective organ recipients must demonstrate life­
style changes to qualify for a transplant. From a logical and ethical point of 
view, in organ transplantation the scarcity of organs affects patient selec­
tion. In contrast, our case of recurrent endocarditis involves the need for 
emergency care without withholding essential care from other patients with 
similar medical problems. The disease mechanism may or may not have been 
related to a disfavored lifestyle or a breach of “contract,” whether enforceable 
 
 
 

	 170	
The Ethics of Surgery
or unenforceable. This should not be viewed as a closed question—to operate 
or not to operate. Rather, the surgeon should operate or transfer the patient 
to another surgeon.
Another important issue is the legality of “contracts” between patients 
and health care professionals. Such contracts should not be incorporated 
in medical practice, because they could be fraught with both ethical prob­
lems and potential legal consequences. Surgeons should provide treatment 
within the prevailing standard of care to patients, regardless of any contract 
or previous agreement. Should the patient not abide by care guidelines and 
recommendations despite the best efforts of health care providers, the con­
sequences are on the patient. But greater consequences would be visited on 
the health care providers who feel empowered to decide whether a patient is 
morally worthy of their care. [. . .]
A contract alone would not insulate the surgeon from a malpractice suit, 
and the risks of that suit under these circumstances could very well be sig­
nificant. Such a case would probably not be defensible on the basis of that 
contract. This would make a strong case for physicians, already exposed to lit­
igation when the care needed is rendered, not to venture into decision-making 
processes based on anything other than medical need. [. . .]
The better choice is for the physician to either provide the indicated care 
or make sure that the patient’s care is transferred to another appropriate 
clinician. [. . .]
SURGEON’S VIEW [TOMAS A. SALERNO, MD]
We, as physicians, have the ethical responsibility to treat and heal. If we ven­
ture into the moral background of patients, then we would spend more time 
passing judgment on lifestyle choices instead of making the medical decisions 
we have been trained for.
Additional considerations may also arise: Some health care profession­
als, at times, tend to feel like omnipotent caretakers, leading them to believe 
that they can do it all and that they do not need help or advice from other 
professionals. The clinical scenario described here seems to be one such situ­
ation. Treating drug addicts can be overwhelming and frustrating. [. . .]
Finally, isn’t the position of the surgeon refusing to treat the same as that 
of a physician dealing with a smoker whose lung cancer has been cured, but 
who would be declared ineligible for further treatment should he continue 
to smoke and develop a recurrence? Or that of a physician dealing with a 
morbidly obese patient who would be denied treatment should he develop 
a complication resulting from recurrent overeating? Does a physician have 
the authority, the time, and the mission to be a law enforcement agent? After 
all, should physicians decide not to treat medical conditions that result from 
exposure to certain risk factors or unsafe behaviors, what would be left for us 
 

	
Obligation to Noncompliant Patients	
171
to treat? A vast number of medical conditions, including heart diseases and 
infectious disease, may result from exposure to well-known environmental 
factors. Does the willingness of a patient to be exposed to those factors dis­
qualify him from receiving indicated medical or surgical treatment? In our 
opinion, that should not be the case.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] Dr.  Jones’s dilemma is clearly complex. Yet, Mr. Smith’s story brings 
to front stage some basic principles of medical ethics. The primary obliga­
tion of physicians is to their patients.11 We have other obligations, of course, 
to ourselves, to the institutions in which we work, to our colleagues, and to 
society, but these are all secondary: Consideration of the patient’s well-being 
must come first. In addition, social worth has no place in medical decision 
making.12 This became a crucial principle of medical ethics when the bottom 
of the slippery slope of social worth as an evaluative factor was reached in 
Europe in the 1930s and 1940s.13 We often stereotype drug addicts as occu­
pants of the lowest rung of the social ladder, but this social judgment must 
play no role in deliberations about whether an operation should be done. [. . .]
As with social worth, several other aspects of Mr. Smith’s story are not 
relevant to making the decision to replace his aortic valve for the second time. 
He has returned to using intravenous drugs, and this lapse is the most likely 
cause of his reinfected valve. He has done it to himself, many would say, so 
does not deserve a second valve. But deciding what is deserved or undeserved 
is a moral judgment that we, as physicians, are not in a position to make. We 
see human frailty in action every day. [. . .]
Mr. Smith’s relapse is just such a human failing, whether it is due to 
unwillingness or to inability to refrain from using drugs. His failure is not 
different from the biker, the overeater, or the smoker, and we should similarly 
care for him without hesitation. From a physician’s perspective, it does not 
matter whether a patient with an unambiguous medical need is addicted to 
traveling on 2 wheels at high-speed in the open air, to eating rich foods, to 
smoking cigarettes, or to abusing drugs: We are ethically bound to use avail­
able resources to provide indicated, proper treatment. In view of the human 
frailty we as physicians observe daily, a patient’s agreement, promise, or 
contract not to return to abusing drugs cannot justify refusing an indicated 
operation. [. . .]
The American Medical Association Code of Medical Ethics discusses 
resource allocation criteria, and includes this statement: “Nonmedical cri­
teria, such as . . . social worth, patient contribution to illness, or past use of 
resources should not be considered.”14 [. . .]
 

	 172	
The Ethics of Surgery
An aid to deciding whether to offer an operation to Mr. Smith is to 
imagine a parallel case, retaining all the features of his case, including avail­
ability of resources and predicted survival, but substituting for Mr. Smith a 
29-year-old black woman with 2 young children. The woman has systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) with chronic glomerulonephritis, requiring treat­
ment with immunosuppressive agents. She does not smoke, drink, or use 
recreational drugs. Yet, her life expectancy is substantially reduced by the 
combination of SLE, immunosuppression, and cardiac valve infections; it is 
roughly comparable to that of an intravenous cocaine drug abuser with infec­
tive endocarditis.
It seems likely that every surgeon would offer this woman a second oper­
ation. Any surgeon who would make such an offer, however, must make the 
same offer to Mr. Smith. The facts that she leads a praiseworthy life and 
her acquisition of a cardiac valve infection is “innocent” and that he is a 
member of a despised group, drug addicts, and his infection is “self-inflicted” 
are of no relevance to the surgical decision. In making treatment decisions, 
Dr. Jones must free his mind of biases and moral prejudgment. He must do 
this to discharge his first responsibility—the care of his patient.
If a surgeon applies the comparison test and finds that he would oper­
ate on the innocent patient but still cannot, in good conscience, offer an 
operation to the drug addict, he can consider alternative courses. He can 
seek advice from experienced, trusted colleagues or an ethics committee 
in thinking through the many complexities of the case, or he can refer the 
patient to another surgeon. He should not, however, simply declare that an 
operation is not indicated and close the book. He owes more than that to 
every patient.
References
	1.	Illich I. Medical nemesis. Lancet. 1974;i:918–21.
	2.	Fitzgerald FT. The tyranny of health. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:196–8.
	3.	Frater RW. Surgical management of endocarditis in drug addicts and long-term 
results. J of Card Surg. 1990;5:63–7.
	4.	Smyth B, Hoffman V, Fan J, Hser YI. Years of potential life lost among heroin addicts 
33 years after treatment. Prev Med. 2007;44:369–74.
	5.	Smyth B, Fan J, Hser YI. Life expectancy and productivity loss among narcotics 
addicts thirty-three years after index treatment. J Addict Dis. 2006;25:37–47.
	6.	Perucci CA, Forastiere F, Rapiti E, Davoli M, Abeni DD. The impact of intravenous 
drug use on mortality of young adults in Rome, Italy. Addict. 2006;87:1637–41.
	7.	Oppenheimer E, Tobutt C, Taylor C, Andrew T. Death and survival in a cohort of her­
oin addicts from London clinics: a 22-year follow-up study. Addict. 1994;89:1299–1303.
	8.	Yamaguchi H, Eishi K. Surgical treatment of active infective mitral valve endocardi­
tis. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;13:150–5.
 

	
Obligation to Noncompliant Patients	
173
	 9.	 Delay D, Pellerin, M, Carrier M, et al. Immediate and long-term results of valve 
replacement for native and prosthetic valve endocarditis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2000;70:1219–23.
	10.	 Savage S, Covington EC, Heit HA, Hunt J, Joranson D, Schnoll SH. Definitions 
related to the use of opioids for the treatment of pain: a consensus document for 
the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the American Pain Society, and the 
American Society for Addiction Medicine. Chevy Chase, MD: American Society of 
Addiction Medicine; February 13, 2001.
	11.	 Sade RM. The primary obligation of physicians should be to their patients, not to 
society. J So Carolina Med Assoc. 2006;102:81–3.
	12.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. Ethical 
considerations in the allocation of organs and other scarce medical resources among 
patients. Arch Int Med. 1995;155:29–40.
	13.	 Pross C. Nazi doctors, German medicine, and historical truth. In:  Annas GJ, 
Grodin M, eds. The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights in Human 
Experimentation. New York: Oxford University Press; 1992:32–52.
	14.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association. 
E-2.03: Allocation of limited medical resources. Code of Medical Ethics: current 
opinions with annotations, 2008–2009 ed. Chicago: American Medical Association; 
2008:9–10.


SECTION 4
Innovation and Uses 
of Technology
Robert M. Sade
Be not the first by whom the New are try’d,
Nor yet the last to lay the Old aside.
—Alexander Pope (“An Essay on Criticism,” 1711)
Innovation is constant in surgery, usually arising from incremental changes 
in a procedure. Most innovation need not be reported to the patient during 
the informed-consent process; in fact, many improvements cannot be 
reported to the patient because they occur on-the-fly during an operation. 
Sometimes, however, planned innovation departs substantially from 
standard practice and in those cases should be reported to the patient 
and his or her consent obtained. Innovation is distinguished from research 
by the absence of systematic collection of data intended to develop or 
contribute to generalized knowledge. The line between the two often 
becomes indistinct when a single innovation is repeated several times and 
data from medical records entered onto a spreadsheet. When a surgeon 
begins to think about publishing a successful innovation as a series of 
cases, then the innovation becomes research, and formal application to an 
institutional review board should be undertaken.
The introduction of a new technology usually results from research 
rather than innovation. The research may be initiated by a surgeon or by a 
company—many of the most important technological advances in surgery 
have been made possible by collaboration between surgeons and industry 
(see ­chapter 24).
 
 

	 176	
The Ethics of Surgery
Technology is the lifeblood of the art and science of surgery—this has 
been true for millennia. The use of various tools to treat injuries goes back 
to prehistory, as one of the earliest uses of homo sapiens’ ability to use 
tools was for the treatment of fractures and wounds. Burr holes resulting 
from trepanning of the skull have been found in human remains from 
Neolithic times.1 The earliest record of devices to treat injuries, fractures, 
and wounds of all kinds is 3,500 years old: the Edwin Smith Papyrus, an 
Egyptian scroll describing the treatment of forty-eight traumatic injuries.2 
The use of medical devices was described by writers in antiquity and the 
Middle Ages. From the time of Galen (129–216 CE), the development of 
clinical technologies was virtually stagnant for more than 1,500 years; 
for example, the practice of bloodletting from the times of Hippocrates 
(460–370 BCE) and Galen persisted well into the nineteenth century.3
Surgical technologies blossomed in the mid-nineteenth century after 
the introduction of anesthesia and antisepsis. These were soon followed by 
the development of artificial ventilation, endotracheal intubation, and a host 
of innovations that made surgery easier and safer and also led to operations 
that were not previously possible. Some new technologies were found to 
work well, were celebrated, and came into wide use. Others appeared to be 
useful but were later found to be flawed and were abandoned. Operations 
that later turned out to be passing fads included ligation of the internal 
thoracic arteries to treat angina pectoris, nephropexy for “floating kidney,” 
colectomy for epilepsy, and laparotomy “to let the air in” for the treatment 
of abdominal tuberculosis.4 Recently, a well-known sham-controlled clinical 
trial demonstrated that arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee 
had no better results than medical treatment.5 A procedure that had a 
brief period of popularity and notoriety before becoming discredited was 
the neurosurgical procedure of prefrontal lobotomy for treating a range 
of psychiatric conditions, for which Egas Moniz won the Nobel Prize for 
Medicine and Physiology in 1949.6 Gastric freezing to treat ulcer disease 
had a brief surge of popularity in the 1960s before its harms were found to 
outweigh its benefits.7 A wide range of controversial techniques in plastic 
surgery have been introduced, and many are still in use, seemingly for the 
central purpose of marketing a surgical practice.8 Every field of surgery has 
seen its share of passing fads and failed technologies.
The introduction of new technologies in the mid-twentieth century was 
largely responsible for the emergence of contemporary biomedical ethics. 
The introduction of hemodialysis to treat end-stage renal failure in the 
1950s and of artificial ventilation to support failing respiratory function 
in the 1960s resulted in large numbers of patients who would have died 
in earlier eras but now were on life support from which they could not be 
removed, especially in cases of neurological injuries. Interestingly, the new 
field of bioethics was driven less by philosophy and medicine than by the law 

	
Section 4	
177
in cases such as those of Karen Ann Quinlan (a court case in which the New 
Jersey Supreme Court established the right to refuse life-sustaining medical 
treatment) and Nancy Beth Cruzan (a case in which the US Supreme Court 
found that states could require an unusually high level of evidence that 
the patient would have wanted to die and that nutrition and hydration are 
medical treatments that can be refused).9
The development and implementation of new devices and technologies 
have produced numerous ethical dilemmas for surgeons. Many such 
technologies are expensive, raising questions of rationing—should a device 
be withheld in certain cases where it might be only marginally helpful? 
Technologies such as ventricular assist devices, da Vinci robots, and 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement have created a range of ethical 
dilemmas for surgeons. This section addresses a few such problems.
Chapters
Chapter 15 addresses the regulation and oversight of surgical innovation as 
distinguished from surgical research, recognizing that the first often shades 
into the second.10 The most serious objection to regulating innovation is 
the potential for it to undermine or obstruct the advances that have been 
the lifeblood of surgery for many decades. Yet innovation suffers from many 
of the same conflicts of interest, particularly nonfinancial conflicts, that 
threaten research. Could innovation be regulated in a way that protects 
patients but at the same time does not threaten advances in surgery? 
One of the participants proposes a candidate for such regulation: collegial 
review of a proposed major innovation by a departmental review committee 
charged with establishing guidelines for carrying out the innovative 
procedure safely. The review process would be both prospective before it is 
initiated and retrospective, examining the results after the new procedure 
has been carried out. In this way, a stifling bureaucracy can be avoided.
Chapter 16 presents a debate on one of the most controversial 
technologies to appear in recent years: robotic surgery.11 A young surgeon’s 
use and promotion of robotic surgery affects the practice of an older 
colleague in the target vignette. The older surgeon is determined to 
learn how to do robotic surgery himself, raising several ethically relevant 
issues: declining mental and physical function related to the age difference 
between the two surgeons, the propriety of competition serving to 
motivate learning a complex new technique, and uncertainties about the 
effectiveness of robotic surgery. Is the older surgeon wrong to seek training 
in a new technology as a response to competition?
Several of the sessions sponsored by the Ethics Forum are related 
to a recent, fast-spreading surgical technology, transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR). This technique involves the transcatheter insertion 
 

	 178	
The Ethics of Surgery
of a device that replaces the function of the aortic valve by way of 
percutaneous vascular access or the left ventricular apex. TAVR initially 
was reserved for patients with comorbidities or severity of disease that 
contraindicated standard aortic-valve replacement. The ethical questions 
raised by TAVR are relevant to all fields of surgery, as they all encounter 
problems related to sophisticated new technologies. Chapter 17 explores 
contemporary implications of a decades-old observation: the positive 
association between high volumes of certain diseases and procedures by 
hospitals and surgeons and positive outcomes in terms of mortality and 
morbidity.12 But should access to TAVR be limited to high-volume surgical 
centers because of this positive association? Evidence is produced to 
support and oppose limitation of access to TAVR. Also addressed is the 
question of whether access to surgical procedures should be limited by 
consideration of excellence of performance or of surgical competence. 
Nearly all of the many reports exploring volume–outcome associations are 
cross-sectional analyses; should such snapshots be used as a rationale for 
limiting access, given that surgical volumes and outcomes are not static 
but rather are moving targets?
Questions regarding rationing of expensive technologies have been 
prominent in ethics-related publications for decades, beginning in the 
1950s with hemodialysis machines to treat renal failure. In ­chapter 18, 
the discussion of rationing focuses on an elderly man who was rejected 
for transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI, an early acronym of 
TAVR) because of his lack of a social support system and the expense 
of the procedure.13 One of the essayists asserts that explicit rationing 
would not be ethical at this time, although it might become a reality in the 
future; the other believes that use of the technology should be controlled 
and monitored by the medical profession, which he believes will result in 
patients and physicians making wise decisions that will effectively limit its 
use. One of the essayists asserts that the first concern of physicians must 
be the patient’s best interests, and withholding a particular technology from 
one’s patient despite a positive benefit–harm balance is inconsistent with 
this responsibility.
References
	1.	 Brothwell DR. Digging up Bones: The Excavation, Treatment and Study of 
Human Skeletal Remains. London: British Museum of Natural History; 
1963:126.
	2.	 Nunn JF. Ancient Egyptian Medicine. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press; 
1996: 26–28.
	3.	 Wooton D. Bad Medicine. New York: Oxford University Press; 2007.
	4.	 Johnson AG. Surgery as a placebo. Lancet 1994;344:1140–1142.
 
 

	
Section 4	
179
	5.	 Moseley JB, O’Malley K, Petersen NJ, et al. A controlled trial of arthroscopic 
surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee. New Engl J Med. 2002;337:81–88.
	6.	 Jansson B. Controversial Psychosurgery resulted in a Nobel Prize. http://
www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1949/moniz-Chapter.
html. Accessed March 19, 2014.
	7.	 Edmonson JM. Gastric freezing: the view a quarter century later. J Lab Clin 
Med. 1989;114(5):613–614.
	8.	 Bosshardt R. Whatever happened to . . .? Passing fads in plastic sur­
gery. House Calls, March 11, 2014. http://www.hypeorlando.com/
house-calls/2014/03/11/whatever-to-happened-to-passing-fads-in-
plastic-surgery/. Accessed March 20, 2014.
	9.	 Annas GJ. Standard of Care: the Law of American Bioethics. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1993:3–12.
	10.	 Morreim EH, Mack M, Sade RM. Is surgical innovation too dangerous to 
remain unregulated? Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1957–1965.
	11.	 Smyth JK, Deveney KE, Sade RM. Who should adopt robotic surgery, and 
when? Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;96(4):1132–1137.
	12.	 Sade RM. Should access to transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
be limited to high-volume surgical centers? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;145(1):1439–1440; Bavaria JE. Access to transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement should be limited to high volume centers. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2013;145:1441–1443; Green P, Rosner GF. Leon MB, Schwartz A. 
Access to TAVR should not be limited to high volume surgical centers. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:1444–1445.
	13.	 Sade RM. Should use of transcatheter aortic valve implantation be rationed? 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(4):769–770; Mayer JE Jr. Transcatheter 
aortic valve implantation should be controlled and monitored by the medical 
profession. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(4):771–773; Wheatley GH III. 
Use of transcatheter valve should not be rationed. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;143(4):774–775.


181
15
Surgical Innovation
TOO RISKY TO REMAIN UNREGULATED?
Haavi Morreim, Michael J. Mack, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
A recent investigation of cardiothoracic surgical studies involving human 
subjects [. . .] showed that only 10% of such studies are randomized clinical 
trials, the gold standard for human research. This should not be surprising, 
because surgical studies are qualitatively different from medical investiga­
tions, for example, drug trials, in a number of ways. Surgical trial protocols 
that use placebo controls or controls with no treatment are often not ethical 
or not desirable, or both. Target populations for many surgical procedures 
are often quite small, so series large enough for accurate statistical evalua­
tion may be difficult to develop. Double-blind studies are usually not possible 
because the surgeon-investigator must always know what he is doing. Most 
importantly, surgical procedures are characterized by a learning curve that 
leads to progressively improving skill in performing the procedure, and small 
incremental changes in the procedure itself lead to progressive improvement 
in results.
Most progress in surgery comes from innovation that does not fit 
into the category of surgical research. A commonly accepted definition of 
research is that contained in federal regulations regarding human subject 
research:  “Research means a systematic investigation, including research 
development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to 
* Morreim EH, Mack M, Sade RM. Is surgical innovation too dangerous to remain unregu­
lated? Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1957–65. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished 
here with permission.
 
 
 

	 182	
The Ethics of Surgery
generalized knowledge.” Innovative surgery is often not systematic but is 
designed to benefit individual patients; there is often no intent to publish the 
surgical series at a later time, or such intent is secondary. Thus, most surgical 
innovation is outside the scope of “research” and not subject to oversight by 
institutional review boards (IRB).
A surgeon’s decision-making is generally motivated by pursuit of the 
patient’s best interests, yet other motivators lurk in the shadows; for example, 
pursuit of the surgeon’s interests, such as increasing personal income. Most 
surgeons recognize the importance of placing the patient’s interests above 
their own and reject even the intimation of any temptation to recommend 
unjustified operations for personal gain.
Surgeons who wish to be innovative, however, may have additional inter­
ests of their own to pursue ahead of those of their patients: the intangible 
reward of emotional excitement from breaking new ground and making new 
discoveries, the possibility of enhanced reputation and of academic advance­
ment through discovery of new information and its publication; the possibil­
ity of obtaining grants, awards, or contracts to create a formal clinical trial 
if an innovation is successful, and perhaps the satisfaction of very strong per­
sonal dedication to advancing the science of medicine.
The following case illustrates surgical innovation that is clearly not 
research, is outside the domain of the IRB, but perhaps requires some kind 
of oversight.
CASE
At general surgery grand rounds, Dr. Outinfrunt, a cardiothoracic surgeon 
at Far South University Health Sciences Center, learns of FlexTexPatch, a 
new tightly woven polymeric fabric that is used as a covering for abdominal 
wall defects and as a vascular patch. It has been available for several years 
in Europe and recently became available in the United States. A few reports 
in European journals regarding its use as a vascular patch indicate that the 
material does not calcify as other patch materials do and seems particularly 
resistant to thrombosis. Dr.  Outinfrunt looks up the material’s technical 
specifications and finds that it is resistant to tearing, supple, easy to suture, 
dimensionally stable, and highly durable, as well as resistant to calcification 
and thrombosis.
[. . .] He obtains samples of several different thicknesses of the material and 
brings them to the autopsy room where he uses them to augment human mitral 
and aortic valve tissue. He is very pleased with the handling of the material and 
its strength in holding sutures. This experience, combined with what he learned 
about FlexTexPatch’s technical specifications and its performance as a vascular 
 

	
Surgical Innovation	
183
patch, leads him to believe that this will be an excellent material to use for valve 
reconstruction.
The following week, Dr.  Outinfrunt has a patient with severe aortic 
insufficiency who has been scheduled for valvuloplasty. Preoperatively, he 
conducts his usual discussion with the patient about the benefits and risks 
of the operation. He also explains in some detail that he intends to use a 
new material, FlexTexPatch, rather than the pericardium that he has used in 
the past, because he believes it may be superior in the long run. The patient 
understands and agrees to the plan, and signs an operative consent form.
Dr. Outinfrunt completes the operation and is satisfied with the result. 
He decides to use this material for such operations in the future. If it works 
out as satisfactorily as he believes it will, he may even be able to publish his 
results.
A month later, the patient is readmitted to the hospital with progressive 
fatigue and dyspnea and echocardiographic findings of severe aortic incom­
petence. The patch is intact, but the adjacent thin aortic leaflet has torn, due 
in part to its fixation to a stiffer artificial material and the stresses of frequent 
opening and closing of the valve. Dr. Outinfrunt reoperates, performing an 
aortic valve replacement. [. . .]
Dr. Outinfrunt’s approach to surgical innovation in this case is repeated 
daily in different forms by cardiothoracic surgeons throughout the United 
States. Should there be some form of oversight for surgical innovation?
Pro
Haavi Morreim, PhD
Surgery isn’t medicine. On this we can agree, and much more. As Dr. Sade 
points out in his introduction, advances in surgery often do not lend them­
selves to evaluation by way of the gold standard of clinical trials: double-blind, 
randomized, (placebo-)controlled. As he also points out, the real work of 
surgical advancement often comes through incremental innovations, not the 
decisive sweeps of change that may more obviously require—and permit—a 
clinical trial. [. . .]
Just as importantly, we can agree that this surgeon is highly conscientious 
and serious about undertaking this innovation in an ethically sound way. 
He has identified a clear problem with the current standard of care, namely, 
the significant inadequacies of using pericardium for valve reconstruction. 
He has done his homework, from evaluating the new FlexTexPatch’s techni­
cal specifications and its performance in Europe, to hands-on work in the 
cadaver lab. And he has ensured that his patient knows that part of the pro­
posed surgery is innovative, and the patient agrees to try it. [. . .]
 
 

	 184	
The Ethics of Surgery
THE DOWNSIDE OF SURGICAL INNOVATION
We also know that surgical innovations can fail, even those that initially 
appear very promising. As noted by Henry Beecher in 1961, “[v]‌arious sur­
gical procedures have been recommended and carried out for the relief of 
angina pectoris,” including ligation of the internal mammary arteries—a 
procedure that became widely used until finally shown to be no better than 
placebo.1 Indeed, “[t]he history of surgery abounds with examples of oper­
ations that were fashionable at the time and then abandoned after being 
found to have no specific effect. Examples include nephropexy for so-called 
‘floating-kidney,’ colectomy for epilepsy, and laparotomy for abdominal 
tuberculosis ‘to let the air in’.”2 Even well-accepted contemporary surgical 
procedures have been shown, on closer and more rigorous examination, to 
be no better than placebo.3 As suggested by some commentators, surgery 
may itself be the placebo. As the case before us in this debate would indi­
cate, even theoretically attractive, thoughtfully conducted innovations can 
bring nasty surprises.4
Nothing—not the greatest care nor the most extensive regulation—can 
avoid all the risks and adverse outcomes that can accompany surgical innova­
tion. And yet, the fact that we cannot avoid all risk does not mean we cannot 
reduce it. Where a surgeon contemplates a significant change from prevailing 
practice, he may needlessly exacerbate the risks when he declines to seek an 
honest evaluation from colleagues. Moreover, the one who is most enthused 
about the idea may be least likely to see its potential drawbacks, and the one 
who has been the most immersed in the idea can, at a certain point, be least 
likely to see its alternatives and potentially helpful improvements.
Martin McKneally has discussed the need for “a systematic approach to 
the introduction and evaluation of new surgical procedures.”5 He does not 
recommend formal regulation such as government might impose, but rather 
a collegial sort of oversight in which such procedures would be reviewed and 
quite possibly improved before introduction on patients. [. . .]
Amplifying on McKneally’s lead, I shall propose a mechanism consid­
erably less formal than an IRB process, yet potentially as or more effective 
in protecting those patients who may be early recipients of surgical innova­
tion. I will describe, first, what kinds of innovations should be subjected to 
formal collegial review before human implementation; second, what should 
be included in such a review; and third, how such a review process should be 
enforced within the profession.
This proposal does not suggest that surgical innovations should rou­
tinely be subjected to the rigors of formal clinical research (which would then 
require IRB review). [. . .] Rather, I will recommend a fairly informal collegial 
review of major innovations, a kind of in-house “curbside consult” designed 
to improve good ideas and weed out those that fellow surgeons consider too 
risky or still too unrefined to try on patients. [. . .]
 

	
Surgical Innovation	
185
A MECHANISM FOR REDUCING RISKS BY REQUIRING REVIEW
What to Review
Clearly, it would be unwieldy, unnecessary, and in most cases, impossible to 
review every prospective innovation in surgery. A good surgeon must adapt 
procedures to any patient’s anatomic anomalies and idiosyncrasies, a process 
of “custom innovation” that often cannot even be anticipated, let alone pro­
spectively reviewed. And many other modifications are incremental refine­
ments more than significant changes. Evolving practical experience often 
shows the need for such refinements and renders their desirability obvious. 
And because they are small, they rarely bring significant unanticipated risks.
Rather, the collegial review I  propose would be applied to the major 
innovations—those that are substantial enough that a conscientious surgeon 
must think them through in advance, conceive of them from start to finish 
(including potential problems and their solutions), and likely test them in the 
laboratory. These are the innovations that, if successful, would be good can­
didates for publication in a professional journal, to share with colleagues, 
and hopefully, improve practices to help patients elsewhere. [. . .]
Hence, we might suggest a rule of thumb: if a contemplated innovation 
would be important enough to share after the fact if successful, then it is 
significant enough to be evaluated before the fact to increase its chances of 
success and reduce its odds of adverse outcomes.
How to Review
The surgery departments within any institution in which significant surgical 
innovations are likely to be contemplated should establish a mechanism for 
assembling a group with the appropriate expertise to evaluate prospectively 
the kinds of innovations just described. Mainly, these institutions will be aca­
demic hospitals. [. . .]
The review should include, though not be limited to:
¤	 ensuring that current management truly is inadequate or 
problematic;
¤	 ensuring that the theoretical merits of the proposed innovation 
withstand scrutiny;
¤	 identifying any need for further theoretical examination, and 
specifying improvements that might reduce risk and enhance 
likelihood of success;
¤	 assuring that preparatory studies with animals or cadavers, or both, 
are adequate and identifying any need for further testing;
¤	 making appropriate refinements on the original idea;
¤	 crafting suitable criteria for patient selection and for surgeon 
selection (the surgeon who conceives the idea may not always be the 
best one to undertake it);
 
 
 

	 186	
The Ethics of Surgery
¤	 determining the kind and amount of training that should be 
undertaken by the surgical team before human testing;
¤	 determining the adequacy of local resources such as equipment and 
nursing personnel;
¤	 stipulating what sort of information should be provided in the 
consent process (the review committee may wish to approve a written 
consent form); and
¤	 specifying a reasonable interval(s) at which to require follow-up 
information about each patient’s outcome.
As suggested by the last element, the review process should not just be 
prospective. It should be retrospective. When the innovative procedure is 
completed and a patient’s outcome is reasonably clear, the same group should 
reassemble to discuss:
¤	 how well the realities matched the hopes;
¤	 any unanticipated problems;
¤	 whether this innovation warrants repetition; and
¤	 if so, what sort of patient would be suitable, and how best to address 
whatever problems arose during the prior patient’s operative 
procedure and postoperative care.
Enforcement Options
Enforcement mechanisms would not inquire into the details of whether the 
review group has performed adequately, but rather would inquire whether 
the review has taken place in good faith. [. . .]
Various mechanisms could ensure reviews are conducted. Theoretically, 
government could issue regulations, or large agencies such as the Joint 
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) might 
step in. I would not recommend either, however. If the collegial review pro­
cess described above were mandated from outside the surgical realm, it could 
easily spawn inflexible bureaucracy and the gamesmanship that often follow. 
Quickly, form could dominate substance.
I would prefer essentially market-based structures that could foster genu­
inely effective review, based on mutual respect and collegiality. For instance, 
professional organizations such as the American College of Surgeons, the 
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, and the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons could state clearly that they expect institutions whose surgeons 
engage in significant innovation to establish such review mechanisms. [. . .]
In addition, because many innovative procedures will take place at aca­
demic institutions, residency accrediting bodies could require such a mech­
anism in any program undergoing the (re)accreditation process. Detecting 
failure to comply could be relatively straightforward. [. . .] Sanctions for non­
compliance can mirror those applied to any other significant failure within a 
 

	
Surgical Innovation	
187
residency program, from remedial actions to probation to, if warranted for 
repeated and un-remediated violations, loss of accreditation.
One other source of informal enforcement can come from the broader 
community. Business firms increasingly encourage their employees to seek 
health care at the best institutions in the belief that higher quality health care 
is not only medically better but, in the long run, also more economic. The 
LeapFrog Group, for instance, [. . .] disseminates information about hospital 
quality ratings to member organizations, [. . .] and gives employees incentives 
to seek higher quality care.6 Once IRCs are established as a best practice, it is 
reasonable to expect that corporations such as those belonging to LeapFrog 
or any similar organization may include IRCs as a criterion for identifying its 
preferred providers.
CONCLUSION
Surgery cannot progress without the creative efforts of its best surgeons con­
stantly considering how to improve patients’ care. Even as these efforts should 
be encouraged, major innovations can carry significant hazards. Surgeons 
need to monitor and guide that progress. Truly, two minds are better than 
one, and collective wisdom should be sought before a surgeon exposes a 
patient to the risks that inevitably accompany the potential benefits of a new 
procedure or a new use of an existing device. The innovation review process 
described here does not represent a stifling bureaucracy imposed from out­
side. Rather, it calls upon surgeons to collect their best wisdom as they push 
forward the boundaries of professional practice.
Con
Michael J. Mack, MD
Surgical innovation has resulted in remarkable advances in the treatment of 
human disease and suffering. This is particularly true in the past 50 years 
of cardiac surgery, from the invention of the heart-lung machine, develop­
ment of heart and lung transplantation, and ventricular assist device therapy 
to coronary artery bypass and valve surgery. These advances have occurred 
through a complex system that strikes an effective and productive balance of 
fostering innovation and introducing new therapy into clinical medicine in an 
efficacious manner while ensuring patient safety. Professor Morreim is now 
proposing to upset that delicate balance between innovation and regulation 
by introducing another bureaucratic layer of committees, which I am afraid, 
will stifle the innovative process.
[. . .] [I]‌t strikes me that although it is hard to argue with the concept of an 
IRC in theory, the barriers that would be constructed to successful adoption 
 
 
 

	 188	
The Ethics of Surgery
and implementation of innovation by these regulatory bodies, however 
informal, are such that what will be created is a quagmire of ineffectiveness. 
Idealism is directly proportional to the distance from an issue. Although 
the proposal is well intentioned and sensible in theory, my view is that it is 
an unnecessary intrusion into an intricate, balanced system that is already 
working and serving patients well.
INNOVATION VERSUS RESEARCH
[. . .] Innovation is defined as a change in therapy to benefit an individual, 
whereas research is a “protocolized” study, the goal of which is to gain knowl­
edge but not necessarily benefit the individual being treated. [. . .] Innovative 
therapies are characterized by being both novel and nonvalidated, which 
have attributes of both research and clinical practice. [. . .]
I would rather submit that this is an artificial distinction, and both pro­
cesses—whether innovation or research, no matter how informal or formal­
ized—are in fact embodiments of the scientific method. [. . .] The scientific 
method is the bedrock of every innovation that occurs in surgery, either 
informal in the surgeon’s mind or formalized in a research protocol. To create 
a “gray zone” between what constitutes clinical practice and research endeav­
ors that requires regulation is at least nonproductive and at most counter­
productive. As Chalmers has stated: “The practice of medicine is in effect 
the conduct of clinical research . . . Every practicing physician conducts clini­
cal trials daily as he is seeing patients. The research discipline known as the 
‘clinical trial’ is the formalization of this daily process.”7
EVALUATION OF NEW TECHNOLOGY AND TECHNIQUES IN SURGERY
To dissect this issue further, it may be helpful to examine how new technology 
and techniques are introduced into surgery. Innovation in surgery is a com­
plex process that is different from the introduction of new therapies in other 
areas of medicine. In the world of drug therapy, a standardized treatment—a 
pill—can be introduced into a study population and its effect, beneficial or 
otherwise, be determined by appropriate trial design; however, the evaluation 
of effectiveness is much more complex and difficult in surgery. Variables that 
need to be accounted for in surgery include not only the innovative technique 
or device and subsequent iterations of both but also surgeon expertise, the 
procedural learning curve, the disease being treated, and the ability to dis­
tinguish the effects of the therapy from the disease being treated. Operations 
are not standardized, and one cannot separate the operative procedure from 
the surgeon performing it. Surgery is a not a pill and, therefore, cannot be 
evaluated as a pill; it is an iterative process, as is the sustaining technology 
to facilitate it.
 
 

	
Surgical Innovation	
189
The standards applied to nonsurgical medical research are not generally 
applicable to the design of surgical research. These difficulties impact the 
ethics of surgical innovation. Whereas the randomized clinical trial is the 
highest order of evidence-based medicine, here are many factors that make 
implementation of that research tool difficult in surgery:8
¤	 First, it is generally impossible to achieve full blinding in surgical 
research.
¤	 Second, surgery has a powerful placebo effect that may exist 
independently of the general efficacy of an operation.
¤	 Third, as Francis D. Moore has observed, “the most remarkable 
and effective extensions of surgery have often not required elaborate 
statistical analysis for their establishment.”
¤	 Fourth, there are situations in which randomized clinical trials may 
be both impractical and ethically dubious. The advisability of a 
trial is open to serious questions when thousands of patients must 
be treated to establish statistically significant but otherwise small 
differences.
¤	 Fifth, randomized clinical trials may be impossible when the newer 
treatment for a given condition is in a state of rapid evolution. The 
introduction of off-pump coronary bypass surgery is a case in point 
here.
¤	 Sixth, it is often difficult to launch controlled studies of surgical 
innovation after the new device or technique has become popular. 
This has been commonly termed “lost opportunity.”
¤	 Seventh, it is often difficult to justify the use of a “placebo,” that is a 
sham procedure in surgery despite its scientific desirability. [. . .]
REGULATION OF SURGICAL INNOVATION
Innovation involves iterations of both device and techniques and signifi­
cant oversight is already in place to regulate both. The US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) at the federal level, medical boards at the state level, 
and credentialing committees at the local hospital level provide appropri­
ate oversight of medical practice and innovation. Furthermore, professional 
societies provide practice guidelines for the adoption and implementation 
of new technologies and techniques. [. . .] IRBs provide oversight of research 
at universities and community hospitals alike. [. . .] Lastly, research studies 
include data safety monitoring boards to adequately protect patient safety.
The FDA, according to its mission statement, is responsible for “pro­
tecting public health assuring the safety, efficacy, and security of . . . medi­
cal devices. . . .” The FDA is also responsible for “advancing public health by 
helping to speed innovation. . . .”9
 

	 190	
The Ethics of Surgery
In recognition of the different levels of significance, there are different 
regulatory paths providing different levels of scrutiny by which new devices 
are approved by the FDA. The most stringent of these is the Pre-Market 
Approval, which is the process by which the FDA evaluates and regulates the 
safety and effectiveness of medical devices that support and sustain human 
life and are of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human 
health. Clinical studies on human subjects are less stringently regulated by 
the Individual Device Exemption (IDE) pathway. A more lenient regulatory 
process (510K) is available for devices that are substantially equivalent to 
already legally marketed devices. [. . .]
INNOVATION REVIEW COMMITTEES
Into this elaborate and effective regulatory structure, we now must consider 
adding another layer of review, the IRC. Morreim makes a number of assump­
tions of the practicality of implementing IRCs that are simply not true.
First, she claims that innovations are most likely to be contemplated in 
academic institutions, and therefore, appropriate personnel would be avail­
able to form committees. Although that may have been true in a bygone 
era, nonacademic institutions are frequently at the forefront of innovation 
and research, from laparoscopic cholecystectomy to coronary stent trials to 
off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery, because academicians and patients 
have moved to private practice settings.
Second is the assumption that the review would be collegial and altruistic. 
Many motivations form opinion—not all of which are consensus, expressed, 
and beneficial. The assumption that there would be unbiased, beneficent 
peers willing to “curbside consult” in the current practice environment is not 
realistic. [. . .]
Next is the opinion that the noninnovator would add balance to the 
assessment. The spectrum of practitioners range from the innovators to the 
early adopters to the late majority and the laggards. An IRC composed of 
laggards would be counterproductive to the process and not only not balance 
innovation, but would halt progress.
OPINION REGARDING THE HYPOTHETICAL CASE
My opinion regarding the hypothetical case presentation posed to us of Dr. 
Outinfrunt is that he acted in a moral and ethical manner despite the fact that 
his innovation did not work. He used an approved device in an off label use, 
which is legal and ethical. He was experienced and knew the shortcomings 
of the current therapy. He performed appropriate due diligence to test the 
device in the new application in a cadaver lab before the procedure, and he 
obtained informed consent from the patient about the use of this innovative 
 
 

	
Surgical Innovation	
191
device. He had a reasonable expectation of success that was based on the 
experience in the use of the device by others in other indications. The failure 
indeed may not have been related to the device itself, but rather to the sutur­
ing technique, to the disease process, or other patient factors. There is no 
evidence that he did this for self-gain, and he acted by all accounts in his own 
patient’s best interest. [. . .]
Innovation is hard work. The easy path is to perform the standard proven 
operation despite its known inadequacies. The extra effort Dr. Outinfrunt 
expended in his attempt to improve his patient’s outcome was laudable and 
the ultimate expression of individualization of care. It arose from the drive to 
make a difference and make a contribution to the human condition.
CONCLUSION
The expansion of oversight systems to surgical innovation that does not fall 
into the category of research will serve only to stifle the advancement of sur­
gical science. [. . .] To promote innovation, one needs a regulatory environ­
ment that allows an easy start and adjustment to changing circumstances and 
opportunities and the ability to innovate. Lack of economic development in 
many African and Middle Eastern countries can be traced to excessive regu­
lation. The same dynamics hold true for surgical innovation as they do for 
economic development. Adequate regulation of surgical research and inno­
vation that does not fall in to the category of research already exists. Let’s not 
fix something that isn’t broken.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Dr. Morreim has proposed an intriguing idea aimed at improving outcomes 
for patients who undergo innovative surgical procedures: prior review of the 
innovative idea by a suitably expert group, which she calls an Innovation 
Review Committee (IRC). [. . .]
Dr. Mack [. . .] suggests that IRCs with noninnovator members would be 
counterproductive and bring progress to a halt. Ultimately, he sees the IRC 
as regulatory excess attempting to fix a well-functioning system that is not 
broken.
Dr. Morreim, however, does not claim that the system is broken; rather, 
she recites evidence of unanticipated adverse consequences of several 
well-known innovative procedures and suggests that the IRC could be part 
of an overall effort to improve the quality of surgical care. Clearly, her inten­
tion is benevolent; however, one might ask: Which alternative weighs more 
heavily in the balance of benefits and harms: the potential benefit (improved 
 
 

	 192	
The Ethics of Surgery
outcomes) of innovative procedures or the potential harms (a stifling new 
layer of review)? A glimpse backward into the mid-20th century might be 
instructive.
An urgent need for oversight of clinical research was recognized in the 
wake of World War II. The Nuremberg trials of 1947–48 shed light on atro­
cious human experimentation during the Nazi regime. The revelations of 
those trials resulted in drafting of the Nuremberg Code, the first interna­
tional guide to the ethics of human research.10 Building on that foundation, 
the Declaration of Helsinki in 1964 promulgated more detailed guidelines.11 
In 1966, Beecher reported a study of 22 human experiments published in 
several of our foremost journals, conducted in leading medical schools, and 
funded by federal agencies and major foundations.12 All were done without 
the consent of the subjects, mostly children and institutionalized mentally 
deficient adults, few of whom could have understood the nature of the exper­
iment. [. . .]
Both the Nuremberg trials and the Beecher paper revealed horrific, 
unethical human experimentation and provided great impetus for the regu­
lation of human subjects research and the development of IRBs. This brief 
retrospective prompts the question: What is the impetus for the development 
of IRCs? Is there evidence of widespread misdeeds associated with surgical 
innovation? Certainly, all innovations do not result in positive advances; 
many have failed in their intended outcomes, and some have resulted in 
fatalities. But such uncertainty of outcomes is to be expected whenever new 
territory is explored. If we must have some sort of prior review or regulation 
of innovative surgery, Dr. Morreim’s suggestion makes sense—but must we 
have prior review?
The horns of the dilemma presented by this debate are two unpleasant 
choices, both arising from inadequate information: we are impaled on one 
horn by the discomfort of abandoning a well-known, comfortable process 
of innovation that we believe has served our patients well and on the other 
horn by the possibility that our process has serious flaws that might be easily 
repaired with a relatively innocuous fix. Unlike research, our current process 
of innovation operates almost entirely under the radar screen. It provides 
no information about the nature of major innovations actually attempted, 
how many there are, and their outcomes. The only innovations we hear about 
(outside of weekly service conferences) are the successes, and then only those 
that are important enough to warrant publishing. As a result, Dr. Morreim 
has no horrendous Nuremberg or Beecher experiences to support her case, 
and Dr. Mack has no recounting of the (hopefully) negligible number and 
severity of harms of innovations-gone-bad to bolster his. Dr. Mack cannot 
confidently assure us [. . .] that the system is not broken, nor can Dr. Morreim 
persuade us that it is.

	
Surgical Innovation	
193
The resolution of this dilemma, like that of all clinical conflicts, lies in 
choosing the alternative that will ultimately be best for our patients. But 
which is the right alternative? There seems only one objective way to make 
the choice. Some brave soul or institution that is committed to attempting 
to improve the lot of patients and is persuaded by the case Dr.  Morreim 
has made must undertake a major innovation, an administrative trial, so 
to speak: designing and executing a study of an innovation review process 
such as she has suggested. I have neither the skill nor the temerity to suggest 
what the design ought to be, how or which outcomes ought to be measured, 
or what, if any, controls would be appropriate. Until the results of such an 
administrative trial are available, however, I am afraid we are stuck with (or 
on) the horns of this dilemma.
References
	 1.	 Beecher HK. Surgery as placebo. JAMA. 1961;176:88–93.
	 2.	 Johnson AG. Surgery as a placebo. Lancet. 1994;344:1140–2.
	 3.	 Moseley JB, O’Malley K, Petersen NJ, et al. A controlled trial of arthroscopic sur­
gery for osteoarthritis of the knee. New Engl J Med. 2002;337:81–8.
	 4.	 Strasberg SM, Ludbrook PA. Who oversees innovative practice? J Am Coll Surg. 
2003;196:938–48.
	 5.	 McKneally MF. Ethical problems in surgery: innovation leading to unforeseen com­
plications. World J Surg. 1999;23:786–8.
	 6.	 LeapFrog group. http://www.leapfroggroup.org/. Accessed July 7–10, 2006.
	 7.	 Miller F, Rosenstein DL. The therapeutic orientation to clinical trials. N Engl J 
Med. 2003;348:1383–6.
	 8.	 Roy DJ, Black P, McPeek B, McKneally MF. Ethical principles in research. 
In: Troidl H, McKneally MF, Mulder DS, et al, eds. Textbook on Surgical Research. 
New York: Springer; 1997:581–604.
	 9.	 US Food and Drug Administration. Mission statement. Washington, DC: US Food 
and Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/opacom/morechoices/mission.html. 
Accessed December 19, 2005.
	10.	 Annas GJ, Grodin MA. The Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code: Human Rights 
in Human Experimentation. New York: Oxford University Press; 1992.
	11.	 World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. Ethical principles for medical 
research involving human subjects. JAMA. 2000;284:3043–5.
	12.	 Beecher HK. Ethics and clinical research. N Engl J Med. 1966;274:1354–60.
 

194
16
Who Should Adopt Robotic Surgery and When?
Jessica K. Smyth, Karen E. Deveney, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
New technologies abound in the surgical specialties, cardiothoracic surgery 
in particular. One of the more highly visible and controversial new technolo­
gies is robotic surgery—some claim that it is a useful adjunct to surgery, oth­
ers that it is mostly a marketing tool. Assuming that it has a high utility value, 
however, when should it be adopted in practice, and by whom? The following 
case serves to focus discussion of opposing points of view.
CASE
Dr Pierre Jaloux, a 55-year-old highly respected cardiothoracic surgeon, 
hires Dr Woody Randolph, a young well-trained surgeon who has recently 
finished fellowship training in robotic surgery. The older surgeon plans to 
cut back on his practice in about 10 years to work part time. Six months 
later, Dr Randolph has developed a busy practice in robotic surgery and has 
a growing reputation for very good outcomes. Dr Jaloux finds his patient 
load declining because referring physicians and patients are impressed by 
the robotic procedures. He has feelings of competitiveness and even jealousy 
toward his new colleague, although they remain friendly and Dr Randolph 
is, by any measure, clearly doing a great job. The older surgeon decides to 
* Smyth JK, Deveney KE, Sade RM. Who should adopt robotic surgery, and when? Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2013;96(4):1132–7. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with 
permission.
 
 
 
 

	
Adoption of Robotic Surgery	
195
take a 2-week course in robotic surgery and use the technology in his own 
practice to better compete with his young colleague. Should Dr Jaloux carry 
out his plan?
Pro
Jessica K. Smyth, MD
Presented with the case of Dr Jaloux, you may ask yourself, “How can any 
surgeon justify performing an operation when there is another surgeon avail­
able who is more experienced or skilled?” The mistake in this line of think­
ing is twofold. The first error is equating technical skill or experience with 
competence. Based solely on technical skill, one may falsely conclude that 
the best technician is the best surgeon. However, competence includes more 
than technical proficiency. Competence is the exercise of the required knowl­
edge, judgment, and skill to perform a particular task reliably to produce an 
appropriate outcome.
The second flaw in this line of thinking is equating competence with per­
fection. At each institution in this country, it is likely there are a great number 
of competent surgeons. Sound quality assurance in surgery should provide 
patients with surgical care that is above the morally required threshold of 
competence, similar to the safety standards for aircraft pilots and bridge 
builders. Fine-grained distinctions of proficiency and expertise may be help­
ful in identifying appropriate surgeons for unusually complex cases, but it is 
unnecessary, and may be counterproductive, to make expertise rather than 
competence the reference standard for all surgical care.
As a highly respected academic surgeon, Dr Jaloux has likely demon­
strated a high degree of competence, not only in his own performance, but 
also in his ability to oversee and train others. We can assume that over the 
course of his career, he has integrated new evidence and technology into his 
practice. Surgeons of all specialties are integrating evidence-based medicine 
and new technologies they mastered after residency training into their cur­
rent practices. For example, neurosurgeons and otolaryngologists are now 
using an endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal approach for the resection 
of many pituitary adenomas.1 In orthopedic surgery, treatment of femoral 
shaft fractures has evolved from traction and casting to locked intramed­
ullary nailing.2 Cardiothoracic surgeons are rapidly adopting the recently 
approved technology of transcatheter aortic valve replacement for use when 
open replacement is deemed high risk.3 Leading practitioners must incorpo­
rate new techniques after their formal training is complete to employ current 
best practices.
And isn’t this one of the greatest draws of medicine—to be challenged, to 
continually learn and refine our expertise?
 

	 196	
The Ethics of Surgery
The daily responsibility for successfully performing invasive procedures 
on another human being distinguishes surgery from other branches of medi­
cine. This is a sobering reminder. What allows an individual surgeon to do 
this? Our ability to operate comes not only from knowledge and technical 
expertise, but also through connecting with patients in such a way that they 
have confidence in our capabilities.
Over the course of his career, Dr Jaloux has assuredly developed signifi­
cant relationships with his patients and their families. This supportive envi­
ronment adds to the overall care he provides to them. Given that the number 
of patients has decreased, it is clear that his current scope of practice is not 
meeting their expectations. How many times has one of your patients said 
to you, “Well, I read on the Internet that this technique was better than that 
technique or that this course of treatment was better for my illness.” Gaining 
this skill set will enable the senior physician to not only offer robotic surgery, 
but also enable him to discuss its advantages and disadvantages and to coun­
sel his patients on the best treatment choice for their particular situation.
Ultimately the decision to pursue further training to effectively incor­
porate advanced technology into his practice should not stem from personal 
interests, but from what is in the best interest of the patients he serves. The 
scenario suggests that he is motivated by feelings of jealousy and competi­
tiveness; however, the question to ask yourself is this: how many can boast 
of only altruistic motivation for every choice made along their career path? 
Oftentimes, decisions or actions are based on personal motives. However, fur­
ther training and education most commonly result in better performance and 
better outcomes for the patient. The patient and the public may be harmed if 
physicians make clinical decisions based on factors other that what is best for 
the patient. That being said, having the capability to offer his patients mul­
tiple treatment options may be in the best interest of the patient.
So the crux of the scenario remains: how can a surgeon safely incorpo­
rate evolving technology into his practice?
Across the globe, health care delivery is undergoing a major evolution. The 
introduction of new technologies, the use of telemedicine to deliver health care 
remotely, and the evolving restrictions in work hours of trainee physicians are 
changing the face of medicine. Training physicians and surgeons in more spe­
cialized techniques, in shorter periods of time, while maintaining the highest 
levels of patient safety and in a cost-effective manner is a challenging order. 
This introduction of new technology and evolution of education and health care 
delivery should lead to improvement without harming patients in the process.
Robotic surgery was developed in response to the limitations and draw­
backs of laparoscopic surgery. Since 1997 when the first robotic procedure 
was performed, various papers have been published highlighting the advan­
tages of this technique. The robotic system offers several features, includ­
ing intuitive movements, tremor filtration, stereoscopic vision, and motion 

	
Adoption of Robotic Surgery	
197
scaling, which are thought to contribute to making robotic-assisted surgery 
more intuitive to conceptualize and master.
In a study performed by Kaul and colleagues,4 operative times and learn­
ing curves were drawn for three surgeons: an experienced laparoscopic sur­
geon who had performed more than 1,000 procedures; an experienced open 
surgeon who was performing his or her first robotic radical prostatectomy; 
and a fellow who started performing robotic radical prostatectomies after 
having assisted and observed during more than 100 robotic procedures.
The robot decreased the learning curve for the experienced open surgeon 
so that by the seventh case, the operative times using the robot were faster 
than those of the experienced laparoscopic surgeon, who had performed 
more than 1,000 laparoscopic procedures. The fellow, who was mentored in 
robotics, performed his first robotic case faster than surgeons A and B, both 
of whom were more experienced surgeons.
Although our scenario implies that Dr Jaloux intends to go to a 2-week 
course and then introduce the technology into his own practice, there are 
professional standards and likely institutional requirements before he would 
be able to incorporate this technology in the operating room. He could begin 
with the course and then be mentored at his home institution by other sur­
geons already trained in robotics before he would be allowed to practice 
independently. Additionally, some institutions are now purchasing robotic 
simulators to aid staff in acquiring robotic skills.
Finally, this discussion wouldn’t be complete without touching on the 
subject of age. What weight should be placed on the fact that the senior sur­
geon is 55? It is not uncommon for professionals to work well into their 60s and 
70s. As a gauge, the average age of an incoming president is 55. Age is not, in 
and of itself, impairing. Studies on learning and age demonstrate that motiva­
tion and positive self-perception are directly linked to our capability to learn.
But let us be guided by words of the English physician, Dr Thomas 
Percival: “Let both the Physician and Surgeon never forget that their profes­
sions are public trusts, properly rendered lucrative whilst they fulfill them, 
but which they are bound by honor and probity to relinquish as soon as they 
find themselves unequal to their adequate and faithful execution.”5
As I conclude, let me summarize: surgical care involves lifelong learning 
that should be directed to improving patient outcomes and may continue as 
long as there is due diligence to our professional obligations.
Con
Karen E. Deveney, MD
No, it would be wrong for Dr Jaloux to take a 2-week course in robotic sur­
gery to compete with his younger, fellowship-trained colleague.
 

	 198	
The Ethics of Surgery
I base my opinion on three diverse arguments: (1) the effects of age on 
cognitive function, dexterity, and ability to learn new technologies; (2) the 
inappropriate, unethical reasons that are motivating him to learn robotics; 
and (3) the increased cost and lack of demonstrated superiority of robotic 
procedures.
Studies on cognitive function have demonstrated unequivocally that 
measured IQ declines in adults as they age. The average IQ of 100 in the 25- 
to 34-year-old person decreases to 90 by age 55 to 64, to 82 by age 65 to 74, 
and to 73 for persons over age 75 years.6 Although these data apply to a gen­
eral population and not MD’s, studies that compare the abilities of non-MDs 
and MDs of varying ages performing tests measuring physical and mental 
traits such as reactivity, attention, numeric recall, verbal memory, visiospa­
tial facility, reasoning, and mental calculation show that MDs decline with 
age more slowly, but still show a decrease of 5% in their total scores by age 60, 
and 10% by age 70.7
A study that looked specifically at cognitive and physical function of 
surgeons as they age was conducted using surgeon volunteers aged 45 years 
and older who were attending the Clinical Congress of the American College 
of Surgeons (ACS) between 2001 and 2006. Surgeons took a battery of tests 
measuring attention, reaction times, visual learning, and memory. The stud­
ies showed a gradual decline in all areas with aging.8
Studies of general surgeons recertifying on the American Board of 
Surgery examination show that the failure rate on the examination dramati­
cally increases with age, from a mean of 3.6% on the first recertification taken 
10 years after initial Board certification to 10.3% at 20 years and to 16.9% at 
30 years.9
Although the above studies show that age is associated with a decline in 
cognition and knowledge and skill on surrogate tests of physical functioning, 
some would argue that the increased surgical experience with age can com­
pensate for the decreased mental agility and manual dexterity that accompany 
aging. In fact, the effects of age and experience were studied as factors in out­
comes of inguinal hernia repair in the much-quoted randomized, controlled, 
multi-institutional Veterans Affairs cooperative study of laparoscopic versus 
open inguinal hernia repair. In that study surgeons older than age 45 who 
had performed fewer than 250 laparoscopic repairs had a mean hernia recur­
rence rate of 18%, compared with 3.4% for surgeons younger than age 45.10 
This finding is consistent with results of a systematic review by Choudhry 
and associates11 in which all but one of 59 studies found some decline in per­
formance with increasing age or time in practice. Are these poorer outcomes 
fair to patients?
Opportunities for fully trained, older surgeons to learn new procedures 
are often limited to short courses with their inherent limitations on oppor­
tunities to practice a procedure longitudinally as is seen over the course of a 

	
Adoption of Robotic Surgery	
199
several-year residency or even a 2-year fellowship. To perform robotic proce­
dures requires not only a course, but also practice time on a trainer and proc­
toring in active practice. The steep learning curve of robotic cardiothoracic 
surgery has been explored in a few small studies in the literature. In one study 
of robotic coronary artery bypass graft surgery, four of five adverse graft 
outcomes occurred in the first quintile of cases. These investigators reviewed 
the reported experience at other centers and concluded that “even in the most 
experienced hands limited-access, telerobotic CABG involves a significant 
learning curve.”12 The steep learning curve has been looked at for complex 
robotic operations in other surgical specialties such as urology. After initial 
robotic training performing prostatectomy, it was found that 110 to 200 cases 
were necessary for a surgeon experienced in open procedures to achieve the 
level of competence that would demonstrate mastery of the robotic proce­
dure.13 The long learning curve for complex robotic procedures certainly 
takes it beyond a 2-week course, especially for an older surgeon with dimin­
ishing cognitive and physical skills.
Privileging to perform robotic procedures requires not only a formal 
course, but also a period of proctoring in practice. Who would be willing 
to provide such proctoring? The older surgeon’s younger partner would be 
the natural person to proctor him, but for him to do so would detract from 
his own practice and also set up an awkward dynamic in which the younger 
surgeon may feel obligated to approve of the older surgeon’s technical skills 
prematurely because they are partners. Finding a surgeon from elsewhere to 
proctor him for an adequate time would be difficult.
Finally, it may be anecdotal, but a prominent and famous academic 
endocrine surgeon, Atul Gawande, recently confessed that his outcomes had 
plateaued and he was no longer “beating the averages.”14 He wondered that 
“maybe this is what happens when you turn forty-five.” He went on to say, 
“Surgery is, at least, a relatively late-peaking career”—not like mathemat­
ics, baseball, or pop music (which peak at age 30), but more like Standard & 
Poor’s 500 CEOs (average age of hire, 52) or age of maximum productivity for 
geologists, 54. “Surgeons apparently fall somewhere between the extremes, 
requiring both physical stamina and the judgment that comes with experi­
ence. Apparently, I’d arrived at that middle point.”
The second argument against the older surgeon’s learning robotic sur­
gery to compete with his younger partner is that his motivation is self-serving. 
Self-interest should never be an ethical justification for any action in the prac­
tice of medicine. One need look no further than the motto of the American 
College of Surgeons (ACS):  “Omnibus per artem fidemque prodesse” (To 
serve all with skill and fidelity). Furthermore, the ACS mission statement 
maintains that “The American College of Surgeons is dedicated to improv­
ing the care of the surgical patient and to safeguarding standards of care in an 
optimal and ethical practice environment.”15 The basic principles of medical 

	 200	
The Ethics of Surgery
ethics require that one place the interests of the patient above those of one’s 
own interest such as personal gain, promotion, or fame.
The third and last issue in this case is to query whether robotic surgery 
has even been shown to improve the care of the surgical patient. To date there 
is no evidence to support the superiority of robotic surgery over open sur­
gery for any procedure. Although potential advantages of robotic procedures 
include better “3-D” vision, better magnification, decreased hand tremor, 
and facilitated suturing in a small space, robotic procedures also take longer, 
cost more, and are at best equivalent to open procedures in outcomes.16 The 
role of robots in cardiac surgery has not been fully defined and, although it 
has “immense long-term potential to minimize morbidity and improve the 
outcomes of CABG procedures,” only “highly specialized centers” can afford 
the cost and garner adequate experience to justify its use. In one study,17 the 
researcher surveyed all US institutions that owned a da Vinci robot concern­
ing the yearly volume of robotic heart operations and found that only an 
average of 7.3 cardiac operations were performed annually per robot, repre­
senting only 0.5% of all cardiac operations. Only 12% of programs performed 
more than 50 robotic procedures yearly. Although some centers did report 
good outcomes with robotic cardiac procedures, the outcomes did not exceed 
those of comparable minimally invasive methods.
For all of the above reasons, then, it would be wrong for the older sur­
geon to attend a 2-week robotic surgery course with the goal of competing 
with his younger, fellowship-trained colleague.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Smyth and Deveney address three broad ethically relevant areas:  mental 
and physical functioning, motivation, and effectiveness of robotic surgery. 
I would add a fourth to those three: marketing.
MENTAL AND PHYSICAL FUNCTION RELATED TO AGE
The debaters agree that 2 weeks of robotic training is inadequate to develop 
clinical competence; additional training on a simulator and a period of proc­
toring will be necessary. Deveney points to declining cognitive and physical 
functioning with age, although less so for physicians than others. Smyth does 
not challenge those findings but emphasizes the importance of noncogni­
tive traits, such as experience, judgment, and adaptability, in determining 
competence. Both essayists analyze the question in general terms, but neither 
mentions the importance of individual variation. What should Dr. Jaloux, 
 
 
 

	
Adoption of Robotic Surgery	
201
specifically, do? Much depends on his individual characteristics; for example, 
a highly intelligent and dexterous surgeon can lose 5% or 10% of his IQ and 
dexterity and still be highly intelligent and dexterous. On this point, I believe 
Smyth makes the stronger case.
MOTIVATION
Deveney finds Dr.  Jaloux’s motivation to be self-serving and asserts, 
“Self-interest should never be an ethical justification for any action in the 
practice of medicine.” “Never” is a strong word, and it seems likely that we can 
never entirely rid ourselves of self-interest. One wonders whether attempting 
to maintain one’s practice volume and the income it generates crosses an ethi­
cal line into unacceptable territory. Arguing to the contrary, Smyth suggests 
that jealousy and competitiveness may not be such a bad thing because, for 
surgeons, “Oftentimes, decisions or actions are based on personal motives.” 
She softens this statement by pointing out that adopting new technologies 
commonly improves patient outcomes, but we can wonder whether it is right 
to base decisions on personal motives. Underlying motives are notoriously 
difficult to analyze and are seldom uncomplicated. Dr. Jaloux’s motivation 
probably is not simple and includes concern for the safety and benefit of his 
patients. Most decisions surrounding patient care have complex motivations; 
ethically, the greatest weight must be given to the interests of the patient.18 
I believe Deveney has made the better case on this point.
EFFECTIVENESS OF ROBOTIC SURGERY
Ethical decision making in clinical medicine often requires weighing of ben­
efits and harms first to the patient, then balancing benefits and harms to oth­
ers, such as the physician, his partners, the hospital, and society in general. 
Dr. Jaloux faced this balancing act in deciding whether to learn robotic sur­
gery. A critical factor is the potential for harm to his patients. For reasons 
Smyth enumerates, it seems likely that Dr. Jaloux can become competent at 
robotic lobectomy, and if he does not, the training and proctoring processes 
should inform him and others that he should not use this technique clinically.
Are the outcomes after robotic lobectomy better than, similar to, or 
worse than those after more standard approaches? Early reports suggest 
that initial survival and other outcome measures may be similar to standard 
approaches, but follow-up reports have been sparse, and comparisons of 
lobectomy techniques could be the topic of another debate that is beyond 
the scope of the present one. For our purposes, there seems to be no decisive 
clinical advantage or disadvantage to robotic lobectomy compared with open 
and video-assisted thoracic surgery approaches.
 
 

	 202	
The Ethics of Surgery
MARKETING
Much of the growth in robotic surgery may be driven by marketing efforts of 
hospitals and surgery programs.19 Is there something intrinsically wrong with 
using new technologies to preserve or increase the patient base of a hospital 
or practice?
At one time, marketing was considered to be unethical, typified by this 
statement in the Principles of the American Medical Association (AMA) 
Code of Medical Ethics of 1957, Section 5: “A physician should not solicit 
patients.”20 This was taken to mean that all forms of advertising other than 
a simple public statement of name, address, telephone number, and nature 
of practice were unethical. A lawsuit alleging restraint of trade against the 
AMA by the Federal Trade Commission in 1975 resulted in an agreement in 
1988 that included the AMA’s removal of the prohibition against solicitation 
of patients from the Code of Medical Ethics.21 For the last 25 years, advertis­
ing and other forms of marketing that are not false, deceptive, or misleading 
are deemed to be legal and are increasingly felt to be ethically acceptable. For 
many, however, some forms of legal marketing, such as using new technolo­
gies to build surgical volume, fail the sniff test. Yet, as long as new technolo­
gies are used competently, full and accurate information about advantages 
and disadvantages is provided, and patients are not harmed, there seems to 
be nothing intrinsically wrong with marketing.
Surgeons using robotic technology could be flirting with ethical bound­
aries, however, if they become involved with certain kinds of promotional 
activities; such issues are beyond the scope of the present case.
CONCLUSION
Dr. Jaloux has already made his decision to seek training in robotic surgery. 
The essayists both gave persuasive reasons why he should or should not decide 
to seek robotic training. They were not asked to advise him on what decision 
he should make, however; rather, they were asked to determine whether he 
should carry out the plan he has already made. We should assume that this 
highly respected surgeon’s decision was based on adequate self-assessment of 
his own strengths and limitations and that he knows the only partially under­
stood advantages and disadvantages of robotic lobectomy. Without good 
reason to believe his patients will be harmed, we seem not to have sufficient 
evidence to tell Dr. Jaloux that the decision he has made was wrong.
References
	1.	Loyo-Varela M, Herrada-Pineda T, Revilla-Pacheco F, et  al. Pituitary tumor sur­
gery: a review of 3004 patients. World Neurosurg. 2013;79(2):33–6.
 
 
 

	
Adoption of Robotic Surgery	
203
	 2.	 Blasier RB. The problem of the aging surgeon: when surgeon age becomes a surgical 
risk factor. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2009;467:402–11.
	 3.	 Stone ML, Kern JA, Sade RM. Transcatheter aortic valve replacement:  clinical 
aspects and ethical considerations. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(6):1791–5.
	 4.	 Kaul S, Shah NL, Menon M. Learning curve using robotic surgery. Curr Urol Rep. 
2006;7:125–9.
	 5.	 Percival T. Medical Ethics, or, a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the 
Professional Conduct of Physicians and Surgeons. London: Johnson & Bickerstaff; 
1803.
	 6.	 Kaufman AS. Assessing Adolescent and Adult Intelligence. Boston: Allyn & Bacon; 
1990.
	 7.	 Powell D. Profiles in Cognitive Aging. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 
1994.
	 8.	 Bieliauskas LA, Langenacker S, Graver C, et  al. Cognitive changes and retire­
ment among senior surgeons:  results from the CCRASS study. J Am Coll Surg. 
2008;207:69–79.
	 9.	 Rhodes RS, Biester TW. Certification and maintenance of certification in surgery. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2007;87:825–36.
	10.	 Neumayer LA, Gawande AA, Wang J, et al. Proficiency of surgeons in inguinal her­
nia repair: effect of experience and age. Ann Surg. 2005;242:344–52.
	11.	 Choudhry NK, Fletcher RH, Soumerai SB. Systematic review:  the relation­
ship between clinical experience and quality of health care. Ann Intern Med. 
2005;142:260–73.
	12.	 Novick RJ, Fox SA, Klail BB, et al. Analysis of the learning curve in telerobotic, 
beating heart coronary artery bypass grafting: a 90 patient experience. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2003;76:749–53.
	13.	 Doumerc N, Yuen C, Saudie R, et al. Should experienced open prostatic surgeons 
convert to robotic surgery? The real learning curve for one surgeon over three years. 
Br J Urol Int 2010;106:378–84.
	14.	 Gawande AA. Personal best. The New Yorker, October 3, 2011.
	15.	 American College of Surgeons Bulletin. www.facs.org. Accessed November 2012.
	16.	 Rawlings AL, Woodland JH, Vegunta K, et al. Robotic versus laparoscopic colec­
tomy. Surg Endosc. 2007;21:1701–8.
	17.	 Robicsek F. Robotic cardiac surgery:  time told! J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2008;135:243–6.
	18.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Principle VIII. In: Code of Medical Ethics 
of the American Medical Association, 2012–2013 ed. Chicago: American Medical 
Association; 2012:lxxi–xxv.
	19.	 Schiavone MB, Kuo EC, Naumann RW, et al. The commercialization of robotic 
surgery: unsubstantiated marketing of gynecologic surgery by hospitals. Am Obstet 
Gynecol. 2012;207:174.
	20.	 Judicial Council, American Medical Association. Principles of medical ethics. 
Chicago: American Medical Association; 1957. http://www.ama-assn.org/resources/
doc/ethics/1957_principles.pdf. Accessed February 13, 2013.
	21.	 Hirsh BD. Antitrust and medical ethics. JAMA. 1983;250: 2759–60.

204
17
Should Access to Transcatheter Aortic 
Valve Replacement Be Limited to 
High-Volume Surgical Centers?
Joseph E. Bavaria, Philip Green, Gregg F. Rosner, 
Martin B. Leon, Allan Schwartz, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] This discussion is a new incarnation of the long-standing volume–out­
come relationship debate, placed this time in the context of a new technology 
that is shared by cardiac surgeons and interventional cardiologists. Bavaria 
presents a great deal of data based on published literature over the last 3 
decades; these data generally show that larger volume programs and individ­
ual surgeons are associated with better outcomes in terms of mortality and 
morbidity, with a few exceptions. Green and colleagues present arguments 
based on recent studies that show no volume–outcome associations and a 
number of other arguments suggesting that limiting access to transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement is not a good idea.
Pro
Joseph E. Bavaria, MD
A document describing characteristics of the heart team to perform trans­
catheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) was recently developed for the 
* Sade RM. Should access to transcatheter aortic valve replacement be limited to high-volume 
surgical centers? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013;145(1):1439–40; Bavaria JE. Access to transcath­
eter aortic valve replacement should be limited to high-volume centers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;145:1441–3. Green P, Rosner GF. Leon MB, Schwartz A. Access to TAVR should not be limited 
to high-volume surgical centers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:1444–5. Copyright American 
Association for Thoracic Surgery, republished here with permission.
 
 
 
 

	
Limiting Access to TAVR	
205
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the Food and Drug 
Administration.1 Among those characteristics were three that are relevant 
to this discussion: cardiac surgeon criteria, interventional cardiologist crite­
ria, and institutional requirements for programmatic volumes. These three 
characteristics are germane to the question of whether there is a relation­
ship between the volume of procedures performed by a program/surgeon and 
patient outcomes.
The association of volume with outcomes was first noted in 1979 when 
hospital surgical volume was associated with better outcomes.2 The same 
relationship was found [. . .] in urological oncology. The most complex cys­
tectomy operations had two to three times lower mortality rates in high than 
in low-volume centers. This outcome was not found in simple urological pro­
cedures, leading to the idea that big procedures should be performed at big 
hospitals and small procedures should be performed at small hospitals.3 One 
study of the volume outcomes metric showed that approximately 39% of the 
effect is related to the surgeon and 61% is the institutional effect.4 Other fac­
tors drive the association between volume and outcomes as well: hospital size, 
urban location, teaching mission, staffing ratios, and patient demographic 
factors, such as age, length of stay, and accompanying procedures.
An early article that used Medicare data to evaluate 12 major cancer 
and major cardiovascular surgical procedures showed a significant inverse 
relationship between hospital volume and mortality rates. When the same 
group looked at surgeon volume in an analysis of more than 500,000 patients, 
the results were dramatic and even more conclusive, showing that surgeon 
volume is inversely related to operative mortality for all procedures exam­
ined.4 The authors concluded: “In the absence of other information about 
the quality of surgery at the hospitals near them, Medicare patients under­
going selected cardiovascular or cancer procedures can significantly reduce 
their risk of operative death by selecting a high-volume hospital.” The excess 
of deaths associated with lower-volume hospitals, according to one analysis, 
is 10,000 lives that could be saved by selective referral to high-volume hos­
pitals.5 [. . .]
Specific cardiovascular procedure volume–outcome relationships have 
been investigated. A  study of carotid endarterectomy showed dramatic 
decreases in the incidence of death, stroke, and length of stay as a function of 
surgeon volume.6 Procedural volume as a marker for coronary artery bypass 
graft (CABG) surgery has similar results: approximately a 3% reduction in 
mortality rate for CABG surgery in high-volume hospitals and approximately 
a 15% reduction in morbidity and mortality from highest to lowest quartile 
volume.7 High surgeon volume was also associated with approximately a 30% 
reduction in 30-day mortality rate. This article similarly studied the outcomes 
in many patients in the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database and found sig­
nificantly better outcomes for patients older than 65 years undergoing CABG, 

	 206	
The Ethics of Surgery
but no difference in lower risk and younger patients. The article concluded 
that hospital volume had limited value as a quality metric for CABG.
Data from the New  York State database show that hospitals with a 
higher CABG surgery volume also have lower risk-adjusted mortality rates; 
high-volume hospitals and surgeons both had a 30% to 40% reduction in 
risk-adjusted mortality rates.8 The combination of a high-volume surgeon 
and a high-volume hospital had far better results than the combination of a 
low-volume surgeon and a low-volume hospital. As a result, New York devel­
oped a policy intended to enhance outcomes, setting specific CABG require­
ments of 200 a year for hospitals and 50 a year for surgeons. Pennsylvania 
also mandated reporting of outcomes, and analysis showed nearly identical 
volume–outcome relations.9
The surgeon volume-mortality relationship showed lower mortality rates 
with greater surgical volume, and this relationship was stronger than hospital 
volumes.
Another indication that the surgeon’s experience in CABG procedures is 
a critical factor in determining outcomes is provided by the observation that 
when the same surgical team uses the same systems in high- and low-volume 
hospitals, the survival outcomes are not statistically different.10
In aortic valve replacement (AVR) surgery, higher surgeon volumes are 
associated with better outcomes, and the effect is substantially augmented 
in the case of complex operations, such as reoperative AVR.11 Similar results 
were found when hospital volume was related to outcomes of CABG, AVR, 
and mitral valve replacement: the surgeon-volume relationship was robust.12
Elective thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery shows the same volume–
outcome relationship—mortality for all aortic operations is much better 
in high-volume centers. It is interesting that thoracoabdominal operations 
were not performed by the low-volume centers at all; they referred all those 
procedures to high-volume centers.13 Heart transplantation shows the same 
thing:  heart transplant outcomes are worse at low-volume centers.14 Type 
A aortic dissection outcomes show further proof of this concept; as volume 
increases, outcomes improve for this operation.15
Clearly, the volume–outcome relationship advantage in high-volume 
centers disproportionately benefits high-risk patients, but one study reached 
the counterintuitive conclusion that operations in high-volume programs 
benefited low-risk patients more than high-risk patients. In this study, even 
very-low-risk patients had substantially better outcomes in high-volumes 
centers.16 It seems logical that poor results in one type of operation could cor­
relate with poor results in others as well. This logic has been confirmed: hos­
pitals that performed badly with CABG surgery also performed badly with 
AVR and mitral valve replacement, both by institution and by surgeon.17 
This suggests that suboptimal results in percutaneous coronary interventions 
(PCIs) and AVR might predict suboptimal results in TAVR.

	
Limiting Access to TAVR	
207
Regarding the interventional volume–outcome relationship, the inter­
national PCI community does well in fairly simple interventions, but in 
the more complicated interventions, the volume–outcome relationship is 
robust. High-volume PCI centers had dramatically better outcomes and 
mortality rates versus low-volume centers. The same is true of patients 
going to emergency CABG surgery.18 The authors concluded that there is no 
doubt in the PCI literature that the volume–outcome relationship remains 
strong. [. . .]
Data from the early experience with TAVR clearly show that as experi­
ence increases, results also improve.19 This holds true for patients undergoing 
TAVR by the transapical approach, which shows far better outcomes in the 
second 150 cases in a series than in the initial 150 cases.20 There is no question 
that as one gains experience, one gets better at TAVR.
This information has substantial implications for health policy. The 
National Agenda to Improve Patient Safety of the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality says this:  “Localizing specific surgeries and pro­
cedures to high-volume centers” ’ is a high priority area for patient safety 
research.21 The data overwhelmingly support the volume–outcome relation­
ship. Therefore, the complex cardiovascular procedure of TAVR should be 
limited to high-volume centers.
Con
Philip Green, MD, Gregg F. Rosner, MD, Martin B. Leon, MD, Allan Schwartz, MD
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has transformed the treat­
ment of aortic stenosis in high-risk older adults in Europe and has begun to 
do so in the United States. Recent Food and Drug Administration approval of 
the Edwards Lifesciences SAPIEN Transcatheter Heart Valve (Irvine, Calif) 
in inoperable and high-risk patients led to enthusiasm for widespread imple­
mentation of this technology. Experts have highlighted the central role of the 
multidisciplinary heart team in implementing a successful TAVR program.22 
Other experts, such as Joseph Bavaria, have suggested that access to TAVR 
should be restricted to high-volume surgical aortic valve replacement centers. 
In our opinion, access to TAVR should not be limited to high-volume surgical 
centers for the following reasons. First, high surgical volume does not ensure 
good outcomes in complex interventional procedures. Second, centers with 
low or no surgical volume can have excellent interventional results. Third, 
new multidisciplinary heart teams have achieved excellent results in part 
because of the transmission of accumulated knowledge from experienced 
centers. Finally, in the absence of evidence suggesting that high-volume sur­
gical centers produce superior TAVR results, therapeutic options for patients 
should not be limited.
 
 

	 208	
The Ethics of Surgery
HIGH SURGICAL VOLUME DOES NOT ENSURE GOOD 
INTERVENTIONAL OUTCOMES
The Synergy between Percutaneous Coronary Angio-plasty with Taxus and 
Cardiac Surgery (SYNTAX) trial23 randomized 1800 patients with multives­
sel disease across sites in 17 countries. Participants were randomized to coro­
nary artery bypass surgery or a Taxus stent (Boston Scientific Corporation, 
Natick, Mass) implantation. Analysis of rates of major adverse cardiac events 
by site showed that there was no relationship between volume and outcomes 
for both the Taxus stent and coronary bypass arm of the trial. This indicates 
that high volume, surgical or percutaneous, does not guarantee excellent out­
comes and therefore volume alone should not be treated as a sufficient marker 
of high-quality care.
CENTERS WITH LOW OR NO SURGICAL VOLUME CAN HAVE EXCELLENT 
INTERVENTIONAL RESULTS
Recent data from the Cardiovascular Patient Outcomes Research Team–
Elective Angioplasty Study (CPORT-E) trial confirmed that surgical backup 
is not necessary for excellent interventional outcomes.24 In the CPORT-E 
study, approximately 1900 patients were randomized to percutaneous coro­
nary intervention with surgery on site versus no surgery onsite. The overall 
6-week and 9-month adverse cardiac event rates were low and there were no 
significant differences between the sites with and without surgical backup. 
These findings underscore the belief that high surgical volume is not essential 
for excellent interventional cardiology results.
GROUP LEARNING CAN ATTENUATE THE LEARNING CURVE
Data from the Columbia HeartSource experience have shown that 
high-volume centers of excellence can transmit expertise to outlying centers. 
This can be achieved through targeted physician recruitment, a focus on 
continuous quality improvement through regular oversight and peer review, 
and formal and informal didactics. Most importantly, expert consultation 
is available to all participating sites at all times, including nights and week­
ends. The use of this approach to transmit knowledge across sites has enabled 
low-volume sites to achieve cardiac surgical risk-adjusted outcomes that are 
comparable with high-volumes affiliates.25
This group-learning phenomena has been replicated on a larger scale in 
the transcatheter arena in Europe and in the United States. In the European 
Edwards SAPIEN Aortic Bioprosthesis European Outcome (SOURCE) 
Registry, the early [. . .] and later [. . .] transapical TAVR results were compared. 
Despite comparable baseline risk characteristics, outcomes in the early group 
 
 
 

	
Limiting Access to TAVR	
209
were as good as outcomes in the later group. Specifically, there were no differ­
ences in 30-day rates of death, stroke, bleeding, or vascular complications.26
The absence of a demonstrable learning curve is a result of shared knowl­
edge across sites, enabling each site to rapidly integrate the collective experience 
to achieve results comparable with more experienced sites. The early US TAVR 
experience also showed that group learning can attenuate the learning curve. 
Dewey and colleagues (STS presentation; January, 2012) analyzed the random­
ized and nonrandomized continued-access transfemoral TAVR Placement of 
Aortic Transcatheter Valve (PARTNER) trial experience and showed the follow­
ing: (1) 30-day and 1-year mortality rates among the TAVR subjects were not 
different when high-enrolling sites were compared with low-enrolling sites, and 
(2) the 30-day and 1-year mortality rates were similar for the first set of 20, the sec­
ond set of 20, and the third set of 20 valve implantations at each site (PARTNER 
Executive Committee presentation; April, 2012). This suggests that early lessons 
learned were integrated rapidly into the group experience and through formal 
and informal educational initiatives and hands-on proctoring, excellent results 
were achieved in low-volume sites and among the first cases at new sites.
Finally, although we applaud the careful assimilation of TAVR tech­
nology to clinical care to ensure optimal outcomes for the highest-risk 
patients, restricting this kind of therapy to centers with high surgical aor­
tic valve replacement volume is unprecedented in the surgical community. 
Bolling and colleagues27 highlighted that most mitral valve surgery occurs at 
low-volume sites, despite the increased likelihood of successful mitral valve 
repair at high-volume centers. Furthermore, Dewey and colleagues28 showed 
that the discordance between observed and expected outcomes after aortic 
valve replacement decreases as surgical volume increases. However, accord­
ing to data from the Society of Thoracic Surgery database, the median num­
ber of sole aortic valve replacements per center is 20 per year, and per cardiac 
surgeon is 8 per year (Society of Thoracic Surgery database; 2010). Despite 
evidence of better outcomes at high-volume surgical centers, heart valve sur­
gery is not restricted to high-volume centers. In TAVR, in which the available 
evidence suggests that an excellent heart team with the support of national 
experts and regional centers can achieve excellent results despite low volume, 
there is no rationale to restrict the availability of this transformative technol­
ogy to patients cared for at high-volume surgical centers.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Several important issues related to the volume–outcomes ongoing debate are 
not addressed by either side of this discussion [. . .]. These are related to excel­
lence, well-controlled studies, and moving targets.
 
 

	 210	
The Ethics of Surgery
EXCELLENCE
All physicians aspire to be the best that they can be and to provide every 
patient with the highest quality care. These are aspirations, however, not 
requirements. The requirement for surgeons is not perfection and is not even 
excellence—it is competence.29 Certification and maintenance of certifica­
tion in a medical specialty are measures of competence; the programmatic 
requirements of the various specialty boards are the 6 core competencies that 
are well known to us30—they have never been designated the 6 core excel­
lences. Requiring that every patient be sent to centers associated with the best 
outcomes is ethically questionable, and making such a requirement a matter 
of policy seems overreaching. If a surgeon is competent, his or her results 
may not measure up to those of a master surgeon, but that should not in itself 
justify depriving potential patients of his or her services.
WELL-CONTROLLED STUDIES
Existing studies of the volume–outcome association suffer from the biases 
that plague all retrospective studies. For example, wide variation in study 
methodology makes meta-analysis of the volume–outcome relation impossi­
ble and is probably responsible for much of the great variation in conclusions 
reached by those studies.31 Moreover, the data in most studies come from 
administrative databases, which are notoriously unreliable regarding their 
clinical accuracy and are not risk adjusted.32 These important flaws make the 
conclusions of such studies unreliable grounds for making policy decisions 
that might make referral lines unreasonably rigid. The need is for studies that 
are designed for prospective collection of clinically accurate risk-adjusted 
data. Such studies seem unlikely to take place in the near future.
MOVING TARGETS
The studies of volume–outcome associations that have been done to date are 
snapshots; that is, they measure relations between surgeon or center volume 
compared with outcomes over a specified time period. But it might be the case 
that those relations vary substantially over time. Some small centers have 
become bigger centers over several years by demonstrating improved results. 
Many examples of this could be cited, but in my own institution, the volume 
of aortic aneurysm/dissection surgery has tripled since Dr John Ikonomidis 
joined our faculty immediately after finishing his training 12 years ago. The 
volume increase has been a result of his interest in such surgery and his 
excellent results. This growth would not have occurred if aortic surgery had 
been regionalized to high-volume centers in the late 1990s. Surgical volumes 
and outcomes are moving targets. It would be helpful to know how many 
 
 
 

	
Limiting Access to TAVR	
211
large-volume programs have become smaller and low-volume programs 
larger over 1 or 2 decades and how these changes correlated with outcomes. 
Such a study has not yet been done.
CONCLUSIONS
The volume–outcome controversy is likely to continue in the future, partly in 
an effort to find ways to optimize outcomes for patients and perhaps partly 
as a means for large programs to increase market share. There are good argu­
ments to be made on both sides of this question, and Bavaria and Green 
and colleagues have presented some of them. This editorial attempts to fill in 
some of the gaps in their presentations.
References
	 1.	 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Characteristics of the heart team to 
perform TAVI for best patient outcomes. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services. http://www.cms.gov. Accessed May 20, 2014.
	 2.	 Luft HS, Bunker J, Enthoven AC. Should operations be regionalized? An empir­
ical study of the relation between surgical volume and mortality. N Engl J Med. 
1979;301:1364–9.
	 3.	 Konety BR, Allareddy V, Modak S, Smith B. Mortality after major surgery for uro­
logic cancers in specialized urology hospitals: are they any better? J Clin Oncol. 
2006;24:2006–12.
	 4.	 Birkmeyer JD, Stukel TA, Siewers AE, et al. Surgeon volume and operative mortal­
ity in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:2117–27.
	 5.	 Dudley RA, Johansen KL, Brand R, et al. Selective referral to high-volume hospi­
tals: estimating potentially avoidable deaths. JAMA. 2000; 283:1159–66.
	 6.	 Cowan JA, Dimick JB, Thompson BG, et al. Surgeon volume as an indicator of out­
comes after carotid endarterectomy: an effect independent of specialty practice and 
hospital volume. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;195:814–21.
	 7.	 Peterson ED, Coombs LP, DeLong ER, et al. Procedural volume as a marker of 
quality for CABG surgery. JAMA. 2004;291:195–201.
	 8.	 Hannan EL, Wu C, Ryan TJ, et al. Do hospitals and surgeons with higher coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery volumes still have lower risk-adjusted mortality rates? 
Circulation. 2003;108:795–801.
	 9.	 Gorton CP, Jones JL, Hollenbeak CS, et al. Variation in volume–outcome rela­
tionships for hospitals and surgeons performing CABG surgery:  Pennsylvania 
Health Care Council Containment Council. http://www.academyhealth.org/.
les/2005/ppt/gorton.ppt. Washington, DC:  Academy Health. Accessed October 
16, 2012.
	10.	 Zacharias A, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, et  al. Is hospital procedure volume a 
reliable marker of quality for coronary artery bypass surgery? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2005;79:1961–9.
 
 

	 212	
The Ethics of Surgery
	11.	 Dewey TM, Herbert MA, Ryan WH, et al. Influence of surgeon volume on outcomes 
with aortic valve replacement. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1107–12.
	12.	 Goodney PP, Lucas FL, Birkmeyer JD. Should volume standards for cardiovascular 
surgery focus only on high-risk patients? Circulation. 2003;107:384–7.
	13.	 Gazoni LM, Speir AM, Kron IL, et  al. Elective thoracic aortic aneurysm sur­
gery: better outcomes from high-volume centers. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210:855–9; 
discussion 859–60.
	14.	 Russo MJ, Iribarne A, Easterwood R, et al. Post-heart transplant survival is inferior 
at low-volume centers across all risk strata. Circulation. 2010;122(Suppl.):S85–91.
	15.	 Knipp BS, Deeb GM, Prager RL, et al. A contemporary analysis of outcomes for 
operative repair of type A aortic dissection in the United States. [published correc­
tion appears in Surgery. 2008;143:301]. Surgery. 2007;142:524–8.
	16.	 Glance LG, Dick AW, Mukamel DB, Osler TM. Is the hospital volume–mortality 
relationship in coronary artery bypass surgery the same for low-risk versus high-risk 
patients? Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;76:1155–62.
	17.	 Goodney PP, O’Connor GT, Wennberg DE, Birkmeyer JD. Do hospitals with low 
mortality rates in coronary artery bypass also perform well in valve replacement? 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;76:1131–6.
	18.	 McGrath PD, Wennberg DE, Dickens JD Jr, et al. Relation between operator and 
hospital volume and outcomes following percutaneous coronary interventions in the 
era of the coronary stent. JAMA. 2000;284:3139–44.
	19.	 Gurvitch R, Tay EL, Wijesinghe N, et  al. Transcatheter aortic valve implanta­
tion: lessons from the learning curve of the first 270 high-risk patients. Catheter 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2011;78:977–84.
	20.	 Kempfert J, Rastan A, Holzhey D, et al. Transapical aortic valve implantation: anal­
ysis of risk factors and learning experience in 299 patients. Circulation. 2011;124(Sup
pl.):S124–9.
	21.	 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Evidence Report/Technology 
Assessment No. 43. Making health care safer: a critical analysis of patient safety 
practices. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. http://www.
ahrq.gov/clinic/ptsafety/pdf/ptsafety.pdf. Accessed October 16, 2012.
	22.	 Holmes DR Jr, Mack MJ, Kaul S, et al. 2012 ACCF/AATS/SCAI/STS expert con­
sensus document on transcatheter aortic valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:1200–54.
	23.	 Serruys PW, Morice M-C, Kappetein AP, et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention 
versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery disease. N Engl J 
Med. 2009;360:961–72.
	24.	 Aversano T, Lemmon CC, Liu L. Outcomes of PCI at hospitals with or without 
on-site cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1792–802.
	25.	 Kurlansky PA, Argenziano M, Dunton R, et al. Quality, not volume, determines 
outcome of coronary artery bypass surgery in a university-based community hospi­
tal network. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143:287–93.
	26.	 Wendler O, Walther T, Schroefel H, et al. The SOURCE Registry: what is the learn­
ing curve in transapical aortic valve implantation? Eur J Cardiothoracic Surg. 
2011;39:853–60.

	
Limiting Access to TAVR	
213
	27.	 Bolling SF, Li S, O’Brien SM, et al. Predictors of mitral valve repair: clinical and 
surgeon factors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90: 1904–12.
	28.	 Dewey TM, Herbert MA, Ryan WH, et al. Influence of surgeon volume on outcomes 
with aortic valve replacement. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1107–13.
	29.	 Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Principles of Medical Ethics, Principle 
I.  Code of Medical Ethics of the American Medical Association, current opin­
ions with annotations. 2012–2013 ed. Chicago:  American Medical Association; 
2012:xx–xxvi.
	30.	 American Board of Medical Specialties. MOC competencies and criteria. 
Chicago:  American Board of Medical Specialties. http://www.abms.org/mainte­
nance_of_certification/MOC_competencies.aspx. Accessed February 5, 2013.
	31.	 Halm EA,Lee C, Chassin MR.Is volume related to outcome in healthcare? A sys­
tematic review and methodologic critique of the literature. Ann Intern Med. 
2002;137:511–20.
	32.	 Cerfolio RJ, Jacobs JP. Sade RM. The ethics of transparency: publication of cardio­
thoracic surgical outcomes in the lay press. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:679–86.

214
18
Should the Use of Transcatheter Aortic 
Valve Implantation Be Rationed?
John E. Mayer, Jr., Grayson H. Wheatley III, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) has great promise of helping 
patients with severe aortic valve disease who are not candidates for open sur­
gery. It is an expensive technology, however, and some believe it should not 
be offered to every patient who is medically suitable to receive it—in other 
words, its use should be rationed.
The Ethics Forum [. . .] sponsored a debate on rationing TAVI at the 2011 
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Thoracic Surgery. John 
E. Mayer, Jr, MD, argued the proponent position, Grayson H. Wheatley, MD, 
the contrariant regarding a hypothetical case, constructed to focus on the ques­
tion of whether the offer of TAVI should be withheld from an elderly patient.
THE CASE OF THE OLD MAN AND HIS VALVE
The patient is 75 years old, and 10  years ago he received a 4-vessel coro­
nary artery bypass graft, including the left internal thoracic artery to the 
* Sade RM. Should use of transcatheter aortic valve implantation be rationed? J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(4):769–70; Mayer JE Jr. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation should 
be controlled and monitored by the medical profession. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(4):771–
3; Wheatley GH III. Use of transcatheter valve should not be rationed. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;143(4):774–5. Copyright American Association for Thoracic Surgery, republished here with 
permission.
 
 
 
 

	
Rationing TAVR	
215
left anterior descending coronary artery. He did well thereafter but has lived 
alone since his wife died 2 years ago; he has no children and no close rela­
tives. Significant heart failure symptoms recently developed in the patient. 
Echocardiographic assessment now shows evidence of severe aortic stenosis 
with a calculated valve area of 0.8 cm2 and a mean gradient across the valve 
of 60 mm Hg. There is left ventricular hypertrophy, and the left ventricular 
ejection fraction is 40%. Coronary catheterization shows severe native coro­
nary disease with all grafts patent and no new native coronary obstructions. 
Computed tomography scan reveals evidence of moderate to severe calci­
fication of the ascending aorta, and the left internal thoracic artery passes 
directly under the sternum, and thus is at high risk of being damaged dur­
ing reoperative sternotomy. In addition, the patient has moderate to severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (forced expiratory volume in1 second 
45% of normal) and a baseline creatinine of 1.8 mg/d.
The patient is referred to Dr. Sloan, an established cardiothoracic sur­
geon who participated in the initial Sapien (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, 
Calif) TAVI trial and has significant expertise with the procedure. Although 
Dr. Sloan has determined that the patient is a medically acceptable candidate 
for TAVI, but not for aortic valve replacement, he wonders whether some 
advanced technologies such as this one are expanding the scope of health 
care beyond sustainable limits. He knows that the only reason to deny TAVI 
to this particular patient is consideration of nonmedical issues, that is, the 
patient’s advanced age and lack of a social support system, and the expense 
of the procedure, and is undecided whether he should offer the procedure or, 
for the greater good, deny him its benefits.
Pro
John E. Mayer, Jr, MD
On the basis of the accompanying case presentation of a 75-year-old wid­
owed male nursing home resident with hemodynamically significant aortic 
stenosis, heart failure, angina, and a high surgical risk for a conventional 
aortic valve replacement, I support the proposition that the newly emerging 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) should be ‘‘rationed,’’ or at 
least monitored and controlled. The placement of aortic transcatheter valve 
(PARTNER) trial assessed both the clinical outcomes and resource use 
results from this multicenter prospective, randomized trial of transcatheter 
aortic valve insertion in both patients at “high risk” for open heart aortic 
valve replacement and in surgically “inoperable” patients. The results of 
the trial indicated that in surgically inoperable patients receiving a trans­
catheter aortic valve compared with “medically treated” patients (most 
with balloon valvotomy alone), the 1-year mortality for patients undergoing 
 

	 216	
The Ethics of Surgery
TAVI was 30.7% versus 50.4% for “medically treated” patients. The stroke 
rate was 5% in the patients undergoing TAVI versus 1.1% in the medical 
group, and the major vascular complication rates were 16.2% versus 1.1% 
for TAVI and medically treated patients, respectively.1 The average total 
cost for the TAVI procedure itself was $46,238, and the average total hospi­
talization cost for the admission at which TAVI was performed was $78,540. 
The 1-year average resource use after the TAVI admission was $29,352 ver­
sus $52,724 for those treated medically. The study showed that this therapy 
added on average 1.59 incremental life years at a cost of $50,212 per added 
life year. The increment in quality-adjusted life years was 1.29 years at a 
cost of $61,889 per added quality-adjusted life year.2 For this patient, my 
recommendation regarding the use of TAVI would rest on an assessment of 
his “frailty” and the presence of other comorbidities that would exert the 
dominant impact on his survival and quality of life. Being a widower and 
living in a nursing home alone do not represent sufficient comorbid condi­
tions to preclude treatment.
However, I  also conclude, on the basis of these data, that the diffu­
sion of this technology should be carefully monitored and controlled by the 
medical profession. Some may argue that “monitoring and control” is a dis­
tinction without a difference from “rationing,” but uncontrolled diffusion 
of new medical technology has been a major source of the current crisis in 
funding for medical care in the United States, with approximately 18% of 
the gross domestic product now devoted to health care.3 Given the growing 
elderly population in this country and the incidence of aortic valve sclerosis 
in this aging population, there is a significant likelihood that use of TAVI 
for all elderly patients with aortic valve disease could add significantly to the 
Medicare expenditures for cardiovascular disease.
I4 and others5 have argued that it is a responsibility of the medical pro­
fession to wisely allocate societal health care resources, but if TAVI results 
in improved 1-year survival, how could an ethical physician or surgeon, 
or an entire society, “deny” a given individual patient access to this tech­
nology. Consideration of this dilemma reveals some fundamental con­
flicts both within the value structures of the medical profession and within 
the value structures of American society, which I will attempt to briefly 
describe. I will then offer my own thoughts on how to address some of these 
dilemmas.
As a starting point, it is important to distinguish between efficacy and 
effectiveness. Assessment of the efficacy and safety of medical devices is the 
province of the US Food and Drug Administration, which is tasked with 
determining whether a new device safely accomplishes the stated purpose of 
the device. This efficacy assessment is typically based on randomized clinical 
trials, such as the PARTNER trial, in carefully defined clinical populations. 
Effectiveness has been described as the outcome when this same device is 

	
Rationing TAVR	
217
deployed in the general population by the medical profession. The Food and 
Drug Administration does not have (or want) the legal mandate to regulate 
the practice of medicine, and thus the assessment of the effectiveness of a 
device has traditionally been the responsibility of the medical profession, 
although health services researchers increasingly have inserted themselves 
into this domain. The assessments of effectiveness involve the medical profes­
sion’s obligations to society to self-regulate and to wisely allocate what is now 
becoming a scarce societal resource. I have argued that if the medical pro­
fession does not actively engage in this effectiveness assessment, then major 
resource allocation decisions will be made by those who do not take care of 
patients, and then the medical profession will have forfeited an important 
role and responsibility in American society.6 Krause, in Death of the Guilds,7 
has pointed out that professions are granted privileges and prerogatives by 
a society only so long as society believes that the profession is acting in the 
society’s interest and not in its own interest. In the context of other erosions 
of medicine’s prerogatives and privileges that have occurred in recent years, 
including managed care constraints on diagnostic testing, medication use, 
and procedures, I believe that failure to address the effectiveness question by 
the profession, even if it means that professional income will suffer, will be a 
major mistake that will affect the ability of medicine to continue to function 
as a profession.
The overriding issue for this debate, however, is reconciliation of the 
2 roles that physicians have: “healer of the sick” and “member of a profes­
sion.” These 2 roles have different historical roots and can potentially come 
into conflict, as in the case that served as the topic for this debate. Should 
a “healer of the sick” choose not to offer a potentially beneficial therapy 
to any patient? Should a member of a profession disregard the profession’s 
responsibilities to the society that it serves by failing to self-regulate or to 
wisely allocate societal resources? If physicians and surgeons indiscrimi­
nately apply a new and expensive technology to any patient who might ben­
efit, even if it will minimally prolong life or marginally reduce suffering, 
can the medical profession argue that there has been a wise use of society’s 
health care dollar? Is there a means by which both of these responsibilities 
of the physician can be fulfilled? I submit that there is, and I believe that the 
solution to this dilemma must rest on a rigorous, controlled collection and 
analysis of data on both the clinical and the resource use outcomes for this 
transcatheter valve therapy. I submit that outcomes data have the great­
est impact on physician practice, and these outcomes must include both 
clinical outcomes and resource use outcomes for the procedure itself and 
for at least several years after the procedure. I believe that this approach 
will, of necessity, require a controlled dissemination of this technology 
and linkage of clinical databases with administrative claims databases 
so that resource use over time can be assessed after device insertion. [. . .] 

	 218	
The Ethics of Surgery
The ASCERT (American College of Cardiology Foundation–The Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons Collaboration on the Comparative Effectiveness of 
Revascularization Strategies) study8 [. . .] attempts to compare coronary 
bypass surgery with percutaneous coronary interventions and has used the 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons’ Adult Cardiac Database and the American 
College of Cardiology interventional catheterization database with linkage 
of both databases to the Medicare claims database. This study has demon­
strated that such database linkages can be accomplished and that long-term 
outcomes, including resource use, can be assessed through linkage of these 
datasets. We cannot ignore the simple notion that value equals quality 
divided by cost, and society must ultimately believe that the deployment 
of its resources is providing real value to its members and not just to the 
profession that provides the services.
It is my expectation that the information from an ongoing study of TAVI 
will provide direction to cardiologists and surgeons involved in this therapy 
to identify subgroups of patients for whom this therapy will provide little 
benefit and could result in significant harm, particularly neurologic injury. 
In addition, it will be critical that the patients be provided this information 
so that each may make his or her own decision. It is this type of rigorously 
collected and analyzed information that will provide a pathway through the 
dilemma posed by the coexisting roles of healer of the sick and member of a 
profession that must wisely allocate societal resources. I anticipate that the 
patient characteristics that will indicate little benefit from TAVI will be in 
the realm of noncardiac comorbidities and “frailty.” There will always be 
differences of professional opinion in a given case, but the information on 
the outcomes and effectiveness of any therapy will enable physicians, sur­
geons, and patients to make the wisest choices both for the patient and for 
society to ensure that both patient and society recognize the value of the 
therapy.
It is for these reasons that I believe the diffusion of the transcatheter aor­
tic valve replacement technology should be controlled and monitored by the 
profession. I believe that such a process is distinctly different from “ration­
ing,” particularly because rationing implies that the process would be carried 
out by an entity that is not directly involved in the interaction between patient 
and physician. If physicians, surgeons, and patients can rationally assess rig­
orously collected and analyzed information, then I am confident that the pro­
fession can be true to its responsibilities to both patients and society, and we 
in the profession can make the right recommendations to our patients regard­
ing the application of this new technology. In so doing, we and our patients 
will be able to limit the application of this new technology to those who will 
best benefit by it and spare society, through its governmental representatives, 
from making ill-advised, blanket judgments about the wisdom of applying 
TAVI to individual patients or to an entire population.

	
Rationing TAVR	
219
Con
Grayson H. Wheatley III, MD
The emergence of new technologies for the treatment of aortic valve disor­
ders has brought with it a host of medical and ethical challenges regarding 
patient selection and choice of treatment. Because of the uncertainty around 
the safety of new transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) technolo­
gies, early device trials have focused on enrolling and treating patients at 
high surgical risk who are “nonoperative” candidates. Although outcomes 
for open surgical repair of critical aortic stenosis are improving, early results 
with TAVI are encouraging and have led to expanded patient selection crite­
ria.9 Although some clinicians believe that the use of TAVI should be rationed 
in these non-operative patients, there is a strong argument to make that these 
patients ethically deserve the same treatment options (when medically appro­
priate) as younger, less high-risk patients.
ETHICAL AND TREATMENT DECISIONS
Our hypothetical 75-year-old patient with critical aortic stenosis, multiple 
comorbidities, and a prior coronary artery revascularization with patent 
bypass grafts has been determined by the surgical team to be a non-operative 
candidate, and this patient’s situation is becoming increasingly common. 
Recent data have shown that there are a growing number of similar patients 
who are denied surgical therapy because of comorbidities. Iung and col­
leagues10 retrospectively showed that 33% of patients referred for aortic valve 
replacement were denied surgical repair because of their high surgical risk. 
The benefits of aortic valve treatment with relief of physiologic gradient 
across the stenotic aortic valve drastically alters the survival curve of patients 
compared with medical management.11 However, in patients with end-stage 
disease, TAVI has shown promise of extending life an average of 6 months.12 
The fundamental question becomes, should we? Or in other terms, should we 
ration health care to patients?
There are 3 different ethical frameworks for which to consider this 
case:  need principles, maximizing principles, and egalitarian principles.13 
The need principle is based on “rules of rescue,” in which the immediate and 
long-term medical needs of the patient are the highest priority and super­
sede all other considerations. This is standard operating practice for most 
physician–patient interactions in today’s healthcare environment. This is the 
perspective that all of our patients expect from us when making difficult and 
complex decisions. This traditional approach is intended to offer the best 
possible outcome and intervention for any patient in need. In this case, it 
would look simply at the patient and the feasibility of implanting a percu­
taneous aortic valve. If the patient were deemed a suitable candidate, he or 
 
 
 

	 220	
The Ethics of Surgery
she would be offered this intervention. Because the patient is a candidate for 
TAVI, it should be offered to the patient to improve his or her quality of life 
and to relieve suffering. A majority of clinicians would follow this principle of 
justice. The facts that the patient did not have a well-developed support struc­
ture to assist him or her after the procedure and that the patient’s life expec­
tancy is short are not important drivers of this ethical and moral framework. 
Essentially, rationing of care is not a consideration with the need principle, 
and the patient should be offered a TAVI procedure.
The second principle of justice in rationing health care is the maximiz­
ing principle. This principle seeks to achieve the best possible consequences, 
both for the patient and for society as a whole. This slightly broader perspec­
tive takes into consideration that this patient has limited support at home 
and after TAVI would most likely not return to being a productive member of 
society. The total economic burden of the TAVI procedure, hospitalization, 
and subsequent care facility is a sizable amount and would certainly have an 
overall impact on total health care costs. It is difficult for patients to actively 
engage in this broader perspective because it is difficult for them to fully 
comprehend the consequences of the therapy in relation to their own debili­
tated state. The intent here is to maximize well-being for the patient. A TAVI 
procedure in this patient would certainly improve his or her well-being, and 
therefore TAVI would meet the threshold for rationing in this patient’s case 
using the maximizing principle and should be offered to the patient.
Finally, the egalitarian principle of justice in health care considers in 
equalities in health care, and every effort should be made to reduce these 
inequalities. The total cost of the procedure and rehabilitation is sizeable 
primarily because of the costs of the percutaneous valve technology com­
pared with a standard aortic valve replacement. From this perspective, the 
total costs used in the last several months of this patient’s life might be better 
served going to a pediatric patient who has a long prosperous life ahead. As 
a result, the egalitarian principle would most likely support rationing care 
to this patient, and using this moral framework, the physician should make 
this informed decision without much input from the patient. This is also the 
hardest decision to make for the physician because the health care system as 
a whole is being considered and the patient is left out of this decision-making 
process. The physician standing at the patient’s bedside must look at society’s 
costs in light of the total costs for the patient relative to the expected outcome. 
Although this type of decision process may be best for the health care system 
in the long run to help decrease health care expenditures, it is a framework 
with which we as clinicians are not yet comfortable. With the passage of the 
US health care reform, tough choices are mandatory to help counteract the 
increasing health care costs, and rationing of health care will most likely be a 
new part of providing care.14 New technologies, such as TAVI, will certainly 
receive a great deal of pushback to ration.

	
Rationing TAVR	
221
In terms of the possibility of rationing TAVI procedures, the costs of this 
procedure need to be compared with other existing technologies and treat­
ments. Wu and colleagues15 have looked at the cost-effective ratio (CER) of 
standard aortic valve replacement and shown that for a 75-year-old patient 
the average CER is $16,500. This is compared with a CER of $50,000 for TAVI 
procedures.16 These costs take into consideration the quality of life, hospital 
costs, and need for extended care. Although this difference is substantial, a 
CER between $20,000 and $100,000 is acceptable to the US health care sys­
tem.12 As a result, TAVI procedures are justifiable from a cost analysis.
TAVI has already proven to be a successful and useful technology for 
high-risk surgical patients with critical aortic stenosis. The increased proce­
dural and device costs of TAVI compared with a surgical aortic valve pros­
thesis and replacement surgery put TAVI procedures at risk for future health 
care rationing as part of health care reform to minimize growing health care 
costs in the United States. The CER of TAVI procedures is in line with other 
existing technologies and therefore should not be singled out as an “expen­
sive” new technology. The principles of justice in health care rationing also 
support continued use of TAVI procedures in high-risk patients. Future new 
technologies must face continued evaluation and scrutiny, and physicians 
must be prepared to be involved in some degree of health care rationing in 
the future.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] Bedside rationing is a relatively new role for physicians, yet the foun­
dation of the healing relationship is the patient’s trust that physicians will 
be primarily concerned for the patient’s interests rather than their own or 
society’s interests. Nearly every current code of ethics [. . .] places the interests 
of the patient as physicians’ paramount responsibility. Bedside rationing—
withholding the offer of a particular therapy from one’s own patient despite a 
positive benefit–harm balance—is prima facie inconsistent with this respon­
sibility. Both discussants recognize the primary obligation of physicians to 
patients. Wheatley believes [. . .] expensive new technologies will likely have to 
be rationed in the future.
Mayer, however, believes rationing can be avoided if rigorous data pro­
vided by the profession’s monitoring of TAVI are used by physicians and 
patients for rational consideration, enabling the physician and patient together 
to limit TAVI to those who will benefit most. In the case presented, TAVI was 
medically indicated, but Dr. Sloan wondered about how to weigh age, social 
situation, and cost in deciding whether to offer the procedure to the patient. 
Both discussants agree that age and social status are not determinants of 
 

	 222	
The Ethics of Surgery
suitability for TAVI, so cost remains as the central nonmedical issue. Mayer 
couples “control” of TAVI with monitoring, but it is unclear what it means 
to control a technology when “it will be critical that the patients be provided 
this information so that each may make their own decisions.” In the presence 
of a positive benefit–harm balance, it is difficult to imagine patients refus­
ing an offer of a life-prolonging, quality of life–improving procedure on the 
basis of avoiding an expense that will not be borne by either them or their 
survivors.
Critical to this discussion is current law and future policy development. 
The legislative battles over revisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act that are currently underway in Washington will eventually produce 
a health care system that will ultimately determine the shape and nature 
of the patient–physician relationship. Some reforms will empower physi­
cians and patients to make clinical decisions, and others will relegate much 
decision-making to external agencies. Resolution of the rationing debate 
awaits the precise configuration of our developing health care system.
References
	1.	Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et al. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation for aor­
tic stenosis in patients who cannot undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1597–607.
	2.	Reynolds MR, Magnuson EA, Wang K, et  al. Lifetime cost effectiveness of 
trans-catheter aortic valve replacement compared with standard care among inoper­
able patients with severe aortic stenosis: results from the PARTNER Trial (Cohort B). 
Circulation. 2012;125:1102–9.
	3.	Martin A, Lassman D, Whittle L, Catlin A. National Health Expenditure Accounts 
Team. Recession contributes to slowest annual rate of increase in health spending in 
five decades. Health Aff (Milwood). 2011;30:11–22.
	4.	Mayer JE. Is there a role for the medical profession in solving the problems of the 
American health care system? Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:1655–61.
	5.	ABIM Foundation, American Board of Internal Medicine, American College of 
Physicians–American Society of Internal Medicine, European Federation of Internal 
Medicine. Medical professionalism in the new millennium: a physician charter. Ann 
Intern Med. 2002;136:243–6.
	6.	Mayer JE. The American health care system and the role of the medical profession in 
solving its problems. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:1432–4.
	7.	Krause EA. The United States: capitalism dominant, professions pressured. In: Death 
of the Guilds. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press; 1995:29–49.
	8.	Holmes DR, Mack MJ. Transcatheter valve therapy: a professional society overview 
from the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91:714–5.
	9.	Finks JF, Osborne NH, Birkmeyer JD. Trends in hospital volume and operative mor­
tality for high-risk surgery. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2128–37.
 

	
Rationing TAVR	
223
	10.	 Iung B, Cachier A, Baron G, et al. Decision-making in elderly patients with severe 
aortic stenosis: why are so many denied surgery? Eur Heart J. 2005;26:2714–20.
	11.	 Brown ML, Schaff HV, Sarano ME, et  al. Is the European System for Cardiac 
Operative Risk Evaluation model valid for estimating the operative risk of patients 
considered for percutaneous aortic valve replacement? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2008;136:566–71.
	12.	 Lefevre T, Kappetein AP, Wolner E, et al. One-year follow-up of the multi-centre 
European PARTNER transcatheter heart valve study. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:148–57.
	13.	 Cookson R, Dolan P. Principles of justice in health care rationing. J Med Ethics. 
2000;26:323–9.
	14.	 Groeneveld PW, Polsky D, Yang F, et al. The impact of new cardiovascular device 
technology on health care costs. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171:1289–91.
	15.	 Wu Y, Jin R, Gao G, Grunkemeier GL, Starr A. Cost-effectiveness of aortic 
valve replacement in the elderly: an introductory study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;133:608–13.
	16.	 Reynolds MR. Lifetime cost effectiveness of implantation compared with standard 
care in inoperable patients: results from the PARTNER Trial (Cohort B). Paper pre­
sented at the American College Cardiology ACC.11/i2 summit; April 2-5, 2011; New 
Orleans, LA.


SECTION 5
Organ Donation and 
Transplantation
Robert M. Sade
What you leave behind is not what is engraved in stone 
monuments, but what is woven into the lives of others.
—Pericles (495–429 BCE), according to Thucydides (460–395 BCE)
Ethical issues related to organ donation and transplantation abound. Most 
are related to the scarcity of organs available for transplantation—there are 
simply not enough organs to supply the needs of patients on the national 
transplant waiting lists. These problems originate in the inadequacy of our 
national organ-donation policy and create the most vexing difficulty of organ 
transplantation: allocation of this scarce resource.
After the first successful kidney transplantation in 1954, the 
growth of transplantation was severely hindered by the lack of effective 
immunosuppression regimens to prevent rejection of donor tissues. The 
field of transplantation began to grow rapidly after the introduction of the 
first highly effective immunosuppressive drug, cyclosporine, in the early 
1980s. The US Congress recognized the need for national policy on organ 
donation and transplantation and in 1984 addressed the issue by enacting 
the National Organ Transplantation Act. This law created the framework for 
organ-procurement organizations and established a national clearinghouse 
for organ allocation, the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. 
The network was initially contracted to the United Network for Organ 
Sharing. In response to the early development of an organ-brokerage firm, 
the National Organ Transplantation Act prohibited the exchange of any 
“valuable consideration” for organs intended for transplantation.1
 
 

	 226	
The Ethics of Surgery
As the field of transplantation expanded rapidly, a growing gap was 
recognized between the number of organs needed for transplantation 
and the number available from donors. Since the earliest days of organ 
transplantation, at least twenty-six laws and regulations at the state 
and federal levels have been passed, with the intent of facilitating 
organ donation, including, for example, the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act 
(1968, 1987, 2006), the Uniform Determination of Death Act (1980), the 
National Organ Transplantation Act (1984), the Federal Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act (1986), the Health Omnibus Programs Extension (1988), 
the Organ Donor Leave Act (1999), and the federal Hospital Conditions of 
Participation Regulations (1998, 2006). None of them has been effective in 
narrowing the gap.
In 2003 the Department of Health and Human Services funded a program 
intended to develop best practices for organ procurement organizations 
to improve rates of organ donation, the Organ Donation Breakthrough 
Collaborative. As shown in Figure S5.1, the collaborative was initially 
effective—rate of organ donation increased from 2003 to 2006 but then 
leveled off, so that by 2013 the rate was the same as it would have been if 
the temporary uptick in donation rates had not occurred. Meanwhile, the size 
of the waiting list continued to grow at a constant rate that was nearly three 
times faster than the rate of increase in donors, paralleled by an increasing 
rate of deaths related to the organ shortage (calculated as deaths on the 
waiting list plus candidates who became too sick to transplant removed from 
the waiting list). This figure extends the donation and transplantation data 
presented in ­chapter 20 (1988–2008 extended to 1993–2013).
Over the past twenty years, an increasing chorus of voices in the 
medical,2 economics,3 and ethics4 literatures have spoken out against 
the absolute prohibition of valuable considerations for organ donors, 
arguing that a reward of some kind for organ donors has the potential 
to wipe out waiting lists and the deaths associated with the shortage of 
organs. Economists at Auburn University, arguing in 1991 for the use of 
financial incentives for organ donation, prophetically wrote: “We have never 
encountered a single policy more at odds with public welfare than the 
current [altruism-only] organ procurement policy in the United States. . . . If 
the current policy is maintained the shortage will continue to grow worse, as 
will the needless suffering.”5
The shortage of organs is the central problem that generates the vast 
majority of ethical issues in transplantation, as well as organ donation—
the shortage has fed the ongoing debate that focuses on the question 
of fairness in the distribution of available organs. The responsibility 
for developing policies regarding organ allocation lies with the Organ 
Procurement and Transplantation Network/United Network for Organ 
Sharing, which considers such factors as severity of the patient’s medical 

	
Section 5	
227
condition and age, likelihood of benefit from receiving an organ, maximizing 
expected years of survival, maximizing relief from suffering, time on the 
waiting list, and likelihood of organ longevity based on immunological 
laboratory examinations, among others.6 Commentators representing 
different perspectives of ethical analysis arrive at different conclusions 
regarding how organs should be allocated; consequentialist, deontological, 
teleological, and many other perspectives have a voice in this debate. 
Policy is developed by the United Network for Organ Sharing in an open 
process that includes public commentary, as well as expert opinion, but 
in the end almost everyone dislikes something about the policies guiding 
the distribution of organs. Nearly all of those disagreements and ethical 
disputes would disappear if the supply of organs were sufficient to eliminate 
the waiting list.
1996
3.0
2.5
2.0
Waiting List
120,882
8,268
Deceased Donors
     11,102
Deaths and
Waiting List
Removals
1.5
1.0
2014
2012
2010
2008
2006
2004
Year
2002
2000
1998
Change Relative to 1995 Baseline
Waiting List Removals
Waiting List
Deceased Donors
FIGURE S5.1  Relative Change in Transplant Data. This graph depicts the change in 
deceased donors, all-organ waiting list, and deaths plus waiting-list removals (virtually 
all are patients who became too sick to transplant and died off the list) relative to 1995 
baseline. The sharp rise in deceased donors in 2003–2006 reflects the results of intensive 
efforts to increase donation by the Organ Donation Breakthrough Collaborative. (Source 
of data: Health Resources and Services Administration. Donation and Transplantation 
Community of Practice, http://organdonor.gov/dtcp/dtcp.html. Accessed May 8, 2014). 
The trend line shows that after the collaborative ended, donation plateaued, placing 
the 2013 donation rate where it would have been if the collaborative had not occurred. 
(Source of data: Health Resources and Services Administration. Data reports: National 
data, http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/latestData/step2.asp. Accessed May 8, 2014.)

	 228	
The Ethics of Surgery
Chapters
The dead-donor rule(DDR) lies at the core of organ-donation policy and is 
the focus of ­chapter 19.7 The basis of this rule is the widespread belief that 
an individual should not be killed to save the life of another, so vital organs 
cannot be removed before a person is already dead, since this act would 
kill that person. The DDR is the underlying rationale for the development of 
the Uniform Determination of Death Act, which renders loss of all functions 
of the brain and brain stem a legal determinant of death. It is also the 
reason for a required period of organ ischemia before organs can be 
removed from the patient who has suffered permanent loss of circulation. 
Although the DDR has been considered a fundamental aspect of organ 
donation, the first chapter in this section raises questions of its relation 
to the realities of death and its potentially adverse effects on the way we 
think about death.
Perhaps the most contentious of current ethical issues in regard to 
organ donation and transplantation is incentives to donate. Chapter 20 
features two of the leading proponents of their respective positions 
regarding the question of whether financial incentives should be used to 
increase organ donation.8 In support of financial incentives, the argument 
is made that individuals in a liberal democracy, which characterizes most 
industrialized countries, should not be prohibited from choosing among 
three options: to donate altruistically (no additional benefit), to donate for a 
financial reward in a regulated market for organs, or not to donate at all. The 
opposing argument focuses on distributive justice as the basis for public 
policy, thus prohibiting financial incentives on the grounds of exploitation of 
the poor; instead, to increase organ donation, public health and preventive 
health measures aimed at reducing the development of kidney failure should 
be intensified.
A highly publicized case of a prisoner on death row who wanted to 
be an organ donor serves as the basis for ­chapter 21, a debate on using 
legally executed prisoners as a source of organs.9 The main argument 
in support of allowing death-row prisoners to donate organs is made on 
practical and ethical grounds: Physicians’ primary concern is helping 
patients, and any medically suitable source of organs should be pursued. 
The argument against permitting such donations is the potential damage 
to organs related to the logistics of causing death by legal execution, 
making them less suitable for transplantation, as well as the position of 
the potential donor as a prisoner, which entails unavoidable coercion. Using 
organs from executed prisoners who volunteer as donors would not be a 
high-yield policy, but it raises questions central to physician responsibilities 
and medical ethics.
 

	
Section 5	
229
References
	1.	 Joralemon D. Shifting ethics: debating the incentive question in organ trans­
plantation. J Med Ethics. 2001;27:30–5.
	2.	 Working Group on Incentives for Living Donation, Matas AJ, Satel S, et al. 
Incentives for organ donation: proposed standards for an internationally 
acceptable system. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(2):306–12.
	3.	 Becker GJ, Elias JJ. Cash for kidneys: The case for a market for organs. Wall 
Street Journal, January 18, 2014.
	4.	 Hippen BE. Introduction: symposium on a regulated market in transplantable 
organs. J Med Philos. 2009;34(6):545–51.
	5.	 Blair RD, Kaserman DL; The economics and ethics of alternative cadaveric 
organ procurement policies. Yale J. Regul. 1991;8:403–52.
	6.	 Health Research Support Agency. Policy 3.5. Allocation of kidneys. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health & Human Services, 2013. http://
optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/PoliciesandBylaws2/policies/pdfs/policy_7.pdf. 
Accessed March 31, 2014.
	7.	 Sade RM, Miller F. Patients declared dead for organ donation are not 
really dead—the dead donor rule should be abandoned. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2014;97(4):1131–4.
	8.	 Hippen B, Ross LF, Sade RM. Saving lives is more important than abstract 
moral concerns: financial incentives should be use to increase organ dona­
tion. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88:1053–61.
	9.	 Lin SS, Rich L, Pal JD, Sade RM. Prisoners on death row should be accepted 
as organ donors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1773–9.
 
 


231
19
Heart Donation Without the Dead-Donor Rule
Franklin G. Miller and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
A discussion of the Dead Donor Rule (DDR) was presented at the 49th Annual 
Meeting of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons in 2013. Prior to Dr. Franklin 
Miller’s paper, the following case was presented.
THE CASE OF THE REJECTED HEART DONOR
Terry Sklavin is 49 years old and was a successful investment banker before 
he sustained a severe head injury in an automobile accident. A week after 
the accident, the patient is ventilator-dependent in the intensive care unit. 
Dr.  P.V. Staat, the consulting neurologist, determines that only minimal 
brainstem function is present, and estimates that Mr. Sklavin’s chance of 
recovery is negligible. The patient’s wife has produced her husband’s living 
will and durable power of attorney for health care; she is his health care agent. 
Both documents specify that if he were ever in an incapacitated condition 
from which he is unlikely to recover substantially, he does not want to be kept 
alive but wants to donate any organs that are medically suitable for trans­
plantation. His hand-written instruction emphasizes that his heart especially 
should be used if at all possible.
The patient and his wife have had several conversations about end-of-life 
preferences, and she says that he felt very strongly about his clearly docu­
mented wishes. Dr. Staat informs her that organ donation might be feasible 
 * Sade RM, Miller F. Patients declared dead for organ donation are not really dead—the 
dead-donor rule should be abandoned. 2014;97(4):1131–2. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, 
republished here with permission.
 
 
 
 

	 232	
The Ethics of Surgery
under the hospital’s donation after cardiac death protocol, but even if DCD 
were successful, it’s highly unlikely that the heart could be used. Mrs. Sklavin 
says that her husband is as good as dead, will die soon, and can’t understand 
why all of his medically suitable organs won’t be used, particularly why his 
heart will most likely be buried with him. She wants his heart and other organs 
to be recovered while they’re still in good condition for transplantation.
Dr. Staat explains that the dead donor rule does not permit recovery of 
organs until the patient has been declared dead after withdrawal of life sup­
port. He’s aware of recent challenges to the current concepts of death and 
organ donation, and wonders whether it’s time to replace the dead donor rule 
with one that permits donation by persons who are not dead but are facing 
inevitable imminent death.
COMMENTARY
A person who has irreversibly lost function of the entire brain, including the 
brain stem, is dead. The concept of brain death seems simple enough, but 
there is a great deal of confusion about it. For example, two out of three 
people think that someone who is brain dead is not legally dead, and more 
than half think that a patient in coma is brain dead.1 Both beliefs are wrong. 
Because of such misunderstandings, controversy has been ongoing for many 
years about the relation between declaration of death and organ donation.
As the field of organ transplantation grew, demand mounted for increas­
ing numbers of organs, especially from the recently deceased, producing a 
paradox: “the need for both a living body and a dead donor.”2 To resolve this 
paradox, the Uniform Determination of Death Act (UDDA) was promul­
gated in 1981 and was subsequently adopted by all the states:
An individual who has sustained either (1) irreversible cessation of cir­
culatory and respiratory functions, or (2)  irreversible cessation of all 
functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem, is dead. A deter­
mination of death must be made in accordance with accepted medical 
standards.
Although death is unitary, the law allows its determination in two differ­
ent ways. Legally, an individual who is brain dead and is warm and pink with 
intact circulation and ventilation is just as dead as a cadaver that has turned 
cold and stiff after permanent circulatory arrest.
The “Dead Donor Rule” (DDR) lies at the heart of current organ procure­
ment policy.3 It is not a legal statute; rather, it reflects the widely held belief 
that it is wrong to kill one person to save the life of another. On those grounds, 
an organ donor must already be dead before vital organs are removed. The 
DDR is therefore an ethical norm: vital organs may be removed only after 
 

	
Abandoning the Dead-Donor Rule	
233
the organ donor is dead. The UDDA assures patients, families, physicians, 
and other health professionals that a patient who is brain dead is in fact dead, 
so the combination with the DDR makes removal of organs for life-saving 
transplantation legally and ethically acceptable.
Brain death under the UDDA undoubtedly increased the supply of 
organs for transplantation, but the demand has grown much faster than the 
supply. Because of the growing waiting list and annual deaths, there has been 
increasing emphasis on donation after cardiac death (DCD) over the last 
20 years. A protocol for DCD allows organ donation by patients who are 
near death and are ventilator-dependent but will not progress to brain death.4 
After a valid decision is made to discontinue life support, the option of organ 
donation may be offered. If the patient expressed a wish to be a donor or if the 
family agrees to donation, DCD may be carried out. The patient is brought 
to the operating room, the ventilator is removed so ventilation stops, circula­
tion stops within 60 minutes, and when there has been no circulation for 2–5 
minutes, the patient is pronounced dead and organs are rapidly removed. 
Kidneys and liver can often be used for transplantation, but because of the 
ischemic time, the heart is seldom transplanted. If circulation does not stop 
within 60 minutes, the organs are deemed to be too damaged for transplant 
and the patient dies without donating organs.
A problem that arises from the DDR is that it may frustrate the express 
wishes of an individual to be an organ donor. An example is Terry Sklavin, the 
patient in our scenario. He wants to donate his heart as well as other organs, 
but he cannot because of the DDR. He is near death and will certainly be 
dead very soon. The DCD protocol requires up to 60 minutes of diminishing 
circulation, several minutes of no circulation, and the additional time it takes 
to open the body cavities, administer tissue preservation fluids, and remove 
the organs. This extended period of ischemia means that his heart will almost 
certainly not be used for transplant, although his kidneys and liver probably 
will be used, as they are less sensitive to ischemic damage than the heart. In 
cases in which the time requirements are not met, all organs are lost.
Although the DDR is well-established in transplantation policy and prac­
tice, it has been challenged in recent years as an unnecessary fiction that results 
in lost lives.5,6 According to this position, without the DDR, Mr. Sklavin’s 
heart, as well as other organs could have been donated without violating basic 
ethical and legal principles, as Dr. Miller explains in the accompanying paper.
Heart Donation Without the Dead Donor Rule
Franklin G. Miller, PhD
Donation of vital organs is currently governed by the “dead donor rule” 
(DDR). Donors must be determined to be dead according to established 
 

	 234	
The Ethics of Surgery
legal criteria and medical standards prior to procurement of vital organs 
for transplantation. Most donors are determined to be dead on neurologi­
cal criteria: the irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain. In 
response to a shortage of “brain dead” donors, vital organs increasingly have 
been procured from donors declared dead according to circulatory criteria 
following withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment (LST). Protocols for dona­
tion after circulatory death (DCD) typically involve patients on mechanical 
ventilation with severe neurological damage short of “brain death,” as in the 
case of Mr. Sklavin. After withdrawal of life support and cessation of circu­
lation, a waiting period of usually 2-5 minutes is required before organs are 
retrieved. Hearts rarely have been procured under DCD protocols, although 
hearts of infants have been transplanted successfully in some controversial 
cases.7
Rethinking the ethics of vital organ donation is imperative because there 
are compelling reasons for calling into question compliance of current prac­
tices of transplantation with the DDR. The first criterion for determining 
death under the Uniform Determination of Death Act—the operative law in 
most states in the U.S.—is “irreversible cessation of circulatory and respira­
tory functions.” Can we be confident that these functions are irreversible a 
very short interval after cessation of heart beat? The fact that circulation has 
ceased 2–5 minutes (or even less in some cases) does not mean that the cessa­
tion of circulation is irreversible. To satisfy the criterion of “irreversibility” in 
its ordinary meaning, it must be impossible to restore circulation with avail­
able means of medical intervention. Although decisions have been made not 
to undertake cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) following withdrawal of 
LST in DCD cases, the use of CPR might be successful in restoring circula­
tion if it were initiated. Hence, donors under DCD protocols are not known 
to be dead at the time of organ procurement. Some commentators have con­
tended that the permanent cessation of circulation is sufficient to satisfy the 
DDR. However, “permanent” does not mean the same as “irreversible.” If 
cessation of circulation is irreversible, then it also is permanent; but the con­
verse is not necessarily true.8
There are even more compelling reasons to argue that the DDR is rou­
tinely being violated in the case of “brain dead” donors. With mechanical 
ventilation, “brain dead” individuals maintain a wide array of biological 
functions, including circulation, respiration, wound healing, infection fight­
ing, temperature regulation, secretion of neurohormones, and even gesta­
tion of a fetus for up to three months. They are not dead according to the 
established biological conception of death. While detailed examination of 
the status of “brain dead” donors lies outside the scope of this essay, it is 
mentioned here to indicate that compliance with the DDR is systemically 
problematic—the problem is not limited to the practice of transplantation 
under DCD protocols.

	
Abandoning the Dead-Donor Rule	
235
What is the upshot if vital organ donors under DCD protocols (and 
“brain dead donors) are not really dead, or not known to be dead, at the 
time of organ procurement? Strict compliance with the DDR would dictate 
that we stop transplanting vital organs from these donors. However, this 
would lead to many desperately ill patients failing to receive life-saving, or 
life-enhancing, organ transplantations—a drastic outcome that few people 
would endorse. To be sure, it is possible to sustain the status quo by mud­
dling through, relying on the fiction, which is not officially acknowledged, 
that vital organ donors are dead at the time of organ procurement. Instead of 
relying on a legal and moral fiction, however, we can seek an ethically sound 
justification for vital organ transplantation from donors who are not known 
to be dead. Space limitations permit only a sketch of the argument, which has 
been developed in detail elsewhere.9
The key to justifying vital organ donation without the DDR is to 
acknowledge the causal force of withdrawing LST, particularly mechanical 
ventilation. The conventional view is that withdrawing mechanical ventila­
tion, or other means of life support, merely allows the patient to die, but does 
not cause the patient’s death. Rather, the patient’s underlying medical condi­
tion causes death. This view, however, is not credible and fails to withstand 
critical scrutiny.
Consider the following case. Debbie, aged 50 years, was thrown from 
her horse in a horse-show event. She sustained a high level spinal cord injury. 
The accident left her quadriplegic and ventilator-dependent. Two years later, 
following rehabilitation and return home, she decided that her life was no 
longer worth living. She arranged to be admitted to the intensive care unit 
of an academic medical center for the purpose of withdrawing her ventila­
tor. Thirty minutes after being sedated and extubated, Debbie died.10 What 
caused Debbie’s death? Was it the spinal cord injury? Despite her spinal cord 
injury, Debbie likely could have lived for many years with continued mechan­
ical ventilation and personal care. Withdrawing the ventilator set in motion 
the causal chain leading to her death, given her inability to breathe spontane­
ously due to the spinal cord injury. In other words, the treatment withdrawal 
was the proximate cause of Debbie’s death. Based on our common-sense 
understanding of causation, withdrawing mechanical ventilation causes 
death in patients unable to breathe spontaneously.
The same causal account pertains to patients on mechanical ventila­
tion with a much more grim prognosis than that of Debbie, as in the case of 
Mr. Sklavin. According to his advance directive and conversations with 
his wife, it is clear that Mr. Sklavin would not want to live with no hope of 
recovery from profound neurological injury and would want to donate his 
heart, along with his other vital organs. Successful heart donation is con­
sidered highly unlikely for him under a DCD protocol. Would there be any­
thing wrong from an ethical perspective in procuring Mr. Sklavin’s heart and 

	 236	
The Ethics of Surgery
other vital organs prior to stopping mechanical ventilation? Through Mrs. 
Sklavin’s surrogate decision-making, in light of Mr. Sklavin’s prior expressed 
preferences, valid decisions have been made to stop life support and donate 
organs. Moreover, Mr. Sklavin would be dead following withdrawal of LST 
regardless of whether his organs are procured. Accordingly, no harm or 
wrong would be done to Mr. Sklavin by procuring his heart and other organs 
under anesthesia prior to withdrawing the ventilator. In this set of circum­
stances, absence of harm to the donor and valid consent to donation justify 
organ procurement prior to stopping life support. This not only would make 
possible a life-saving heart transplantation that otherwise would not occur; it 
also would provide greater assurance of viability for his other organs, which 
would be continuously perfused until they were retrieved.
Once we see that withdrawing LST, in service of patient self-determination 
and relief of suffering, causes the death of patients, there is no sound ethi­
cal reason for concern about procuring vital organs prior to treatment with­
drawal. The patient is on a planned trajectory, with death as the imminent 
outcome. Procuring vital organs with valid consent before treatment with­
drawal does not change this trajectory; nor does it wrong the patient, who 
soon will be dead whether or not the organs are procured.
It might be objected that withdrawing mechanical ventilation does not 
necessarily cause death. While this is true, the possibility of surviving with­
drawal of life support does not reflect the medical conditions of current candi­
dates for DCD. In two recent prospective multi-centered studies of potential 
DCD donors in the Netherlands and the U.K., including 402 cases, all the 
patients died after treatment withdrawal.11,12 The median times to death were 
20-36 minutes, and the longest times to death were less than four days. Viable 
organs could not be retrieved in 17% of the potential donors in one of the 
studies, and 38% in the other. However, under the approach recommended 
here, vital organs could have been donated from all of these potential donors 
with procurement prior to withdrawing LST, and heart donation likely would 
have been possible in many of the cases.
The scope and limits of vital organ donation from still-living patients 
should be carefully defined. Limiting this practice to patients with valid deci­
sions to stop LST and to donate organs would assure that the interests of 
patients are not being sacrificed in order to save the lives of others.
Unbiased examination of the practice of withdrawing LST, which causes 
the death of patients, underwrites a rethinking of the ethics of vital organ 
donation. From an ethical perspective, we do not need to uphold the DDR. 
Abandoning the DDR and procuring organs prior to withdrawing LST will 
potentially lead to many more lives saved from transplantation and greater 
respect for the donation preferences of individuals like Mr. Sklavin. Realizing 
this potential, however, will require policy changes predicated on honestly 
facing up to the realities of withdrawing LST and vital organ donation.

	
Abandoning the Dead-Donor Rule	
237
References
	 1.	 Siminoff LA, Burant C, Youngner SJ. Death and organ procurement: public beliefs 
and attitudes. Kennedy Inst Ethics J. 2004;14(3):217–34.
	 2.	 Greenberg G. As good as dead. The New Yorker, August 13, 2001:36.
	 3.	 Iltis AS, Cherry MJ. Death revisited: rethinking death and the dead donor rule. 
J Med Philos. 2010;35:223–41.
	 4.	 Bernat JL, D’Alessandro AM, Port FK, et al. Report of a national conference on 
donation after cardiac death. Am J Transplant. 2006;6:281–91.
	 5.	 Truog RD, Robinson WM. Role of brain death and the dead donor rule in the ethics 
of organ donation. Critical Care Med. 2003;31:2391–6.
	 6.	 Miller FG, Truog RD, Rethinking the ethics of vital organ donations. Hastings 
Center Rep. 2008;38(6):38–46.
	 7.	 Sade RM. Consequences of the dead donor rule. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;97(4):1131–2.
	 8.	 Marquis D. Are DCD donors dead? Hastings Center Rep. 2010;40(3):24–31.
	 9.	 Miller FG, Truog RD. Death, Dying, and Organ Transplantation:  Reconstructing 
Medical Ethics at the End of Life. New York: Oxford University Press; 2012.
	10.	 Miller FG. Heart donation without the dead donor rule. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2014;97:1133–4.
	11.	 Wind J, Snoeijs MGJ, Brugman CA, et al. Prediction of time of death after with­
drawal of life-sustaining treatment in potential donors after cardiac death. Crit Care 
Med. 2012;40:766–9.
	12.	 Suntharalingam C, Sharples L, Dudley C, et al. Time to cardiac death after with­
drawal of life-sustaining treatment in potential organ donors. Am J Transplant 
2009;9:2157–65.
 

238
20
Saving Lives Is More Important 
Than Abstract Moral Concerns
FINANCIAL INCENTIVES SHOULD BE USED TO 
INCREASE ORGAN DONATION
Benjamin Hippen, Lainie Friedman Ross, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Ever since organ donation became clinically feasible, there have not been 
enough organs to go around. Figure 20.1 shows the rate of change from a base 
value in 1995 through 2008, of three variables: (1) the number of deceased 
donors, (2) the number of patients with end-stage organ failure who are wait­
ing for an organ, and (3) the number of waiting list patients who either die 
before an organ becomes available (i.e., death on the waiting list or after 
removal from the waiting list as “too sick to transplant”).1 The number of 
potential recipients on transplant waiting lists has more than doubled, and 
now stands at over 100,000, whereas the number of deceased donors has 
increased by only half. Meanwhile, the numbers of deaths related to the 
organ shortage, which is now greater than 9,000 a year, has grown in parallel 
with the waiting list. Thus, the gap between supply and demand has grown 
every year for the past 15 years. [. . .]
How can we increase the number of donors? When a difficult or danger­
ous job has to be done, such as working on high-rise construction projects, we 
give workers an added incentive to take these jobs by offering them more ben­
efits, such as salary supplements. Perhaps offering a financial incentive for 
organ donation would increase the number of willing donors. But if offering 
* Hippen B, Ross LF, Sade RM. Saving lives is more important than abstract moral 
concerns:  financial incentives should be used to increase organ donation. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2009;88:1053–61. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
239
people financial incentives could increase the supply of organs, should we do 
it? Would it be morally appropriate? [. . .]
The debate is rendered more concrete by focusing on the case of a United 
States senator who has a decision to make.
THE CASE OF THE CONSCIENTIOUS SENATOR
Senator Alexis Murray is a member of the Senate’s Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions, which is holding a hearing on a bill that 
will permit payment of up to $10,000 plus in reimbursement for expenses to 
living kidney, liver, or lung donors. Senator Murray listened to testimony 
by a few individuals and by representatives of organizations that either sup­
port or oppose the bill. He is particularly struck by the story told by George 
Cranford, a computer repair technician.
Mr Cranford’s 25-year-old daughter, Karen, has diabetic nephropathy 
and has suffered from end-stage renal disease for 5 years. On renal dialy­
sis, she has had frequent bloodstream infections, several of which have 
been nearly fatal. She is currently hospitalized, recover-ing from her latest 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. The recurrence rate of 
such infections is high, and the mortality rate is between 50% and 75%. Karen 
is an only child; her parents and other relatives are unsuitable to donate a 
2.5
Change relative to 1995 baseline
2
Waiting List
101,043
9,048
7,984
Deceased Donors
Deaths and
Waiting List Removals
1.5
1
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
FIGURE 20.1  Relative change (from 1988 baseline data) in the number of patients on organ waiting 
lists, deaths on the waiting list, and number of donors each year, 1988–2008. Graph derived from 
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network data (Removal reasons by year; Removed from 
the Waiting List: January, 1995–March 31, 2009. OPTN: Organ Procurement and Transplantation 
Network. http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/latestData/rptData.asp. Accessed June 16, 2009)
 

	 240	
The Ethics of Surgery
kidney. She is waiting for an organ from a deceased donor, but her place on 
the waiting list makes it likely that she will be among the 9,000 patients who 
die each year because of the shortage of organs for transplantation.
Mr Cranford has several friends and acquaintances who have said they 
have considered donating a kidney for Karen, but have decided not to do so 
because of concerns for lost income from time away from work, the possibil­
ity of losing their jobs, possible health consequences from having only one 
kidney, and the stress, pain, and physical risks of the donor operation. He 
expresses the belief that these concerns could be outweighed by the offer of 
an award of some kind, such as payment for health insurance, an income tax 
credit, or cash payment of a few thousand dollars. If some of his friends and 
perhaps many others around the country could be persuaded by such incen­
tives to donate a vital organ, thousands of lives could be saved each year.
Senator Murray is impressed by the story, but is concerned about poten­
tial negative consequences of permitting a market in human organs. After the 
hearing, he seeks the advice of two thoughtful physician-ethicists, Benjamin 
Hippen, MD, and Lainie Friedman Ross, MD, PhD.
Pro
Benjamin Hippen, MD
The number of people with kidney failure in the United States is increasing. 
By 2010 it is expected to be 591,000, with more than 80,000 patients waiting 
for a kidney transplant.2 Incremental improvements in immunosuppression 
have rendered kidney transplantation a superior therapeutic modality for 
more and more patients with kidney failure. Unfortunately, despite our best 
efforts, the supply of transplantable kidneys has not and will not keep up with 
the growing demand.
The current state of affairs is responsible for several unintended, but 
foreseeable, consequences. Longer waiting times for transplant candidates 
result in patients who are sicker at the time of transplantation. This factor, 
combined with an increased reliance on extended criteria donors (i.e., mar­
ginal donors), results in inferior graft survival. Longer waiting times also 
serve to increase emotional pressure on any available living donor. Longer 
waiting times and few available options have contributed to an upsurge in 
international organ trafficking. [. . .]
Various solutions to this problem have either proven to be inadequate or 
are unlikely to succeed. [. . .] Despite the aggressive efforts of the Organ Donor 
Collaborative to increase the number of available organs, the total number of 
procured organs during the last 10 years has been flat relative to the growing 
demand and a sizeable fraction of “new” organs, which are from extended 
criteria donors. These organs afford shorter graft survival, increasing the 
 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
241
likelihood that recipients of these kidneys will return to dialysis. A policy of 
involuntary organ conscription is morally problematic, and countries that 
have such policies ensconced in law have not been able to successfully pro­
cure more organs than countries that rely on consent for donation.3
The costs of this public policy failure is high, measurable in the unneces­
sary loss of human life, the vast expenditure of public treasure on a subopti­
mal therapy (dialysis), and the spread of desperation among waiting recipients 
and their families. This state of affairs supports arguments in favor of pilot 
trials of incentives to increase organ procurement from living donors.
The central argument in favor of incentives is patient autonomy. Free 
societies typically do not interfere with competent adults making choices that 
affect their lives and do not significantly harm themselves or others. Free 
societies rely on this principle for ethically defensible uncompensated living 
donation and (rightly) look askance at those who would abridge this liberty. 
Opponents of a regulated market in organs encourage us to view this pro­
posal through the lens of the manifest harms to vendors and recipients who 
participate in underground organ trafficking, without lingering on the fact 
that organ trafficking in developing countries would not be economically 
sustainable, except for the shortage of available organs in developed coun­
tries. Because organ trafficking continues unfettered by existing laws prohib­
iting the practice, those who are authentically committed to reducing organ 
trafficking can find the most straightforward solution in reducing the incen­
tive for recipients in wealthy, developed countries to economically support 
trafficking. Our public policy failure merely ensures the continued health of 
international organ trafficking abroad.
Regulated organ markets also may be safer than the current system of 
living donation. It is true, but trivially so, that organ donors become, in some 
sense, a patient. The obligations that physicians have to their patients would 
not change because some donors are compensated and others are not. The 
existing literature on donor outcomes, however incomplete, nonetheless, sup­
ports the premise that donating a kidney is safe for the long term.4 By vastly 
expanding the number of potential living donors, one can cherry-pick to iden­
tify people who everyone agrees would be at the lowest risk for long-term 
harm from donation. Incentives would also helpfully eliminate the psycho­
logical pressures brought to bear on living donors, borne of their recipient’s 
desperate plight. Far from suppressing altruism, the authentic altruism of 
those who still choose to donate (uncompensated) would thereby be clarified 
and preserved.
In itself, low socioeconomic status is an independent risk factor for the 
development of kidney disease over time, a fact which constitutes sufficient 
reason to exclude the poorest among us from participation in organ vend­
ing (or for that matter, in living organ donation). Exclusion of the very poor 
is justified not because poor donors and vendors are somehow incapable of 

	 242	
The Ethics of Surgery
autonomous judgment. [. . .] Rather, exclusion is justified because the purpose 
of a regulated market in organs is to increase the number of available organs 
without increasing harm to others. The “right to sell” does not impose an 
“obligation to buy,” and the interests of all involved entail an exchange that 
benefits recipients without harming sellers.
Any system of incentives requires regulation and oversight, and it is a 
caricature to suppose that there is a contradiction between free exchange and 
the strictures of law. Law outlines the conceptual space for articulating obli­
gations to donors and vendors, and the law explains the means whereby the 
legitimacy and enforcement of these obligations are possible. Among the nec­
essary protections to be included would be the assurances of safety for both 
donors and recipients; transparency in regard to the risk of a living kidney 
donation for both the compensated and uncompensated donors; institutional 
integrity to protect donors, recipients, healthcare providers, and institutions 
who choose to participate or abstain from compensation arrangements; and 
the rule of law, to define how the arrangements for exchange could take place 
for mutual benefit.5
These protections morally distinguish a regulated system of incentives for 
organ procurement from the significant harms generated by organ traffick­
ing, and they would provide a useful guide to the construction of pilot trials 
for incentives in this country, as well as a means of assessing the conditions in 
other countries. Along these lines, the United States has something to learn 
from Iran, which is the only country in the world with a legal pseudo-market 
in organs from living donors, and the 22-year legacy of that institution pro­
vides useful lessons and cautionary tales.6 No evidence is perfect, but the 
peer-reviewed evidence we have from several sources supports the following 
facts: (1) for the last decade, Iran has not had a waiting list for transplantable 
kidneys; (2) the long-term outcomes of recipients of purchased organs is not 
significantly different from the outcomes of recipients of donated kidneys (a 
useful surrogate marker for the health of organ vendors); (3) the existence 
of a flourishing market has not resulted in attrition of the number of kid­
neys donated by biological relatives; and (4) uncompensated organ donation 
from the deceased has increased 10-fold since 2000, when laws recogniz­
ing brain-death as death were approved by the Iranian Parliament. On the 
other hand, the following is also true: (1) organ vendors are disproportion­
ately impoverished and poorly educated; (2) the data on long-term outcomes 
for organ vendors is conflicting and mixed, but at any rate it is substantially 
incomplete. It does not follow that a system of incentives inexorably leads to 
bad outcomes for vendors. What does follow is that a defensible system of 
incentives must offer plausible assurances that the long-term consequences 
for organ vendors are at least as safe as for organ donors.
A broader view of what might constitute “compensation” will be 
instrumentally useful in beginning to provide some of these assurances. 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
243
Compensations need not be limited only to cash payment. Providing a non­
fungible, lifelong, comprehensive healthcare benefit for donors would inter­
sect with the desire of the transplant community for a long-term, prospective 
study of outcomes after donation. Compensation might take the form of 
a deposit in a donor’s health savings account, retirement account, favorite 
charity, or any number of possible permutations. The specific nature of the 
incentive is less important than the following: (1) a successfully functioning 
incentive by making more organs available, and (2) an incentive that would 
not give rise to further harms.7
The point is that our current system brings harm to recipients who are 
dying by the thousands every year on a waiting list, harm to donors who 
(correctly) understand the dire consequences of their choice not to donate 
for their recipient, and harm to legions of victims of organ trafficking who 
silently shoulder the true costs of our ongoing public policy failure. Incentives 
can be structured in a way to decisively answer moral objections. Whether 
the transplant community and our political leaders see fit to understand this 
point in practice, or whether the needless suffering and economic boondoggle 
of the status quo will simply continue, remains an open question.
Con
Lainie Friedman Ross, MD, PhD
We are posed with the hypothetical case of a senator who is considering a 
bill that will permit payment for living donors. [. . .] Karen’s story is sad, but 
so is the story of every individual in end-stage renal disease on dialysis. [. . .] 
Although the National Organ Transplant Act made it illegal to buy or sell 
organs in the United States in 1984, and the World Health Organization rec­
ommended a similar ban in 1991, support for a kidney market has blossomed 
in the past decade.8 In this article, I argue that the market is not an ethi­
cal solution to the organ shortage. I argue this position using the bioethical 
framework developed by Beauchamp and Childress.9 [. . .]
THE FOUR PRINCIPLES
[. . .] Beauchamp and Childress explicate four fundamental principles of bio­
ethics: (1) autonomy, (2) beneficence, (3) nonmaleficence, and (4) justice. The 
principle of autonomy (or more accurately, the principle of respect for auton­
omy) refers to the right of self-determination. In medical ethics, we say that 
the competent patient (an individual who has decision-making capacity) has 
the right to accept or refuse medical care, even lifesaving medical care. The 
principle of beneficence addresses the obligation of physicians to act in their 
patient’s best interest, whereas the principle of nonmaleficence states that 
 
 
 

	 244	
The Ethics of Surgery
physicians should avoid, when possible, harming a patient. Neither of these 
principles is absolute in that we often cause some harm with our treatments, 
with chemotherapy for cancer being a case in point. Rather, these principles 
are understood to mean that the benefits should outweigh the risks of harm.
The fourth principle, the principle of justice, is the most complicated 
one, because it refers to obligations beyond the doctor–patient relationship. 
Jonsen and colleagues10 discuss the importance of justice in policy deci­
sions, but that it should not be used to make distribution decisions at the 
bedside. There are two main competing conceptions of justice in medical 
ethics: (1) utilitarian justice and (2) deontological or principle-based justice. 
Utilitarian justice focuses on utility or efficiency. A distribution scheme of 
organs is just if it maximizes the number of lives or the number of life-years 
gained. That is, the focus is on maximizing the well-being of the greatest 
number. In contrast, egalitarian justice focuses on equity and a fair distribu­
tion of resources, even at the expense of efficiency. In general, in the realm 
of organ transplantation, the practice has been to use policies and practices 
that balance equity and efficiency.11 For example, the current deceased donor 
allocation system focuses on ABO blood type matching (efficiency) and on 
waiting time (equity). [. . .]
First, let us look at the principle of autonomy. The principle of autonomy 
is not absolute, as with all guiding bioethics principles. There are moral con­
straints on autonomy. As Oliver Wendell Holmes remarked, “The right to 
swing my fist ends where the other man’s nose begins.”12 That is, one moral 
constraint on autonomy is harm to others. But the harm to the organ vendor 
is to himself, not to others, except insofar as one believes that we as a society 
are worse off if we allow vulnerable individuals to sell their body parts on the 
grounds of commodification.13 The argument from commodification holds 
that market valuation has a degrading effect on certain goods and practices 
if they are bought and sold, even if fair bargaining positions exist (a most 
unlikely position).
[. . .] Respect for autonomy [. . .] permits one to challenge an individual’s 
decision when it is contrary to the individual’s best interest. There are many 
reasons why an individual may make a decision that is contrary to their inter­
ests: misinformation, miscalculation, coercion, or even undue influence (an 
offer that seems too good to be true). Thus, to the extent that one believes that 
individuals who are willing to sell their kidneys are not acting voluntarily, it 
would be morally imperative to prohibit them from doing so. [. . .]
What is interesting about the autonomy debate, however, is that all of the 
market supporters do not discuss a free market. [. . .] [T]‌he proponents of an 
organ market reject a free market (on grounds of its potential to be exploit­
ative) and focus instead on a regulated market [. . .].14 It is not clear if those who 
promote this believe they are protecting recipients or vendors. The answer is 
probably both. They are protecting recipients because of the greater risks of 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
245
infectious diseases in potential vendors abroad.15 They claim to be protect­
ing the vendors because a market price of $10,000 in the United States would 
bring hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of individuals from third-world 
countries for whom the dollar amount would be undue inducement. If ven­
dors were not restricted to citizens of the United States, then the market value 
could fall to less than $1,000.16 This may not be a large enough incentive for 
Mr Cranford’s friends, but $1,000 could go a long way in China and India. 
In addition, if this is the only way for the individual to escape poverty, it is 
not clear how our protection helps them. The same arguments regarding the 
opportunity to escape poverty should hold true for citizens in the United 
States who are poor and for poor citizens of China and India. [. . .]
It is also the case that autonomy must be understood within a social con­
text. In a society in which great disparities exist in wealth and opportunities, 
the claim that poor people should have the right to sell their kidney as one 
more option to escape poverty denies any social responsibility we may have 
to prevent such a tragic option. [. . .]
The argument that beneficence requires physicians to help treat the 
thousands of patients in organ failure at any price also fails. First, we must 
remember that in transplantation with living sources, the vendor or donor 
becomes a patient as well.17 It is not the case that taking an organ in a set­
ting of exploitation is acting in the vendor’s best interest. This argument 
also ignores the fact that the whole focus of organ failure is about how 
to procure more organs without consideration of our failure in the public 
health and preventive health mission to reduce organ failure in the first 
place. [. . .]
The concerns of harm (nonmaleficence) cannot be pushed aside on the 
grounds that we take kidneys from family members and view the harms as 
acceptable. As previously explained, the principles of beneficence and non­
maleficence must be understood in tandem and evaluated as benefit-to-harm 
ratio. Then, here is why there may be a difference between exposing a paid 
kidney vendor to the risks of surgery and long-term psychological and clini­
cal risks of unilateral nephrectomy compared with the altruistic donor. That 
is, we believe that the altruistic donor gains significant psychological benefits 
by aiding an emotionally related family member or friend.18 In contrast, data 
(from Iran and India) show that the paid vendors do not reap the benefits they 
expected (improved financial circumstances);in fact, data show they experi­
ence many emotional and social harms in the stigma that they face for having 
sold a part of their body.19 [. . .]
Even if we assume the current state of affairs, many justice theorists 
reject utilitarianism because of a theory limited to maximizing good con­
sequences that could allow for significant harm to specific subpopulations. 
That is, it could be allowed for one adult to sacrifice himself to serve as an 
organ donor for 10 individuals on the waiting list for financial gain to his 

	 246	
The Ethics of Surgery
next of kin. Worse yet, it might justify lotteries in which individuals were 
sacrificed to maximize the well-being of 10 individuals per sacrifice! Rather, 
most justice theorists would argue that in organ transplantation, as in many 
areas of medicine, we need to consider the distribution of goods and not just 
the maximization of goods. One widely accepted theory of egalitarian jus­
tice was developed by John Rawls.20 It would permit policies that increase 
organ transplantation using living vendors if this policy would be accepted 
behind a veil of ignorance where one was not aware of one’s personal traits 
but did have knowledge of the social and political state of affairs. Behind the 
veil of ignorance, an individual would know that demand for organs greatly 
outstripped supply. Behind the veil, the rational Rawlsian individual would 
adopt policies to increase organ transplants provided that the new policies 
were not harmful to those who are already “worse off.” A market in organs 
would be most attractive to those who are poor without other alternatives. 
Then, Rawlsian justice would judge those who are willing to vend as some 
of the “worst off” members of society. Such a market would be exploitative 
and not permissible. The market proponents who seek to restrict the kidney 
market to citizens of the United States are conceding this point. They are 
failing to acknowledge that if this practice were to be legalized in the United 
States, then other countries could quickly follow suit, and it would be hard to 
restrict trade across borders. Even if we could restrict border trades, we could 
be doing great harm to the “worst off” in poor countries who may now feel 
that this is an opportunity that they cannot resist, even if it leaves them no 
better off in the long-run. [. . .]
CONCLUSION
Although proponents try to use the “Four Principles of Bioethics” to sup­
port a market in organs, I have shown that the four principles, when prop­
erly operationalized, do not support a market. Rather, I  have shown that 
the pro-market interpretation fails to understand that the principles need to 
be understood within a particular conception of justice. In a liberal society 
that values human rights and the dignity of man, an egalitarian conception 
of justice is the most appropriate conception of justice for public policy. An 
egalitarian theory of justice must prohibit the sale of organs on grounds of 
exploitation! The concern of exploitation makes the vendor’s autonomy sus­
pect, and it clearly does not minimize the harms to which we expose any 
living source of organs nor does it ensure that they truly benefit from the 
procurement.
Bad cases make bad laws. I am sympathetic to Karen, but I am also sym­
pathetic to all individuals with chronic renal failure, even if their illness is 
somewhat self-induced. A policy to pay Karen’s father’s friends may resolve 
the stress, pain and risks of donation, but they do not address the risk of 
 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
247
death, which is a real but rare event. If Mr Cranford’s friends really thought 
about the risk of mortality, they would realize that $10,000 is too little, given 
the real but remote risk of death. They should also realize that money should 
not fully resolve their reluctance. In fact, the risk of mortality should give us 
reason to pause and realize that the solution to our organ shortage should not 
be based on increasing the number of living donors. Rather, we need to focus 
on prevention, to maximize voluntary deceased donation, to develop alterna­
tive organ sources (such as therapeutic organ cloning), and even to promote 
research in xenotransplantation.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] The conclusions readers should draw from these opposing positions, 
which start with mostly identical facts but reach radically different conclu­
sions, depend largely on how they weigh the two central facts of the issue at 
hand in the context of their own personal value systems. The central facts 
are: (1) in this country more than 9,000 patients in need of a transplant die 
each year because the number of available organs is inadequate; and (2) finan­
cial incentives in a regulated market would increase the supply of organs (a 
fact asserted by Hippen and not denied by Ross).
A reader will support Hippen’s position if persuaded that people in a 
mature liberal democracy, such as the United States, should be allowed the 
freedom to choose among three options (in the context of a carefully regu­
lated market that excludes poor people as donors and ensures safety for all 
participants): that is, to donate altruistically, to donate for financial benefit, 
or not to donate at all.
A reader will support Ross’s position if persuaded that egalitarian (dis­
tributive) justice is the best guide for public policy, that financial incentives 
for organ donations must therefore be prohibited on grounds of exploitation 
of the poor, and that we should not attempt to increase the number of living 
donors but should pursue alternative strategies, including a greater emphasis 
on public health and preventive health measures that may reduce or retard 
the development of kidney failure.
The heat generated by the public debate on financial incentives for organ 
donors has been rising as more voices join each side. Congress has shown 
interest in this issue, including Representative James Greenwood in 2003,21 
and most recently Senator Arlen Specter by way of his proposed bill, the 
Organ Donor Clarification Act.22 How public policy makers respond to the 
opposing views presented in this debate will have long-term effects on the 
quality and duration of the lives of many patients and on the moral founda­
tions of our society.
 

	 248	
The Ethics of Surgery
References
	 1.	 Removal reasons by year; removed from the waiting list:  January, 1995–March 
31, 2009. OPTN: Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Health & Human Services. http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
latestData/rptData.asp. Accessed June 16, 2009.
	 2.	 Gilbertson DT, Liu J, Xue JL. Projecting the number of patients with end-stage renal 
disease in the United States to the year 2015. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:3736–41.
	 3.	 Healy K. Do presumed consent laws raise organ procure-ment rates? De Paul Law 
Rev. 2006;55:1017–43.
	 4.	 Ibrahim HN, Foley R, Tan L. Long-term consequences of kidney donation. New 
Eng J of Med. 2009;360:459–69.
	 5.	 Hippen BE. In defense of a regulated market in kidneys from living vendors. J Med 
Philos. 2005;30:593–626.
	 6.	 Hippen B. Organ sales and moral travails: lessons from the living kidney vendor pro­
gram in Iran. Cato Policy Analysis No. 614. 2008. Washington, DC: Cato Institute. 
http://www.cato.org/pub_display.php?pub_id=9273. Accessed July 31, 2009.
	 7.	 Hippen BE. The case for kidney markets. The New Atlantis 2006;14:47–1461. http://
www.thenewatlantis.com/archive/14/hippen.htm. Accessed July 31, 2009.
	 8.	 Taylor JS. Stakes and Kidneys:  Why Markets in Human Body Parts Are Morally 
Imperative. Hampshire. UK: Ashgate; 2005.
	 9.	 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 5th ed. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 2001.
	10.	 Jonsen A, Siegler M, Winslade W. Clinical Ethics: A Practical Approach to Ethical 
Decisions in Clinical Medicine, 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
	11.	 Veatch RM. Transplantation Ethics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press; 
2000.
	12.	 Holmes OW Jr. http://thinkexist.com/quotation/the_right_to_swing_my_.st_ends_
where_the_other/217369.html. Accessed August 1, 2009.
	13.	 Sandel MJ. What money can’t buy: the moral limits of markets. The Tanner Lectures 
on Human Values. Paper presented at, Brasenose College, Oxford, May 11–12, 1998. 
http://www.tannerlectures.utah.edu/lectures/documents/sandel00.pdf. 
Accessed 
August 1, 2009.
	14.	 Erin CA, Harris J. An ethical market in human organs. J Med Ethics. 2003;29:137–8.
	15.	 Rizvi SNS, Zafar M, Ahmed E, et al. Health status and renal function evaluation of 
kidney venders: a report from Pakistan. Am J Transplant. 2008;13:453–76.
	16.	 Adams AF, Barnett AH, Kaserman DL. Markets of organs: the question of supply. 
Contemp Econ Policy. 1999;17:147–55.
	17.	 Danovitch GM. The doctor–patient relationship in living donor kidney transplanta­
tion. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2007;16:503–5.
	18.	 Frade IC, Fonseca I, Dias L, et al. Impact assessment in living kidney donation: psy­
chosocial aspects in the donor. Transplant Proc 2008;40:677–81.
	19.	 Goyal M, Mehta RL, Schneiderman LJ, Sehgal AR. Economic and health conse­
quences of selling a kidney in India. JAMA. 2002;288:1589–93.
	20.	 Rawls J. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press; 1971.
 

	
Incentives for Organ Donation	
249
	21.	 Assessing initiatives to increase organ donations: hearing before the Subcommittee 
on Oversight and Investigations of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, House 
of Representatives. June 3, 2003. http://archives.energycommerce.house.gov/repar­
chives/108/Hearings/06032003hearing946/print.htm. Accessed June 16, 2009.
	22.	 Pitney JJ. Incentives for organ donation. Politicalmavens.com. December 2, 2008. 
http://politicalmavens.com/index.php/2008/12/02/incentives-for-organ-donation/. 
Accessed June 16, 2009.

250
21
Prisoners on Death Row Should 
Be Accepted as Organ Donors
Shu S. Lin, Lauren Rich, Jay D. Pal, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Ten years ago, Christian Longo had been deeply enmeshed in a career of 
minor crimes and crushing financial burdens that had led to bankruptcy. He 
saw only one way out: relieving his family, his wife Mary Jane and their three 
children, of their dependency on him. He strangled Mary Jane and 2-year 
old daughter Madison, put them into suitcases and threw them into Yaquina 
Bay in Newport, Oregon. He stuffed his 3-year old daughter Sadie and 4-year 
old son Zachery into pillowcases, weighted them down with rocks, and threw 
them, still alive, into a nearby pond where they drowned.
His crime was discovered when Zachery’s body floated to the surface of 
the pond. He was placed on the FBI’s 10 most wanted list, was found 2 years 
later living with his girlfriend in Cancun, Mexico, and was arrested, brought 
back to Oregon, put on trial, found guilty on four counts of murder, and sen­
tenced to death.
In March 2011, Longo wrote an editorial that was published in the 
New York Times: “Giving Life After Death Row.”1 The editorial began with 
these words: “Eight years ago I was sentenced to death for the murders of my 
wife and three children. I am guilty. I once thought that I could fool others 
into believing this was not true. Failing that, I tried to convince myself that 
* Lin SS, Rich L, Pal JD, Sade RM. Prisoners on death row should be accepted as organ 
donors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1773–9. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished 
here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Prisoners as Organ Donors	
251
it didn’t matter. But gradually, the enormity of what I did seeped in; that was 
followed by remorse and then a wish to make amends.”
He continued: “There is no way to atone for my crimes, but I believe that 
a profound benefit to society can come from my circumstances. I have asked 
to end my remaining appeals, and then donate my organs after my execution 
to those who need them.” He went on to say, “And yet, the prison authority’s 
response to my latest appeal to donate was this: ‘The interests of the public 
and condemned inmates are best served by denying the petition.’ ”
Longo claimed that half of the other inmates on death row wanted to 
do the same and that there was no valid reason to prohibit them from donat­
ing. The question: [. . .] who was right, the condemned prisoner or the prison 
parole board [. . .]?
Pro
Shu S. Lin, MD, PhD, Lauren Rich, RN, BSN
The shortage of donor organs often seems insurmountable. As a transplant 
surgeon, I understand the importance of seizing every appropriate opportu­
nity to help patients with end-stage organ failure. When I learned that pris­
oners on death row have been denied their desire to donate their organs after 
execution, I asked myself, “Why not allow it?”
WHY NOT ALLOW DEATH ROW INMATES TO DONATE?
Each organ donor means at least one or more lives saved. Pursuing every 
opportunity for organ donation is not merely an attempt to “close the 
ever-widening gap between demand and supply of organs” in transplanta­
tion, as some have charged.2 It is, quite simply, to help individuals suffering 
from end-stage organ disease. The center of attention, in my mind, should be 
the patient, and how we, as health care providers, can help them. There is no 
question that, when there is a therapy with known benefits to the patients we 
serve, it is reasonable that we should attempt to implement that therapy pend­
ing evaluation of the risks or the drawbacks of that therapy.
Organ donation is legally governed in the United States by two docu­
ments—the National Organ Transplantation Act (NOTA) of 1984, a federal 
law, and the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act (UAGA), a state law—neither 
explicitly prohibits organ donation by death row inmates. NOTA stipulates 
that organ donation cannot be made for “valuable considerations,” includ­
ing any monetary or material benefit or, for prisoners, a shorter sentence—
obviously not an issue for death row inmates. Under the UAGA, any adult 
can commit to being an organ donor simply by saying so in a document, 
such as a donor card or a symbol on a driver’s license. Therefore, the critical 
 
 
 

	 252	
The Ethics of Surgery
question here is what are the reasons not to permit donation by condemned 
prisoners?
WHY PROHIBIT PRISONER DONATION?
Objections to allowing death row inmates to be organ donors can be catego­
rized into those caused by practical barriers and those involving ethical or 
moral concerns
Wide cultural differences require that this discussion be considered in 
the context of US law and culture, not necessarily those of other countries.3
Practical Barriers
Small number of potential organ donors. Even if death row inmates are allowed 
to donate their organs, this practice “cannot yield anything more than a tiny 
number of organs for those in need.”2 Whether or not this statement is true, the 
point of using consenting death row inmates as organ donors is not to solve 
the problem of organ shortage but to help patients who are in dire need of 
transplantable organs. The number of patients directly helped is not relevant, 
given the hugely significant impact on the recipients and their families.
Quality of donor. On the basis of the medical and social history of these indi­
viduals, many of these prisoners “would not be eligible to serve as donors due to 
age, ill health, obesity, or communicable disease.”2 Yet, so-called marginal donors 
have yielded perfectly usable organs for transplantation, and donor variables 
rarely have significant adverse effects on the outcome of transplant recipients. 
Although all might not be suitable donors, exclusion of all prisoners as donors 
would result in missed opportunities to transplant acceptable organs.
In addition, the idea that transmission of infectious diseases is a great risk 
if prisoners donate, while seemly legitimate, is refuted by the fact that there 
would be more time for screening death row inmates than typical brain-dead 
donors in hospitals. Thus, the rate of disease transmission might actually 
be lower when death row inmates donate because of the possibility of more 
thorough screening processes.
Difficulties from method of execution. Organ donation by condemned prison­
ers will be less successful than donation in a hospital setting because of the “legal 
and practical requirements of the execution.”2 The most common method of 
execution in the United States is injection of a three-drug combination (sodium 
thiopental to induce unconsciousness, pancuronium bromide to cause muscle 
paralysis and respiratory arrest, and potassium chloride to achieve cardiac 
arrest), so donation by death row inmates will be more like donation after 
cardiac death (DCD) than typical brain-death donation. The speculation that 
a prisoner’s DCD organs would be qualitatively inferior is flawed, however, 
because DCD in hospitals is associated with more or less lengthy periods of 
hypoxemia before death is declared, up to 60 minutes after extubation, and 
 
 
 

	
Prisoners as Organ Donors	
253
the procurement process begins after an additional waiting period of up to 
5 minutes. Thus, the potential for ischemic damage to various organs may 
actually be greater in hospital DCD than in the setting of execution, which has 
an ischemic time of only 10 to 15 minutes before organ recovery can begin. [. . .]
Respecting the dead donor rule. The question, “Could organ removal be 
used as the mode of execution?”2, is a cynical polemic, not an argument. The 
dead donor rule requires that procuring organs not cause death; that rule 
has governed the transplant field for decades and is likely to continue to do 
so. Moreover, death and donation are consistently observed as two distinct 
processes, and in accordance with current guidelines, physicians must not be 
involved in the execution of the prisoner-donor.4
Ethical or Moral Concerns
Coercion is inevitable in donation by death row inmates. Coercion can be “sub­
tle” and “even without an explicit reward like early parole in exchange for a 
promise of organ donation, prisoners will understand themselves to be making 
an implicit exchange for their generosity, and policymakers will take advantage 
of that unspoken expectation.” Moreover, “free and voluntary consent is com­
promised by the prison environment.”5
Although this argument may be relevant to ordinary inmates, it does not 
apply to condemned prisoners, such as Christian Longo, who willingly and 
voluntarily ask to donate after execution. Precedent for allowing donation 
by non–death row inmates already exists (although the arguments for and 
against this practice are just as heated),6 so why not permit it in condemned 
prisoners, in whom coercion is less of an issue?
Although Christian Longo is not the first condemned prisoner to request 
organ donation after his execution, his case is the most publicized in recent 
memory. As far as we know, no one approached Longo to ask him to consider 
donating his organs after the execution; he voluntarily thought of this plan 
and wrote his editorial in The New York Times after its rejection. In at least 
14 earlier cases, death row inmates or their lawyers sought opportunities to 
donate their organs but were denied. Clearly, death row inmates are request­
ing to donate their organs for transplantation, indicating their willingness 
to consent to this process. It is hypocritical to argue that organ donation 
by death row inmates is morally wrong because the prisoners’ autonomy is 
undermined by a subtle form of coercion, because denying the prisoners’ 
requests to donate is an even greater compromise of their autonomy.
Organ donation by death row inmates undermines moral justification of 
capital punishment. The two moral justifications of capital punishment are ret­
ribution and deterrence of future criminal acts, and organ donation by death 
row inmates undermines both justifications.2 These arguments are not strong 
enough, in my view, to prohibit death row inmates from willingly donating 
their organs for transplantation.
 

	 254	
The Ethics of Surgery
Retribution “may be made far more difficult to achieve as families and 
friends of victims watch as executed perpetrators are lauded in their final 
days by possible recipients and the media for their altruism in saving lives.”2 It 
seems unfair, at initial glance, that a person who committed a heinous crime 
would become a hero of some sort at the end. Consider the implications of 
this position: if the goal is to uphold retribution in capital punishment, then 
perhaps society should not allow “condemned prisoners to apologize or make 
amends for their crimes, to perform the simplest unselfish acts of kindness, 
to seek religion, or experience any form of spiritual growth or awakening.”7 
Viewed in this way, retribution seems to be a weak justification for capital 
punishment. The same ethicists who claim that organ donation after execu­
tion will be seen as a heroic act contradict their other assertion that subtle 
coercion forces donation on the prisoners. Is such donation a willing, altru­
istic, laudable deed, or is it a coerced action? The logical inconsistency of the 
moral opposition to donation by death row inmates is evident.
The deterrence function of capital punishment is undermined when 
“social good is seen as issuing from the practice [of condemned prisoners 
donating organs].”2 It seems highly unlikely that the perpetrator of a violent 
crime would contemplate, in advance of his evil deed, the potential benefit to 
society by the availability of organ donation. Furthermore, if deterrence is an 
important goal of capital punishment, then “execution preceded by extended 
torture” might be a better deterrent than “execution preceded by imprison­
ment,” so advocates of deterrence might find torture to be morally superior 
to mere imprisonment.8
OPINION POLLS
In our liberal democracy, public acceptance of a policy or a practice is impor­
tant. We were able to find three extensive opinion polls related to this topic, 
and all provided overwhelming support for the idea that condemned prison­
ers should be allowed to donate their organs for transplantation.9,10 A month 
after Longo’s editorial, MSNBC news organization found that 77.3% of 
86,736 subjects responded “yes” to the question, “Should death row inmates 
be allowed to donate their organs?”9 Another opinion poll conducted in con­
junction with Longo’s story asked, “Should a man who killed his wife and 
two children be allowed to donate his organs?”; nearly 90% of 588 voters 
responded “yes.”10 Clearly, the general public seems to see death row inmates 
like Longo as potentially acceptable donors for those who are in dire need of 
transplantable organs. [. . .]
SUMMARY
Given appropriate screening, no medical reason renders death row inmates 
unsuitable as organ donors. Individuals with past criminal records and those 
 
 

	
Prisoners as Organ Donors	
255
with unknown medical and social background are currently not excluded 
from organ donation, and many donors who were once considered marginal 
are now known to contribute safely to helping patients who are suffering from 
end-stage organ failure. Thus, there is no logical reason why condemned pris­
oners, after execution, cannot donate usable organs. Death row inmates will­
ingly request it, the general public supports it, and potential recipients accept 
it. Should poorly grounded moral objections of a few people prevent the pre­
cious opportunities for those who might benefit from receiving those organs? 
Ultimately, opinions for or against donation after execution reflect the values 
of our society—are we more interested in retribution and deterrence, or in 
actually helping those who have no other options?
Con
Jay D. Pal, MD, PhD
Organ donation is a life-saving treatment for patients who suffer from 
advanced organ failure. [. . .] With the exception of living related kidney 
(and to a much smaller extent, liver) donors, most transplanted organs are 
obtained from cadaveric donors. As such, organ transplantation remains 
limited by the number of available donors. Despite the incidence of trau­
matic death in the United States, only 6,000 to 8,000 deceased donors are 
available annually, compared with 112,718 patients currently awaiting trans­
plantation.11 Approximately 18 individuals will die each day while awaiting 
a suitable organ donor.12 Therefore, many novel attempts have been made 
to increase the potential donor pool. These have included donor registries, 
first-person consent, surrogate consent, and the use of prisoners as a source 
of organs. [. . .]
Transplant physicians are regularly confronted by the effects of an inad­
equate donor population on patients awaiting transplantation. However, 
deeper consideration of the use of prisoners as organ donors raises several 
concerns. These reservations can be grouped into three categories:  legal, 
moral or ethical, and logistical. Thoughtful insight into these concerns 
will provide ample evidence that death row inmates are not suitable organ 
donors.
LEGAL ISSUES
Two basic tenets of organ transplantation as stated by the World Health 
Organization and the World Medical Association are that vital organs should 
only be removed from dead patients, and that living patients should not be 
killed for or by organ procurement. This dead-donor rule has been fundamen­
tal in the identification of potential organ donors since the 1950s. Accordingly, 
the accepted definition of death can be by (1) traditional cardiopulmonary 
 
 
 

	 256	
The Ethics of Surgery
criteria, which is the cessation of circulatory and respiratory functions, or 
(2) brain-death criteria, which is the irreversible cessation of brain function 
including brainstem activity (Uniform Declaration of Death Act of 1981). 
Although there has been recent discussion regarding the modification of the 
dead-donor rule in the case of patients with irrecoverable brain injury with 
remaining brainstem activity, the prevailing norm is that potential donors 
meet the currently accepted definitions of death.13
The concept of brain death provided the legal justification for organ pro­
curement.14 More recently, the declaration of brain death has been clarified 
and standardized.15 The primary obstacle for organ donation from executed 
prisoners is that they do not die (brain death) on life support, as is typical for 
most organ donors. The most common method of execution in the United 
States is a three-drug protocol to cause sedation, then respiratory and cir­
culatory arrest. After a waiting period of 10 to 15 minutes, the prisoner is 
examined for evidence of cardiac activity, and in its absence, declared dead. 
Any modification of the method of execution to decrease this waiting period 
may result in death occurring as a result of organ procurement, which places 
the surgeon in the role of executioner.
The second legal question to arise in the use of organs from death row 
inmates is the ability to consent. The concept of informed consent requires 
the ability to understand the procedure, as well as the autonomy to make a 
decision without coercion. Although there are some differences among states, 
all prisoners lose some component of citizenship rights at the time of convic­
tion. Death row inmates, in particular, are expressly stripped of the right to 
make personal decisions. In most states, the prisoner becomes a ward of the 
state, or a property of the state, and therefore the state holds the legal author­
ity to consent for the inmate. In every case regarding prisoner donation of 
organs, state prison boards have upheld this authority and denied inmate 
petitions. Furthermore, numerous legal reviews have provided arguments 
against the legality of organ donation from executed prisoners, citing lack 
of defined first-person consent, implied coercion, and an inherent conflict of 
interest.16
MORAL OR ETHICAL ISSUES
A far more problematic issue in the use of organs from death row inmates 
is the ethical dilemma of obtaining organs from patients who are being exe­
cuted. Prisoners are subject to physically and psychologically stressful condi­
tions that undoubtedly affect the decisions they make. Mr. Longo states that 
he “spend(s) 22 hours a day locked in a 6 foot by 8 foot box on Oregon’s death 
row.”3 The Uniform Anatomical Gift Act requires that all organ donation 
be provided without coercion. However, prisoners are particularly vulner­
able to both direct and implied coercion by virtue of their incarceration. This 
 

	
Prisoners as Organ Donors	
257
coercion may be subtle, without any explicit promise of reward for donation, 
but prisoners may “understand themselves to be making an implicit exchange 
for their generosity.”17
The National Institutes of Health acknowledges this coercion in its 
rules regarding prisoner consent: “Prisoners may not be free to make a truly 
voluntary and uncoerced decision . . . the regulations require additional 
safeguards.”18
Organ procurement in the setting of such coercion is often cited by bio­
ethicists as a reason to avoid the use of executed prisoners as organ donors.19 
In addition, the American Society of Transplant Surgeons states that the use 
of organs from executed prisoners is unacceptable and that procurement 
under these circumstances violates the basic principles of transplantation, 
such as the need for free and willing donation of organs. [. . .]
Given the numerous outstanding ethical issues regarding organ pro­
curement from executed prisoners, the Organ Procurement and Transplant 
Network/United Network of Organ Sharing Ethics Committee generated 
a white paper that concluded: “The UNOS Ethics Committee has raised a 
small number of the many issues regarding organ donation from condemned 
prisoners. The Committee opposes any strategy or proposed statute regard­
ing organ donation from condemned prisoners until all of the potential ethi­
cal concerns (coercion, method of execution, issues of informed consent) have 
been satisfactorily addressed.”
LOGISTICAL ISSUES
A third argument against the feasibility of transplanting organs from pris­
oners is the logistical and practical difficulties in procuring and preserv­
ing organs after execution. The most common method of execution in the 
United States is lethal injection. Prisoners are typically sedated, paralyzed 
to induce respiratory arrest, then injected with potassium to induce cardiac 
arrest. After a waiting period of 10 to 15 minutes, the prisoner is examined 
for evidence of cardiac activity, and in its absence, declared dead. Because 
executions are performed in maximum security prisons and not in medi­
cal facilities, the prisoner would be dead for an extended period before the 
donor is transported to a hospital and organ procurement can be performed. 
Organ donation from brain-dead donors occurs with preservation of organs 
at the time of circulatory arrest. This allows preservation of graft function 
by immediately halting cellular respiration by instillation of cold preserva­
tion solution as systemic blood flow is interrupted. During DCD, circula­
tory death occurs in an environment (typically an operating room) where the 
procurement procedure can commence rapidly and organs can be placed in 
preservation solution within minutes. However, fewer organs are recoverable 
because of the delay in preservation. Highly metabolically active organs such 
 

	 258	
The Ethics of Surgery
as the heart and lungs are frequently not recoverable with DCD. In the setting 
of death in a prison environment, the extended delay to procurement would 
yield very few transplantable organs.
A possible solution would be to move the execution to a facility where 
organs can be recovered more rapidly, similar to DCD procedures. But that 
would require moving an inmate to a hospital before execution. The pro­
cess of moving an inmate to an unsecured location would be difficult, given 
the uncertainty of the appeals process, protests, demonstrations, security 
requirements, and potential for escape. Also, many hospitals will likely be 
resistant to accepting prisoners for execution. Despite the potential financial 
benefit from providing a location for organ procurement, the public relations 
impact of becoming a center of execution would be detrimental. [. . .]
CONCLUSIONS
Although organ donation after prisoner execution will continue to be 
debated, it is helpful to consider how much benefit may actually be realized. 
In the first 9 months of 2011, 10,558 individuals donated organs in the United 
States. In contrast, 39 inmates were executed. The average age of executed 
prisoners is older than 50 years, and many suffer from chronic illnesses such 
as diabetes and hypertension. By conventional criteria such as age, medical 
conditions, and communicable disease, half of these prisoners would not be 
eligible donors. Therefore, the net increase in donors is less than one fifth of 
1%. And given the DCD nature of these donations (with prolonged ischemic 
times), only kidneys are likely to be recoverable.
Given the contentious nature of this topic, we must evaluate the legal, 
moral, and logistical impediments to organ procurement from prisoners 
for the net gain of only 20 donors per year. Less controversial methods to 
increase the number of donor organs can be obtained by increasing public 
awareness of organ donation, creating donor registries, and improving organ 
yield from the eligible donors.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Lin and Rich make a single but telling point in favor of allowing prisoners 
on death row to be organ donors: the primary focus of physicians should 
be on helping patients, in this case, patients with failing organs who need a 
replacement organ. They classify objections to allowing condemned prison­
ers to donate into two categories: practical obstacles and ethical or moral 
issues. They respond to several concerns in each category, indicating why 
they believe none is decisive. They also cite opinion polls asking whether 
 
 

	
Prisoners as Organ Donors	
259
condemned prisoners should be allowed to donate and report the results of 
a survey of waiting lung transplant recipients in their institution. All survey 
results strongly favor allowing donation.
Pal finds problems with allowing donation in three areas: legal, moral 
or ethical, and logistical. He discusses the 10- to 15-minute delay between 
lethal injection and pronouncement of death, which increases warm ischemic 
time, threatening the quality of recovered organs. He says that the situation 
of prisoners makes coercion unavoidable, but this claim rests largely on how 
one frames the meaning of coercion.20
[. . .] He also believes that the small number of potential donors under 
these circumstances, perhaps 20 a year, is not worth overcoming the many 
objections to the practice and could result in adverse publicity for organ 
donation.
We have not been told the reasons for parole boards denying condemned 
prisoners the option of voluntary organ donation, apparently the conclusion 
in all the cases of which we are aware. Legally, there is little question that 
prison authorities have the power to decide whether to allow organ dona­
tion. From an ethical viewpoint, however, the question is, should donation be 
denied a condemned prisoner who makes a voluntary request? For physicians, 
the idea of allowing donation draws support from the highest of physician’s 
obligations, our paramount responsibility for the welfare of our patients. As 
a matter of law, the decision of whether organ donation by prisoners on death 
row should be permitted rests with prison authorities. As a matter of eth­
ics, however, the question has not been settled, as this debate demonstrates. 
For physicians, our primary ethical responsibility—doing what is best for 
our patients, including the few whose lives would be saved by organs from 
executed prisoners—seems to place the burden of proof on those who would 
deny condemned prisoners the option of donation.
References
	1.	Longo C. Giving life after death row. The New York Times, March 5, 2011:WK12.
	2.	Caplan A. The use of prisoners as sources of organs—an ethically dubious practice. 
Am J Bioeth. 2011;11:1–5.
	3.	Tsai DF-C, Tsai M-K, Ko W-J. Organs by firing squad: the medical and moral implau­
sibility of death penalty organ procurement. Am J Bioeth. 2011;11:11–3.
	4.	Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Opinion 2.06, Capital Punishment. 
In:  Code of Medical Ethics of the American Medical Association, 2010–2011 ed. 
Chicago: American Medical Association, 2010:23–32.
	5.	Potter NN. What it means to treat people as ends-in-themselves. Am J Bioeth. 
2011;11:6–7.
	6.	Goldberg AM, Frader J. Prisoners as living organ donors: the case of the Scott sisters. 
Am J Bioeth. 2011;11:15–6.
 

	 260	
The Ethics of Surgery
	 7.	 Johnson LSM. The ethically dubious practice of thwarting the redemption of the 
condemned. Am J Bioeth. 2011;11:9–10.
	 8.	 Murphy P. Would donation undercut the morality of execution? Am J Bioeth. 
2011;11:13–4.
	 9.	 http://health.newsvine.com/_question/2011/04/20/6504300-should-death-row-inmat
es-be-allowed-to-donate-their-organs.
	10.	 Should man who killed wife and two children be allowed to donate his organs?: http://
www.sodahead.com/united-states/should-man-who-killed-wife-and-two-children-be-
allowed-to-donate-his-organs/question-1707899/. Accessed March 13, 2012.
	11.	 Transplant trends. Richmond, VA: United Network for Organ Sharing. http://www.
unos.org. Accessed March 13, 2012.
	12.	 Health Resources and Services Administration. Organ Procurement and 
Transplantation Network. http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov. Accessed March 13, 
2012.
	13.	 Truog RD, Miller FG. The dead donor rule and organ transplantation. N Engl J 
Med. 2008;359:674–5.
	14.	 A definition of irreversible coma. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Harvard 
Medical School to Examine the Definition of Brain Death. JAMA. 1968;205:337–40.
	15.	 Quality Standards Subcommittee. Practice parameters: determining brain death in 
adults. St. Paul, MN: American Academy of Neurology, 1994. http://www.aan.com/
professionals/practice/guidelines/pda/Brain_death_adults.pdf. Accessed March 13, 
2012.
	16.	 Hinkle W. Giving until it hurts: prisoners are not the answer to the national organ 
shortage. Indiana Law Rev. 2002;35: 593–619.
	17.	 Youngner SJ, Arnold RM. Ethical, psychosocial, and public policy implications of 
procuring organs from non-heart-beating cadaver donors. JAMA. 1993;269:2769–74.
	18.	 Research involving vulnerable populations, OER US Department of Health and 
Human Services, ed. Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health.
	19.	 Hillman H. Harvesting organs from recently executed prisoners. Practice must be 
stopped. BMJ 2001;323:1254.
	20.	 Wertheimer A. Coercion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1987:3–14.

SECTION 6
Conflicts of Interest in Surgery
Robert M. Sade
It is asking more than human perfection to assume 
that a surgeon’s judgment may not be influenced 
unconsciously by a pressing financial need.
—Edwin P. Lehman, MD (Surgery, 1950;28:595)
A conflict of interest (COI) is present when an individual has a primary 
responsibility that could be unduly influenced by a secondary interest. 
COIs can be found in every profession; they are widespread and occur 
frequently every day. In medicine, a physician’s primary responsibility 
when caring for patients is to serve the interests of the patient. Secondary 
interests may be personal financial gain, personal nonfinancial gain (e.g., 
academic promotion, enhanced recognition and reputation), and interests 
of a third party, such as a group practice, partnership, hospital, or 
health-care insurance plan. Financial conflicts may arise from investments 
in or payments for services from pharmaceutical or device companies, 
reimbursement incentives, or gifts from industry.
Usually, COIs are quickly and easily resolved, so they may not even 
be recognized as COIs. For example, consider the case of a surgeon who 
could recommend either a low-revenue operation that is appropriate for the 
patient or a high-revenue operation that is at best a distant second choice; 
he is being considered for elevation to full partnership in his surgical group 
based in part on the income he generates. The surgeon is faced with a 
COI: The interests of the patient are best served by recommending the 
lower-revenue procedure, but the surgeon’s career (the secondary interest) 
would be better served by recommending the higher-revenue procedure. It 
is unlikely that a surgeon would give a second thought to recommending the 
 
 

	 262	
The Ethics of Surgery
higher-revenue procedure. Like the many other COIs the surgeon faces every 
day, he probably would not even recognize that a COI is present because he 
resolves it so easily in the patient’s favor.
When he is in a nonclinical role, such as a researcher or teacher, a 
physician’s primary interest may not be what is best for the patient. For 
example, as a researcher, his primary responsibility is to contribute to the 
body of scientific knowledge by carrying out investigations and publishing 
results that add valid information. Secondary interests that could undermine 
his fidelity to the search for knowledge include incentives to falsify or 
fabricate data in order to produce a publishable paper or to make his grant 
application more competitive. In the role of teacher, a physician’s primary 
interest is the accurate presentation of knowledge to students. Secondary 
interests in this setting could be saving time for other projects by preparing 
a lecture rapidly and sloppily or by being unavailable to provide guidance for 
students after class.
The presence of a COI is independent of the occurrence of impropriety. 
Questions of inappropriate behavior arise not when a COI is present but 
when it is resolved. A COI may produce harm to a patient, a research 
study, or a student if it is resolved in favor of a secondary interest rather 
than the primary interest. Among regulatory organizations, emphasis in 
recent years has shifted from recognizing the presence of a COI through 
disclosure requirements to managing its resolution. COIs in medicine 
received little attention until around the year 2000, following a series 
of sensational scandals in medical research (see ­chapter 24). These 
concerns have expanded to include clinical COIs as well, resulting in a 
new focus on developing policies to mitigate the harms that may result 
from them. Many medical organizations have developed policies regarding 
COIs and their management; for example, the Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education has promulgated rules governing the nature 
and content of presentations at meetings approved for continuing medical 
education credit,1 and many hospitals and academic medical centers have 
developed their own policies limiting how their faculty and staff interact with 
industry representatives. The evolution of laws and regulations regarding 
relationships between physicians and industry is ongoing, as additional 
measures are being considered by Congress and many nongovernmental 
organizations. In response to this state of affairs, the Ethics Forum has 
sponsored debates on questions surrounding COIs and their management.
Chapters
Chapter 22 explores the question of whether small gifts from industry 
representatives to physicians are sufficiently harmful to patients to warrant 
restriction of access, as has been enforced by policy in many medical 
 

	
Section 6	
263
centers.2 The arguments in favor of such restrictions rest on the claim that 
even small gifts influence people to favor certain companies or products 
because of the effect of reciprocity, a fundamental aspect of human 
behavior. There is also evidence that drug companies engage in marketing 
practices that mislead physicians in ways they often do not recognize. 
Patients may be harmed when physicians make substandard choices under 
the sway of this unconscious bias. The contrary view is that the harm that 
comes from supposed bias under the influence of industrial representatives 
is overblown and based on anecdotal information that is scientifically 
unsound, comparable in some ways to the witch-hunts of the sixteenth 
century. Collaborative relations between industry and medicine have been 
highly productive and ought to be protected rather than attacked.
In ­chapter 23 the relation between industry and physicians who consult 
for industry is debated, specifically whether the financial link between 
the two should be cut.3 According to one view, a few high-profile scandals 
have created the impression that fraud is rampant in the health-care 
industry, leading to the passage of laws intended to regulate physician 
COIs through mandatory disclosure of financial transactions. Disclosure 
alone is insufficient to protect against harmful effects of conflicts, however 
—management of COIs is required to ensure appropriate resolution of 
the conflict. An important method for accomplishing this might be through 
institutional oversight of individual consulting activities. From a different 
perspective, relations between industry and surgeons have been extremely 
productive, and this relationship should not be disrupted by overregulation. 
The best approach, instead, would be for physician leaders, legislators, and 
businesspeople to join in an effort to craft legislation that would regulate 
the financial relationships between physicians and industry in a way that 
protects productive collaboration. Given the developments of the past 
few years, it is argued, some form of regulation is certain, but its form 
and substance are hidden in the shadow of the regulatory environment’s 
evolution.
Another highly controversial issue regarding COIs is the question of how 
much disclosure of conflicts should be required; this question is discussed 
in ­chapter 24, which departs from the usual format of these debates—it 
takes the form of a point–counterpoint discussion.4 In one view, it is not 
enough to report the existence of a COI; full disclosure is needed and 
should include how long a relationship between a surgeon and industry has 
existed and how many dollars were exchanged. Underlying this position is 
the primary obligation to patients—we must protect them by ensuring that 
unbiased information reaches their physicians. Moreover, physicians should 
control their own destinies by anticipating the coming legislative regulation. 
The counterargument asserts that there is virtually no reliable evidence that 
the collaboration between industry and physicians poses any credible threat 

	 264	
The Ethics of Surgery
to the safety of patients; the real threat is the potential for interrupting 
the long-existing and highly productive industry–physician collaboration by 
increasing financial disclosure requirements.
References
	1.	 Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education. Standards for 
Commercial Support: Standards to Ensure Independence in CME Activities. 
Chicago: Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education. http://
www.accme.org/requirements/accreditation-requirements-cme-providers/
standards-for-commercial-support. Accessed April 2, 2014.
	2.	 Iserson KV, Cerfolio RJ, Sade RM. Politely refuse the pen and note 
pad: gifts from industry to physicians harm patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;84(4);1077–84.
	3.	 Immelt SJ, Gaudiani VA, Sade RM. Should the financial link between industry 
and physician consultants be severed? Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92(3):781–7.
	4.	 Murphy JP. Full disclosure—presentations and publications should include 
dollar amounts and duration of surgeon–industry relationships. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2011;92(2):413–6; Sade RM. Ethics in cardiothoracic surgery: full dis­
closure—where is the evidence for nefarious conflicts of interest? Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2011;92(2):417–20.
 
 

265
22
Politely Refuse the Pen and Note Pad
GIFTS FROM INDUSTRY TO PHYSICIANS HARM PATIENTS
Kenneth V. Iserson, Robert James Cerfolio, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Drug companies use many methods to bring their products to the attention 
of physicians. Most of us are familiar with contacts between drug com­
pany representatives, formerly called detail men, stemming from the time 
when, as medical students, we were beneficiaries of the Eli Lilly Company’s 
largesse: doctor’s bag, stethoscope, hammer, and tuning fork. Since then, 
most of us have been offered many other small (sometimes big) gifts that 
are intended to gain our attention. Decades ago, no one saw much of a 
problem with this practice; rather, most saw it as a harmless, friendly ges­
ture that led to valuable educational exchanges between detail men and 
physicians. In recent years, however, there has been a crescendo of warn­
ings that such gifts are not harmless but endanger patients by binding us 
to the giver of the gift through the elemental human response to gifts: reci­
procity, the need to give something back to the giver. Some worry that the 
impulse of reciprocity may lead us to prescribe products that are not quite 
right for a particular patient or prescribe an expensive drug in place of an 
effective drug that is much less expensive. Do we unwittingly endanger our 
patients by accepting gifts?
 * Iserson KV, Cerfolio RJ, Sade RM. Politely refuse the pen and note pad: gifts from industry 
to physicians harm patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84(4);1077–84. Copyright Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 266	
The Ethics of Surgery
THE CASE OF THE DETAILED SURGEON
Dr. John DeNile is always happy to see Cindy, a representative of the NovoCefalo 
Company, in his office. She is an articulate and attractive brunette who vis­
its Dr.  DeNile once every month or two with information that has recently 
become available about the various drugs produced by NovoCefalo. She always 
brings with her ball-point pens, note pads, Post-it pads, and other small gifts 
(most bearing the company’s logo), which Dr. DeNile finds useful in his office. 
On this particular visit, Cindy provides Dr.  DeNile with information about 
NovoCefalo’s fourth generation cephalosporin, Cefprophylax. [. . .] Dr. DeNile 
is impressed with the spectrum and the safety of the drug. He has routinely used 
cefazolin for antibiotic prophylaxis for 48 hours after his open heart operations, 
in accordance with practice guidelines from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
and the Surgical Infection Society. After listening to the details Cindy has pro­
vided, he thinks that it is a good idea to switch to Cefprophylax.
Dr. DeNile uses Cefprophylax after every open heart operation, as he did 
cefazolin. Two months after changing antibiotics, he does an uncomplicated 
coronary artery bypass on 62-year-old John Luckless. Mr Luckless is doing 
quite well at his 2-week follow-up visit, but a month later, he reports that for 
the last several days he has not been urinating as much as he did previously, 
has noted that his urine is tinged pink, has vomited several times after meals, 
and has gained nearly 10 pounds.
These symptoms are of great concern to Dr. DeNile, and he orders labora­
tory tests; the blood urea nitrogen is 36 mg/dL and creatinine is 3.2 mg/dL. He 
consults a nephrologist colleague, who, after an appropriate workup, makes the 
diagnosis of interstitial nephritis, probably resulting from an allergic response 
to the antibiotic Mr Luckless received at the time of his operation. The patient’s 
interstitial nephritis progresses and he is placed on dialysis. He is worked-up as 
a possible kidney transplant candidate and is placed on the kidney transplant 
waiting list.
Dr. DeNile is sure this is a rare complication of the antibiotic and con­
tinues using it. The nephrologist reports the allergic reaction to the com­
pany. Eight months later, Dr. DeNile receives notification from NovoCefalo 
and from the FDA that Cefprophylax has been withdrawn from the market 
because of a high incidence of kidney damage. He immediately switches back 
to cefazolin, his former routine prophylactic antibiotic.
At Cindy’s next visit, she gives Dr. DeNile a small leather-bound date 
book with NovoCefalo’s logo on the cover and the surgeon’s name engraved 
below it. She has some very interesting information on the latest generation 
corticosteroid, which lacks the fluid retention side effect that has been so 
troubling with other corticosteroids. While she is talking, Dr. DeNile won­
ders whether the article he read recently on the effect of gifts on physician’s 
 

	
Gifts from Industry	
267
prescribing patterns might apply to him and whether the small gifts Cindy 
always brings might have affected his decision to use the now withdrawn 
Cefprophylax. Although he believes the literature showing that even small 
gifts produce a sense of obligation to reciprocate and that most physicians are 
by gifts, he is certain that his dedication to his patients’ welfare prevents any 
such influence on him. He turns his full attention back to Cindy’s recitation 
of the new steroid’s pharmacologic details.
Pro
Kenneth V. Iserson, MD, MBA
A battle is being waged to win the hearts and minds of the physicians who 
write 2.2 billion drug prescriptions annually in the United States. Given that 
virtually all these physicians accept some gifts from pharmaceutical or equip­
ment manufacturers, and the case described demonstrates merely one tragic 
outcome, what new information might be imparted to change attitudes and 
behavior toward drug/medical device manufacturers’ sales tactics? Perhaps 
what might be most useful is to look at the truth behind typical physician 
responses to such tactics.
The following are common responses physicians give when asked about 
why they accept gifts, in any form, from drug and medical device companies:
	1.	 Why do you think that I accept gifts? And if I do, why do you think 
that would influenced my prescribing habits, which equipment I use, 
or what I recommend to my hospital or group to buy?
Nearly all of you accept gifts. We know from multiple studies that nearly 
all physicians accept gifts from the drug detailers whom they meet with an 
average of four times a month.1 [. . .] Those gifts, worth billions of dollars, 
run the gamut from free pens, pads, and drug samples to high-priced meals, 
entertainment tickets, trips, and honoraria. In fact, gifts are one of the main 
reasons physicians meet with drug detailers.
It does influence you. These studies also show that physicians believe that 
company representatives present accurate drug information. And although 
physicians deny that gifts influenced their behavior, those who accepted drug 
samples preferentially and rapidly began prescribing the new drugs—often 
in lieu of equally effective or less-expensive generic drugs or previously used 
medications.2 [. . .]
Even the smallest gifts influence you. Even the small tokens that physi­
cians receive from pharmaceutical companies may make a large impact. As 
a prestigious physician group recently wrote in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association,
 

	 268	
The Ethics of Surgery
Most of the recommendations from medical and industry groups share key 
assumptions. The first is that small gifts do not significantly influence phy­
sician behavior. The second is that disclosure of financial conflicts is suf­
ficient to satisfy the need to protect patients’ interests. Although these two 
assumptions are widely accepted among physicians, compelling research 
findings using a variety of methods have called their validity into ques­
tion. . . . Social science research demonstrates that the impulse to recipro­
cate for even small gifts is a powerful influence on people’s behavior.3 [. . .]
Receiving industry gifts compromises professionalism and your fiduciary 
duty to your patients. Part of the surgeon’s professional role is to manage the 
patient’s resources for his or her best interest. This so-called fiduciary duty 
means putting the patient’s interests before personal benefit. Market incen­
tives to surgeons and relationships between them and pharmaceutical com­
panies and medical device manufacturers may compromise this duty. [. . .]
	2.	 I’m smarter than they are; they can’t fool me.
Devious marketing strategies. Drug detailing has been a major part of the 
pharmaceutical industry for more than a century. Although their methods 
have changed over time, the fact that they continue to spend large sums to 
promote drugs and devices to the physicians who control access shows that 
it is working.
“Devious” may seem like a harsh term to describe the industry’s mar­
keting strategies. Yet, as a result of a federal lawsuit over the marketing of 
gabapentin, we got a rare glimpse into the real, often deceitful, world of 
pharmaceutical promotion. The companies involved eventually admitted to 
violating federal regulations by promoting the drug for pain, psychiatric con­
ditions, migraines, and other unapproved uses.4 [. . .]
	3.	 Why can’t I spend a few minutes talking with the very pleasant (and 
pretty/handsome) drug rep? They have to make a living, too.
Ever see an ugly drug rep? “Detailing” is sending attractive company rep­
resentatives (lobbyists) to meet with physicians in their offices or clinics to 
discuss (push) their newest drugs. These are individuals who are knowledge­
able about the drugs they are selling, about how to best interact with physi­
cians, and who have excellent sales techniques. [. . .]
How intense is drug detailing? It costs a great deal for you to receive the 
drug companies’ largesse. The industry employs 80,000 to 100,000 drug com­
pany detailers, a ratio of 1 salesperson for every 5 office-based physicians and 
an increase of more than 100% from the approximately 42,000 employed in 
1996. During 2003, drug manufacturers spent $22 billion on direct market­
ing to doctors in the United States alone. That amounts to about $25,000 per 
physician per year.5 [. . .]

	
Gifts from Industry	
269
	4.	 Why shouldn’t I have someone to tell me about the newest drugs and 
devices? I don’t have the time to read all the journals.
Admittedly, about 150,000 medical journals are now being published 
worldwide. No one can keep up with this deluge of information. However, 
there are good alternatives, such as the subscriber-supported, rather than 
advertiser-supported, Medical Letter and Thoracic Surgery Clinics.
	5.	 Anyway, the reps don’t know whether I prescribe their drugs or not.
Of course, they do! Most physicians don’t realize that each week drug 
detailers receive detailed lists of every prescription written by every physician 
they visit.6 Huge data-mining companies purchase information on the millions 
of prescriptions that physicians write each month and resell it to pharmaceuti­
cal manufacturers, who then distribute the information to their detailers. This 
information allows pharmaceutical reps to target individual doctors and to 
adjust their sales pitches until they find the one that works best. [. . .]
	6.	 Are you claiming that I don’t practice elegant, evidence-based medicine?
Elegant medicine is providing patients with the best result that has the 
lowest cost, the least discomfort, and the fewest and least-risky interventions. 
Evidence-based medicine is the integration of the best available clinically rel­
evant research evidence with clinical expertise and patient values. [. . .]
	7.	 Don’t indigent patients need drug samples?
This is the most frequent defense physicians give for interacting with 
industry salespeople. It is best viewed by asking [two] separate questions:
[A]‌ What drugs are given to physicians as samples? Sample medications 
given to physicians are the most costly gifts that pharmaceutical companies 
distribute. Although individual trips, medical equipment, grants, and con­
sulting fees are more expensive, they are much less commonly dispersed. 
Samples are never generic and are seldom for inexpensive therapy.7
[B]‌ What happens to these samples? Although the medical community 
likes to assert that drug samples are used for patients, either because they are 
indigent or for the convenience of being able to start the medication imme­
diately, this often is not true. Physicians, their families, and office staff often 
use these samples. Many samples are stolen and resold.8 [. . .]
	8.	 Don’t medical journals, medical societies, and fellowship programs 
need funds from the pharmaceutical and medical device industries to 
survive?
Journal publishers become anguished when anyone suggests that they 
eliminate drug and medical equipment advertising. In 2003, the pharmaceuti­
cal industry spent $448 million on advertising in medical journals, a relatively 

	 270	
The Ethics of Surgery
paltry amount given the $5.3 billion spent on detailing aimed at physicians 
and the $16.4 billion (market value) on providing free drug samples. (The real 
value of the sample drugs is estimated as $2 to $3 billion per year.)9 [. . .]
	9.	 Doesn’t the pharmaceutical industry regulate itself? How about gov­
ernment regulations? Aren’t there enough controls on pharmaceuti­
cal/equipment marketing to physicians to prevent abuses?
Aren’t there industry and medical association guidelines? The PhRMA 
adopted voluntary ethical guidelines in 1990, and slightly revised them in 
2002. Those guidelines prohibit gifts worth more than $100. [. . .]
The American Medical Association’s (AMA) Council on Ethical and Judicial 
Affairs developed a policy on gifts to physicians from industry in 1990. They con­
formed to the same standard of allowing gifts only if they “primarily entail a ben­
efit to patients and should not be of substantial value” (less than $100).10 [. . .]
What guidelines does the US government have? In April 2003, the Office 
of the Inspector General (OIG) for the US Department of Health and Human 
Services issued final federal guidelines for physician-pharmaceutical indus­
try relations, including the gray areas that they said had a “significant poten­
tial for abuse”: funding for education, research and consulting, as well as gifts 
and gratuities.11 [. . .]
	10.	  It doesn’t really matter what I do. The drug companies are switching 
tactics.
Pharmaceutical industry advertising increasingly targets consumers 
directly through the media and the Internet, which is often difficult to counter. 
Physician-directed advertising is also changing with the times and with companies’ 
need to comply with federal guidelines to avoid prosecution. The pharmaceutical 
and medical equipment industries are increasingly targeting physician-customers 
using electronic media, including Web sites, e-mail, Web-based “surveys,” instant 
messaging, and personal digital assistant programs.
Given this onslaught, what individual practitioners do matters enor­
mously. We serve as role models for colleagues and trainees, and as examples 
to our patients. Compromising our values for any reason diminishes our self 
worth and our professionalism.
To know what to do, we need only ask ourselves. Are we adequately pro­
tecting our patients’ interests?
Con
Robert James Cerfolio, MD
The history of the relationship between industry and medicine is long and 
productive. It is marked by many great achievements. Millions of Americans 
 

	
Gifts from Industry	
271
and patients all around the world have benefited greatly from this partner­
ship. The facts are clear. Many more patients have benefited from this part­
nership than have the pockets of doctors or members of industry. A plethora 
of examples illustrate just how well this relationship works and how it has 
helped a large number of patients. [. . .]
The interaction between industry and physicians takes place on many 
different levels [. . .] [One] type of interaction occurs mostly at academic cen­
ters and involves research projects or studies. These types of interactions can 
involve large dollar amounts and are more problematic. Once again, strict 
rules and regulations exist on both sides and help promulgate rules to protect 
both sides. The specific rules vary for each academic hospital and for each 
drug company but can be easily viewed at the Web sites of each university 
or industry. Yet, it has been this latter relationship that has been the focus 
of great debate and controversy lately. We will focus our discussion on this 
second type of interaction.
Any relationship between two large, diverse groups that are composed of 
many different individuals gives rise, unfortunately, to negative events as well 
as positive. The negative events often gain quick overnight national atten­
tion. A complicated issue becomes compressed into a perfunctory 10-second 
sound bite by the media. Irrational exuberance often follows, sometimes 
leading to sweeping legal changes. One or two egregious cases that receive 
national attention can quickly and permanently overshadow the thousands 
of previous positive stories that go untold. [. . .]
In 1988, a news report suggested misconduct at a Harvard-affiliated hos­
pital in an industry-supported clinical study. The immediate response from the 
Harvard administration, as it has to be in today’s legal climate, was to tighten 
its academic-industry research rules and regulations, even though not all of the 
facts behind the case had been fully discovered or evaluated.12 Similarly, the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) mandated that their 20,000 employees sell 
all of their investments in stocks and bonds in any health-related industry.13 
These types of internal changes at many academic institutions illustrate the 
climate that exists within these centers. [. . .]
This debate, for which no true scientific data exist to support either side, 
is as much about the promulgation of laws and the protection of academic 
institutions from lawsuits as it is about the protection of physicians’ mor­
als or patients’ rights. Because no prospective randomized data support 
either side in this debate, decisions must be based on common sense and 
experience.
[. . .] [T]‌he supporting literature offered by Kenneth Iserson [. . .] was all 
retrospective and subjective. There is no prospective data that industry and 
greed have led to increased mortality secondary to compromised ethics by 
physicians or industry members. In fact, the death rate in industry-sponsored 
research has held constant over the past decade, even though the level of 

	 272	
The Ethics of Surgery
involvement between industry and academia has significantly increased.14 
Thus, the only objective evidence available implies the opposite conclusion.
In an amusing but tragically accurate article [. . .], Thomas P.  Stossel 
equates the witch-hunts of the 16th century to the call by the Journal of the 
American Medical Association (JAMA) and the NIH to outlaw all industry 
from their society. Stossel shows the similarities between the hysteria of the 
two events: lack of logic, absence of data, and subsequent actions out of fear 
and ignorance. Stossel writes:
The witch hunters of “The Hammer” and of the JAMA paper propose 
extreme remedies that promise great but practically unattainable rewards. 
The Hammer recommended torture to elicit confessions from witches 
and severe punishments following convictions . . . the JAMA authors 
want all commercial contributions removed from academic health cen­
ters. The JAMA article badly states “that a system review of the medical 
literature on industry gifting . . . found that an overwhelming majority of 
industry interactions had negative results on patient care” Although the 
sources it cites explicitly say “No study used patient outcome measures,” 
the JAMA article reminds us that industry marketing influenced the pre­
scribing habits of physicians . . . but it repeatedly neglects documented 
evidence that physicians fail to prescribe appropriate drugs according to 
evidence-based guidelines. . . . The Hammer predicted that eliminating 
witches would cleanse the world of ills. . . . But witches burned and the 
problems persisted. The JAMA article says that abolishing the commer­
cial interface in academic health centers will lower the cost of drugs by 
encouraging prescriptions of cheaper ones. Since physicians not in aca­
demic centers write by far the most prescriptions the basis of this hypo­
thetical cost savings is unclear. Even stranger is the idea that companies 
would sponsor research of no direct benefit to them. . . . They wield the 
hammer of a new witch hunt.15
The facts and data that supported burning witches at the stake are strik­
ingly similar to the facts and data presented on the malevolent effect that 
industry has on physicians. There exist no data for either, only hysteria.
What does common sense tells us about this issue? How many of us really 
believe that the daily decisions we make to treat our patients are swayed by 
the company’s logo on the pen in our pocket? Do we truly believe that the 
care of our patients is affected or subconsciously altered because a drug com­
pany sponsored a lunch that we attended earlier in the day or last week? If 
we answer no, it is possible that we are completely blind to the unconscious 
effect the drug companies are having on our free will? However, if we receive 
a cash bonus each time we place a certain type of cardiac valve or chest wall 
prosthetic in a patient’s chest are we sure we are not biased toward using that 
company’s product?

	
Gifts from Industry	
273
Common sense guides us in our answers to these questions. In my experi­
ence, members of industry often supply me with important peered-reviewed 
scientific articles and educational pamphlets. They are well informed and 
provide sound educational information to me and my residents and fellows. 
Regulations and restrictions already in place help monitor our interaction 
and keep us both honest and ethical. These rules and regulation have been 
specifically cited earlier in this article and are found in every academic uni­
versity in the United States (although each center’s rules slightly vary). In 
addition, each industry has specific guidelines for its employees as well.
There are, however, obvious differences between us. Our main objective 
during our training (a long road that entails 12 grueling years of education 
and training after college) is to learn how to best care for the sick. The main 
objective of members of industry is to make money for their companies. This 
difference uniquely positions us to handle our interaction with members of 
industry and to ensure it remains responsible and ethical. This is not to imply 
that members of industry do not want physicians to provide outstanding 
patient care; we all know that the vast majority of them do—in fact, I have 
never meet a single one who did not. They know that the optimal way for 
them to maximize their profits is to provide us with products that help us 
improve the care of our patients. [. . .]
A healthy interaction is a critical pathway towards achieving the best 
medicine, medical equipment, and care that our patients deserve. If we elimi­
nate our contact with our friends and colleagues from industry; that is, if we 
“refuse the pen and notepad,” the repercussions on future research and devel­
opment would be severe. Most importantly, the impact on our patients would 
be profound. Our health care system, which is already financially strapped, 
is ill positioned now more than ever to avoid all contacts with industry. 
President Bush recently called for further reduction in the federal funding 
of cancer research. Industry and physicians need one another to further 
improve patient care. Thus, a relationship between us is needed on all levels. 
But further refinements and education of these existing laws and regulations 
are needed to ensure that the relationship remains appropriate, honest, and 
open to peer review.
So, “refuse the pen and notepad”? Of course not. We should accept them 
and be willing to discuss our knowledge with local members of industry. 
We should be able to learn from them as well as allow them to learn from 
us. Together, we can share each other’s expertise and strength and together 
develop better medicines and medical devices for our patients. We should 
maintain an amicable relationship, but ensure it is appropriate and is care­
fully regulated by sensible rules that are open and subject to review. Our 
patients have reaped the benefits of this relationship in the past and they 
deserve to continue to enjoy the fruits of a healthy physician-industry rela­
tionship in the future.

	 274	
The Ethics of Surgery
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] Industry, physicians, and patients have benefited from physicians’ inter­
actions with drug and device representatives for decades, as Cerfolio has 
summarized, and at least some harm has been done, as Iserson has docu­
mented. The possibility that the benefit-harm ratio has diminished or per­
haps even reversed, producing a net harm, raises important ethical issues. 
The principle at the core of medical ethics is this: we, as physicians, owe our 
first allegiance to our patients. There is no question, therefore, that we should 
do whatever is necessary to protect the interests of our patients. Iserson alerts 
us to the harm he sees being done to patients and urges us, as individuals, 
to maintain our professionalism. He stops short, however, of recommend­
ing banning drug representative interactions with physicians, as others have. 
For example, Stanford, Pennsylvania, and Yale Universities, among others, 
have pioneered a policy of excluding drug representatives entirely from their 
academic medical center campuses.16 The extent to which this policy has pro­
tected patients has yet to be demonstrated.
We might consider following their example, but before we go beyond 
Iserson’s hortatory conclusion and take more severe measures, we must rec­
ognize that the evidence impelling us in that direction is not strong in any 
scientific sense. In science, we have a generally accepted standard of valid­
ity: the probability that a proposition is not true is less than 5%, or p <0.05. 
In the law, decisions are made under several standards of evidence, depend­
ing on the nature of the charge: preponderance, clear and convincing, and 
beyond reasonable doubt. The preponderance of evidence on the effects on 
physicians of gifts from industry favors harm over benefit, in my view, but the 
truth of this conclusion is far from beyond a reasonable doubt.
There will be a wide spectrum of views on whether the evidence is 
clear and convincing. It seems simple enough merely to do as Iserson sug­
gests: maintain sensitivity to potential ill effects of gifts and do not compro­
mise professional values. Others have suggested far more draconian responses 
to the information we have on the effects of gifts from industry on physicians, 
as I have noted. An important question arising from the exchange between 
Iserson and Cerfolio is this: How strong must be the evidence of harm to 
patients before we should be willing to undertake such drastic measures as 
locking drug and device representatives out of our teaching hospitals?
References
	1.	Wazana A. Physicians and the pharmaceutical industry. Is a gift ever just a gift? 
JAMA. 2000;283:373–80.
 
 

	
Gifts from Industry	
275
	 2.	 Harder B. Pushing drugs: how medical marketing influences doctors and patients. 
Science News 2005;168(5):75–76. www.sciencenews.org/articles/20050730/bob10.asp. 
Accessed October 16, 2006.
	 3.	 Brennan TA, Rothman DJ, Blank L, et al. Health industry practices that create con­
flicts of interest. JAMA. 2006;295:429–33.
	 4.	 Steinman MA, Bero LA, Chren MM, Landefeld CS. Narrative review: the promo­
tion of gabapentin: an analysis of internal industry documents. Ann Intern Med. 
2006;145:284–93.
	 5.	 Center for Policy Alternatives, Prescription Drug Marketing 2004. www.stateac­
tion.org/issues/issue.cfm/issue/PrescriptionDrugMarketing.xml. Accessed October 
16, 2006.
	 6.	 Brownlee S, Lenzer J. Spin doctored: how drug companies keep tabs on physicians. 
Slate, May 31, 2005.
	 7.	 Grant DC, Iserson KV. Who’s buying lunch: are gifts to surgeons from industry bad 
for patients? Thorac Surg Clin. 2005;15:533–42.
	 8.	 Westfall JM, McCabe J, Nicholas RA. Personal use of drug samples by physicians 
and office staff. JAMA. 1997;278:141–3.
	 9.	 Scherer FM. The pharmaceutical industry—prices and progress. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351:927–32.
	10.	 American Medical Association’s (AMA) Council on Ethical and Judicial 
Affairs:  E-8.061 Gifts to physicians from industry. Chicago:  American Medical 
Association; adopted December 1990; updated June 1998.
	11.	 US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector 
General: Compliance program guidance for pharmaceutical manufacturers. Federal 
Register 2003;68: 23731–43.
	12.	 Presidents and Fellows of Harvard College. Policy on conflicts of interest and com­
mitment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. http://www.hms.harvard.edu/integ­
rity.conf.html.
	13.	 Steinbeck R. Financial conflicts of interest and the NIH. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350:327–30.
	14.	 Montaner JS, O’Shaughnessy MV, Schechter MT. Industry-sponsored clinical 
research: a double-edged sword. Lancet 2001;358:1893–5.
	15.	 Stossel TP. Witch Hunt. Wall Street Journal. February 2006.
	16.	 Croasdale M. Some medical schools say no to drug reps’ free lunch: Stanford, Yale 
and the University of Pennsylvania have adopted policies to create a brighter line 
between medicine and marketing. AMNews. October 9, 2006. http://www.ama-assn.
org/amednews/site/free/prl21009.htm. Accessed March 16, 2006.

276
23
Should the Financial Link Between Industry 
and Physician Consultants Be Severed?
Stephen J. Immelt, Vincent A. Gaudiani, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Conflicts of interest come about when one must choose between two or more 
options that are incompatible. In medicine, they usually relate to choices 
between serving the interests of patients directly or indirectly versus serving 
one’s own interests, which might be career related or financial. A particularly 
controversial area lies in the relations between physicians and pharmaceu­
tical or device companies. For cardiothoracic surgeons, the most frequent 
interactions are with device companies.
The high level of public attention to such Conflicts of interest has led 
the drug and device industries and medical specialty societies, including 
The Society of Thoracic Surgeons and American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, to develop guidelines for physician-industry interactions.1 The 
guidelines generally are not intended to eliminate Conflicts of interest, which 
is impossible, but to “manage” them. To Congress, however, self-imposed 
management is not enough. Scandalous payments of millions of dollars have 
received front-page coverage. [. . .]
Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa has been the bulldog behind Senate 
investigations, and introduced a bill that requires all health care–related com­
panies to report publicly all payments to physicians: the Physician Payments 
Sunshine Act. The provisions of this bill were included in the new health care 
* Immelt SJ, Gaudiani VA, Sade RM. Should the financial link between industry and physi­
cian consultants be severed? Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Sep;92(3):781–7. Copyright Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Financial Links Between Industry and MDs	
277
reform law [. . .].2 In the view of Congress, medical centers may not be capable 
of managing industry payments to physicians, so it seems altogether possible 
that Congress will eventually enact laws that will entirely sever the financial 
link between industry and physicians. At the least, we are in a regulatory 
atmosphere that seems headed toward ever-increasing restrictions on such 
financial interactions.
In a point-counterpoint discussion [. . .], an argument for institutional 
oversight of physician-industry financial interactions was made by Stephen 
Immelt, an attorney who focuses primarily on complex enforcement litiga­
tion [. . .]. Taking exception to Immelt’s views, Vincent Gaudiani, a cardiotho­
racic surgeon who has had long-time interests in quality assurance in cardiac 
surgery and in relations between physicians and industry, argues that institu­
tional oversight is inadequate and collaboration between physicians, health 
care institutions, industry, and Congressional leaders is needed to legislate 
rationality into a chaotic area.
Pro
Stephen J. Immelt, JD
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: THE CASE FOR INSTITUTIONAL OVERSIGHT 
OF INDIVIDUAL CONSULTING ACTIVITY
Twenty years ago, health care fraud and abuse was viewed as the province of 
shady doctors and crooks engaged in clear and obvious fraud such as billing 
for nonexistent patients. At the same time, there existed a web of financial 
relationships between physicians and providers and a range of suppliers such 
as pharmaceutical and device companies. Extravagant entertaining and gifts 
were common, as were a range of other payment relationships. These rela­
tionships took place outside the public eye, and the participants viewed them 
as standard business practices, not a form of corruption or a conflict of inter­
est. This was, in essence, a black box.
Here we are in 2010, with meetings generally at an airport hotel, a deli 
platter for lunch, and increasing insistence that physicians document their 
consulting activities to the level of a lawyer. Yet still questions linger. What 
happened?
One explanation is that the health care sector, including the medical pro­
fession, lost control over the narrative. Using two key federal statutes—the 
Anti-Kickback Act (AKA) and the False Claims Act—a group of determined 
prosecutors sought to pry the lid off that black box. What they found was 
not a pretty picture. To be sure, that did not happen in one step. They started 
with clinical laboratories, then moved to dialysis providers, hospitals, and 
academic medicine, then hit the mother lode in pharmaceuticals, an effort 
that has been expanded in recent years to include devices.3 Some observers 
 
 

	 278	
The Ethics of Surgery
have applauded this development. After all, the AKA is a criminal statute, so 
these must have been corrupt practices.4
The problem is that the AKA can be construed quite broadly through 
the so-called “one purpose” test, and the huge penalties, which can include 
exclusion from participation in all governmental health care programs, can 
make it ruinous to contest the theories. That is not to imply that there were 
no bad facts in these cases. There were. But the format of these settlements 
had the effect of casting the issues in extremely broad terms. And the nar­
rative that emerged from these many proceedings was that the health care 
system suffered from rampant fraud, particularly with respect to the financial 
relationships.
Another consequence of these various enforcement efforts was to expose 
the scope and scale of the financial dealings. Putting aside any notion of cor­
ruption, there has been increasing discomfort with those appearances. This 
has been particularly true as more information has emerged about the details 
of the collaboration between industry and the profession in areas like medi­
cal education, publications, and treatment standards. But the inflammatory 
labels applied to these activities do not capture the nuances and good faith 
efforts to develop and communicate useful scientific information.
Although the “corruption” model continues to play a primary role in 
driving the mainstream narrative, there has been a recognition that cor­
ruption cannot explain all the areas of concern. Increasingly, the discus­
sion has been cast in terms of conflicts of interest. The American Medical 
Association, Pharmaceutical Research Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), 
and Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed) codes all speak 
in terms of good ethical practice.
A focus on conflicts of interest has brought an interesting dimension to 
the discussion. The classic legal paradigm for dealing with conflicts of inter­
est is disclosure and consent. Acting on that model, we have seen a series of 
legislative initiatives at the state level focused on disclosure, and the approach 
of a federal disclosure requirement. And recent settlements in orthopedic and 
pharmaceutical cases have mandated public posting of the company’s finan­
cial dealings with physicians and customers.
But does disclosure solve the problem?
The 2009 Institute of Medicine (IOM) study [. . .] suggests not.5 The 
IOM study posits that the goal of conflict of interest policies is to protect 
the integrity of professional judgment, not just to remediate problems after 
they occur. Defining a conflict of interest broadly as “a set of circumstances 
that creates a risk that professional judgment on actions regarding a pri­
mary interest [e.g. patient care] will be unduly influenced by a secondary 
interest,” the IOM cautions that failure to adopt a more robust approach 
to such conflicts may ultimately erode public trust in health care provid­
ers. Although the IOM views the identification of conflicts as a crucial 

	
Financial Links Between Industry and MDs	
279
undertaking, it considers disclosure to be merely a preliminary step, not a 
solution. Why is disclosure insufficient? One problem is that patients may 
not be in a position to analyze the relevance of a disclosed relationship, nor 
feel comfortable raising it with someone who they are trusting with their 
care. More importantly, the IOM canvasses the psychological and medical 
literature and develops an intriguing case for the proposition that uncon­
scious bias plays a much stronger role in decision making than any of us 
may be prepared to acknowledge. In this regard, such bias poses a larger 
threat than corruption, and one that disclosure cannot address or mitigate. 
Thus, as the IOM sees it, there must not only be a system for disclosing con­
flicts but a way to manage them.
Unfortunately, the IOM report does not identify a clear way forward 
beyond identifying the need for stronger standards and active manage­
ment. Yet without effective attention to these issues, the pressure for exter­
nal regulation will increase, driven by a “corruption” narrative that may 
seek to reduce further or eliminate financial relationships without regard 
to any corresponding benefits. One available option that warrants con­
sideration might be to insist that consultant activity be directed through 
the institutions that employ physicians—namely, academic medical cen­
ters and practice organizations—as opposed to being viewed as the inde­
pendent province of those physicians. Most institutions, and virtually all 
academic medical centers, already have conflict of interest policies and, 
more importantly, a mechanism for managing the conflicts. Ensuring that 
institutions are in a position to manage these relationship would help blunt 
both the influence and appearance of the payments, and also ensure com­
pliance in other areas such as National Institutes of Health regulations, 
Bayh-Dole, and policies dealing with the ownership and transfer of intel­
lectual property.
Admittedly, a shift toward institutional funding would work against 
the interests of private practice physicians, many of whom have been active 
and productive consultants. But the IOM study challenges the assumption 
that the public interest in unbiased decision making can be ensured simply 
by broader disclosure. Even presuming complete good faith, there is only 
so much an individual physician consultant can do. Certainly, the rela­
tionship can be disclosed, but how can that relationship be managed? The 
burden arguably should be on those entrusted with making professional 
judgments to demonstrate that the possible bias attendant to a finan­
cial relationship can be managed and ameliorated in a meaningful way. 
Perhaps it may be possible to develop a model for third party oversight of 
individual consulting arrangements, but until that happens, the institu­
tional approach would seem a better option for ensuring that the public 
supports industry collaboration and avoiding another round of embarrass­
ing enforcement actions.

	 280	
The Ethics of Surgery
Con
Vincent A. Gaudiani, MD
HOW SHOULD PHYSICIANS INTERACT WITH THE 
HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY?
Corrupt practices have infiltrated an otherwise enormously fruitful relation­
ship between physicians and big business. These practices have lead two states 
to pass legislation that substantially changes how business and physicians 
interact. In this essay, we examine whether severing all financial relationships 
between individual physicians and big business will reduce corruption and 
improve patient care. This idea is incorrect for reasons we outline, but this 
relationship does need grooming. We recommend that physician leaders join 
with legislators and businessmen to craft template legislation to regulate this 
important relationship. Unless we come together to decide upon optimal pro 
forma rules, we will continue to get a mishmash of State laws that will serve 
all parties poorly.
BACKGROUND
Open heart surgery began with collaboration between big business and vision­
ary surgeons. As many of you know, just after World War II, John Gibbon, 
a young Philadelphia surgeon, was struggling to develop a cardiopulmonary 
bypass machine. He enlisted the help of Tom Watson, the founder of IBM, 
and the result of that collaboration was the beginning of our craft. [. . .] A few 
years later, Lowell Edwards, a successful aeronautical engineer, challenged 
Albert Starr to collaborate on a total artificial heart. [. . .] The result of that 
encounter is a company that is still at the forefront of valve replacement tech­
nology. Starr and Edwards had barely begun when they encountered Tom 
Fogarty. Fogarty had already patented the embolectomy catheter that would 
save thousands of lives and limbs and started the era of less invasive surgery 
even before the era of large incision surgery had hit its stride. These pioneers 
and others lit the tinder that would not only save millions of lives, but would 
create, in less than a lifetime, a huge and vibrant health care industry that is 
the envy of the world.
Now, less than a half century later, industry and physicians have formed 
increasingly complex relationships to solve increasingly complex clinical 
problems. For instance, consider the elaborate partnership required to intro­
duce percutaneous aortic valve prostheses into the United States. There are 
scientific, ethical, regulatory, training, proctoring, and manufacturing issues 
that can only be solved by committed physicians and businessmen working 
together. Physicians contribute their time and expertise, and business con­
tributes millions of investors’ dollars and their own special knowledge. [. . .]
 
 
 

	
Financial Links Between Industry and MDs	
281
THE PROBLEM
Such efforts as these occurring through all the specialties and with both 
device and pharmaceutical companies could not occur without a ration of 
the vices that flesh is heir to. These are as common to us as speech itself and 
deeply a part of our nature: it is the corruption of greed, kickbacks, misrep­
resentation, and cronyism that have always been the camp followers of legiti­
mate enterprise, be it legal, political, religious, medical, or commercial. Some 
forms of it are clearly illegal, and all are distasteful. Those who would sever 
the financial relationship between physicians and industry argue that there 
have been numerous scandals in which doctors were paid kickbacks to use a 
certain device or drug. More generally, they argue that physician prescribing 
behavior is influenced by sales visits and small gifts from industry and that 
many follow-up studies, educational dinners, and speaking fees are sub rosa 
bribes to encourage use of a particular drug or device. [. . .]
SOME INFERENCES
Given these observations, we can make certain inferences. First, Western 
democracies have thrived by encouraging private enterprise, and private 
enterprise requires that businesses create and maintain customers. The cus­
tomer relationship in every business is complex and interactive, particularly 
in medicine, because the businessmen and the physicians each have special 
skills required to create new products and teach their proper use. In addi­
tion, most of the contact between industry and physicians has not only been 
moral, but has also produced health, wealth, and employment for millions of 
people. We should be wary of outlawing whole classes of business relation­
ships unless they are pervasively immoral.
The term “conflict of interest” is omnipresent in discussions such as this, 
but it is widely misused by all sides. It is the job of all professionals, preachers, 
lawyers, and doctors to skillfully negotiate these conflicts. What is really at 
stake here is immoral conduct. We must define it clearly, and punish it appro­
priately, as I will suggest with a few recommendations at the end of this essay.
Some believe that all business arrangements between physicians and 
industry should be mediated by an academic institution or hospital. That 
belief is deeply ironic because the most damaging behavior between business 
and medicine occurs at the institutional level, not with individual doctors. You 
will learn the sad facts when you read The New York Times,6 Marcia Angell’s 
book on big pharma, or her article in the New York Review of Books.7 [. . .] 
These and many other recent works document serious malfeasance among 
physicians, their official institutions, and the business community. They are 
final proof that all relationships involving money and power require rules and 
laws to minimize corruption. The key question is what form they should take 
 
 

	 282	
The Ethics of Surgery
to minimize our vices without trampling the relationships that have brought 
us so far. [. . .]
SOME FRAMEWORKS OF A SOLUTION
The crux of the problem is to define a framework for interaction between 
business and medicine that encourages valuable collaboration, deemphasizes 
the normal jostle and the imperfections of capitalist interchange, and pun­
ishes what is immoral and what is dangerous for patients. So let us begin the 
discussion of how we should relate with a few observations:
First, business will always be business. No rules will make it otherwise. 
Most major health care companies recognize that in the long run, ethical 
behavior best serves shareholders’ interest. [. . .] Some marketing is just hype, 
but some of it is genuinely useful education. These businesses should foster 
their brands and offer their newest products. None of this is corrupt, in my 
view. Perhaps medical students and physicians need courses to help them to 
analyze the difference between valuable information and lipstick, both of 
which are inevitable in a society such as ours.
Second, a business cannot be a business unless it has customers. Peter 
Drucker, the original management consultant, once said that the purpose 
of a business is to create customers, and that is a deep truth about the con­
struction of our society.8 We physicians are one group of customers served by 
business. Patients are another. At every level, our society depends on moral 
contact between customers and businesses. Therefore, I  respectfully pro­
pose that we avoid legislation that interferes unduly with this fundamental 
American relationship. We must aim to regulate these important relation­
ships to achieve better care, not impair them because they might become 
corrupt.
Third, physicians must act in the best interest of the patients they care 
for. This is an absolute. Physicians simply cannot choose inferior or unneces­
sary therapies because they have a strong customer relationship with a busi­
ness. [. . .]
Fourth, all major research centers must demand freedom from industrial 
interference in the research mechanism. That doesn’t require laws; it requires 
that all such institutions demand academic freedom.
Fifth, we should concentrate on structuring relationships between busi­
ness and individual physicians that will bear fruit for patients and, for the 
moment, ignore the many other classes of problems between society and 
health care businesses. [. . .]
Finally, any rules we create must account for the variety of ways physi­
cians interact with the business world. We are consultants, teachers, inven­
tors, and investors. Each of these roles must be addressed, and I believe they 
must be addressed directly between physicians and business. [. . .]
 

	
Financial Links Between Industry and MDs	
283
Fortunately, we have an ethical framework to start the process of making 
safe venue for physicians and business to continue creating products and pro­
cedures without endangering patients. It is an excellent start, but it is a long 
way from a robust template of rules that might be incorporated into various 
State laws. That should be our goal.
To achieve this goal, I  respectfully suggest that our major Societies 
convene a meeting with leaders from AdvaMed, distinguished health care 
attorneys, and interested legislators [. . .] to craft optimal legislation to set the 
standard for robust, moral interchange between physicians and business. [. . .]
At about the same time that Dr. Gibbon was struggling to develop car­
diopulmonary bypass, Peter Drucker had just finished his landmark study, 
The Concept of the Corporation.9 He wrote, “The central problem of all mod­
ern society is not whether we want Big Business but what we want of it, and 
what organization of Big Business and of the society it serves is best equipped 
to realize our wishes and demands.” This is the fundamental problem we face 
as we try to decide how and under what constraints physicians and the health 
care industry should interact. Together we must weed the garden that has 
produced so much health and wealth.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
[. . .] Relations between industry and physicians have a checkered history. As 
recently as the 1950s and 1960s, contacts between industry representatives 
and physicians were seen in a strongly positive light; drug representatives 
were viewed as important sources of information for physicians. That light 
has dimmed considerably in recent decades, to near extinction. Since the turn 
of this century, frank condemnation of such contacts has become prominent 
in both the medical literature and the lay press.
The number of articles in the medical literature dealing with conflicts of 
interest in health care professionals’ relations with industry has grown over 
the past 15 years (Figure 23.1).10 No paper on this topic was published until 
one appeared in 1987. Thereafter, the number of articles per year grew slowly, 
remaining in the range of 10 to 15 through the 1990s. In 2000, the number 
jumped to the range of 35 to 70 papers per year, stimulated at least in part 
by several high-profile scandals in medical research. This plateau has been 
sustained through 2010.
Most published articles during this period have been critical of inter­
actions between industry and health care professionals, and many propose 
regulation, some draconian, of physician-industry interactions. Yet, there is 
a small but eloquent and persuasive literature arguing that the seriousness of 
these problems has been overblown.
 

	 284	
The Ethics of Surgery
In a widely cited paper in the New England Journal of Medicine, Thomas 
Stossel asserts that none of the justifications for regulating physician-industry 
interactions hold up under close inspection.11 In countering several types of 
arguments for regulation, for example, he points out that no data exist show­
ing that research misbehavior is more common in studies that are sponsored 
by industry than in those that are not. There is also no evidence that financial 
interactions are disproportionately associated with fabrication of data, nor 
is there any credible evidence that industry consultants are biased positively 
toward the companies for which they consult. No data supports claims of 
a low quality of research done under commercial sponsorship. Moreover, 
there is no evidence that public trust in the health care enterprise has suffered 
because of high-profile scandals involving physician-industrial interactions. 
To the contrary, Stossel says, a great deal of damage can be done by excessive 
regulation arising from overreaction to adverse events, by erecting barriers 
between academic and industrial entities with a history of highly productive 
collaboration in the past.
In addition to Stossel’s observations, a recent editorial in these pages 
points out that there is little to no evidence that patients are harmed by con­
flicts of interest arising from physician-industry interactions, but there is 
much evidence that such interactions have resulted in great benefit.12 Evidence 
or lack of it, however, does not drive public policy; rather, the impetus for 
change comes mostly from anecdote, publicity, and the perceptions they gen­
erate. It seems likely that policy making that is designed to rectify percep­
tions of wrongdoing in relations between physicians and industry will not 
be deflected by rational arguments, such as Stossel’s, which point to greater 
80
Year of Citation
Number of Citations
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
FIGURE 23.1  Health-care professionals’ conflicts of interest related to industry: number 
of citations per year in PubMed. The numbers were derived from a PubMed search 
using the search term “conflict of interest industry,” with limitations to English language 
and core clinical journals. Adapted from Sade RM. Dangerous liaisons? Industry 
relations with health professionals. J Law Med Ethics. 2009;37:398–400.

	
Financial Links Between Industry and MDs	
285
harm than benefit of such policies. It seems nearly certain that further regula­
tion is in the future of industry-sponsored biomedical research. Regulation of 
physician-industry interactions seems highly likely to develop over the next 
few years through a political process of compromise and accommodation 
among our health care institutions, accrediting agencies, and lawmakers. 
What is uncertain is the form and substance of future regulations. All sides 
in the many debates surrounding these issues hope to influence the political 
process, guaranteeing that we will be hearing much more about this issue in 
the coming years.
References
	 1.	 Mack MJ, Sade RM, for the American Association for Thoracic Surgery Ethics 
Committee and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Standards and Ethics Committee. 
Relations between cardiothoracic surgeons and industry. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2009;87:1334–6.
	 2.	 Transparency Reports and Reporting of Physician Ownership or Investment 
Interests. Social Security Act 1128G 42 U.S.C. §1320a-7h (2010). http://www.ssa.gov/
OP_Home/ssact/title11/1128G.htm#ft116. Accessed July 13, 2011.
	 3.	 Kalb PE. Health care fraud and abuse. JAMA. 1999;282:1163–8.
	 4.	 Libby RT. The Criminalization of Medicine:  America’s War on Doctors. Santa 
Barbara, CA: Praeger; 2007.
	 5.	 Institute of Medicine. Conflict of interest in medical research, education and prac­
tice. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 2009. http://www.iom.edu/
reports/2009/conflict-of-interest-in-medical-research-education-and-practice.aspx. 
Accessed December 2, 2010.
	 6.	 Harris G, Carey B. Researchers fail to reveal full drug pay. The New York Times. 
June 8, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/08/us/08conflict.html?ex=1370664
000&en=a8295c43acc64e60&ei=5124&partner=permalink&exprod=permalink. 
Accessed December 14, 2010.
	 7.	 Angell M. Drug companies and doctors: a story of corruption. New York Review of 
Books. January 15, 2009.
	 8.	 Drucker P. The Practice of Management. New York: Harper-Business, 1954; reissue 
ed., 1993.
	 9.	 Drucker P. Concept of the Corporation. New York: John Day; 1946.
	10.	 Sade RM. Dangerous liaisons? Industry relations with health professionals. J Law 
Med Ethics. 2009;37:398–400.
	11.	 Stossel TP. Regulating academic-industrial research relationships—solving prob­
lems or stifling progress? N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1060–5.
	12.	 Sade RM. Counterpoint: full disclosure—where is the evidence for nefarious con­
flicts of interest? Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92:417–20.
 

286
24
Full Disclosure—Should Presentations and 
Publications Include Dollar Amounts and 
Duration of Surgeon-Industry Relationships?
J. Peter Murphy and Robert M. Sade*
Point: Presentations and Publications Should Include Dollar Amounts 
and Duration of Surgeon-Industry Relationships
J. Peter Murphy, MD
Much has been written regarding relationships between practicing physi­
cians, the pharmaceutical industry, and device manufacturers and their inter­
face with the medical and ethical duties we have to our patients. As medical 
fiduciaries, we are obligated to discharge our responsibilities of trust openly 
and ethically. It has been suggested that even such trivial items as pens and 
notepads should be refused, as the acceptance of such items might “endanger 
patients” through a sense of “reciprocity, the need to give something back to 
the giver,” and thereby compromise faithful execution of our duties.1
The primary issue with such concerns is whether such trivial gifts or 
items of far greater value generate conflicts of interest and thereby might 
result in compromised decision making and possible harm to patients with 
resultant erosion of doctor-patient relationships. The Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) defines conflict of interest as “circumstances that create a risk that 
professional judgments or actions regarding a primary interest will be unduly 
influenced by a secondary interest.”2
Those “secondary interests” noted by the IOM may include items such 
as professional appointments, academic advancement, lucrative consulting 
* Murphy JP, Sade RM. Ethics in cardiothoracic surgery. Point: Full disclosure—presentations 
and publications should include dollar amounts and duration of surgeon–industry relationships. 
Counterpoint: Full disclosure—where is the evidence for nefarious conflicts of interest? Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2011;92(2):413–20. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Full Disclosure of COIs	
287
contracts, stock ownership and options, speaker fees, and even the lowly pen 
and notepad. The issue at play in the present debate deals with effective and 
appropriate management of these conflicts and attempting to resolve the 
question of whether true “full disclosure” and complete transparency will be 
beneficial in the quest for optimal conflict management, and thereby protect 
us from accusations of intellectual dishonesty and moral compromise.
While it might seem intuitively obvious that “secondary interests” 
could possibly unduly influence physician behavior and judgments, evi­
dence based on tightly controlled studies is lacking, and even the IOM 
recognizes that these issues have not and cannot be analyzed by controlled 
trials. Data are available, but are primarily based upon observational 
studies and social science analysis.3 There is solid evidence from social sci­
ence research that “financial motives distort judgment,” “self-serving bias 
is unintentional” and “unconscious,” and that it can be “recognizable, but 
only in others.” Based on these observations, many major academic cen­
ters (Yale, Harvard, and Stanford, among others) have taken a proactive 
position in this regard, and prohibit contact between industry representa­
tives and medical students and residents in training, but, curiously, have 
less restrictive guidelines affecting full-time faculty.
With the preceding as background, it would seem logical and consistent 
to analyze and review the expectations of and guidance given to those with 
the highest level of potential conflict of interest, that being those physicians 
who have contractual/financial relationships (consulting, speaker, or prod­
uct development), ownership positions (stock or stock options), or potential 
royalty revenues (based upon intellectual property rights) with device man­
ufacturers or pharmaceutical companies, who also present or publish data 
pertaining to the efficacy and performance of those companies’ drugs or 
devices. A recent joint position statement from the American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery (AATS) and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) 
specified that “disclosure” is required,4 but the meaning of “disclose” is not 
defined, bringing to mind a very famous Presidential speculation on “what 
the meaning of the word ‘is’ is.”
Presently, despite the aforementioned AATS/STS position paper, dis­
closure continues for the most part to consist of a bland acknowledgment 
that a “financial relationship” exists, but a more complete disclosure regard­
ing precise dollar amounts involved and the duration of the relationship is 
absent. Interestingly, the Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 
editorial staff requires that they be informed as to the dollar amount, but 
this information is not presented with published papers. It would be infor­
mative to learn the extent to which the editorial staff reflects on this infor­
mation and why they have chosen not to fully disclose it with publication. 
Can disclosure absent these critical details truly be considered “full disclo­
sure?” Certainly not.

	 288	
The Ethics of Surgery
It is important to acknowledge the advancements and benefits our pro­
fession and thereby our patients have derived from medical professionals 
working with device manufacturers on innovative and revolutionary prod­
ucts and with pharmaceutical companies to create life-enhancing drugs. 
Clearly, many such devices and medications have developed only because of 
such collaboration, and, unquestionably, full compensation for physicians 
involved in this manner should not be prohibited or be considered undesir­
able. Conflict does not arise solely from the work and compensation related 
to product or drug invention or development, but rather from the advocacy 
and analysis of the performance or outcomes related to the specific device 
or drug. There should be no issue with physicians deriving income based 
upon their unique expertise, but we should have the intellectual honesty to 
recognize the need for full transparency regarding the extent of the relation­
ships when expounding on the efficacy or preferability of a device, product, 
or drug. [. . .]
Without full and absolute transparency regarding these potential con­
flicts, we are in danger of losing the trust that the public has in our profession. 
The key point is to proactively preserve our professional integrity and repu­
tations rather than attempt to retroactively restore our stature after it has 
been compromised by embarrassing exposure of financial conflicts. The IOM 
reflects on the extent of needed information in disclosure: “The disclosure of 
financial relationships can be effective only if it provides sufficient informa­
tion for others to use in assessing a relationship and judge the severity of the 
conflict.” [. . .]
Unfortunately, the lay press has picked up on this issue, and one can cite 
many egregious examples of unethical behavior seemingly stemming from 
the vast sums involved. A recent example from The Wall Street Journal noted 
that “Medtronic paid the surgeon accused of falsifying study nearly $800,00.”5 
In this case, a tenured professor of orthopedics at a prestigious Midwestern 
university was forced to resign his appointment after being accused of falsify­
ing data regarding the efficacy of a Medtronic bone growth drug and having 
failed to acknowledge the extent of his consulting fees to the university and 
to the publishing journal (Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery).6 If this journal 
had known upon submission of the article the extent of potential financial 
conflict, the editors might have vetted the data differently or more thoroughly 
before publication and thereby avoided this professionally humiliating and 
destructive circumstance.
I have already acknowledged that data utilized to support my opinions 
have not been derived from randomized, controlled trials, but to dismiss 
them solely upon this criterion seems irrational. Furthermore, how could one 
ever construct such a trial? It is rational that we attempt to manage conflicts 
of interest internally, and certainly if we do not, the Federal government will 
become even more intrusive than it is presently. In fact, if one argues that our 

	
Full Disclosure of COIs	
289
current standards are acceptable, and no changes are necessary or appropri­
ate, consider the following two points.
First, the Physician Payment Sunshine Act was signed into law as a sig­
nificant component of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 
(PPACA). Under the provisions of this law, device manufacturers, drug mak­
ers, and others will be required to track any payments or gifts of $10 or more 
made to physicians or academic medical centers, and the federal government 
will store, collate, and disseminate this information to the public through an 
electronic database beginning in 2013. Interestingly, this act signed March 
23, 2010, does require full financial disclosure, but puts no limits on financial 
relationships. [. . .]
Second, inevitably our patients will demand more information as they 
become increasingly aware of and more sophisticated regarding the extent 
of physician/industry relationships. Guy Chisolm [. . .] recently related that 
polling of 2,300 Clinic patients dealing with this specific topic generated a 
response rate of greater than 50%. Most respondents suggested that more 
information with greater specificity regarding the details of the relationships 
was desirable and important to them (personal communication). [. . .]
If the government is going to mandate it and our patients already want 
it, what is the legitimate argument against transparency and precise details 
regarding financial relationships? The first would seem to be that it is person­
ally intrusive and is an unnecessary invasion of privacy. Those who express 
discomfort with the prospect of full reporting (dollars and duration) seem to 
validate the feeling that a problem does exist. [. . .]
The second argument against full disclosure relates to the costs and dif­
ficulties involved with collating and reporting the data. Obviously, consulting 
and speaker’s fees that result in the issuance of 1099 forms will not be prob­
lematic as these are submitted to the recipient and to the Internal Revenue 
Service by the involved corporation on an annual basis. Equity and royalty 
positions might be somewhat more difficult, but certainly should not create 
insurmountable challenges. [. . .]
The issue of full transparency and full disclosure of potential conflicts of 
interest comes down to managing fiduciary obligations and preserving our 
trust with our patients. We must also acknowledge that full disclosure does 
not mitigate the potential for bias. It does, however, provide program com­
mittees, editorial staffs, and the listening and reading medical professionals 
important information that can be used in their analysis of data and positions 
presented and advocated. Conflicts do and will exist, and it is important that 
we manage them properly, for if we do not, they will undermine the reputa­
tion and stature of our profession, and erode the bond between ourselves and 
our patients. [. . .]
There has been pushback to the above positions, however, and recently 
a newly organized professional organization—the Association of Clinical 

	 290	
The Ethics of Surgery
Researchers and Educators (ACRE)—suggested that “the push to police 
financial relationships has gone too far” and will “impede physician-industry 
collaboration.”7 Thomas Stossel, MD, a Harvard professor of medicine, 
stated that critics of current conditions “aim to bring about a conflict-of-
interest police state.” Transparency and full disclosure might be challenging 
and discomforting, but it certainly is not draconian and is not in any way 
a prohibition to collaboration and the future development of relationships 
between physicians and industry.
The ideas and suggestions advocated herein are by no means new or 
unique. Jerome Kassirer, MD, has articulated these views for years, and most 
explicitly in his book “On the Take.”8
Among his observations are these:  Most physicians who are close to 
industry swear that they are not and could not be influenced by a financial 
conflict of interest, yet this posture ignores what we know about human 
nature and the powerful influence of money. Dr. Kassirer further opines on 
the issue of disclosure: although disclosure is not a particularly high stan­
dard, and has flaws, it is better than no disclosure at all. Addressing the “pre­
cise meaning of disclosure,” he states that there should be a requirement for 
full, detailed disclosure in legible handouts at all teaching events of the type 
(drug or devices), dollar amounts, and duration of the lecturer that relate to 
the subject at hand.
Although these statements are based on his opinion and observational 
studies rather than on randomized studies, they are precise in their intent 
and are reflective of an increasingly recognized and accepted ethical position. 
The possibility of any randomized trials resolving the debate seems remote 
and impractical.
We should leave the parsing of the “precise meaning of disclosure” to 
the professionals with legal degrees. We should “fully disclose” because not 
only is it right and honorable, but also it is inescapable as our government has 
legislated it and our patients will soon have access to it. We need to clearly 
stake out our position and plan of action before the public reporting coming 
in 2013. This is a “no brainer,” and the time for action is now.
Counterpoint: Where Is the Evidence for Nefarious Conflicts of Interest?
Robert M. Sade, MD
Recent years have seen increasing focus on relations between physicians and 
industry, particularly pharmaceutical and device companies, and the con­
flicts of interest (COIs) that might arise from them.9 Specific abuses of such 
relationships have often garnered national attention through scholarly jour­
nals and public communications media.
 
 

	
Full Disclosure of COIs	
291
[. . .] The AATS and STS official journals, The Annals of Thoracic Surgery 
(ATS) and Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery (JTCVS), respec­
tively, have specified the details of industry relationships that must be dis­
closed before a paper will be published. If a conflict is disclosed, ATS places 
a text box on the title page of the published article: “Dr. X discloses that he/
she has a financial relationship with company Y.” No additional details are 
provided.10 The JTCVS disclosure statement requires reporting not only the 
name of the company with which a conflict exists and the nature of the rela­
tionship, but also the dollar amount received by the author—other details, 
such as the duration of the relationship, are omitted.11
The published disclosures of COIs for these annual meetings and jour­
nal publications include neither dollar amounts nor duration of the reported 
relationships.
SHOULD FULL DISCLOSURE INCLUDE DOLLAR AMOUNTS 
AND RELATIONSHIP DURATION?
Cardiothoracic surgeons are familiar with the requirements of disclosure 
of COIs in presentations and in publications, as they are ubiquitous in pre­
sentations at meetings and papers in journals. In answer to the question of 
whether increased levels of disclosure are needed, J. Peter Murphy responds 
in the affirmative [. . .] and argues that we should add dollar amounts and 
duration of relationships to current disclosure requirements. [. . .] Disclosures 
of conflicts are rarely verified, making their accuracy unreliable; listeners 
and readers are often unable to identify biased information because of their 
lack of expertise; and attention may be distracted from bias by implying that 
the disclosure itself diminishes the speaker’s or author’s bias.12 Moreover, the 
plethora of disclosures at conferences and in publications may dull sensitivity 
and interest in them by virtue of frequent repetition, inuring receivers of the 
information to the relevance of disclosures.13
Much anecdotal information has been published about biased presenta­
tions and publications. Yet, the gravity of problems related to inaccurate, 
unbalanced, or prejudicial presentations is poorly understood owing to the 
paucity of systematic investigations of the frequency and impact of such 
presentations.
ARGUMENTS AGAINST DISCLOSURE OF RELATIONSHIP 
DURATION AND PAYMENTS
Murphy makes several observations with which we agree:  COIs are not 
related only to money, but also to non-financial considerations such as career 
advancement and academic achievement; the collaboration between industry 
 
 

	 292	
The Ethics of Surgery
and physicians has been highly productive and beneficial for patients in the 
past; some, but not all, financial interactions between industry and physi­
cians are unseemly or worse; hard evidence for the existence or severity of the 
problem is in short supply; and, finally, the status quo is unsatisfactory.
In making the case for increasing disclosure requirements to include dol­
lar amounts and duration of relationships, however, Murphy cites what he 
understands to be the two “legitimate” arguments against such a require­
ment: it is an intrusive, gratuitous invasion of privacy, and collecting the data 
and reporting it are difficult and costly. These are legitimate arguments, but 
they seem of minor importance compared with two much more important 
counterpoints to the case for requiring more detail in disclosures: the real 
danger of slowing if not interrupting the highly productive research and 
innovation that has come from physician-industry collaboration over the 
last half-century, and the nearly complete absence of reliable evidence that 
this collaboration or any other interactions between physicians and industry 
poses a serious threat to patient safety.
PRODUCTIVE RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
To appreciate the progress that has been made through physician-industry 
collaboration, one need only mention the pump oxygenator developed by John 
Gibbon collaborating with engineer Thomas Watson of IBM, the cardiac valve 
prosthesis developed by Albert Starr working with engineer Lowell Edwards 
(resulting in the creation of the highly successful Edwards Laboratories), and 
external, then implantable, pacemakers developed by Dr. C. Walton Lillehei 
jointly with engineer Earl Bakken, creator of Medtronic. These pairs repre­
sent collaboration between heart surgeons and commercial engineers, each of 
which led to a major advance in heart surgery. Many other highly productive 
alliances could be cited in other surgical specialties, such as orthopedics and 
neurosurgery.
The contributions to human welfare by cooperative work between phy­
sicians and industry—both pharmaceutical and device companies—have 
been enormous. In the last few decades, fully half of the reduction in deaths 
due to coronary artery disease can be attributed to collaborations that have 
led to improvements in evidence-based therapies.14 Indeed, such advances 
would not have been possible without merging the knowledge and skills of 
businessmen, engineers, and technical experts in industry with the clinical 
expertise of physicians, whose knowledge of clinical needs and the ways in 
which drugs and devices interact with the human body is indispensable to 
biomedical innovation. The higher the barriers that are erected between the 
creative minds of industry and of medicine, the less innovation and improve­
ment of human health are likely to occur. Admittedly, there is little clear and 
convincing evidence that physician-industry collaboration has been harmed 
 

	
Full Disclosure of COIs	
293
by current disclosure requirements, but given the amply proved benefits of 
such alliances and the absence of scientific evidence that they cause harm, 
the burden of proof rests on those who wish to impose additional regulation.
ABSENCE OF EVIDENCE
The facts underlying the national debate on relations between industry and 
physicians are seen to be meager when stripped of assumptions grounded 
in intuition and unsupported assertions. Murphy clearly documents much 
negative publicity in the media, some emanating from Congress, about dis­
turbingly high levels of payment from industry to some physicians. Beyond 
that, very little hard evidence indicates that physician COIs vis-à-vis industry 
pose a serious threat to health care. Nearly all of the experimental research 
underlying this concern comes from the psychology and sociology literature, 
from which physician behavior is projected from investigations carried out in 
non-medical contexts. Most of the remaining evidence comes from surveys of 
the views and experiences of physicians, residents, and patients. Both of these 
data sources have low probative value.
The ranking and relative value of evidence types has been investigated 
and described by several groups, such as the US Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF)15 and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Working Group.16 Rankings of the 
relative value of different kinds of evidence may be helpful in thinking about 
the question at hand. All of the evidence supporting the need for a high level 
of scrutiny and regulation of physician-industry relations falls into code D, 
quality of evidence is very low, suggesting that existing data are far from dis­
positive of this issue. Moreover, the lowest of five ranks on the USPSTF effec­
tiveness of evidence scale is authoritative statement: “Opinions of respected 
authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of 
expert committees.”17 We ought to exercise extreme caution in using currently 
available information, all of which is of low quality, to make important policy 
decisions.
Murphy agrees that the data supporting his position is weak and points 
to the difficulty of carrying out randomized controlled trials in this area, 
implying that the only alternative to anecdotes, surveys, expert opinions, 
and extrapolations from experiments in unrelated fields is a randomized con­
trolled trial. There are many other kinds of evidence, however, such as non­
randomized prospective and retrospective studies of various types. In fact, 
one particular study that is both feasible and relevant to the debate has not 
been done. It is related to the critical central issue, the reason why anyone 
cares about physicians’ COI: the possibility that COIs cause harm to patients. 
Harm to patients should be the primary outcome measure in studies of the 
concerns about COI, disclosures, and conflict management. Yet, no study, 
 

	 294	
The Ethics of Surgery
retrospective or prospective, has been carried out to examine the effects of 
physicians’ COIs on the outcomes of patient care. In the absence of this criti­
cal information, no rational policy to regulate physician-industry relations is 
possible.
One of the most widely cited and exhaustively researched papers on inves­
tigations of the effects of relations between physicians and the pharmaceuti­
cal industry was published in 2000 and states this about the outcomes of such 
relations: “No study used patient outcome measures.”18 To fill in that infor­
mation for subsequent years, this writer undertook an extensive search of the 
biomedical literature and was able to find only a single paper that addressed, 
albeit indirectly, COI and clinical outcomes. It is a meta-analysis of patient 
outcomes after autologous chondrocyte implantation, comparing commer­
cially funded with independently funded studies.19 The authors found no dif­
ference in patient outcomes between the two groups. Although this evidence 
is from meta-analysis, and therefore of only intermediate quality, it does not 
support a need for intensified regulation of physician-industry relations.
Until we have well-designed and executed studies of physician-industry 
COI that use the outcomes of patient care as the primary outcome measure, 
we will not be able to weigh the benefits to patients (known and documented 
medical innovation and improved health outcomes) against the harms (as 
yet undocumented compromise of patient care outcomes caused by physi­
cians’ biases in prescribing and using drugs and devices due to COI). Without 
such studies, we cannot create rational policy and law on physician-industry 
relations—that is, we cannot rationally decide whether optimal health care 
can be achieved most reliably by strengthening disclosure requirements, as 
Murphy suggests, or by encouraging collaboration between physicians and 
industry by breaking down barriers rather than building them. To this writer, 
the latter, although politically unpopular, seems the more reasonable course.
References
	1.	Iserson KV, Cerfolio RJ, Sade RM. Politely refuse the pen and note pad: gifts from 
industry to physicians harm patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:1077–84.
	2.	Institute of Medicine. Conflict of Interest in Medical Research, Education, and 
Practice. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2009.
	3.	Dana J, Loewenstein G. A social science perspective on gifts to physician from indus­
try. JAMA. 2003;290:252–5.
	4.	Mack MJ, Sade RM, and American Association for Thoracic Surgery Ethics 
Committee and The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Standards and Ethics Committee. 
Relations between cardiothoracic surgeons and industry. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2009;87:1334–6.
	5.	Armstrong D, Burton TM. Medtronic paid the surgeon accused of falsifying study 
nearly $800,000. The Wall Street Journal. June 18, 2009. http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB124527830694724953.html. Accessed December 30, 2010.
 

	
Full Disclosure of COIs	
295
	 6.	 Kumar K. Surgeon accused of lying quits Washington University. St Louis 
Post-Dispatch. August 10, 2009. http://www.allbusiness.com/education-training/
education-administration-university/12701347-1.html. Accessed December 30, 2010.
	 7.	 O’Reilly KB. Industry gift bans slammed for overreaching. Am Med News. 
2009;52:19. http://www.ama-assn.org/amednews/2009/08/10/prl20810.htm. Accessed 
December 30, 2010.
	 8.	 Kassirer JP. On the Take: How Medicine’s Complicity with Big Business Can Endanger 
your Health. New York: Oxford University Press; 2005.
	 9.	 Sade RM. Dangerous liaisons? Industry relations with health professionals. J Law 
Med Ethics. 2009;37:398–400.
	10.	 Annals of Thoracic Surgery, conditions for publication form. http://ats.ctsnetjour­
nals.org/misc/pubconditions.shtml. Accessed December 30, 2010.
	11.	 Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, disclosure statement. http://www.
editorialmanager.com/jtcvs/. Accessed December 30, 2010.
	12.	 Brennan TA, Rothman DJ, Blank L, et  al. Health industry practices that cre­
ate conflicts of interest:  a policy proposal for academic medical centers. JAMA. 
2006;295:429–33.
	13.	 Cain DM, Loewenstein G, Moore DA. The dirt on coming clean: perverse effects of 
disclosing conflicts of interest. J Legal Studies. 2005;34:1–25.
	14.	 Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, et al. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from 
coronary disease, 1980–2000. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2388–98.
	15.	 US Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville, MD: USPSTF Program Office. http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/. Accessed December 30, 2010.
	16.	 Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) 
Working 
Group. 
http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/about_us.htm. 
Accessed 
December 30, 2010.
	17.	 West S, King V, Carey TS, et al. Appendix C. Systems to rate the strength of sci­
entific evidence. Evidence Reports/ Technology Assessments No. 47. Rockville, 
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2002. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/books/NBK33882/. Accessed December 30, 2010.
	18.	 Wazana A. Gifts to physicians from the pharmaceutical industry. JAMA. 
2000;283:2655–8.
	19.	 Lubowitz JH, Appleby D, Centeno JM, Woolf SK, Reid JB. The relationship between 
the outcome of studies of autologous chondrocyte implantation and the presence of 
commercial funding. Am J Sports Med. 2007;35:1809–16.
	20.	 Essential evidence plus: Levels of evidence. http://www.essentialevidenceplus.com/
product/ebm_loe.cfm?show.grade#. Accessed December 29, 2010.


SECTION 7
Ethical Issues in 
Health-Care Policy
Robert M. Sade
No oppression is so heavy or lasting as that which is inflicted 
by the perversion and exorbitance of legal authority.
—Joseph Addison (1672–1719)
Coercion may prevent many transgressions; but it 
robs even actions which are legal of a part of their 
beauty. Freedom may lead to many transgressions, 
but it lends even to vices a less ignoble form.
—Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835)
The etymological root of the word “policy” is the Greek polis (city) and 
politeia (citizenship), modified through Old French and Middle English to 
its current meaning: a course of action adopted by a government (e.g., 
federal regulations, executive orders), business (media communications, 
government relations), or individuals. Hospitals commonly separate policies 
into two categories: administrative (e.g., reporting medical errors to a 
risk-management office; a weather-emergency plan) and clinical (e.g., use of 
abbreviations in medical records and management of end-of-life care).
Medical ethics provides a basis for choosing among two or more 
competing options: good versus bad, right versus wrong, better versus 
worse. We generally think of surgical ethics as guides for behaviors that 
affect our relationships with patients and others in professional settings; 
however, it also applies in a broader sense to development of policies 
that affect medical practice. The role of physicians as policymakers 
 
 

	 298	
The Ethics of Surgery
encompasses a wide range, from making policies within one’s own practice, 
over which one has a great deal of control, to voting at the national 
level, casting a single vote among millions. Between those ends of the 
policymaking spectrum are activities such as working on committees or task 
forces that develop or recommend policies in hospitals or state and national 
specialty societies. Policies above the personal level may change the way 
physicians relate to patients or may affect other professional activities. 
For these reasons, policies related to health care at all levels are rich with 
ethical implications for surgeons.
The Ethics Forum has sponsored discussions and debates focusing on 
ethical aspects of policy issues that are involved with surgical practice; these 
particular issues were chosen because of their currency and interest to 
surgeons. The debates address policies at several levels: surgical tourism at 
the international level, rationing of expensive therapies at the national level, 
regionalization of surgical care at the state level, and, at the local level, bans 
on smoking tobacco products in hospitals. These discussions and debates 
are intended to help surgeons think about the implications of broad policies 
for their professional and personal lives, how they could or should attempt to 
influence policy development, and how they might respond professionally to 
policies that affect their patients and their surgical practices.
Chapters
In most sectors of the US economy, individuals choose to spend their 
resources on goods and services, guided by their personal values, 
preferences, and available funds. This form of personal choice and 
responsibility does not hold in the health-care sector because individuals 
pay for their care at a steep discount: Only 10% of health-care purchases 
are paid with personal funds; the remaining 90% are paid by someone 
else in the form of health-care insurance, government programs, charities, 
or hospital cost-shifting, among others. Because most health care is 
purchased by someone other than the patient, the payor has substantial 
responsibility for determining what health-care goods and services will 
be purchased. Thus the question of whether expensive treatments with 
limited benefit to the patient should be allowed becomes a matter of public 
concern. Chapter 25 describes the case of a patient with life-threatening 
leukemia who also has severe heart failure that can be treated with a left 
ventricular assist device (LVAD) at great cost.1 The question of rationing 
expensive treatments, exemplified by this case, is debated by a surgeon 
highly experienced with the devices and a former state governor cum 
professor of public policy.
Regionalization is a public policy that mandates referral of patients 
with certain conditions to specialized centers that treat a high volume of 
 

	
Section 7	
299
such patients. The rationale is that high-volume centers generally have 
better outcomes for certain conditions than lower-volume centers. Some 
countries, such as Canada and the United Kingdom, use regionalization 
for certain surgical procedures, but this has not been done in the United 
States except on a relatively small scale, for example in the Veterans Health 
Administration hospital system. The debate over whether regionalization 
should be public policy in the United States has been ongoing for over 
three decades without resolution. In ­chapter 26, staunch advocates on 
opposite sides debate the question of whether existing data justify imposing 
regionalization of coronary artery bypass graft surgery.2
While there is little doubt that smoking tobacco products is harmful 
to health, it is not so clear that the passage of laws to prohibit smoking in 
public places is justified. Most of the public discussion has focused on the 
potential gains from passing such laws, but little has been said about what 
might be lost. Chapter 27 begins with a vignette about a surgeon who has 
become a state legislator and is faced with vetting a bill that proposes a 
law prohibiting smoking in public places.3 He has heard arguments on both 
sides of the question and now must decide whether to vote for sending 
the bill to the full legislature for final action or to kill the bill in committee. 
The question is debated by a thoracic surgeon who has been a staunch 
antismoking advocate and a philosopher who believes that insufficient 
grounds support such laws.
The national campaign against smoking has recently extended beyond 
prohibiting the use of tobacco products in public places to a more direct 
attack on smokers: denial of employment to physicians who smoke. 
An increasing number of medical centers, such as the Cleveland Clinic, 
which pioneered this policy in 2007, the Geisinger Health System, and the 
University of Pennsylvania Health System, have adopted such policies, 
including use of routine urine tests to detect nicotine metabolites toward 
enforcement of the policy. In ­chapter 28, a supporter of such employment 
policies argues that medical centers have an obligation to promote healthy 
activities and provide a healthy environment for employees, among others.4 
Opposing this position, another surgeon cites the hypocrisy of excluding 
smokers while hiring individuals who harm themselves in other ways, for 
instance, by overeating, driving recklessly, and using alcohol. Surgeons 
generally object strongly to the use of tobacco products, but does a hiring 
ban go a step too far?
References
1. McCarthy P, Lamm R, Sade R. Medical ethics collides with public policy: LVAD 
for a patient with leukemia. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(3):793–8.
2. Nallamothu B, Eagle K, Ferraris V, Sade R. Should coronary artery bypass 
grafting be regionalized? Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(5):1572–81.
 
 

	 300	
The Ethics of Surgery
3. Dresler C, Cherry M, Sade RM. Should smoking tobacco products in public 
places be legally banned? Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:699–707.
4. Jones JW, Novick W, Sade RM. Should a medical center deny employment 
to a physician because he smokes tobacco products? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2014;98(3):799–805.

301
25
Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy
LVAD FOR A PATIENT WITH LEUKEMIA
Patrick M. McCarthy, Richard D. Lamm, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
There is a general perception that too much money is being spent on health 
care, and that costs are rising too rapidly. One source of the problem is 
believed by some to be the widespread use of expensive technologies, and 
this logically leads to a potential solution: get physicians to stop using such 
technologies. Obvious targets are cardiothoracic surgeons who have access to 
a substantial number of expensive technologies and a substantial number of 
patients to use them on.
To highlight some of the issues underlying the question of whether uti­
lizing such technologies is justified, a case was constructed to illustrate the 
use of an expensive technology in a marginal clinical situation: a left ven­
tricular assist device (LVAD) implanted in an older man with leukemia and 
an uncertain prognosis. To argue the question of whether or not the proce­
dure was warranted, we recruited two outstanding proponents of differing 
views: Dr. Patrick McCarthy, a cardiac surgeon who has broad experience 
with LVADs, and former Governor Richard Lamm of Colorado, one of the 
few public figures audacious enough to use the word “rationing” publicly. 
[. . .] The case that served as the focal point of their discussion is detailed as 
follows.
* McCarthy P, Lamm R, Sade R. Medical ethics collides with public policy: LVAD for a patient 
with leukemia. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(3):793–8. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, repub­
lished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 302	
The Ethics of Surgery
CASE
A 62-year-old male carpenter, Mr. I. Sandy Wood, noticed that he was tir­
ing much earlier in the day than he had just a few weeks before, and that the 
frequent small cuts he received at work bled much longer than in the past. 
His family doctor ordered a battery of laboratory tests that revealed acute 
myelogenous leukemia. Echocardiogram at that time was normal, with a left 
ventricular ejection fraction of 63%. He was told that the chance of ultimately 
curing his acute myelogenous leukemia with appropriate chemotherapy was 
about 40%, and that nearly all relapses occur within 2 years of treatment. He 
underwent a full course of chemotherapy [. . .]. Aside from nausea and fatigue 
during chemotherapy, he did well.
Five months after the end of chemotherapy, Mr. Wood noticed increas­
ing shortness of breath, generalized weakness, and ankle edema. An echo­
cardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 19% and 
cardiac catheterization showed mild obstruction (25%) of the left anterior 
descending artery. Endomyocardial biopsy showed damage consistent with 
idarubicin-induced cardiomyopathy. Medical management included appro­
priate doses of an ACE inhibitor, beta-blocker, loop diuretic, spironolactone, 
and digoxin.
Despite intensive outpatient management, his dyspnea and edema 
continued to worsen, and he became dyspneic at rest. He was hospitalized 
3 times during a 4-month period, requiring intravenous inotropic support and 
high-dose intravenous diuretics. During his third hospitalization, he failed to 
respond to intravenous drug therapy, and a repeat echocardiogram demon­
strated an ejection fraction of 10%. He was deemed not to be a candidate 
for heart transplantation because of his recently active leukemia. Because he 
appeared unlikely to survive for more than a few weeks, he was evaluated as 
a candidate for support with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) as des­
tination therapy, was found to meet the criteria for support, and underwent 
placement of a HeartMate LVAD.
His postoperative course was initially uncomplicated. On the second 
postoperative day, the patient became febrile and was found to have septice­
mia with staphylococcal pneumonia. He was treated with intravenous anti­
biotics for 4 weeks. His septicemia cleared immediately and his pneumonia 
gradually improved. His LVAD flows stayed in the range of 6 to 7 L/min and 
he was discharged from the hospital in good condition on postoperative day 
46. His health insurance company paid the discounted cost of the hospital­
ization and physicians’ fees, totaling $210,000. The company also agreed to 
pay the costs of any needed hospitalizations, estimated to be in the range of 
$105,000 a year. At that time, it was estimated that the LVAD gave him a 40% 
to 50% chance of surviving 2 years if his acute myelogenous leukemia did not 
relapse.
 

	
Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy	
303
Ten months after implantation of the LVAD, Mr. Wood was feeling well 
and walking 2 miles a day; his acute myelogenous leukemia was still in remis­
sion, now 2 years after treatment began, and therefore it was probably cured.
Pro
Patrick M. McCarthy, MD
The debate about the use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) for desti­
nation therapy has been with us for many years. An undercurrent has circu­
lated, sometimes highly visible as in the opinion from Governor Lamm, that 
we will create another dialysis program, another costly burden on a burgeon­
ing health budget under loose control.
The hypothetical case report [. . .] crystallizes our thinking on the issues. 
Rather than consider the medical wisdom of treating a cancer patient with an 
LVAD, let’s take a fresh look at the “bigger issue” (not bigger to the patient 
and his family however!). How much will the United States LVAD program 
cost, and is it “worth it”?
First, the vast majority of the readers of this article will have to admit to 
a serious conflict of interest. We took an oath to treat the sick according to 
our ability and judgment. Nothing in the Hippocratic Oath speaks to cost of 
therapy, rationing, or withholding available therapy because society cannot 
afford it. This has brought us trouble before. Coronary artery bypass was 
controversial when introduced because it was expensive. However, it is part of 
our sworn duty as physicians to offer treatment, and fortunately millions of 
patients are alive after having heart surgery who now thank us for it.
Let’s be clear about how much money is at stake. The Institute of 
Medicine projected that 50,000 United States patients per year were poten­
tial destination therapy LVAD recipients.1 If each LVAD (with batteries, sup­
port equipment, and so forth) cost $100,000, that would cost $5 billion. If 
hospitalization, surgery, intensive care unit stay, and so forth cost another 
$100,000, that would add another $5 billion, or $10 billion total. The $200,000 
cost per patient is very similar to the Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical 
Assistance in Treatment of Chronic Heart Failure (REMATCH) cost 
($210,187).2
The REMATCH experience taught us more about patient eligibility too. 
For each patient placed in the trial, almost 50 were screened.3 Medical comor­
bidities are frequent contraindications to destination therapy (i.e., diabetes 
with secondary complications, prior stroke with residual deficits, chronic 
renal failure, and elderly frail patients to name a few). Psychosocial issues 
may also be a problem, such as medical noncompliance and drug or alco­
hol abuse. Also, some patients just don’t want destination therapy; they’ve 
“had enough.” These factors rarely weigh heavily in the decision to use other 
 

	 304	
The Ethics of Surgery
implantable devices, such as pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibril­
lators, but because LVADs still require daily care and maintenance, these 
are important factors that limit the spread of current LVAD use. Perhaps 
10,000 patients per year would be more reasonable, which translates to $2 
billion per year. Finally, the surgeons and cardiologists cull even more of 
the potential patient population. The medical team weighs the morbidity 
and mortality of the operation and the potential for LVAD infection, emboli, 
and device failure versus the expected gain in quality and length of life. Even 
though the HeartMate device is Food and Drug Administration approved 
and reimbursed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (albeit 
at a low level), the true number of implants is much less than 1,000 per year, 
or $200 million in health care expenditures. Also, consider that this is money 
returning to our economy.
This adds to the healthcare bill though, and the accelerating rise in 
healthcare spending relative to inflation. But we are not alone. Our spending 
on prison populations increased from $9 billion to $49 billion between 1982 
and 1999, a 444% jump.4
Also, is $10 billion too much to pay for all potential LVAD patients? 
Advertising and promotions for cigarettes and tobacco products in 2001 cost 
$11.2 billion.5
Which would be money better spent? Perhaps a more conservative cost 
of LVADs would be more appropriate, such as $2 billion for 10,000 patients. 
After all, United States revenue at McDonalds in 2003 rose to its highest 
level ever, $6 billion, due to numerous factors including Americans spending 
on the new McGriddle breakfast sandwich. The most conservative spend­
ing on LVADs, $200 million, perhaps, is reasonable to save a thousand lives. 
To put this in perspective, we spent $213  million just at the box-office on 
“Austin Powers in Goldmember.”6 Is it unreasonable to suggest that patients 
should help pay part of the $100,000 for this life-saving device? In 2001, the 
average retail selling price of a new vehicle was $25,800. The Transportation 
Department reports there are 107 million United States households with an 
average of 1.9 cars, but only 1.8 drivers.7 For the first time there are more 
vehicles than people to drive them.
Governor Lamm has written: “To avert a collapse of the system, citi­
zens and policy makers must come to grips with the fact that they cannot 
do everything for everyone.”8 He was referring to regulation of the health­
care system. But as a former policy maker, as our government deepens its 
deficit spending to try to protect everyone from everything, is he equally 
outraged by the revived $10 billion dollars per year spending on a missile 
defense system (i.e., Star Wars)? Finally, if the policy makers and citizens 
didn’t want us to use these devices, then why did they invest hundreds of 
millions of dollars through the National Institutes of Health to help us 
develop them?

	
Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy	
305
These are difficult questions and there are no easy answers. How we as a 
society spend our money in relative terms is an issue most cardiac surgeons 
ponder only rarely. If I had been asked to see the patient described in this 
report, I probably would have acted as those clinicians did. I would have tried 
to relieve his suffering, improve his quality of life, and hopefully prolonged 
his life. Those collective actions by thousands of physicians, motivated by an 
oath we swore when we took this job, have led to the rise in healthcare spend­
ing. One last question: Is that such a bad thing? It seems there are worse ways 
to spend your money.
Con
Richard D. Lamm, LLB, CPA
Decisions evaluating LVAD support in stage D chronic end-stage heart fail­
ure patients cannot be made in a vacuum. Let me suggest a proposed proce­
dure that we should go through to truly evaluate the practicability of such a 
technology. [. . .] [W]‌hen we fund health care with commonly collected funds, 
everything we do prevents us from doing something else. As General George 
Marshall said during WW II, “When deciding what to do, one is also decid­
ing what not to do.”
You can’t build a modern health care system an individual at a time, 
and you can’t adequately evaluate an individual technology in isolation of 
all other needs of the funder’s system. The sum total of our ethical choices, 
an individual at a time, has given us an unethical health care system. We see 
the trees but not the forests. Left ventricular assist devices compared with 
what? [. . .]
Unavoidably, there is a conflict between individual goods and societal 
goods. No person sees his or her health care in context with the other health 
needs of society. Just as every driver in a traffic jam pleads “not guilty,” so 
also no patient ever sees his or her health care as “too expensive.” But some­
one must set limits. We cannot simultaneously optimize the health of the 
individual and the health of a group.
Medical research into increasingly marginal health care such as the 
LVAD is crowding out many of the other needs of society. We are develop­
ing more and more high-cost, low-benefit medical technology in a society 
that offers health care to fewer and fewer people at a higher and higher 
cost. [. . .]
Public policy is a different world from that of the medical bedside. 
Medical ethics can educate and enlighten, but they cannot control public 
decision making. Medical ethics are useful and hold important information 
but not the full picture that must be considered by third party payers. The 
only way third party payers have of saying yes, is saying no somewhere else. 
 

	 306	
The Ethics of Surgery
Making optimum social policy is “terra incognito” that must be mapped 
anew. [. . .]
In a world of limited resources, you cannot explore the best use of your 
resources, the so-called “opportunity costs” of each dollar unless you set pri­
orities on what you can afford. We must start a community dialogue about 
how we can put our health care dollars to the highest and best use. It is an 
inevitable dialogue and we ought to make a virtue out of necessity. [. . .]
If we are really going to take the World Health Organization’s compre­
hensive definition of health (complete physical, mental, and social well being) 
seriously, public policy must panoramically consider the entire public policy 
landscape. As the Canadian study “The Determinants of Care” found: “For 
more than half a century the understanding that there is much more to health 
than health care has been largely ignored, despite the fact that increased 
spending on the formal health care system is no longer having a correspond­
ing positive impact on overall population health.”9 [. . .]
Our current system maximizes demands for medical services paid for 
with pooled resources within a system that insulates patients from the cost. 
People usually buy health care with free or deeply discounted dollars. No sys­
tem, public or private, can allow people to consume as worried patients and 
fund as parsimonious taxpayers or rate payers. Someone must judge whether 
or not an intervention is a fair and reasonable expenditure of the group’s lim­
ited funds.
No common pool of funds collected by third party payers can ultimately 
ignore the law of diminishing returns. If every American would get all the 
“beneficial” health care demanded by current medical ethics and practice, 
it would create an unethical society in which medical care trumps too many 
other important social goods. Medical ethics provide no mechanism to 
weigh and balance individual health needs with other social or group needs. 
However elegantly reasoned, medical ethics cannot control the practical allo­
cation of pooled funds. [. . .]
For a state or nation to cover all its citizens with modern medicine, it 
must (l) subsidize those who cannot afford coverage, (2) avoid “free riders” 
by compelling all citizens to pay something into the system, and (3) set limits 
on what health care is covered. Limits are painful but inevitable if we are to 
avoid crowding out all other social spending.
We need a new moral vision for health care that allows us to evaluate 
cases like the LVAD; I set forth what I see to be the essential elements of that 
new vision:
	1.	A nation’s health goal can never be, nor should it be, to fund the sum 
total of all its citizens’ individual needs. Thus, the legislature should 
not be limited to or controlled by the ethics of the physician-patient 
relationship. That relationship is important, but not exclusive. [. . .]

	
Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy	
307
	2.	Public policy should concern itself more with extending the health 
care floor than raising the research ceiling. Public policy makers must 
care about the health of the total society as passionately as health 
provider’s care about an individual’s health.
	3.	Group funds, public or private, should maximize the health of the 
group. It is the duty of those distributing pooled money to optimize 
the health of all those in the pool. The doctor-patient relationship 
may be the most important relationship in health care, but it is not 
the only relationship. Doctors are patient advocates, but they are 
imperfect agents to maximize the health of a group of patients or a 
nation.
	4.	When people pool funds, they cannot maximize the amount of ben­
eficial treatment to each member of that pool, and cost has to be a 
consideration when distributing those funds. We optimize the health 
of a group by sub-optimizing the treatment of the individual.
	5.	Oregon set up a system that prioritizes health care and uses limited 
public monies to fund the most health-producing priorities for the 
maximum number of insured. Not only is the Oregon health plan 
ethical, it is unethical for a state not to have a system of priorities. 
Likewise, those in health plans who distribute pooled resources have 
an independent ethical duty to prioritize and budget those funds to 
maximize the total health of the group. [. . .]
	6.	We must recognize that the problems of the uninsured and the prob­
lems of cost containment are not separate problems, but inextricably 
intertwined and must be solved together.
	7.	We must go substantially beyond “eliminating waste and inef­
ficiency” into the unpopular issues of life, death, and cost-benefit 
thinking. One of the toughest issues of the future is: “What benefi­
cial medicine can we ethically avoid funding?” What may have been 
unthinkable under assumptions of infinite resources becomes think­
able in the tradeoff world of finite resources. Many concepts must 
be reconsidered and re-debated. Does not a society owe a greater 
moral duty to a 10-year old than a 90-year old? Shouldn’t a patient’s 
smoking and drinking habits be laid on the scale for high cost rescue 
procedures?
	8.	Life is precious but it cannot be priceless. Death is always a loss, 
but now it is often a publicly subsidized event. There will always be 
“10 leading causes of death” no matter how brilliant our medicine. 
The threat to biologic life cannot highjack a disproportionate share 
of finite resources needed elsewhere for the quality of life. People 
have a “right to die,” but it is a negative right against interference, 
not a positive right to a state-subsidized LVAD for such marginal 

	 308	
The Ethics of Surgery
improvement. The postponement of death is an important value, but 
it must take its place among other health values.
	 9.	We do not necessarily maximize health by maximizing health care. 
Society must better analyze and study the determinants of health for 
a state and for the nation. The most important question for Congress 
to debate is not prescription drugs for the elderly, but “How do we 
keep a nation healthy?” What factors produce health? In this we have 
the benefit of a number of other countries in which the subject has 
been considered.
	10.	Goethe warned, “If you are going to live in your father’s house, you 
must rebuild it.” We have not adequately structured the house of 
health care. We have overbuilt and over-furnished the first floor, but 
most of the rest of the structure remains not only unfinished but also 
unframed. There is more than one level of ethical analysis in health 
policy, there are multiple levels. A legislator, a health plan, and a 
family member have different moral duties and a different moral 
geography than a doctor. We need different levels of ethical analysis 
corresponding to the various levels of moral obligation.
	11.	All modern health care must be based first on self-responsibility. We 
are our own best “doctor,” and we cannot expect society to cure the 
consequences of all our self-imposed illnesses.
We have to rebuild the house of health care by rethinking the moral duties 
of each level of the health care organization. The foundation of the house of 
health care is self-responsibility. The first floor is the ethics and duties of the 
doctor-patient relationship; the second floor is the ethics and duties of the 
health insurance plan whose financial and moral obligation is to the total 
group whose premiums made up the money under their control. The third 
floor of health care is the state and the nation. Neither the second nor the 
third floor of health care can give the Hippocratic Oath a blank check. We 
need new ethical analysis to determine the role of the health plan for govern­
ment and better evaluate their fiduciary duty in the funding of health care. 
All three levels of analysis are necessarily related but not coterminous, and 
rationing is unavoidable on the top two floors. Only when we have a system 
that considers all the social needs and sets priorities can we know whether or 
not if LVAD support fits into those priorities.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Dr.  McCarthy and Governor Lamm have reached different conclusions 
about whether Mr. Wood’s should have received his LVAD: yes, I would have 
done the same thing, says one, but you can’t know whether he should or not, 
 

	
Medical Ethics Collides with Public Policy	
309
replies the other. It may seem strange, therefore, to recognize that they may 
both be correct.
How can two very different conclusions be compatible and correct? They 
can be because they are reached through two different sets of guiding prin­
ciples. Dr. McCarthy’s perspective is that of a physician working within an 
ethical context that we, as physicians, can easily understand: our first prior­
ity must be to serve the best interests of our patients. Governor Lamm, on 
the other hand, is a social scientist who necessarily takes the broad view of 
society as a whole. He accepts that physicians are ethically bound to do their 
best to serve the needs of their patients, arguing, for that very reason, that 
physicians are in a poor position to be the decision makers for allocation of 
commonly held resources. [. . .]
Governor Lamm’s metaphor (i.e., the house of health care) powerfully 
conveys the diversity of ethical obligations incumbent upon the many play­
ers in health care. [. . .] Priorities must be set for how these limited common 
funds should be spent, as they are insufficient to satisfy all needs and wants. 
[. . .] Those who wish to advance the cause of free choice in health care will 
want to maximize the funds available to the foundation and to the first floor 
and, as much as possible, to control tightly the expenditures at levels two and 
three. The Health Savings Accounts enacted by Congress and signed into 
law by President Bush in December 2003 are a step in that direction, giving 
individual patients far more control over their health care dollars than they 
have had in the past, thereby increasing the self-responsibility of individuals 
for both their own health and their own health care.
A tension exists today between commentators who wish to reinforce the 
paramount obligation of physicians to the welfare of their patients, which 
they see as sine qua non of a salutary healing relationship,10 and bioethicists 
who wish to redirect the focus of physicians toward social welfare, which 
they see as a higher obligation emanating from a purported basic right to 
health care.11 One consequence of such a realignment of ethical obligations is 
likely to be the co-option of physicians as agents of society, helping to control 
health care costs by bedside rationing of such technologies as LVADs.
Dr. McCarthy and Governor Lamm disagree about the need for con­
straints on the use of expensive technologies, such as LVAD for a patient 
with leukemia, but they are in agreement on an important underlying ethical 
principle: physicians are obligated to do the best they can for their patients. 
Regardless of the outcome of the debate on limiting the use of high tech­
nology, physicians should resist the siren call to “social responsibility” and 
continue to advocate whatever is medically best for the patients we advise 
and treat. If certain technologies should not be used, it is the responsibility 
of insurance companies, government agencies, or sociopolitical units such 
as states (perhaps using an Oregon-like method) to set the limits. We physi­
cians can and should help to develop rationing policies by participating on 

	 310	
The Ethics of Surgery
hospital committees, speaking at public hearings, or consulting with insur­
ance companies and government agencies, but we should never ration tech­
nology at the bedsides of our patients. In an important sense, both McCarthy 
and Lamm are right.
References
	 1.	 Hanna KE, Manning FJ, Bouxsein P, Pope A, eds. Innovation and Invention in 
Medical Devices: Workshop Summary, 1st ed. Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press; 2001.
	 2.	 Oz MC, Gelijns AC, Miller L, et al. Left ventricular assist devices as permanent 
heart failure therapy: the price of progress. Ann Surg. 2003;238;577–85.
	 3.	 Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Long-term mechanical left ventricular 
assistance for end-stage heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1435–43.
	 4.	 Wickham D. ABA report offers wise Rx for ailing U.S. penal system. USA Today. 
June 29, 2004:A13.
	 5.	 Tobacco Industry Marketing. Fact sheet. TIPS. Atlanta:  Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/factsheets/Tobacco_Industry_
Marketing_Factsheet.htm. Accessed February 2004.
	 6.	 BoxofficeGuru.com. All-Time Domestic Blockbusters. http://boxofficeguru.com/
blockbusters.htm. Accessed July 5, 2004.
	 7.	 Americans’ love affair with cars, trucks and SUVs continues. USA Today. 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2003-08-30-outnumbered-cars_x.htm. 
Accessed: August 30, 2003.
	 8.	 Lamm RD. High-tech health care and society’s ability to pay. Health Finance 
Manage. 1990;44(9):20–24, 26, 28–30.
	 9.	 The determinants of health. CIAR Publication No. 5. Toronto: Canadian Institute 
for Advanced Research; August 1991:4.
	10.	 Levinsky NG. The doctor’s master. N Engl J Med. 1984;311(24):1573–5.
	11.	 Buchanan A, Brock D, Daniels N, Wikler D. From Chance to Choice: Genetics and 
Justice. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2001.
 

311
26
Should Coronary Artery Bypass 
Grafting Be Regionalized?
Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, Kim A. Eagle, 
Victor A. Ferraris, and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
Several studies have shown that cardiac care centers that provide a high 
volume of cardiac services, particularly coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG), have better outcomes than those with low volumes. Some analysts 
have used these data to suggest that patients in need of care for coronary 
artery disease would be best served if they were referred only to those centers 
that treat a large number of these patients. They reason that regionalizing 
coronary artery disease treatment will result in fewer deaths, because low 
volume–high mortality programs would be deleted and may have additional 
advantages in efficiencies of scale.
Those who oppose regionalization claim that the data justifying region­
alization are seriously flawed. Reliable measurement of outcomes requires 
accurate risk stratification; technologies for accomplishing this are being 
developed and used, but are far from perfect. Moreover, although it is true 
that many studies show a relationship between volume and outcome, a few 
well-designed recent studies have not found such a relationship.
In the unregulated referral system that now exists in this country, region­
alization already occurs informally; primary care physicians are more likely 
to refer their patients to centers with good results, and many large-volume 
centers achieved their dominant status by virtue of good outcomes. Formal 
* Nallamothu B, Eagle K, Ferraris V, Sade R. Should coronary artery bypass grafting be 
regionalized? Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(5):1572–81. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, 
republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 312	
The Ethics of Surgery
regionalization already exists in other countries, such as Canada and Great 
Britain, and it exists on a small scale in this country (e.g., in the VA hospital 
system). Many have suggested formal regionalization of CABG in the United 
States on grounds of achieving better outcomes and gaining efficiency, 
whereas others object on the grounds of inadequate supportive data. Do cur­
rently available data justify regionalization of CABG?
The cases for opposing points of view (i.e., for and against regionaliza­
tion) are made herein by scholars with deep and persistent interest in this 
question.
Pro
Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, MD, MPH and Kim A. Eagle, MD
A quarter of a century has passed since Luft and colleagues first published 
their seminal article on the hospital volume–outcome effect.1 In that study, 
the investigators found a strong and consistent association between higher 
hospital volume and lower in-hospital mortality for several high-risk proce­
dures, including CABG, using a national administrative database of nearly 
1,500 hospitals. Numerous additional reports have confirmed this associa­
tion across a variety of procedures, populations, and clinical settings.
Despite compelling evidence supporting the existence of a hospital vol­
ume–outcome effect, little has been done during the intervening 25 years to 
ensure minimum volume requirements for high-risk procedures in the United 
States. Traditional arguments against the regionalization of high-risk proce­
dures to higher volume hospitals through volume-based referral have relied 
on two fundamental lines of reasoning: (1) analyses supporting the hospital 
volume–outcome relationship are flawed, and (2) the design of the United 
States health care system prohibits its practical application.2
In this article, we briefly review the evidence supporting the existence of 
a hospital volume–outcome effect for CABG and address common fears that 
are typically mentioned when regionalization is discussed. We conclude by 
proposing a practical strategy for initiating CABG regionalization within the 
current environment of the United States health care system.
EVIDENCE SUPPORTING THE HOSPITAL VOLUME–OUTCOME EFFECT
Nearly 300 studies have examined the hospital volume–outcome effect in 
various medical conditions and procedures with CABG being one of the 
more thoroughly studied procedures. Most published studies have reported 
statistically significant associations between hospital volume and outcomes 
favoring higher–volume hospitals. Only a small number of studies have 
not demonstrated a hospital volume–outcome effect in CABG. In general, 
 
 
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
313
these “null” analyses were performed in specific patient populations (e.g., 
the Veterans Affairs health care system) or under circumstances in which 
hospital volume did not vary widely. In the largest study to date, Birkmeyer 
and colleagues analyzed Medicare data in over 900,000 patients undergoing 
CABG and demonstrated a 20% reduction in 30–day mortality for hospitals 
with the highest volume (> 849 annual cases) when compared with those with 
the lowest volume (< 230 annual cases).3
EVIDENCE SUPPORTING REGIONALIZATION: MOVING 
BEYOND THE FEARS
Critics of regionalization strategies have raised both methodological and 
practical concerns regarding earlier hospital volume–outcome studies and 
their implications for regionalization:
¤	 Fear No. 1: Most studies are outdated and use administrative 
data sources. The concern is that studies do not reflect recent 
advancements in surgical technique, anesthesia, and perioperative 
medical therapy, or they inadequately adjust for important 
confounding variables. Some have also focused exclusively on 
Medicare patients, a group that is generally older and at higher risk 
for complications.
However, recent data from the New  York Cardiac Surgery Reporting 
System (CSRS) and The Society for Thoracic Surgery (STS) National Cardiac 
Database continue to support the existence of a hospital volume–outcome 
effect in CABG.4 [. . .]
¤	 Fear No. 2: There is inconsistency of statistical analyses in earlier 
reports. Studies have varied broadly in their methodological modeling 
of the hospital volume–outcome effect.5 [. . .]
Yet more recent analyses have largely addressed these methodological 
concerns. Both contemporary studies from the New York CSRS and the STS 
National Cardiac Database have used complex statistical techniques (i.e., 
adjusting for surgeon volume and use of a hierarchical modeling), and they 
have reconfirmed significant associations between hospital volume and surgi­
cal mortality. [. . .]
¤	 Fear No. 3: Hospital volume is an imperfect proxy for quality. This 
concern is undeniable. There are certainly some low-volume 
programs that may have acceptable risk-adjusted mortality rates 
for CABG when compared with hospitals that have higher–volume 
programs. However, an unfortunate reality is that policy, like clinical 
decisions based on randomized clinical trials, needs to be based on 
aggregated or “averaged” data. [. . .]
 

	 314	
The Ethics of Surgery
Furthermore, hospital volume has been correlated with quality measures 
such as postoperative renal failure or prolonged mechanical ventilation in 
addition to short-term mortality.4 [. . .]
¤	 Fear No. 4: There is insufficient data for setting a specific volume 
threshold. As mentioned earlier, studies have varied widely in their 
use of specific thresholds during statistical analyses.6 [. . .]
¤	 Fear No. 5: The hospital volume–outcome effect is small in CABG and 
not worth the effort. When compared with other high-risk procedures, 
such as operations for pancreatic or esophageal cancer, the absolute 
risk difference in surgical mortality between very high-volume and 
very low-volume hospitals for CABG is relatively small at between 1% 
and 2%.3 However, the large number of CABG procedures performed 
each year in comparison with these other procedures makes it likely 
to have a broader impact in regard to avoiding deaths. [. . .]
¤	 Fear No. 6: Regionalization will limit access and be impractical for a 
large number of patients due to geographic location. Previous studies 
have suggested that physical access would not be substantially 
restricted if very low-volume programs were closed as most patients 
live within reasonable distances of high-volume hospitals.7 In 
addition, existing data suggest that although a substantial number 
of health referral regions (i.e., tertiary-care catchment areas) do not 
have a single high-volume hospital for CABG, the number of annual 
population-based rates for surgeries performed in these areas could 
support a high-volume hospital if smaller surgical programs were 
combined.8 Despite these facts, we recognize that there will continue 
to be geographically isolated communities that need to be excluded 
from any strategy for CABG regionalization.
¤	 Fear No. 7: The quality of care and financial viability of smaller 
hospitals will be threatened. This is an important and valid fear. The 
performance of CABG at a hospital is tied to a large number of 
cardiovascular-related services including PCI, cardiac catheterization, 
and noninvasive cardiovascular services. [. . .] Lost revenue from 
eliminating CABG and related services may reduce the hospital’s ability 
to provide other less lucrative but necessary care to its community. 
Although this fear is a compelling argument, it must be balanced 
against the strong evidence supporting the potential benefits of 
regionalization for patients undergoing major surgery such as CABG.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REGIONALIZATION IN THE UNITED STATES
With several legitimate fears still existing, how can regionalization possibly 
occur? We believe that the availability of empirical data highlighting the 
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
315
limitations of CABG regionalization should be used to guide policy, not to 
eliminate any attempts toward regionalization. We support a strategy that 
uses volume-based standards in addition to other criteria for hospital refer­
rals with CABG. The alternative, which would be waiting for the “ideal” 
study to be performed, is inadequate in our view. Accordingly, we suggest the 
following strategies for regionalization:
	1.	Eliminate very low-volume programs at hospitals with an aver­
age annual cardiac surgery volume of less than 100. This would 
include the total number of CABG procedures and other adult 
open-heart procedures, with exceptions made for hospitals that 
serve geographically–isolated communities. The evidence is too 
strong and consistent that hospitals with such low numbers of 
cases have poor outcomes when compared with higher–volume 
centers. [. . .]
	2.	For hospitals with annual cardiac surgery volumes above 100 cases, 
additional criteria, such as the use of risk-adjusted mortality rates, 
should be used to assess hospital quality. When annual cardiac surgery 
volumes are between 100 to 250 annual cases, strong consideration 
should be made for referring high-risk patients such as the elderly (> 
65 years old) or complex procedures like concomitant valve replace­
ment to higher–volume hospitals.9 [. . .]
	3.	Initiate a nationwide, mandatory reporting system for CABG in 
order to collect outcomes data on quality and processes of care at 
individual programs. This could be piggybacked onto the established 
framework of the current STS National Cardiac Database. With this 
we would encourage participation in regional collaborative networks 
targeting key quality opportunities and providing a forum for con­
tinuous quality improvement strategies. [. . .]
	4.	Begin formal assessments of the appropriateness of CABG at individ­
ual programs. We believe no volume-based regionalization strategy 
can be properly implemented without concurrently evaluating appro­
priateness. Without this precaution, the incentive to do inappropriate 
cases may be too great for providers and hospitals wishing to meet 
strict volume criteria. [. . .]
We believe the last two points are critical. As regionalization is imple­
mented in small steps, the process of collecting and refining data to mod­
ify structural changes in the strategy is needed. As procedures “mature” 
and transform over time, the importance of the hospital volume–outcome 
effect may change. Although this strategy for regionalization may not 
completely address all the fears previously raised, we believe that it is a 
fair and equitable plan that can be transitioned into the current health 
care system. [. . .]

	 316	
The Ethics of Surgery
FUTURE ISSUES
Techniques for coronary revascularization are advancing rapidly in the 
United States. In particular, recent evidence supporting the use of PCI in 
acute coronary syndromes and ST segment elevation myocardial infarction 
is compelling. The impact of eliminating very low-volume CABG programs 
on the availability of PCI in the general population will need to be evalu­
ated. In addition, advances in medical therapy and PCI may be contributing 
to diminishing population-based rates for overall CABG. How regional­
ization will influence cardiac surgical training programs and the physician 
workforce, given the declining use of CABG, will need to be assessed. We 
also believe that continued research into why volume is so strongly associ­
ated with better outcomes is needed. If key system-level characteristics are 
identified, these processes of care can hopefully be disseminated across more 
hospitals. Finally, the impact of regionalization on cost needs to be better 
understood. [. . .]
CONCLUSIONS
Evidence supporting the hospital volume–outcome effect in CABG is per­
suasive. Although several studies have cautioned us on the importance of 
cautiously interpreting the data, these studies should not be used to justify 
avoidance of regionalization. Instead, we should use the data to inform and 
direct our policy decisions to create a rational and effective system of region­
alization. This is particularly important as diminishing CABG volumes may 
create larger numbers of very–low volume CABG programs. For the nearly 
500,000 patients undergoing CABG each year in the United States, the impli­
cations of regionalization are enormous. Given its potential benefits, we 
should not wait to collect data for yet another 25 years before considering its 
implementation.
Con
Victor A. Ferraris, MD, PhD
WHAT IS REGIONALIZATION?
Regionalization of health care resources is the selective referral of patients to 
regional centers. Health care payers have jumped on the concept of regional­
ization to attempt lowering the spiraling health care costs. There are at least 
two unique features of the United States health care system: (1) the ability 
of patients to seek medical care from whomever they want (i.e., access), and 
(2) the expectation that access to health care will be readily available at a local 
level (i.e., availability). Regionalization infringes on these two principles. To 
 
 
 
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
317
understand regionalization, it is necessary to talk about provider volume, 
health care costs, and quality of care. All of these concepts are wrapped up in 
discussions of regionalization of health care resources.
EXAMPLES OF REGIONALIZATION OF HEALTH CARE
There is absolutely no evidence that deliberately concentrating procedures in 
the hands of regional providers will actually improve outcomes. In fact, the 
opposite may be true. The hypothesis that regionalization based on some cri­
teria (either provider volume or cost) results in better outcomes has not been 
tested in a randomized trial or in any rigorous way. [. . .]
Regionalization of trauma care is an important component of most 
statewide trauma systems. On the surface it may seem that regionalization of 
trauma resources would focus care in high-volume hospitals and result in a 
drop in mortality. Many other factors undoubtedly influence improved out­
come from major trauma, including better treatment algorithms (Advanced 
Cardiac Life Support protocols), improved response times, and focused 
training of physicians. A review of the National Trauma Databank in the 
United States found no positive relationship between outcome and treatment 
of severe trauma in high-volume centers.10
Another example of regionalization of resources is the localization of 
cardiac care in regionalized centers in the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) health care system. Petersen and co–authors found underuse of indi­
cated angiography in patients with acute myocardial infarction in the VA sys­
tem.11 This rate of underuse was greater than that of similar non-VA Medicare 
patients. [. . .]
REGIONALIZATION BASED ON PROVIDER VOLUME
Almost by default, the concept of regionalization springs from multiple 
investigations that find better outcomes from high-volume providers (both 
hospitals and surgeons). Among health care planners it is almost axiomatic 
that high-volume providers will have better outcomes [. . .]. Health care payers 
are quick to embrace this concept. [. . .]
Provider (either hospital or physician) volume is a structural variable. 
Structural variables are those that reflect the setting or system in which care 
is delivered. Structural variables are different than process variables that 
describe the care that patients actually receive. The disadvantages of using 
structural variables as indicators of quality include: (1) inability to evaluate 
outcomes by randomized trials, (2)  other confounding variables are more 
important in determining outcomes, and (3)  structural variables are not 
readily actionable (e.g., a small hospital cannot readily increase its volume). 
The advantages of using structural variables include: (1) expediency, which 
 
 

	 318	
The Ethics of Surgery
is easily measured, (2) structural variables are inexpensive to measure, and 
(3) association exists between hospital volume and outcomes in most reports. 
It is easy to see why health care payers chose structural variables as surro­
gates of quality, because simply put, it is easier.
More than 88 studies examined the relationship between provider vol­
ume and outcome [. . .]. A  higher–volume, better outcome association was 
observed in three fourths of the studies. At least 10 of these large studies 
addressed the notion that hospitals performing small numbers of CABG 
operations have higher operative mortality. Interestingly, in the three stud­
ies done more recently (since 1996) there was no clear relationship between 
outcome and volume.12 In two separate studies done on some of the same 
patients in the New York State cardiac surgery database, completely oppo­
site results were obtained. The Institute of Medicine summarized the rela­
tionship between higher–volume and better outcome [. . .] and concluded that 
“volume per se does not lead to better outcome.”12 The dilemma is that some 
low-volume providers have excellent outcomes, whereas some high-volume 
providers have poor outcomes. [. . .]
It is simplistic to suggest that hospital volume is a principle surrogate of 
outcome and much more sophistication is required to sort out this relation­
ship. Several published studies reveal the inadequacy of the volume–outcome 
relationship. Peterson and co–authors reviewed the STS National Cardiac 
Database to evaluate the relationship of CABG volume to outcome. They 
found almost no potential benefit in closing low-volume centers.4 [. . .]
Halm and co–workers performed an exhaustive review of the literature 
on the volume–outcome relationship.13 They observed an association between 
high–volume and better outcomes across a wide range of procedures. They 
also observed multiple methodological shortcomings in most of the studies 
dealing with the volume–outcome relationship. Even when a significant asso­
ciation exists, volume did not predict outcome well for individual hospitals 
or physicians. [. . .] Even advocates of regionalization of health care resources 
concede that the best indicator of provider outcome is uncertain and provider 
volume alone should not be used as a means to direct referral of patients.8 [. . .]
REGIONALIZATION BASED ON COST SAVINGS
Why is regionalization of health care touted as a cost saving measure? There 
is no good answer. In the United States, the Leapfrog Group (Washington, 
DC) and other consortiums of health care payers are concerned about the 
spiraling increase in health care costs, and ultimately the cost that corpora­
tions must pay to provide health care to their employees. [. . .] Menke and 
Wray suggest that most empirical estimates of the cost implications of region­
alization suffer from methodological shortcomings.14 He outlines the various 
factors that must be taken into account before an accurate assessment of cost 
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
319
benefit from regionalization can be assessed. The remarkable thing is that no 
one has done this assessment, yet regionalization is viewed as cost beneficial. 
Regionalization is just as likely to result in increased costs as it is to result in 
decreased health care costs.
WHAT REGIONALIZATION IS NOT
In the current health care climate, it is important to understand what region­
alization does not imply. What regionalization is not is the concentration of 
patients with a particular medical illness, such as diabetes or hypertension, in 
centers that only treat high volumes of these medical illnesses. Why are medi­
cal illnesses excluded from talks about regionalization? Procedures such as 
CABG, esophagectomy, and aortic aneurysm repair are big ticket items and 
cost far more than giving a shot of insulin to a diabetic. Furthermore, very 
little data is available on quality of care for common medical illnesses. [. . .]
Make no mistake that regionalization of health care resources is about 
money and the potential for saving health care dollars. Proponents of region­
alization advocate, quite rightly, that there is nothing wrong with using cost 
savings as a driver for regionalization, yet no clear cut cost savings has ever 
been observed from any form of regionalization.
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF REGIONALIZATION
Regionalization of health care resources is an untested concept that may have 
the opposite effects to those anticipated. Crawford and co–workers pointed 
out that a policy of regionalized referrals for CABG may have several adverse 
effects on health care, including increased cost, decreased patient satisfac­
tion, and reduced availability of surgical services in remote or rural loca­
tions.15 [. . .] [E]‌nforced referrals of CABG patients to high-volume providers 
may actually increase operative mortality, which is an undesirable conse­
quence of regionalization.
Advocates of regionalization point to the potential number of lives saved by 
artificially forcing referrals to high-volume providers. They attempt to intervene 
and influence the natural market forces that are expected to result in patients 
migrating to the best places regardless of the volume of cases done. The very 
clear impression is that patients should have their CABG done by high-volume 
providers.16 In the past, market forces shifted patients to places where they get 
good outcomes regardless of the volume of the provider. After all, high-volume 
providers were once low-volume providers and only achieved their high-volume 
status by providing excellent care and obtaining high-quality outcomes. [. . .]
Several authors speculated on the consequences of directed referral of 
patients. There are likely to be adverse effects on the health care systems from 
these directed referrals. [. . .]
 
 

	 320	
The Ethics of Surgery
ARE THERE ALTERNATIVES TO REGIONALIZATION?
The Leapfrog Group [. . .] is a consortium of health care purchasers formed 
“to initiate breakthrough improvements in the safety, quality, and afford­
ability of health care for Americans” [. . .]. The Leapfrog Group practices 
“evidence-based hospital referral.” Based largely on an estimate of patient 
lives saved by referral to high-volume providers, the Leapfrog Group rec­
ommended payment premiums to hospitals that performed more than 500 
CABG procedures per year.17 Because of concerns about rural health care, the 
Leapfrog Group’s standards only apply to urban settings. [. . .] Birkmeyer and 
Dimick reviewed the potential effects of applying these new Leapfrog Group 
standards to a typical CABG population.18 They found that standards com­
prised of process of care or direct outcome measures would be more effective 
than those based on volume alone in improving outcomes for CABG. For 
CABG and PCI, standards based on risk-adjusted mortality rates would save 
at least five times more lives than those based on volume criteria alone. [. . .]
Corporations and health care payers embrace provider volume as an 
indicator of outcome because of expediency. Hospital or physician volume 
is an inexpensive and easily measured structural variable that is readily 
understood by the consumer and the payer. [. . .] There is little doubt that 
a comparison among providers using risk stratification methods is better 
than using volume to judge quality. Using quality indicators like the STS 
database risk-adjustment scheme can improve quality of care by low-volume 
providers.19 [. . .]
Quality improvement projects, either in-house or in collaboration with 
high-volume providers, would improve outcomes to a level at which directed 
referrals away from low-volume providers would not be necessary. Sollano 
and coworkers reanalyzed the CABG mortality from the New  York State 
database between 1990 and 1995.20 They found that the previously observed 
volume–outcome relationship disappeared after the implementation of a 
statewide quality improvement program. [. . .] Clinical guidelines, quality 
improvement projects, provider education, and collaborative interactions 
between high-volume and low-volume providers are just a few interven­
tions that do not involve regionalization but are likely to improve quality for 
low-volume providers.
Should we as health care professionals and scientists give in to the expe­
diency of measuring provider volume and embracing regionalization when 
we know that there are better measures of outcome and better ways to 
improve quality? [. . .] The unproven concept of regionalization may become 
a non issue when providers address outcomes using risk adjustment and 
process of care variables in an open transparent way aimed at self improve­
ment and enhancing high-quality care. [. . .] There is almost certainly a bet­
ter alternative. It remains for us as a profession to lead and not to follow, 
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
321
to embrace transparent risk-adjusted outcome analysis proactively, and to 
work interactively with payers to reach a common goal of high-quality care. 
Regionalization is not the first place to start.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
A fundamental ethical principle is central to this discussion: the paramount 
obligation of physicians is to serve the medical interests of their patients.
Flowing from this principle is the imperative to make the health care of 
patients as safe as possible. Would regionalization of CABG move us toward 
or away from that goal? The preceding discussions suggest that the available 
data do not provide an unambiguous answer.
To understand how the principle of fidelity to the patient’s interests can 
guide our thinking about this question, let us assume much clearer data than 
we have now. The assumptions, for the sake of discussion, are that programs 
and surgeons performing a high volume of CABG procedures have signifi­
cantly lower mortality rates than low-volume programs and low-volume 
surgeons. Assume further that patients are indifferent to how far they must 
travel for their cardiac care and that family physicians referring the patients 
have no preferences for where the surgery is done or who will do it. The case 
then seems to be closed: regionalizing CABG so that all patients needing 
the procedure are referred to high-volume, low-mortality programs will best 
serve our patients.
But is the case really closed? Perhaps not, for there is a hidden assumption 
in this scenario, namely that the universe of CABG programs and surgeons 
and their respective capabilities to provide safe operations is immutable. This 
assumption is false. High-volume programs can become complacent and lose 
their competitive edge; high-volume surgeons grow old, their skills diminish, 
and their knowledge may become outdated. Low-volume programs want to 
thrive, so they strive for efficiency and patient friendliness; low-volume sur­
geons strive for better results and other means of increasing referrals. Thus, 
high volume may become low, and low volume may become high.
Studies of volume–outcome relationships provide a snapshot, yet health 
care, like every other human activity, is dynamic. The slow ebb and flow in 
which large programs shrink and small programs grow is driven by quality, 
cost, accessibility, and many other factors. Even if there were a causal rela­
tionship between high volume and low mortality, we have no way of knowing 
in advance which large programs have peaked and are moving down the mor­
tality rate scale and which small programs are dynamically moving up the 
scale. [. . .] [A]‌t the local level, competition is based to a great extent on quality 
of care, which includes subjective factors (such as patient satisfaction) and 
 

	 322	
The Ethics of Surgery
objective information (such as mortality rates). These rates are known at least 
roughly by referring physicians, whether or not the actual data are published. 
So it may be that in the long run, the interests of patients will be best served 
by allowing physicians and patients to decide, thousands of times every day, 
where the patient’s cardiac care will be provided and by whom. Such freedom 
of choice may be the surest way to foster excellent care for the largest number 
of patients for the long term.
We know of no studies that examine the flux of CABG volume in sur­
gical programs and practices over time. Therefore, even if the assumptions 
in the “closed case” previously described were true, there still would be no 
useful data with which to compare the benefits and harms of regionalizing 
CABG with those of freedom of choice in the CABG market. The short term 
would favor the lower mortality rates of regionalization, but the price would 
be freezing the dynamism of the current unregulated market for CABG. 
The long term may well favor the current dynamic system, as low-volume, 
low-mortality programs grow bigger and become the new high-volume, 
low-mortality programs.
For physicians, the ethical dilemma in the debate on regionalization, it 
appears, turns on the question of how to best serve the interests of patients 
(i.e., with a static referral system based on today’s snapshot of CABG 
results or with a dynamic system that more easily allows future change?). 
Unfortunately, we cannot weigh the evidence for and against the alternatives, 
because reliable data do not exist. Volume itself does not lead to good out­
comes, as both discussants have agreed; it is a proxy measure for other factors 
that affect care. [. . .]
Like most robust debates, this one has left us with more questions 
than answers. If an immediate decision is urgently needed, we must choose 
between the alternatives on the basis of philosophical beliefs about how 
the best outcomes are likely to be achieved (i.e., from a centralized, orderly 
command-and-control system or from an untidy free market system). If we 
judge that the situation is not urgent, then we can wait for reliable and valid 
data generated by measures of quality of care more accurate and specific than 
volume to guide a well-grounded decision.
References
	1.	Luft HS, Bunker JP, Enthoven AC. Should operations be regionalized? The empirical 
relation between surgical volume and mortality. N Engl J Med. 1979;301:1364–9.
	2.	Russell TR. Invited commentary:  volume standards for high-risk operations:  an 
American College of Surgeons’ view. Surgery 2001;130:423–4.
	3.	Birkmeyer JD, Siewers AE, Finlayson EV, et al. Hospital volume and surgical mortal­
ity in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1128–37.
 

	
Regionalization of CABG	
323
	 4.	 Peterson ED, Coombs LP, DeLong ER, Haan CK, Ferguson TB. Procedural volume 
as a marker of quality for CABG surgery. JAMA. 2004;291:195–201.
	 5.	 Shahian DM, Normand SL. The volume–outcome relationship:  from Luft to 
Leapfrog. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:1048–58.
	 6.	 Shahian DM. Improving cardiac surgery quality—volume, outcome, process? 
JAMA. 2004;291:246–8.
	 7.	 Grumbach K, Anderson GM, Luft HS, Roos LL, Brook R. Regionalization of car­
diac surgery in the United States and Canada: geographic access, choice, and out­
comes. JAMA. 1995;274:1282–8.
	 8.	 Dimick JB, Finlayson SR, Birkmeyer JD. Regional availability of high-volume hospi­
tals for major surgery. Health Aff (Millwood) 2004(Suppl. Web Exclusive):VAR45–53.
	 9.	 Nallamothu BK, Saint S, Hofer TP, Vijan S, Eagle KA, Bernstein SJ. Impact of 
patient risk on the hospital volume–outcome relationship in coronary artery bypass 
grafting. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:333–7.
	10.	 Glance LG, Osler TM, Dick A, Mukamel D. The relation between trauma center 
outcome and volume in the National Trauma Databank. J Trauma. 2004;56:682–90.
	11.	 Petersen LA, Normand SL, Leape LL, McNeil BJ. Regionalization and the under­
use of angiography in the Veterans Affairs Health Care System as compared with a 
fee-for-service system. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2209–17.
	12.	 Nallamothu BK, Saint S, Ramsey SD, Hofer TP, Vijan S, Eagle KA. The role of 
hospital volume in coronary artery bypass grafting: is more always better? J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2001;38:1923–30.
	13.	 Halm EA, Lee C, Chassin MR. Is volume related to outcome in health care? 
A systematic review and methodologic critique of the literature. Ann Intern Med. 
2002;137:511–520.
	14.	 Menke TJ, Wray NP. When does regionalization of expensive medical care save 
money? Health Serv Manage Res. 2001;14:116–24.
	15.	 Crawford FA, Anderson RP, Clark RE, et  al. Volume requirements for cardiac 
surgery credentialing: a critical examination. The Ad Hoc Committee on Cardiac 
Surgery Credentialing of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1996;61:12–6.
	16.	 Birkmeyer JD. High-risk surgery—follow the crowd. JAMA. 2000;283:1191–3.
	17.	 Dudley RA, Johansen KL, Brand R, Rennie DJ, Milstein A. Selective refer­
ral to high-volume hospitals:  estimating potentially avoidable deaths. JAMA. 
2000;283:1159–66.
	18.	 Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB. Potential benefits of the new Leapfrog standards: effect 
of process and outcomes measures. Surgery. 2004;135:569–75.
	19.	 Ferguson TB Jr, Peterson ED, Coombs LP, et al. Use of continuous quality improve­
ment to increase use of process measures in patients undergoing coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;290:49–56.
	20.	 Sollano JA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, et  al. Volume–outcome relationships in 
cardiovascular operations: New York state, 1990–1995. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1999;117:419–428; discussion 428–30.

324
27
A Clash of Rights
SHOULD SMOKING TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN PUBLIC PLACES 
BE LEGALLY BANNED?
Carolyn M. Dresler, Mark J. Cherry, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
There is little question that smoking tobacco products is an important con­
tributor to the development of many kinds of cancer, as well as to morbidity 
through its effects on lungs, blood vessels, and other vital organs and pro­
cesses. Virtually all thoracic surgeons advise their patients who smoke to 
stop smoking because of the risks it poses to health, both short-term and 
long-term. Yet, it is a valid question to ask whether or not or to what extent 
these medical facts constitute justification of coercive action against smokers 
through enactment of laws.
There seems to be strong sentiment among thoracic surgeons in support 
of such laws, probably driven largely by their personal experiences with the 
pathology that smoking visits on those who are exposed to it. They are not as 
vocal, however, about the need for laws to control other destructive habits, such 
as eating too much (obesity is also a major cause of morbidity) or drinking too 
much (prohibition of alcohol early in the last century was not notably success­
ful in reducing the damage caused by drinking, and was eventually repealed).
Much discussion in the popular media and medical literature has focused 
on what might be gained by legal prohibition of smoking in public places, 
but relatively little discussion has focused on what might be lost by enacting 
such laws. To put the arguments of both sides of this issue on the table for our 
* Dresler C, Cherry M, Sade RM. Should smoking tobacco products in public places be legally 
banned? Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:699–707. Copyright Society of Thoracic Surgeons, republished 
here with permission.
 
 
 

	
Smoking Prohibition	
325
inspection and thoughtful consideration, we present the case of a conflicted 
legislator who is also a thoracic surgeon.
THE CASE OF THE AMBIVALENT SURGEON
Dr. Thomas Brady, a thoracic surgeon, has never had strong political inclina­
tions, but he is very concerned that politicians seem to have little appreciation 
of the complexities of the contemporary health care system. In a moment of 
what he would have considered lunacy when he was younger, he decided to 
run for public office. He took his campaign seriously and worked hard, but 
realistically, he had little hope of winning. To his considerable surprise, how­
ever, he awoke on the first Wednesday of November to find himself elected to 
membership in his state’s House of Representatives. [. . .]
Ever since his earliest days of training as a surgeon, he has known of the 
many dangers of cigarette smoking. The cancers of the lungs, head and neck, 
and bladder caused by smoking disturb him, as do the effects of smoking on 
lung function and blood flow, especially to the heart and brain. Secondhand 
smoke, he is convinced, damages people who don’t smoke at all, especially those 
who live with or are otherwise in close proximity to someone who smokes. [. . .]
A bill is filed in the House and it is assigned to the Medical Affairs 
Committee on which Dr. Brady serves. At the committee’s hearing on the 
bill, they listen to several proponents testify on the need for a law to protect 
the health of the public. Smokers may damage themselves, if they so choose, 
but they have no right to damage others by exposing them to ambient tobacco 
smoke. A much smaller number of opponents argue that it is legislative over­
reaching and paternalism to use the force of law to protect people from dam­
age they can easily avoid on their own. Decisions by private business owners, 
they say, will allow people to make their own judgments about protecting 
their health, and the free choices of proprietors and customers, taken in 
aggregate, will arrive at the correct balance between the pleasures of smok­
ing and its dangers to smokers and those around them.
Dr. Brady understands the arguments of both sides and is uncertain whether 
he should vote for the bill, sending it to the House for final action, or vote against 
it, effectively killing it within the committee. He asks two of his friends, a tho­
racic surgeon and a philosopher, to help him think through the issues.
Pro
Carolyn Dresler, MD, MPA
Dr. Brady is puzzled on how to proceed with his vote and is wondering where 
to seek advice to help him make his decision. Some basic topics should first be 
 
 

	 326	
The Ethics of Surgery
reviewed that are relevant, and this will provide some background for solving 
Dr. Brady’s dilemma.
First of all, a review of the science should be made so that it is clearly 
understood. The recent 2006 United States’ Surgeon General report states 
that the health consequences of involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke 
result in four key conclusions:1
	1.	Secondhand smoke causes premature death and disease in children 
and in adults who do not smoke.
	2.	Children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk for 
sudden infant death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, ear prob­
lems, and more severe asthma. Smoking by parents causes respira­
tory symptoms and slows lung growth in their children.
	3.	Exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has immediate adverse 
effects on the cardiovascular system and causes coronary heart dis­
ease and lung cancer.
	4.	The scientific evidence indicates that there is no risk-free level of 
exposure to secondhand smoke.
Secondhand smoke, or involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke—this ter­
minology is used to emphasize that it is an undesired or involuntary exposure 
to tobacco smoke—is unsafe at any level for everyone. This is explicitly clear 
with solid, scientific evidence. Solid science has also demonstrated several 
factors: that secondhand smoke bans do increase smoking cessation efforts 
among smokers, the bans do create more “smoke-free homes,” as people are 
educated about the dangers to loved ones from secondhand smoke, and the 
bans do not drive businesses to close with loss of profits, as this has been 
proven to be true around the world nationwide down to cities, from Ireland 
to El Paso, Texas. Studies have demonstrated that people who do not smoke, 
but work in smoking environments have higher levels of tobacco metabolites 
than nonsmokers who work in nonsmoking environments, thus clearly dem­
onstrating the exposure and consequent potential health effects from work­
ing in a smoky environment.2 Therefore, the science is clear. However, oddly, 
science is probably not the issue in this discussion.
As an elected official, it is Dr. Brady’s responsibility to review or cre­
ate laws and regulations (or both) that provide for an orderly, yet functional 
society. The United States often adds a caveat to this mandate that we do not 
interfere too much and that we value our individual independence! [. . .]
What are we owed by our society and what do we owe it? “What” or 
“who” is our “society” anyway? One could say that our “society” is the group 
of people with whom we interact. They are the school teachers who teach our 
children, the people in the grocery store that supply our food, our bankers, 
the people who staff our hospitals, and our families. Because we are a com­
plex society, our society also includes the people who grow our food, those 

	
Smoking Prohibition	
327
who ship our food, those who make or sell our clothes, our bus drivers, or for 
some of us, our housekeepers or our babysitters. [. . .]
What do those people, that is, all of those “other people” owe us. What 
is meant by “owe” in this case? One could say that they don’t owe anyone else 
anything. Actually, they do. They owe others the respect of their person and 
of their ability to exist and prosper within our society. As an obvious exam­
ple: they are not allowed to kill another person. We, as a society, have decided 
that killing one another is not allowed. Another example, our society owes 
individual adults the right to vote, that is, an adult individual has the ability 
to decide on what the rules and regulations are to be by which we all live. 
Each person is a part of the society that has decided that one can not be killed 
by another member of the society. Each person helps decide the penalty for 
breaking these rules, because each person can vote. To follow this example, 
as a member of United States society, each adult has the right to due process 
of law, that one’s being or belongings will not be illegally searched or seized. 
These are all legally protected “rights” and it is the duty of the governing 
bodies, whom adults of the society have elected or [who have] been appointed, 
to provide each of us with these legally protected “rights.”
So far, the discussion has reviewed what the society owes each of us, but 
what does each person owe their society? Depending on how one looks at this 
question, it is an easier one to answer. Each person owes society their ability 
and willingness to follow the rules that govern us all equally. We will treat 
fellow members of our society with all the respect that we claim for ourselves.
All of this to this point is very basic, we know all of this already, but how 
can this help Dr. Brady make his decision? Actually, a few key words and 
concepts have been sprinkled into this dialogue; what are they and how can 
they help us find the answer for Dr. Brady?
First, what are legally protected rights and human rights? They are differ­
ent, very different, yet one often derives from the other. Human rights are the 
highest order of “rights” and they supersede any “legally protected” rights. 
Remember, legally protected rights, such as one person cannot be killed 
by their neighbor, result from laws passed by our elected representatives. 
Human rights have a very well-delineated description; in legal terminology, 
these describe what our behavior should be to others in our society, and in 
addition, what our group or society has a duty to provide to us individually. 
One of those rights is the right to life, and this human right, in the example 
of murder, has been codified as a legally protected ability to claim one’s life. 
Conversely, our society has the duty to provide each of us, as individuals in 
our society, these human rights, and thus, the enforcement of the laws that 
punish the murderer.
For the purposes of this brief discussion, the legal documents that 
were created after World War II and the Nuremberg trials will be acknowl­
edged as the impetus in the development of modern human rights discourse. 

	 328	
The Ethics of Surgery
However, three main documents resulted: (1) the United Nations’ Charter, 
(2) the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, and (3) the 
International Convention on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.3 These 
three documents have formed the core of international human rights decla­
rations. The vast majority of countries have chosen to codify these human 
rights into national law that make them into legally protected rights.
The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights 
discusses human rights, such as the right to work, the right to choose who to 
marry, the right to health, and with this, the right to a healthy environment. 
Both the Convention on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on 
Economic, Cultural, and Social Rights delineate human rights, that is, rights 
that accrue to us as individuals that we have the responsibility to claim, and 
our society has the duty to provide. We, as individuals in our society have 
a right to health and the right to a healthy environment. We have the right 
to claim for ourselves this healthy environment, which is called having the 
agency to claim our duly owed human right, and our society has the duty to 
provide that healthy environment.
Some have argued that certain public health measures are examples of a 
coercive political authority. However, there are public health measures that 
are allowable even though they could be construed as coercive. Such inter­
ventions that serve to benefit the greater whole are allowed to restrict certain 
“freedoms” of the individual. Such public health interventions are allowable 
if they are based on three constructs:
	1.	the magnitude of the problem: greater than 50% of all children in 
the United States are still exposed to secondhand smoke and 1 in 4 
American children between 3 to 19 years of age live in a household 
with a smoker;
	2.	logical construct: secondhand smoke causes significant morbidity 
and mortality with a strong and solid scientific base;
	3.	legal construct: the right to health; the right to a healthy environment 
is part of our human rights that needs to be codified into our soci­
ety’s laws.
With such constraints, it is not likely that public health interventions will 
become insidious.
We have, as individual members of our society, the right, the human 
right, to a healthy environment. We have this human right because we are a 
member of our society, our group of people. Our elected representatives have 
the duty to provide that healthy environment. [. . .]
As a society, we owe its members the right to a healthy environment, and 
as individuals we must have the agency to claim this right. Dr. Brady, as our 
representative, must vote to provide a healthy environment to his society, his 

	
Smoking Prohibition	
329
constituents, to the best of his ability, because it is the duty of the government 
to provide such human rights. When such a law is passed that provides a 
healthy environment, then we have incorporated what is considered a human 
right into a legally protected right. Human rights trump legally protected 
rights; they are from a higher order. Our government should move to incorpo­
rate our human right to a healthy environment by legally protecting us with a 
comprehensive smoke-free law.
Con
Mark J. Cherry, PhD
Public health has become the very willing agent of coercive political author­
ity. The power vested in the public health community has become increas­
ingly significant. Its judgment is sought on nearly all aspects of life, from 
appropriate births and deaths, diets and sexual behaviors, to methods of 
child rearing and permissible lifestyle choices. Public health expertise serves 
as the basis of expert testimony in courts of law and [. . .] it is widely sought 
in the framing of governmental policy. Because the concern for “health” has 
become a pervasive aspect of modern culture, Dr. Brady’s unease with the 
proposed smoking ban reflects the circumstance that such agency has the 
potential to be particularly insidious.
Witness the growing popularity of banning smoking from all so-called 
“public” venues, including privately owned facilities, such as businesses, 
bars, and restaurants. Such bans have become popular among state and 
local governments, with the hope of anti-smoking advocates that “100% of 
Americans will live in smoke-free jurisdictions within a few years”;4 smoking 
bans of various forms exist in California, Hong Kong, Singapore, France, 
Ireland, and elsewhere worldwide. [. . .]
In contrast to such well-intentioned assertions, this article argues that 
legislative smoking bans can not be justified either in terms of private good 
or public good. To justify a smoking ban in terms of private good, the state 
must overturn longstanding legal and moral considerations that highlight 
individual autonomy and individual authority of persons over themselves. 
The weight of this moral and jurisprudential tradition establishes persons 
as in authority over themselves and as the presumed authoritative judge of 
their own interests. To justify a smoking ban in terms of the “public good,” 
the state would need to demonstrate that accidental exposure to secondhand 
smoke in public places significantly increases actual personal risk above the 
level of background health risks that routinely exist in public. Otherwise, 
smoking bans simply enact a facile, hyperbolic, and discriminatory solution 
to what is a very complex moral and scientific issue.
 
 

	 330	
The Ethics of Surgery
PRIVATE GOODS
Environmental tobacco smoke, that is, secondhand smoke, in bars, restau­
rants, and other indoor venues is typically characterized as “involuntary” 
exposure. Note the recent United States Surgeon General’s report on “The 
Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke.”1 The rhe­
torical force of this depiction is that nonsmoking patrons and employees are 
forced into breathing secondhand tobacco smoke, a purported harm, which 
somehow violates their rights. At least with regard to businesses, bars, res­
taurants, and other private venues that the public freely choose to patron­
ize, this characterization is inaccurate. Although such establishments are the 
usual target of legislative public smoking bans, these are not genuinely public 
places; rather, they are privately owned and operated businesses that the pub­
lic freely chooses to frequent.
Consider bars and restaurants that permit smoking. Patrons who choose 
to enter thereby volunteer to breathe the internal air, including ambient viral 
and bacterial loads (e.g., influenza spread by the sneezing individual next to 
you), bad breath, body odor, smelly food, flower pollens, nauseating perfumes 
and scented candles, and present levels of tobacco smoke. Those who do not 
wish to inhale the establishment’s internal air may leave; each is free to seek 
establishments with a personally acceptable (by whatever criteria) internal 
atmosphere. Whereas employers are typically at liberty to craft no-smoking 
policies, employees who chose to work in smoking establishments have con­
sented to such risks; each person is free to seek a profession with types and 
levels of risk that one finds acceptable. [. . .]
In general, one may permissibly engage in more or less risky activi­
ties, such as joining the military or the police, working on oil rigs, climbing 
mountains, donating a kidney or liver segment while alive,5 parachuting 
out of airplanes, undergoing elective plastic surgery, engaging in promis­
cuous sex, piercing body parts, having oneself tattooed, and so forth, set­
ting life and health at risk for national patriotism, career advancement, 
monetary profit, recreational or altruistic interests, personal pleasure, or 
to enhance one’s attractiveness to potential sexual partners. [. . .] Persons 
may thus grant permission to be touched or used in ways that (absent their 
permission) could profoundly harm them (e.g., kidney donation vs assault, 
or free love vs rape). [. . .] Such moral and legal considerations constitute, for 
example, one of the central justifications of the practice of informed consent 
in medicine.6 [. . .]
Advocates of smoking bans often rationalize that “. . . the general public 
accepts smoke-free bars and restaurants and that such smoke-free laws will 
not cause their targets to lose money.”7 Conclusive empirical data is needed to 
document such contentious claims, as many businesses continue to maintain 
that anti-smoking laws drive away customers and reduce profits. [. . .]
 

	
Smoking Prohibition	
331
Furthermore, not all important interests are health-directed or 
profit-minded. Consider a good old-fashioned, Texas bar owner, Billy Bob, a 
Bible-belt Christian, who combines his interests in profits with other personal 
interests, such as sermonizing, hunting, drinking, and smoking. In addition 
to bourbon and single-malt whisky, patrons are offered the opportunity to 
listen to the occasional sermon, admire the preserved animal heads lining the 
walls, and purchase cigars and cigarettes for the pleasurable activity of smok­
ing with friends and colleagues. The sign outside his door reads: “Smoke if 
you wish, but blasphemers and animal rights activists will be shown to the 
door.” Billy Bob realizes that his facility stands out as different from the 
more “up-scale” bars, like the La Grenouille Qui Danse, a nonsmoking 
wine-tasting bar up the street. [. . .] No one is forced to enter his establishment, 
and no one is hindered from leaving. He offers a choice of lifestyle, social 
risks, and freedom of association with others of similar tastes and interests. 
It is his venture capital or his private property at stake; his business is open to 
success or failure based on the free choices of others. [. . .]
PUBLIC GOODS
“The comprehensive body of research documenting the serious adverse 
health effects of passive smoking provides a powerful rationale for prohibit­
ing smoking in all public places. The time has come to clean the air.”7 So con­
cludes yet another advocate of smoking bans, but let us honestly consider the 
case of public risks and the element of accidental exposure to environmental 
tobacco smoke in the overall level of social risk.
Consider just a few sources of indoor air pollution in public places. 
According to the American Lung Association, radon, which is a tasteless, 
colorless, odorless gas, naturally occurring in the environment as a product 
of decaying uranium that becomes trapped in well-insulated buildings, is the 
likely cause of approximately 21,000 annual lung cancer deaths.8 [. . .]
Consider some sources of public outdoor air pollution. Ozone, the cen­
tral component of most ground-level smog, is formed when hydrocarbons and 
oxides of nitrogen react with volatile organic compounds in sunlight. Ozone is 
considered a powerful oxidizing agent that can damage lung tissue.9 Sources 
of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides include automobile emissions, electric 
utilities, refineries, waste storage, recycling, and chemical solvents. [. . .]
Consider other risks to life and health in the public space. According to 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, there were some 42,636 
automobile traffic fatalities and 2,788,000 injuries in the United States in 
2004.10 Approximately 76 million individuals contract food-borne illnesses, 
leading to some 325,000 hospitalizations and more than 5,000 deaths each 
year in the United States, with salmonella, listeria, and toxoplasma each 
responsible for more than 1,500 deaths each year.11 [. . .]
 

	 332	
The Ethics of Surgery
The actual health risk of accidental exposure to environmental tobacco 
must be appreciated in light of the overall level of background public risks. 
Given this lengthy, but incomplete, list of health risks to which individuals 
are exposed daily, it is arbitrary to hold smoking to a significantly higher 
standard than we hold other types of pollution or hazards to the “public 
health.” [. . .]
Governments lack legitimate authority to restrict individual freedom to 
smoke in public places unless the risk to others is greater than the normal 
background risks that persons assume simply by going about their daily lives. 
Persons consent to many background risks as they venture into the public 
space, but not to all risks. For example, highway drivers consent to the usual 
risks of driving (e.g., the slipperiness of a wet road, possible automobile fail­
ure, and so forth), but not to all risks (e.g., the risk that others are driving 
under the influence of heroin).
Similarly, persons consent to many health risks, but not usually to the 
risk of picking up a highly contagious and crippling or deadly disease, which 
can be passed on to others through casual public contact. [. . .]
Such an argument likely justifies compulsory vaccination for diseases, 
such as polio and smallpox, which are dangerous and highly contagious 
through casual contact. It might even justify quarantine for persons with 
highly infectious and dangerous diseases. The risks associated with such dis­
eases are significantly greater than the background risks that one generally 
assumes in daily life. [. . .]
To bring these reflections to bear on smoking bans: it is fairly straight­
forward to step out of the way of most environmental tobacco smoke (e.g., 
ceasing to patronize a smoking permitted bar) and to avoid most truly invol­
untary environmental tobacco smoke (e.g., moving to a different bench at a 
public park). Perhaps with sufficient data regarding environmental hazards, 
pollution levels, and other background public risk factors, such reflections 
might support a sliding scale for the standard of proof necessary to justify 
a smoking ban in truly public locations, considering both risk level and ease 
of avoidance. In areas with very little pollution, involuntary exposure to 
environmental tobacco smoke in public places might significantly increase 
individual health risks above local background risk levels. However, in many 
other locales such truly involuntary exposure will likely constitute only a very 
small element of one’s daily overall level of health risk. [. . .]
To return to the point-counterpoint discussion, Dr.  Brady’s decision 
against legislative smoking bans ought to be made in recognition of the 
limits of moral political authority—much to the frustration of many public 
health advocates. Morally permissible legislation does not extend to the coer­
cive imposition of paternalistic regulations on free citizens, as if they were 
mere children. Smoking bans that target restaurants, bars and other private 
establishments, seek to overturn a longstanding moral and jurisprudential 

	
Smoking Prohibition	
333
tradition that highlights the authority of persons over themselves to make 
their own judgments regarding acceptable costs and benefits, risks and 
pleasures. Smokers enjoy the taste and smell of fine tobacco, and smoking 
provides stress relief and other benefits; those who frequent smoking estab­
lishments evidently prefer these opportunities, pleasures, and other benefits 
to different opportunities with fewer tobacco-associated risks. [. . .] In addi­
tion, Dr. Brady ought to appreciate that smoking bans in truly public places 
simply pick out one small element of overall health risk for social appro­
bation, civil liability, and political criminalization, and therefore constitute 
biased and unjust discrimination. It may be easier, less expensive, and more 
politically expedient coercively to ban smoking rather than to encourage the 
reduction of other much more substantial sources of public pollution, or to 
persuade individuals to engage in less risky behavior, but such factors do not 
change the strongly paternalistic and discriminatory character of legislative 
smoking bans.
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Our fictional legislator, Dr. Brady, has received the advice he sought. He sus­
pected that his cardiothoracic surgeon friend would advise in favor of the 
bill banning smoking in public places and that his philosopher friend would 
advise him to reject the bill. He was correct on both counts. [. . .]
Each essayist fails to address key points made by the other. Dr. Dresler 
does not consider the distinction between public places that are privately 
owned and those that are held in common. She does not explain why interna­
tional declarations are superior to the national law cited by Dr. Cherry. She 
does not justify the requirement for laws focused on mitigating the harms 
caused by secondhand smoke when there are so many other agents that may, 
singly or in aggregate, cause even greater harm. Dr. Cherry speaks only of 
state and federal law and does not mention international conventions and 
declarations, which assert that health and a healthy environment are basic 
human rights that take precedence over national laws. He does not explain 
why national law should override international conventions.
Comments made by thoracic surgeons at our meetings and in other pub­
lic forums nearly uniformly support legal prohibition of smoking in public 
places. This attitude is easy to understand, because we all have seen firsthand 
the devastation inflicted by the diseases caused by smoking. [. . .] When con­
sidering the arguments advanced by Drs Dresler and Cherry, we should put 
aside the biases that arise from our personal experiences. We should instead 
dispassionately consider not only what we as individuals and as a society have 
to gain but also what we have to lose by passing laws that go beyond the 
 

	 334	
The Ethics of Surgery
hortatory messages we have been giving to our patients and to the public for 
decades. [. . .]
References
	 1.	 United States Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences 
of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke:  A  Report of the Surgeon General—
Executive Summary. Atlanta:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2006.
	 2.	 Stark MJ, Rohde K, Maher JE, et al. The impact of clean indoor air exemptions and 
preemption policies on the prevalence of a tobacco-specific lung carcinogen among 
non-smoking bar and restaurant workers. Am J Public Health. 2007;97:1457–63.
	 3.	 International human rights laws. Geneva:  Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights, United Nations. http://www.ohchr.org/english/law/index.htm. 
Accessed November 2007.
	 4.	 Griffith M. Smoking bans cover half of all Americans. Seattle Times. January 21, 
2007.
	 5.	 Cherry MJ. Kidney For Sale by Owner:  Human Organs, Transplantation, and the 
Market. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press; 2005.
	 6.	 Engelhardt HT, Cherry MJ. Informed consent in Texas: theory and practice. J Med 
Philos. 2004;29:237–52.
	 7.	 Eisner MD. Banning smoking in public places:  time to clear the air. JAMA. 
2006;296:1778–9.
	 8.	 American Lung Association. Radon fact sheet. Chicago:  American Lung 
Association. www.lungusa.org. Accessed January 31, 2007.
	 9.	 American Lung Association. Annotated bibliography of recent studies of the health 
effects of ozone air pollution 1997–2001. Chicago:  American Lung Association. 
www.lungusa.org. Accessed January 31, 2007.
	10.	 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic safety facts 2004. 
Washington, DC:  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2005. www.
nhtsa.dot.gov. Accessed January 31, 2007.
	11.	 Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dietz V, et al. Food-related illness and death in the United 
States. Emerg Infect Dis. 1999;5:607–25.
 

335
28
Should a Medical Center Deny 
Employment to a Physician Because 
He Smokes Tobacco Products?
James W. Jones, William M. Novick, 
and Robert M. Sade*
Introduction
Robert M. Sade, MD
A growing number of health care institutions are adopting a policy of deny­
ing employment to smokers, based on urine testing for the presence of nico­
tine and nicotine metabolites.1 [. . .]
These policies are controversial. Arguments favoring them include a 
social obligation of medical centers to promote healthy activities, an obliga­
tion to provide a healthy environment for employees, and not supporting a 
habit that is addictive and lethal. Moreover, smokers add considerable cost to 
the institution’s bottom line, because of their higher health care expenses and 
costs in lost productivity.
Arguments against denial of employment to tobacco users include the 
hypocrisy of banning smokers, while continuing to hire those who are obese, 
have a record of reckless driving, and use alcohol. Also, such policies are 
paternalistic: it’s none of the hospital’s business what its employees do when 
they are not at work.
Thoracic surgeons as a group strongly oppose tobacco use, but a hiring 
ban changes the game: should surgeons oppose or support a hiring ban of 
smokers? [. . .]
* Jones JW, Novick W, Sade RM. Should a medical center deny employment to a physician 
because he smokes tobacco products? Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98(3). Copyright Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, republished here with permission.
 
 
 

	 336	
The Ethics of Surgery
THE CASE OF THE PERPLEXED PRESIDENT
Dr. Nicholas Ateene is the president of University Physicians, the group prac­
tice that comprises all physicians who work in the University Hospital. The 
hospital’s Executive Director has asked him to review a policy the hospital 
will implement in a few months. The hospital campus has been smoke-free 
for several years, and under the new policy, the hospital will not hire any 
job applicants who currently smoke tobacco products. The executive direc­
tor is requesting that University Physicians adopt a similar policy for physi­
cian applicants. Dr. Ateene asks two of his colleagues, Dr. James Jones and 
Dr. William Novick, for their advice about how he should respond to this 
request.
Pro
James W. Jones, MD, PhD. MHA
I was surprised when I heard this topic was going to be debated because the 
ethical answer is so obviously clear. Next, I was saddened by such a deficiency 
of professional self-regulation that institutional regulation again was neces­
sary. The ethics of the topic will be discussed on an ethical basis, a societal 
basis, an institutional basis, and on a professional basis.
Everyone knows smoking is harmful but to be a difference something 
needs to make a statistically significant difference. Smoking clearly qualifies 
as an major threat to health. According to the Centers for Disease Prevention 
(CDC) data, the top four causes of death in America (about one and a half 
million deaths combined)—heart disease, malignancy, chronic respiratory 
disease, cerebrovascular disease—are smoking related.2 Lung cancer—one 
of the least desirable cancers, smoking’s signature sickness—is increased 
twenty fold in smokers.
Further CDC calculates 443,000 deaths in 2010 resulted from smoking 
related diseases. These are from protracted conditions requiring continuing 
sometimes debilitating therapies. Consider for a moment, the total amount of 
suffering of those dying and in those recovering from the scourges of smoking 
associated diseases.
The question is: Can smoking be considered a moral failure? Smoking 
violates the virtue of prudence which is the ability to personally self-govern 
and professionally to wisely advise others. Engelhardt defines prudence suc­
cinctly as: soundness of judgment to achieve a positive balance of benefits 
over harms.3 This definition clearly echoes and emphasizes the most impor­
tant concept in surgical therapeutic decision making—“the risk/benefit 
ratio.” Is a proposed benefit of an action worth the risk it entails? If not, the 
action violates prudence and is reckless at best and most likely foolish.
 
 

	
Denying Employment to Smokers	
337
The benefits are meager indeed when compared to the risks. Nicotine 
is an acetylcholine receptor agonist which briefly enhances mood. It pro­
motes alertness, calmness, and relaxation as it opens the door for the reaper. 
Smoking violates the virtue of prudence.
Rights include rights of three principals: the patient, the surgeon, and the 
institution. The patient has the right to be treated by a knowledgeable com­
petent surgeon and to have his or her health valued more than the surgeon’s 
interests.4
The surgeon has the right to be rewarded financially for clinical work and 
has all other non-professional rights and duties of the public. Professional 
rights have strict limitations because of the assumption of a fiduciary role. 
Physician behavioral freedoms end where fiduciary obligations begin.
Medical institutions operate more in accordance with duties than 
rights. Its rights are those of a business. Aside from meeting substantial 
regulatory compliance, a medical institution has the right to maintain its 
health-promoting image to secure the trust of patients. All institutions, medi­
cal and non-medical, have the right to “employer branding” their products 
and services. Since tobacco smoking is causal for the majority of diseases 
treated by the Cleveland Clinic and smokers carry a recognizable odor of 
their habit, why should they permit smokers to be caregivers?
Dr. Paul Terpeluk, director of Occupational Medicine at the Cleveland 
Clinic updated me about their employee non-smoking policy. The policy was 
initiated in 2007 [. . .] and the policy is regarded as very successful for sev­
eral reasons. Three thousand surgeons and forty thousand employees work 
there and none can smoke. The health-promoting image of the Clinic is not 
weakened which is vital to an important heath care institution. And the rate 
of smoking in the county where the clinic is located has declined double the 
average elsewhere. The basis legitimizing their right to institute the policy 
was the desire to have healthier employees for the business of medical care.
Physicians are overwhelmingly chosen as the source of information and 
encouragement for patients adopting healthier lifestyles.5 This ethical obli­
gation is at risk when physicians have adopted the unhealthy lifestyles they 
should be recommending that patients stop. The compromise occurs because 
our beliefs often adjust to defend our behavior.
The STOP study (Smoking: The Opinions of Physicians) examined the 
interactions of several thousand physicians with patients about smoking.6 
Physician smokers considered beneficial stress relief from smoking was a 
major barrier to cessation and were less likely to counsel against smoking. 
And, amazingly, one-third of physician smokers did not believe that smoking 
was a health hazard.
The harm principle has broad legal standing for limiting behavioral 
autonomy to prevent one from harming others. First articulated by John 
Stuart Mill: “. . . the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually 

	 338	
The Ethics of Surgery
or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action, of any of their num­
ber, is self-protection.”7 Equally, one’s right to liberty ends when it imposes on 
another’s rights—especially when the imposition induces observable harm. As 
data showing harm to others accumulated from public smoking, it was banned.
American Medical Association in publication H-490-917 entitled, 
“Physician Responsibilities for Tobacco Cessation” supports and advocates 
measures by physicians to: . . . quit smoking and to urge colleagues to quit; 
inquiring of all patients at each visit about their smoking habits; and at every 
visit, counseling those who smoke to quit using tobacco in any form. It sup­
ports the concept that hospitals, among others, be primary sites for educating 
the public about the harmful effects of tobacco.
According to the American Association of Thoracic Surgery’s and the Society 
of Thoracic Surgeon’s combined Code of Ethics, article 1.4: “Members should use 
their best efforts to protect patients from harm by recommending and providing 
care that maximizes anticipated benefits and minimizes potential harms.”8
Ethics are defined by logical examination of the societal mores in which 
we are immersed. Currently personal illness is a societal responsibility from 
medical insurance and obligations of medical institutions to provide care 
regardless of payment probability. Illness not physicians drives medical cost. 
Loss of heath drives illness and health is frequently behaviorally controlled.
In American society, cost of medical care is approaching a tipping point 
of no return. The Affordable [. . .] Care Act [ACA] is a financial tsunami which 
is fiscally unsound. The Office of the Actuary for the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services projects the 2014 National Medical Expenditures, 
after the [ACA] actualizes, are over $3.1 trillion. The government will pay half 
or $1.55 trillion. The 2012 total direct governmental revenue was 2.5 trillion.
Chronic disease is the deadly killer and there is no greater promoter of 
chronic disease than smoking. The answer to the ballooning cost of medical 
care is not to provide more medical treatments; it is to avoid needing expen­
sive care; the only answer is prevention.
The arguments against refusing to hire smokers lack validity. “It is cal­
lous—and contradictory—for health care institutions devoted to caring for 
patients regardless of the causes of their illness to refuse to employ smokers.”9 
That argument erroneously equates the relationship of the institution with 
patients and employees; the ethics are very different: one is a fiduciary rela­
tionship and the other is an employer/employee relationship.
The claim that the policy of excluding smokers is discriminatory because 
more smokers are poor and minorities is not a legitimate claim because the 
demographics of health care employees differs from the general population; 
nurses commonly are smokers. Correlation is not always confirmation. Being 
qualified for employment at the Cleveland Clinic requires the same for all 
groups: They must give up smoking. Societies are improved by increasing top 
down standards and diminished by reducing bottom up standards.

	
Denying Employment to Smokers	
339
Make no mistake: we are our profession’s keepers. There is no higher 
calling than our fiduciary role in providing exemplary medical care to our 
fellow human beings. Emotional, religious, legal, financial, and occupational 
problems take a backseat when the health of us or our loved ones is seriously 
threatened. To default, even minimally, from that calling is at best a moral 
error and we should thank [. . .] the Cleveland Clinic.
Con
William M. Novick, MD
Is it ethical for a hospital to deny employment to a physician who smokes 
tobacco products? This is the essence of the current debate. We are not discuss­
ing the negative impact smoking has on the individual. The position of those in 
favor of such a ban regarding employment is based upon a number of assertions:
	1.	Tobacco usage contributes to 20% of all annual deaths in the United 
States
	2.	Physicians should be role models for our patients, and therefor prac­
tice a healthy life-style, which includes no use of tobacco products
	3.	Hospitals should practice what they preach, i.e., healthy life-styles in 
their employee’s
	4.	Health care systems and practitioners should strive to decrease health 
care expenditures, i.e., decreasing use of tobacco products would 
decrease costs
	5.	companies in the US can set the standards for employment in their 
institution.
[. . .]
OTHER UNHEALTHY LIFE-STYLES THAT CONTRIBUTE TO THE ANNUAL DEATHS 
IN THE US
Obesity contributes to 15% of all annual deaths in the US and 35.7% of all 
adults in the US were considered obese in 2010 10,11,12,13. Smoking of tobacco 
products is estimated to occur in approximately 19% of the adult population in 
the US, just over half the number of obese individuals. The estimated contribu­
tion to the annual death rate in the US for alcohol consumption is 80,000 [. . .].14 
Fatalities from traffic accidents were estimated to cause 35,000 deaths in 2012 
and the protective effects of seat-belts, driving at the speed limit and not having 
consumed significant amounts of alcohol, are all well known to decrease fatali­
ties in traffic accidents.15 [. . .]
The debate over whether or not obesity actually contributes 400,000 
deaths annually is another political maneuver specifically designed to keep 
 
 
 

	 340	
The Ethics of Surgery
tobacco smoking at the top of the list of causative agents and to preserve 
funding.16 [. . .]
DOCTORS SHOULD SERVE AS ROLE MODELS FOR THEIR PATIENTS BY 
PRACTICING HEALTHY LIFE-STYLES
While this is certainly a laudable goal, doctors are just as human as the next 
person. Smoking among physicians has decreased from 18.8% to just over 
3% between the 70’s and 1991.17 [. . .] It would appear that the decrease in the 
percentage of physicians who smoke has leveled out over the last 20 years. 
However, when one examines other unhealthy life-styles among physicians, 
we find that 42% are overweight or obese, 35% exercise less than 30 minutes 
once per week (if at all) and alcohol intake up to 2 drinks per day is common 
(men 18.9%, women 11.3%). Where do we stop with this idea of physicians 
being role models for healthy life-styles? [. . .]
Hospitals Should Practice What They Preach, Healthy Life-Styles[. . .] hos­
pitals in the US are institutions where the treatment of disease occurs. To 
suggest that they have somehow undergone a metamorphosis into preventa­
tive treatment centers alone is disingenuous at best.18 Cleveland Clinic adver­
tises on its web-page that it has a Wellness Institute, yet within the different 
options are those offering treatment plans for smoking cessation.19 By offer­
ing of such a program, the clinic promulgates the hypocrisy of not allowing 
new employees to smoke. Why is it that they offer to help others stop smoking 
and yet are so callous to not help potential employees? [. . .]
A COMPANY IN THE UNITED STATES HAS THE RIGHT TO SET 
STANDARDS FOR HIRING PEOPLE
Although companies do have the right to set standards for individuals they 
hire, they must do so within the legal limits of state and federal laws in the 
United States. Currently, there are 29 states which have enacted laws pro­
tecting smokers from what state legislators viewed as a form of workplace 
discrimination.20 [. . .]
Discrimination in the workplace is not a new concept in the US. The 
Equal Employment Opportunity Act was signed into law by President R.M. 
Nixon in 1972. At the signing ceremony, Nixon stated, “One of the basic prin­
ciples in our way of life in America has always been that individuals would 
be free to pursue the work of their own choice, and to advance in that work 
subject only to consideration of their individual qualifications, talents and 
energies.”21 Where in this statement or in this law does it allow for discrimina­
tion against individuals who smoke in the privacy of their own homes, cigar 
lounges or golf games? What exactly is the point of this highly discriminat­
ing action by a few hospitals? Physician smoking is at an all-time low, yet 
 
 

	
Denying Employment to Smokers	
341
by self-admission, over 40% of physicians are overweight or obese. What is 
more evident to casual observers: a doctor who smokes, but they never see 
smoking or an obese physician that is clearly seen by all? The economics of a 
few smokers (2% or less) regarding health care expenditures compared to the 
economics of overweight physicians clearly is not the issue. The issue is one of 
marketing. Those hospitals that can claim a 100% smoker free staff stand to 
gain in the eyes of the public [. . .].
ETHICAL? IS IT LEGAL?
The United States was founded upon the principles of individual rights and, 
over the years since our founding, we have consistently reviewed our soci­
ety and added laws to protect those who are discriminated against, regard­
less of the issue. The three pieces of paper that make the foundation of 
our government; the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and 
the Bill of Rights, all uphold our rights to independent choice and decision 
without the fear of discrimination. The requirement for blood and urine 
tests for legal products used in the privacy of our own homes, which do 
not impact one’s ability to practice their specialty, is very close to violat­
ing the Fourth Amendment as an illegal search and seizure.22 Currently, 
29 states have enacted laws specifically preventing discrimination on the 
basis of an individual being a smoker. It is important that the other 21 fol­
low suit before this act of discrimination gains any more ground. The overt 
paternalism in this edict is not that different from the “nanny-state” of 
New York City where Mayor Bloomberg recently pushed a plan to prevent 
the purchase of “big sized” soda beverages23. [. . .] We are not a culture or 
society that responds well to having our choices made for us by the govern­
ment, as exemplified by the 60% of New York City residents who opposed 
Bloomberg’s proposal.24 [. . .]
SUMMARY
Smoking among physicians is at an all-time low, indicating that we as 
health-care providers, for the most part, practice what we preach. The hypoc­
risy of preventing those remaining physicians who smoke from practicing at a 
particular health care institution that provides care for individuals who suffer 
the consequences of smoking is obvious. We should accept these colleagues 
who continue to smoke and provide them with the necessary support to quit. 
The hard, paternalistic position of some institutions seems in principle to vio­
late the very ideals on which this country was founded and is actually against 
the law in the majority of states. Let us embrace our roles as physicians and 
help our colleagues who smoke rather than discriminate against them and 
ostracize them from our society.
 
 

	 342	
The Ethics of Surgery
Concluding Remarks
Robert M. Sade, MD
Both essayists were asked to advise the hypothetical Dr. Ateene on how he 
should respond to a request to adopt a policy of not hiring any physician 
applicant who smokes tobacco products. Jones is clear in advising him to 
adopt such a policy, while Novick is similarly clear in advising him not to do 
so. Each makes a strong case in support of his position.
In arguing their viewpoints, however, both also are blowing smoke 
at their audience in the form of irrelevant or misleading discussions. For 
example, Jones goes to some length in describing smoking as a moral failure 
of individuals, but the issue was not the morality of individuals’ smoking; 
rather, it was the ethics of institutional policy making. Novick mistakenly 
equates coercive law with corporate policy making by comparing New York 
Mayor Bloomberg’s plan to prohibit sales of large-size soft drinks by force 
of law with a health care institution’s development of a hiring policy—public 
law and private policy have very different ethical implications.
Interestingly, both essayists claim that the no-smokers policy is aimed at 
the public image of the health care institution, but each sees its purpose in an 
entirely different light. Jones describes this aspect of the policy as the institu­
tion maintaining “its health-promoting image to secure the trust of patients,” 
an altogether praiseworthy objective. Novick understands this facet of the 
policy completely differently, seeing it as merely another sales pitch aimed 
at the public, “which is constantly deluged by marketing and public relations 
firms to ‘buy’ their product.” [. . .]
The number of companies, including many health-related companies, 
that have adopted a no-hiring-of-smokers policy is said to be over 6,000 and 
increasing.25 The facts that 65% oppose policies that ban the hiring of smok­
ers and 29 states have already passed laws prohibiting such policies26 suggest 
that the contest between supporters and opponents of smoker hiring bans is 
likely to continue for the foreseeable future. It also seems likely that no clear 
winner will emerge any time soon.
References
	1.	Asch DA, Muller RW, Volpp KG. Conflicts and compromises in not hiring smokers. 
N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1371–3.
	2.	Ten leading causes of death and injury. Injury Prevention and Control:  Data and 
Statistics. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/
injury/wisqars/leadingcauses.html. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	3.	Englehardt H. The Foundations of Bioethics. New  York:  Oxford University Press; 
1986.
 
 

	
Denying Employment to Smokers	
343
	 4.	 Jones JW, Novick W, Sade RM. Should a medical center deny employment to a phy­
sician because he smokes tobacco products? Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98(3):799–805.
	 5.	 Llewellyn DJ, Lang IA, Langa KM, et al. Exposure to secondhand smoke and cogni­
tive impairment in non-smokers: national cross sectional study with cotinine mea­
surement. BMJ 2009;338:b462.
	 6.	 Pipe A, Sorensen M, Reid R. Physician smoking status, attitudes toward smok­
ing, and cessation advice to patients: an international survey. Patient Educ Couns. 
2009;74:118–23.
	 7.	 Mill J. On Liberty. London: John W. Parker and Son; 1859:34.
	 8.	 Code of Ethics. Chicago: Society of Thoracic Surgeons; 2009. http://www.sts.org/
about-sts/policies/code-ethics. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	 9.	 Schmidt H, Voigt K, Emanuel EJ. The ethics of not hiring smokers. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:1369–71.
	10.	 Satcher D. Surgeon general’s column. Commissioned Corps Bull. 2002; 16(2):1–2.
	11.	 Johannes L, Stecklow S. Dire warnings about obesity rely on slippery statistic. The 
Wall Street Journal. February 9, 1998:B1.
	12.	 Allison DB, Fontaine KR, Manson JE, et al. Annual deaths attributable to obesity 
in the United States. JAMA. 1999;282:1530–8.
	13.	 Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of Obesity in the United 
States, 2009–2010. NCHS Data Brief, No. 82. Atlanta: National Center for Health 
Statistics; January 2012.
	14.	 White IR, Altmann DR, Nanchahal K. Alcohol consumption and mortality: model­
ing risks for men and women at different ages. BMJ. 2002; 325:191–8.
	15.	 US Census. Transportation: motor vehicle accidents and fatalities. http://www.cen­
sus.gov/compendia/statab/cats/transportation/motor_vehicle_accidents_and_fatal­
ities.html. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	16.	 Kolata G. Data on deaths from obesity is inflated, U.S. agency says. The New York 
Times. November 24, 2004. http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/24/health/24obese.
html. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	17.	 Nelson DE, Giovino GA, Emont SL, et al. Trends in cigarette smoking among US 
physicians and nurses. JAMA. 1994;271(16);1273–5.
	18.	 Schmidt H, Voight K, Emanuel EJ. The ethics of not hiring smokers. N Engl J Med. 
2013;15:1369–71.
	19.	 Tobacco Treatment Center. http://my.clevelandclinic.org/tobacco/default.aspx. 
Accessed December 3, 2013.
	20.	 Editorial: Not hiring smokers crosses privacy line. USA Today. January 29, 2012. 
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/opinion/editorials/story/2012-01-29/not- 
hiring-smokers-privacy/52874348/1. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	21.	 The American Presidency Project. Richard Nixon. Statement about signing the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
ws/?pid=3358. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	22.	 US Bill of Rights, Fourth Amendment. http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/
bill_of_rights_transcript.html. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	23.	 Grynbaum MM. New York soda ban to go before state’s top court. The New York Times. 
October 18, 2010. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/18/nyregion/new-york-soda-ban-to-
go-before-states-top-court.html?_r=0. Accessed December 3, 2013.

	 344	
The Ethics of Surgery
	24.	 Grynbaum MM, Connelly M. 60% in city oppose Bloomberg’s soda ban, poll finds. 
The New  York Times. August 23, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/23/nyre­
gion/most-new-yorkers-oppose-bloombergs-soda-ban.html. Accessed December 3, 
2013.
	25.	 Homans MD. Banning smokers may harm your company’s health. The Legal Intelligencer. 
2012;245(92). http://www.flastergreenberg.com/media/article/383_Michael%20Hom­
ans%20Byline%20Article_May%202012.pdf. Accessed December 3, 2013.
	26.	 More workplaces don’t allow employees to smoke at work, anywhere. WFMY 
News. January 6, 2012. http://www.digtriad.com/news/article/207243/8/Experimental 
%20Severe%20Weather%20Warnings%20To%20Motivate%20Response. Accessed 
December 3, 2013.

345
AANS (American Association of Neurological 
Surgeons),  100
AATS (American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery),  27, 276, 287, 338
ABTS (American Board of Thoracic 
Surgery),  27, 29
Accola, Kevin,  61–5, 66, 67
accountability,  5, 144
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education (ACGME)
and eighty-hour work week,  69, 74, 80
guidelines for presentations,  9
policies regarding conflicts of interest,  262
ACGME (Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education),  see Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education
ACRE (Association of Clinical Researchers and 
Educators),  289–90
ACS (American College of Surgeons),  see 
American College of Surgeons
addiction,  168; see also substance abuse
addicts,  163–71
administrators, surgeons as,  3
advance directives,  104, 107, 116, 120, 122, 123, 
124, 125, 126
adversity, ability to cope with,  165
advocacy, restricted  vs. unrestricted, 153
age
and adoption of technology,  197, 198, 200–1
and cognitive function,  198
and manual dexterity,  7
air pollution,  331
AKA (Anti-Kickback Act),  277–8
American Academy of Pain Medicine,  168
American Association for Thoracic Surgery 
(AATS),  27, 276, 287, 338
American Association of Neurological 
Surgeons (AANS),  100
American Board of Surgery,  198
American Board of Thoracic Surgery 
(ABTS),  27, 29
American College of Cardiology Foundation–
The Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
Collaboration on the Comparative 
Effectiveness of Revascularization 
Strategies (ASCERT),  218
American College of Physicians Ethics 
Manual,  143, 149
American College of Surgeons (ACS),  74
Code of Conduct,  60, 97
mission statement,  199
motto,  199
standards of behavior for expert 
witnesses,  98
American Medical Association (AMA)
Code of Medical Ethics  (see Code of 
Medical Ethics (AMA))
Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs,  60, 
270
Jehovah’s Witnesses’s view of,  109
on obligation to assist in administration 
of justice,  97
Principles of Medical Ethics,  60
standards of behavior for expert 
witnesses,  98
on tobacco cessation,  338
American Pain Society,  168
American Society of Addiction Medicine,  168
American Society of Transplant Surgeons,  257
American Thoracic Society,  125–6
Angell, Marcia,  281
Annals of Thoracic Surgery, The (ATS), 26, 27, 
28, 29, 291
Anti-Kickback Act (AKA),  277–8
aortic valve replacement (AVR) surgery
in noncompliant patients,  163–72
outcome-volume relationship in,  206
apology,  134
Araujo, Katia,  168–71
Aristotle,  37–8, 77, 96, 133
Armey, D.,  96
ASCERT (American College of 
Cardiology Foundation–The Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons Collaboration 
on the Comparative Effectiveness of 
Revascularization Strategies),  218
Association of American Medical Colleges,  3
Association of Clinical Researchers and 
Educators (ACRE),  289–90
ATS (Annals of Thoracic Surgery, The), see 
Annals of Thoracic Surgery
attentional failures,  83–4
INDEX
 

	 346	
Index
Auburn University,  226
authority
argument from,  12
of physicians,  24
autonomy, behavioral,  337–8
autonomy, patient
balance with paternalism,  50
of death row inmates,  256–7
described,  243
emphasis on,  19, 61
and impending loss of insurance,  155
implications of,  104
and incentives for organ donation,  241, 244–5
and informed consent,  84, 85
new emphasis on,  38
and refusal of blood transfusions,  107–16
and refusal of treatment,  111
respect for,  12, 156–7
social context of,  245
undermining of,  115
understanding of,  115
aviation,  89–90
AVR (aortic valve replacement) surgery,  see 
aortic valve replacement surgery
Bakken, Earl,  292
bankruptcy,  155
Bavaria, Joseph E.,  204–7
Beauchamp, Tom,  12, 159, 243
Beecher, Henry,  184, 192
behavioral freedoms,  337
Belmont Report,  159
beneficence,  12, 156, 159
concept of,  151
described,  243
and disclosure of HCV status,  49–50
and impending loss of insurance,  155
and market for organs,  245
and providing treatment,  123
and refusal of treatment,  111
and refusal to testify,  97
and treatment goals,  126
benefits,  42, 136, 137, 139
Bentham, J.,  96
Bernstein, Ron,  168–71
best interests, patient’s
determining,  151
and gifts from industry,  268
guidance for,  3
and industry gifts,  268
and new technologies,  196
and rationing,  221
and regionalization,  321
responsibility to,  261
vs. social responsibility,  309
and surgeon-industry relationships,  282
best interest standard,  127; see also best 
interests, patient’s
Bigger, Thomas,  81
bioethics
Beauchamp-Childress framework for,  12, 159, 
243–4
diversity of viewpoints in,  11
foundation of,  133
and law,  176–7
principles in,  243–4 (see also autonomy; 
beneficence; justice; nonmaleficence)
see also ethical analysis; ethics
Birkmeyer, J. D.,  313, 320
blame,  144
blood transfusions,  104–5, 107–16
Bok, Sissela,  38
Bolam principle,  66
Bolling, S. F.,  209
Bosk, Charles,  5
brain death,  232, 234, 256
Brett, A. S.,  155
Bridges, Charles R.,  107, 112–15, 116
business,  282; see also industry
CABG (coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery),  see coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery
capital punishment, moral justifications 
of,  253–4
Cardiothoracic Ethics Forum,  see Ethics Forum
cardiothoracic surgery, and need for knowledge 
about ethical challenges,  28
Cardiovascular Patient Outcomes Research 
Team– Elective Angioplasty Study 
(CPORT-E),  208
Cardozo, Benjamin,  113
care
appropriateness of, determining,  147–8, 
153–61
futile care,  126
informed care,  142–3
quality of,  321–2
refusal of,  19
career,  7, 197, 199
Carrel, Alexis,  75
Cassell, Eric,  153
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention),  see Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention
CEJA (Council on Ethical and Judicial 
Affairs),  60, 270
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
on causes of death,  336
and guidelines for surgeons with HCV,  47, 53
recommendations for health care providers 
with HBV,  51

	
Index	
347
CER (cost-effective ratio),  221
Cerfolio, Robert James,  270–3, 274
Cherry, Mark J.,  329–33
Childress, James,  12, 159, 243
Chisolm, Guy,  289
choice, process of,  73
Choudhry, N. K.,  198
Chu, M. W.,  87
Churchill, Winston,  75
cigarettes,  see tobacco
Cleveland Clinic,  337, 338–9, 340
clinical studies,  8–10; see also randomized 
controlled trial; research
Code of Medical Ethics (AMA),  2
description of informed consent in,  60
and disclosure of other surgeons’ errors,   
142–3, 149
honesty in,  40
marketing in,  202
and patient self-determination,  38
resource allocation in,  171–2
on surrogate/proxy,  128
Code of Professional Conduct (American 
College of Surgeons),  60, 97
coercion
influence on decision making,  115
and organ donation,  253, 256–7
in public health measures,  328, 329, 332
COIs (conflicts of interest),  see conflicts of 
interest
compassion,  2, 3
competence,  2, 6–7, 195
competition
and disclosure,  33
and informed consent,  58–67
and quality of care,  321–2
Concept of the Corporation, The (Drucker),  283
conduct, professional standards of,  97–8
conflict, surgeon-family,  118–28
conflicts of interest (COIs)
articles on,  283–4
corruption narrative of,  279
difficulties in studying,  288, 293
disclosure of,  263, 278–9
evidence of effects of,  290–4
gifts from industry,  265–74
laws and regulations regarding,  262, 263
misuse of term,  281
policies regarding,  262
recognizing,  261–2
resolutions of,  262, 278–9
secondary interests,  286–7
see also surgeon-industry relationships
Congress, U. S.,  276–7
Conklin, Lori D.,  74–6, 78
consent,  see informed consent
consequentialism,  12, 136–7, 138
consulting,  see surgeon-industry relationships
continuing medical education events,  9
coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG)
regionalization of,  299, 311–22
volume-outcome effect in,  205–6, 312–14, 
316, 318
Coselli, Joseph S.,  74–6, 77, 78
cost-effective ratio (CER),  221
Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs 
(CEJA),  60, 270
courage,  135
CPORT-E (Cardiovascular Patient Outcomes 
Research Team– Elective Angioplasty 
Study),  208
Crawford, F. A.,  319
Cruzan, Nancy Beth,  177
CSRS (New York Cardiac Surgery Reporting 
System),  313
customers,  282
Czeisler, Charles A.,  81–6, 90
D’Amico, Thomas A.,  120–3, 127, 128
Daniels, Norman,  153
DCD (donation after cardiac death) 
protocol,  232, 233, 252–3, 257–8
Dead Donor Rule (DDR),  228, 231–6, 253, 255
death
accepted definitions of,  255–6
brain death,  232, 234, 256
causes of,  336, 339
determination of,  228, 232–3, 234
Uniform Determination of Death Act,  228, 
232–3, 256
and withdrawal of LST,  235–6
DeBakey, Michael E.,  74
debate format,  11, 17
deception
benefits and harms of,  42–5
in Code of Ethics,  38
early views of,  38–9
by insurance companies,  41
of insurance companies,  32, 37–45
and long-term harm,  43–5
vs. lying,  38, 134
of patients,  38–9
as self-serving,  41–2
decision making,  2, 5–6, 305
about end-of-life care,  120
and authority of physicians,  24
considering society’s good in,  220
freedom in,  115
and lack of advance directive,  122
motivations in,  182
risk-benefit ratio in,  336–7
social worth in,  171–2

	 348	
Index
and UHCDA,  108, 111, 116
unconscious bias in,  279
see also autonomy
decision-making, shared,  61, 159
decision-making, surgeon-patient,  52
decision-making, surrogate/proxy
and advance directives,  104, 114, 115–16
ATS statement on,  125–6
authority of,  127–8
and lack of advance directive,  122
and overriding of advance directives,  111–12
and rejection of treatment,  107
standard for,  127
in study on ethics gap,  20–4
and surgeon-family conflict,  120
Declaration of Helsinki,  192
Denlinger, Chadrick E.,  145–9
deontology,  12
destination therapy,  303; see also left ventricular 
assist device
detailing,  265–74
deterrence function of capital punishment,  254
Deveney, Karen E.,  197–200, 201
devices,  7–8
approval of,  190
availability of, and disclosure,  58–67
development of,  304
efficacy of,  216
efficiency of,  216–17
research on,  8–10
use of in history,  176
see also technologies, surgical
Dewey, T. M.,  209
Dickey, Jamie,  70–4, 77
dignity, and refusal of treatment,  111
DiMaio, J. Michael,  164–8
Dimick, J. B.,  320
disability, and treatment withdrawal 
decisions,  22–3
discrimination,  340, 341
diseases, communicable
guideline for physicians with,  50–1
and vaccinations,  332
see also hepatitis C virus
diseases, self-inflicted,  106; see also smoking; 
substance abuse
donation after cardiac death (DCD) 
protocol,  232, 233, 252–3, 257–8
Dorotheus of Gaza,  45
Dresler, Carolyn,  48–52, 55, 56, 325–9, 333
Drucker, Peter,  282, 283
drug companies
advertising in journals,  269–70
banning of representatives of,  274
gifts from,  265–74
marketing by,  268
regulation of,  270
see also industry
drugs,  7, 8–10
drug samples,  269
drug use,  72, 163–72
duress, giving consent under,  110
Eagle, Kim A.,  312–16
economic issues
in refusal to operate on noncompliant 
patient,  167
and treatment,  154–61
Edmunds, L. Henry, xvii
Edwards, Lowell,  280, 292
effectiveness,  vs. efficacy, 216–17
egalitarian principle,  220, 244, 246
eighty-hour work week,  33, 69, 73–4, 87
Eisenhower, Dwight D.,  75
end-of-life care,  118–28
Engelhardt, H.,  336
equipoise,  8
errors
and blame,  144
disclosure of,  3, 105, 130–40, 141, 145
disclosure of, manner of,  134, 150
disclosure of, rates of,  144
To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health 
System,  105, 130, 141
nondisclosure of,  135–8
other surgeons’, disclosure of,  141–50
and well-being of surgeon,  139, 144, 145
errors, other surgeons’,  141–50
Estrera, Anthony L.,  152–5, 160, 161
“ethical,” concepts of,  96
ethical acceptability,  20, 21, 22
ethical analysis
difficulties in using presecriptive  
analysis,  159
models of,  1, 12, 20, 49–50, 133, 136, 138–9
ethical obligations,  75, 76
ethics
foundations of,  96
need to know about,  28
and public decision making,  305, 306
relation with law,  101
research ethics,  8–10
surgical ethics,  4–10, 15, 16
in surgical literature,  20
values in,  111
ethics committee,  124–5
ethics education,  16–17, 26–30
Ethics Forum, xvii, xx,  10, 26–30
ethics gap, xvii,  16, 20–5
evidence, types of,  293
evidence-based medicine,  62
decision making (cont.)

	
Index	
349
excellence, and volume-outcome relationship 
debate,  210
execution, and organ donation,  252, 256, 257
expertise, transmission of,  208–9
FAA (Federal Aviation Administration),  89–90
False Claims Act,  277
FDA (Food and Drug Administration),  189–90, 
216, 217
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),  89–90
Ferraris, Victor A.,  316–21
fidelity to patient’s interests,  see best interests, 
patient’s
fiduciary duty,  337; see also best interests, 
patient’s
Fitzgerald, Faith,  165
Fogarty, Tom,  280
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),  189–90, 
216, 217
Frater, Robert,  166
fraud,  43
freedoms, behavioral,  337
free market,  244–5
Freidman, Richard,  81
futility,  126
Gallagher, T. H.,  134, 144, 149, 150
Gaudiani, Vincent,  277, 280–3
Gawande, Atul,  199
Georgetown Mantra,  159
Gibbon, John,  280, 292
gifts, from industry,  262–3, 267–8, 270, 272; see 
also conflicts of interest
Gilbert, J. A.,  81
“Giving Life After Death Row” (Longo),  250–1
Goethe, Johann von,  308
Gorney, Mark,  100
GRADE (Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation) 
Working Group,  293
Grassley, Charles,  276–7
Green, Philip,  204, 207–9
Greenwood, James,  247
group learning,  208–9
Halm, E. A.,  318
harms
balancing with benefits,  42
and behavioral autonomy,  337–8
and disclosure of error,  136, 137, 139
Harvard Medical Practice Study,  147
HCV (hepatitis C virus),  see hepatitis C virus
health
definition of,  165, 306
maximizing,  308
responsibility for,  165
Health and Human Services, Department  
of,  270
health care
access to,  316
availability of,  316
cost of,  74, 301, 303–4, 338
distribution of,  157–8, 244 (see also 
regionalization)
inequalities in,  220
payors,  298, 302, 306
priorities in,  307, 308, 309
rationing of  (see rationing)
right to,  309
sustainable limits of,  215
health care policy
concerns of,  306–8
and ethics,  297, 305, 306
physicians in development of,  297–8
health care reform
and miscoding,  44
Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act,  222, 289
and rationing,  220, 222
and reporting of industry payments to 
physicians,  276–7, 289
health information, privacy of,  54–5, 85
health law, understanding of,  25; see also legal 
acceptability
Health Savings Accounts,  309
Helsinki, Declaration of,  192
hemodialysis,  176
hepatitis C virus (HCV),  32–3
guidelines for health care workers with,  50–1, 
53, 54
incidence of,  55–6
lack of guidelines for surgeons with,  47
stigma of,  55
transmission of,  52–3, 55
treatment of,  53
heroic measures,  118–28
Himmelstein, D. U.,  155
Hippen, Benjamin,  240–3, 247
Hippocrates,  123
Hippocratic Oath,  49, 60–1, 97, 165, 303; see 
also nonmaleficence
Holmes, Oliver Wendell,  244
honesty,  2, 3, 4
and character,  43
in Code of Medical Ethics,  40
and deception of insurance companies,  37–45
and disclosure of HCV status,  51–2, 56
history of,  32
in professional integrity,  32
house officers,  see residents
human rights,  327–8
Hume, David,  43

	 350	
Index
IDE (Individual Device Exemption),  190
Ikonomidis, John S.,  155–8, 160, 161, 210
Ikonomidis, Sharon,  155–8, 160, 161
illnesses, medical
cost of,  338
and regionalization,  319
see also disease
Immelt, Stephen J.,  277–9
impairment, performance,  82–3
Individual Device Exemption (IDE),  190
industry
benefits of medicine’s relationship with,  270–1
calls to remove from medicine,  272
gifts from,  262–3, 267–8, 270, 272
and innovation,  64–5
see also drug companies; surgeon-industry 
relationships
infection
by bloodborne pathogen,  47 (see also 
hepatitis C virus)
of health care workers,  166
informed consent
basic conditions of,  104
for clinical studies,  8–10
in Code of Medical Ethics,  60
and cognitive understanding,  113
and communication,  124
complexity of,  104
and comprehension,  110–11
by death row inmates,  256–7
disclosure during process of,  33
disclosure of all options in,  58–67
and disclosure of other surgeons’ errors,   
142–4
disclosure of sleep deprivation in,  33–4, 82–91
under duress,  110
ethical principles of,  161
explicit consent,  123–4, 125
focus on,  50
implied consent,  125
importance of,  103
informational requirements for,  65–7
legal definition of,  113
management of perioperative complications 
in,  125
newness of,  19
and patient autonomy,  84, 85
physician’s obligation in,  60
preconditions of,  103–4
“reasonable patient” standard,  66–7, 84, 85
“reasonable physician” standard,  66, 84
reporting innovation during process of,  175
and respect for autonomy,  115
informed refusal of care,  19, 111
injustice,  157–8
innovation,  7
adoption of,  63–4
distinguished from research,  175, 177, 188
downside of,  184
FDA’s role in,  189–90
innovation review committee,  184–8, 190, 
191, 192
introduction into surgery,  188
Law of Diffusion of Innovation,  63–4
reducing risks of,  184
regulation of,  177, 181–93
reporting during informed consent 
process,  175
see also devices; procedures; technologies, 
surgical
innovation review committees (IRC),  184–8, 
190, 191, 192
Institute of Medicine (IOM)
on conflicts of interest,  278–9, 286–7
on disclosure of financial relationships,  288
To Err is Human,  105, 130, 141
on studies of volume-outcome effect,  318
insurance companies
deceiving,  32, 37–45
deception by,  41
insurance coverage, impending loss of,  151–61
integrity,  2, 4
and disclosure of other surgeons’ errors,    
142–3
honesty in,  32
meaning of,  31
intentionality,  115
International Council of Medical Editors,  9
International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights,  328
International Covenant on Economic, Social, 
and Cultural Rights,  328
internists, in study on ethics gap,  23, 24
interpretation, and ethical analysis,  159
IOM (Institute of Medicine),  see Institute of 
Medicine
Iran,  242
IRBs,  189
IRC (innovation review committees),  184–8, 
190, 191, 192
Iserson, Kenneth V.,  267–70, 271, 274
Jackson, J.,  134
JAMA  (Journal of the American Medical 
Association), 272
Jehovah’s Witness,  104–5, 107–16
Jones, James W.,  336–9, 342
Jones, R. S.,  74
Jonsen, A.,  153, 244
Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery,  288
Journal of the American Medical Association 
(JAMA),  272

	
Index	
351
Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 
(JTCVS),  26, 27, 28, 29, 287, 291
journals
advertising in,  269–70
articles on conflict of interest in,    
283–4
JTCVS  (Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery), 27, 28, 29, 291
JTCVS (Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery),  26
judgments, in surgeon-family conflict,  118–28
justice,  12
administration of,  97
described,  244
egalitarian justice,  244, 246
and health care distribution,  157–8
and impending loss of insurance,  155
in professional’s moral role,  153
in rationing health care,  220, 221
and refusal of treatment,  111
and resource allocation,  244
and Utilitarianism,  245–6
Kant, I.,  96, 133, 156
Kassirer, Jerome,  290
Kaul, S.,  197
Kent, Michael S.,  52–5, 56
kidneys, supply of,  240; see also organ donation/
transplantation
Kornfield, Donald,  81
Krasna, Diane M.,  123–7, 128
Krasna, Mark J.,  123–7, 128
Krause, E. A.,  217
Krizek, T. J.,  134
Lamm, Richard,  301, 303, 304, 305–10
law
and informational requirements for informed 
consent,  66–7
relation with ethics,  101
Law of Diffusion of Innovation,  63–4
lawsuits
and disclosure of errors,  131, 137
effects of,  94
monetary awards in,  138
number of,  94
surgeons’ testimony in,  34, 94–102
threats of,  34
lawyers,  94
Leapfrog Group,  187, 318, 320
left ventricular assist device (LVAD),  298, 
301–10
legal acceptability,  20–1, 22–3
Leon, Martin B.,  204, 207–9
letters of recommendation (LOR),  48–56
liability, and apology,  134
lifestyle
and disease,  106, 339
of physicians,  337, 340
of surgeons,  72–3, 76
see also eighty-hour work week; smoking; 
substance abuse
life support, withdrawal of,  118–28, 235–6
Lin, Shu S.,  251–5, 258
litigation,  see lawsuits
living will,  120; see also advance directives
lobotomy, prefrontal,  176
Longo, Christian,  250–1, 253, 256
LOR (letters of recommendation),  48–56
Luft, H. S.,  312
lung cancer,  336
LVAD (left ventricular assist device),  298, 301–10
lying,  37–8
vs. deception,  38, 134
justified,  40
and sense of wrongdoing,  45
see also deception
Mack, Michael J.,  187–91, 192
malpractice litigation,  see lawsuits
manipulation,  115
manual dexterity,  6–7
marketing
in Code of Ethics,  202
by drug companies,  268, 269–70
of robotic surgery,  202
smoke-free policies as,  341, 342
usefulness of,  282
Marshall, George,  305
Mavroudis, Constantine,  132–5, 138
Mavroudis, Constantine D.,  132–5, 138
maximizing principle,  220
Mayer, John E. Jr.,  214, 215–18, 221, 222
Mazor, K. M.,  134
McCarthy, Patrick,  301, 303–5, 308–10
McKneally, Martin,  184
Medical School Graduation Questionnaire,  3
medicine, evidence-based,  62
medicine, foundational moral principles in,  97
Medtronic,  288, 292
Menke, T. J.,  318
Mill, J. S.,  96, 337–8
Miller, Franklin G.,  233–6
miscoding,  39–45
misdiagnosis, and previous miscoding,  43
mistakes,  see errors
Moffatt-Bruce, Susan D.,  142–5, 148–9
money, saving,  167
Moniz, Egas,  176
Moore, Francis D.,  189
morality,  133
moral obligations,  75

	 352	
Index
morbidity and mortality conferences,  130, 136
Morreim, Haavi,  183–7, 190, 191, 192
mortality
and blood transfusions,  112
from drug abuse,  166
and volume,  205
Murphy, J. Peter,  286–90, 291, 293
Nallamothu, Brahmajee K.,  312–16
National Agenda to Improve Patient Safety,    
207
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and academic-industry relationships,    
271, 272
on coercion of prisoners,  257
National Organ Transplant Act (NOTA),  225, 
243, 251
National Sleep Foundation,  85
Naunheim, Keith,  107, 108–12, 116, 135–8
need principle,  219
negligence,  147; see also lawsuits
New England Journal of Medicine,  284
New York Cardiac Surgery Reporting System 
(CSRS),  313
New York Review of Books,  281
New York Times,  281
“no heroic measures,”  118–28
noncompliance,  163–72
nondisclosure, of errors,  135–8
nonmaleficence,  12, 156, 159
concept of,  49–50
described,  243–4
and impending loss of insurance,  155
and market for organs,  245
and providing treatment,  123, 124
and refusal to testify,  97
and treatment goals,  126
NOTA (National Organ Transplant Act),  225, 
243, 251
Novick, William M.,  339–41, 342
Nuremberg Code,  192
Nuremberg trials,  192, 327
obesity,  339–40
obligations
ethical obligations,  75, 76, 95–8, 101, 141
moral obligations,  75
personal obligations,  75
of physicians,  139, 171
professional obligations,  142–3, 167–8
On the Take (Kassirer),  290
open heart surgery,  280
operative notes, dictation of,  39, 42
Oregon,  307
Organ Donation Breakthrough 
Collaborative,  226, 240
organ donation/transplantation
and autonomy,  244–5, 256–7
and coercion,  253, 256–7
compensation for,  240–7
Dead Donor Rule,  228, 231–6, 253, 255
by death row inmates,  228, 250–9
distribution of available organs,  226–7
distribution of organs,  244
donation after cardiac death protocol,  232, 
233, 252–3, 257–8
incentives to donate,  228, 238–47
laws and regulations,  226, 243, 247, 251, 256
market in organs,  240–7
and method of execution,  252, 256, 257
need to rethink ethics of,  234
number of deceased donors,  238
organ trafficking,  241
policy on,  225
procuring organs before withdrawal of 
LST,  235–6
prohibition of valuable considerations 
for,  225, 226
rates of,  226
supply of organs,  225, 233, 238–47
waiting lists,  238
Organ Donor Clarification Act,  247
Organ Procurement and Transplantation 
Network,  225, 226, 257
Osmon, S.,  134
outcomes, surgical
in investigations of effects conflicts of 
interest,  294
relationship with volume  (see 
volume-outcome effect)
Paget, Stephen,  76
Pal, Jay D.,  255–8, 259
PARTNER (Placement of Aortic Transcatheter 
Valve) trial,  209, 215
paternalism,  50, 52, 60–1, 325, 332, 335, 341
patient, noncompliant,  163–72
patient-physician relationship,  4–5; see also 
autonomy; informed consent
Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act,  222, 289; see also health care reform
patients
best interests of  (see best interests, patient’s)
as customers,  282
privacy of,  54–5
serving good of,  2–3
solicitation of,  202
Patrick, G. T. W.,  81
PCI (percutaneous coronary intervention), 
outcome-volume relationship in,  207
pediatricians, in study on ethics gap,  23, 24
Pellegrini, Carlos A.,  86–90, 91

	
Index	
353
Pellegrino, E. D.,  96
Percival, Thomas,  38, 197
perfection,  135–6, 195
performance impairment,  82–3
personal obligations,  75
persuasion,  115
Petersen, L. A.,  317
Peterson, E. D.,  318
pharmaceutical companies,  see drug companies
phronesis,  77
physician, compromised,   50–1; see also 
hepatitis C virus
physician harm,  136, 137, 139
physician-industry relationships,  see 
surgeon-industry relationships
Physician Payments Sunshine Act,  276, 289
physicians
as customers,  282
as educators,  3
obligations of  (see obligations)
as policymakers,  297–8
responsibilities of,  217, 218, 261 (see also best 
interests, patient’s)
roles of,  1–2, 3–4
and social responsibility,  309
see also surgeons
pilot fatigue,  90
placebo, surgery as,  184
Placement of Aortic Transcatheter Valve 
(PARTNER) trial,  209, 215
Plato,  37, 38, 40, 96, 133
policy, defined,  297
policy, health care,  see health care policy
political correctness,  96, 98
poverty, and market for organ donation,  241–2, 
245, 246
prefrontal lobotomy,  176
prescriptions, information on,  269
presentations, and disclosure of financial 
interactions,  286–94
preventive ethics,  114
“Principles of Medical Ethics, The” (AMA),  60
principlism,  12
prisoners
organ donation by,  250–9
spending on,  304
privacy,  4–5, 54–5, 85
private goods,  330–1
procedures
acceptance of,  63–4
access to,  178
see also technologies, surgical; specific 
procedures
profession, defined,  32
professional, defined,  32
professionalism, and malpractice testimony,  101–2
prudence,  77
publications, and disclosure of financial 
interactions,  286–94
public goods,  331
public health, coercion in,  328, 329, 332
Quinlan, Karen Ann,  177
randomized controlled trial (RCT),  8, 9–10, 181, 
189, 293
Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical 
Assistance in Treatment of Chronic Heart 
Failure (REMATCH),  303
rationing,  214–22, 298, 301–10
RCT (randomized controlled trial),  8, 9–10, 181, 
189, 293
“reasonable patient” standard,  66–7, 84, 85
“reasonable physician” standard,  66, 84
reciprocity,  265, 286
referral system,  311; see also regionalization
regionalization
alternatives to,  320
consequences of,  319
of coronary artery bypass graft surgery,  311–22
and cost savings,  318–19
defined,  298–9
described,  316–17
evidence supporting,  313–14
and medical illnesses,  319
and patient’s best interests,  321
recommendations for,  314–15
and referral system,  311
and volume-outcome effect,  317
REMATCH (Randomized Evaluation of 
Mechanical Assistance in Treatment of 
Chronic Heart Failure),  303
reputation,  56
research,  3–4
cardiothoracic surgical studies,  181
conflicts of interest in,  262
defined,  181–2
distinguished from innovation,  175
and introduction of new technology,  175
and physician-industry relationships,    
271–2, 273
recognition of need for oversight in,  192
in surgery,  189
see also randomized controlled trial
research ethics,  8–10
residency programs, unfilled,  76
residents
readiness of,  7
work hours of,  33, 69, 73–4, 87
resource allocation,  8, 167, 171–2, 216, 244; 
see also organ donation/transplantation; 
rationing

	 354	
Index
respect,  2, 3
retribution function of capital punishment,  254
Ricci, Marco,  168–71
Rich, Lauren,  251–5, 258
Richardson, J. David,  75, 76
rights
human rights,  327–8, 329
legal rights,  327, 329
and smoking bans,  337
risk-to-benefit ratio,  156, 336–7
Robicsek, Francis,  95, 98–100, 101
Rosner, Gregg F.,  204, 207–9
Ross, Lanie Friedman,  243–7
Rothschild, J. M.,  87
rules,  12
rules of rescue,  219
Russell, Charles Taze,  108, 109
Sade, Robert M.,  290–4
Salerno, Tomas A.,  168–71
samples, of medications,  269
SAPIEN Aortic Bioprosthesis European 
Outcome (SOURCE) Registry,  208
SAPIEN Transcatheter Heart Valve,  207
Satir, Virginia,  73
Schloendorff v. The Society of New York 
Hospital,  113
Schwartz, Allan,  204, 207–9
scientists,  3–4
secondary interests,  286–7
self-awareness,  5–6
self-determination, of patients,  see autonomy
self-interest,  199
SHEA (Society for Healthcare Epidemiology 
of America),  50–1
Silen, William,  7
Skipper, Eric,  59–61
sleep deprivation,  6
disclosure of,  33–4, 80–91
effects of,  80, 81–4, 86
mitigating risk of,  88–90
studies on,  81–2, 86–7
and surgical outcomes,  81–2, 87, 90
sleep inertia,  83
Sleep Research Society,  85
smoke, secondhand,  325, 326, 328, 330, 331, 
332; see also smoking
smoking
banning of in public places,  324–34
as cause of death,  336
and denial of employment,  299, 335–42
effects of,  324, 325, 326
as moral failure,  336
prohibition of,  299
risk-benefit ratio,  336–7
secondhand smoke,  325, 326, 328, 330, 
331, 332
see also tobacco
Smoking: The Opinions of Physicians (STOP) 
study,  337
Smyth, Jessica K.,  195–7, 200
social contract,  76
social justice,  157
social responsibility,  165, 309
social welfare,  309
social worth, in decision making,  171–2
society,  326–7
society, good of,  166–7, 305
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America 
(SHEA),  50–1
Society for Thoracic Surgery National Cardiac 
Database,  313
Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS)
Code of Ethics,  338
on physician-industry interactions,  276, 287
position statement on off-label use of 
coronary artery stents,  61
standards of behavior for expert witnesses,  98
in study on ethics gap,  27
socioeconomic status, and market for organ 
donation,  241–2, 245, 246
solicitation, of patients,  202
Sollano, J. A.,  320
SOURCE (SAPIEN Aortic Bioprosthesis 
European Outcome) Registry,  208
specialty, choice of,  76
Specter, Arlen,  247
standards of professional conduct,  97–8
Starr, Albert,  280, 292
stents, off-label use of,  61
STOP (Smoking: The Opinions of Physicians) 
study,  337
Stossel, Thomas P.,  272, 284, 290
structural variables,  317–18
STS (Society of Thoracic Surgeons),  see Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons
students, medical,  3; see also residents
substance abuse
by physicians,  72
and treatment,  163–72
substituted judgment standard,  127
suicide, physicians’ risk of,  72
surgeon-family conflict,  118–28
surgeon-industry relationships,  263–4
articles on conflict of interest in,  283–4
benefits of,  280, 288, 292–3
corruption narrative of,  278, 279, 281
disclosure of financial interactions,  276–7, 
286–94
effects of financial motives,  287–8

	
Index	
355
evidence of effects of,  274, 284, 288, 290–4
institutional oversight of,  279
investigations of effects of,  293–4
and patient’s best interests,  282
regulation of financial interactions,  276–84
transparency in,  288
surgeons
as authoritarian,  20
career peak of,  199
roles of,  1–2, 3–4
in study on ethics gap,  23, 24
training of,  15–16
well-being of,  144, 145
work environment of,  89
work hours of,  80(see also sleep deprivation)
surgery
image problem of,  15
lack of understanding of,  15–16
as placebo,  184
refusal to perform,  163–72
and risk of transmission of HCV,  52–3
surgery, preemptive,  151–61
surgery, robotic,  177
adoption of,  194–202
advantages of,  196–7
development of,  196
disadvantages of,  198
effectiveness of,  200, 201
learning curve of,  199
and marketing,  202
prevalence of,  200
surrogate decision-making,  see decision-making, 
surrogate/proxy
survival, meaningful,  126
Synergy between Percutaneous Coronary 
Angioplasty with Taxus and Cardiac 
Surgery (SYNTAX) trial,  208
system congruence,  73
system esteem,  73
TAVI (transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation),  178, 214–22
TAVR (transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement),  177–8, 204–11, 218
teaching, conflicts of interest in,  262
techniques, introduction of into surgery,  188
technologies, surgical,  7–8
acceptance of,  63–4
access to,  204–11
adoption of,  188, 194–202
and best interests of patients,  196
diffusion of,  218
focus of ethical concerns about,  62
history of,  176
industry perspective on,  64–5
motivations for adopting,  199, 201
opportunities for learning,  198–9
promotion of,  65
rationing of,  178, 214–22, 301–10
and research,  175
robotic surgery,  194–202
surgeon’s responsibility to,  62–3
see also devices; innovation; procedures; 
specific procedures
teleological ethics,  12
Terpeluk, Paul,  337
testimony, expert,  94–102; see also lawsuits
thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery, 
outcome-volume relationship in,  206
Thoracic Surgical Directors Association 
(TSDA),  28
tobacco,   304; see also smoke, secondhand; 
smoking
To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System 
(Institute of Medicine),  105, 130, 141
tort system,  132, 138; see also lawsuits
trainees,  3; see also residents
training, of surgeons,  15–16
transcatheter aortic valve implantation 
(TAVI),  178, 214–22
transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(TAVR),  177–8, 204–11, 218
transparency
and disclosure of HCV status,  51–2, 56
in surgeon-industry relationships,  288, 289
trauma care,  317
treatment
outside of standards,  105–6, 151–61
refusal of,  107 (see also blood transfusions)
treatment withdrawal decisions,  22–3, 118–28
trust
and decision making,  67
and full disclosure,  134
loss of,  43
and miscoding,  44
in physician-patient relationship,  4–5
trustworthiness,  3
truth,  37–8, 94–102; see also deception; errors; 
honesty
truthfulness, and refusal of treatment,  111
TSDA (Thoracic Surgical Directors 
Association),  28
UAGA (Uniform Anatomical Gift Act),    
251, 256
UDDA (Uniform Determination of Death 
Act),  228, 232–3, 234, 256
UHCDA (Uniform Health Care Decisions 
Act),  108, 111, 115, 116
uncertainty,  5

	 356	
Index
Ungerleider, Ross M.,  70–4, 77
Uniform Anatomical Gift Act (UAGA),  251, 256
Uniform Determination of Death Act 
(UDDA),  228, 232–3, 234, 256
Uniform Health Care Decisions Act 
(UHCDA),  108, 111, 115, 116
United Nations Charter,  328
United Network for Organ Sharing,  225, 226, 
257
US Preventive Services Task Force 
(USPSTF),  293
Utilitarianism,  133, 137, 166–7, 245–6
VA (Veterans Affairs),  317
values,  111
ventilation, artificial,  176
Veterans Affairs (VA),  317
virtue ethics,  12
virtues,  2, 3, 4, 96
volume-outcome effect
concerns about studies of,  210–11, 313–14, 
317–18, 321–2
debate on,  204–11
evidence supporting,  312–13, 316
and excellence,  210
and regionalization,  317
studies of effects of in CABG,  313–14
see also regionalization
Wall Street Journal,  288
Watson, Donald,  95–8, 100, 101
Watson, Thomas,  280, 292
well-being, patient’s,  153
Wheatley, Grayson H. III,  214, 219–21
Whyte, Richard,  52–5, 56
Wilper, A. P.,  154
wisdom, practical,  77
witch hunt,  272
Witman, A. B.,  137
witness, expert,  94–102; see also lawsuits
work environment,  89
work ethic,  69, 77; see also work week
work-life balance,  72–3, 74
work shifts,  82
work week, eighty-hour,  33, 69, 73–4, 87
World Health Organization,  255, 306
World Medical Association,  255
Wray, N. P.,  318
Wu, Y.,  221
Zion, Libby,  69, 86
Libby Zion Law,  80









