

— PRAISE FOR MICHAEL HUDSON'S WORK —
 
“There are few people alive who have taught me more than Michael 
Hudson. The incisive and brilliant essays in this book should really be 
assigned to every first-year student of economics. The fact they never will be 
is the ultimate testimony to the fact economics has betrayed its own most 
noble tradition  —  and Hudson here so magnificently embodies  —  to 
become a sheer instrument of power.”
— David Graeber, author of Debt: The First 5,000 Years and co-organizer 
of Occupy Wall Street
 
“Michael Hudson has consistently been an eloquent, erudite, accurate 
analyst of the strengths and failings of modern capitalism. He is one of the 
prescient few who anticipated today’s never-ending economic crisis, and one 
of a smaller number still whose advice about how to end the crisis would 
actually work. His simple mantra debts that can’t be repaid, won’t be repaid 
will echo down the ages. Buy this book and acquire real wisdom, with a 
breadth of vision from the origins of human society till today that no-one else 
can match  —  and I include myself in that judgment.”
— Steve Keen, author of Debunking Economics. The Naked Emperor 
Dethroned? and editor of Debtwatch blog at debtdeflation.com
 
“Among the contemporary voices crying in the wilderness of the world’s 
financial trouble, I know of none more forceful or prescient than Michael 
Hudson’s. He sets the crooked straight and makes the rough places plain.”
— Lewis Lapham, editor of Lapham’s Quarterly and editor emeritus of 
Harper’s magazine
 
“Michael Hudson is a vital and productive force. He is a top notch 
economist and historian, a man to whom the phrase “class struggle” still has a 
vital imperative. On the left, and at CounterPunch we await eagerly his 
dispatches and this book promises to be a rich treat.”
— Alexander Cockburn, co-editor of CounterPunch.org

 
“Hudson argues convincingly that there is no legitimate debt repayment 
option, only variations on debt forgiveness, and that elected governments 
should determine the policy that is in the best interest of constituents, not 
financial firms, and that the future of the global economy hangs in the 
balance."
— Eric Janszen, founder and president of iTulip.com
 
“Michael Hudson is able to articulate the truths behind our economic crisis 
and provide solutions that would liberate tens of millions of Americans from 
desperate financial conditions. This book explains the choices before us and, 
more importantly, how to maneuver ourselves away from what many of us 
believe is a looming economic catastrophe. If Dr. Hudson were sitting at 
Obama’s right as chief economic advisor, I would feel far more secure and 
hopeful about our future.”
— Gary Null, author, president and co-founder of prn.fm (Progressive 
Radio Network)

© 2012 Michael Hudson / ISLET-Verlag 
© September 2012 eBook edition
Cover design by Kate McInnes 
All illustrations, tables, charts and graphs © Michael Hudson with the 
exception of the two illustrations in Chapter 2 by Nigel Holmes.

All rights reserved. 
www.michael-hudson.com 
www.islet-verlag.de 
Hudson, Michael, 1939– 
The Bubble and Beyond. Fictitious Capital, Debt Deflation and Global Crisis 
Michael Hudson 
ISBN 13: 978-3-9814842-0-5 
_____________

*****
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements 
Preface & Sources
Introduction: The Crisis in the Economy and in the Economics Discipline 
Part I. Fictitious Capital and Economic Fictions 
1.  Two Traditions of Financial Doctrine (Table) 
2.  The Magic of Compound Interest: Mathematics at the Root of the Crisis 
(2 illustrations) 
3.  How Economic Theory Came to Ignore the Role of Debt 
4.  The Industrialization of Finance and the Financialization of Industry 
5.  The Use and Abuse of Mathematical Economics 
6.  The Financial Character of Today’s Crisis and Why Economists Avoid 
Confronting It 
Part II. Inflated Debt and Debt Deflation 
7.  A Property is Worth Whatever a Bank Will Lend Against It (5 Charts)
8.  The Real Estate Bubble at the Core of Today’s Debt-leveraged 
Economy (19 Charts)
9.  Junk-Bonding Industry (2 Charts)

10. Privatizing Social Security to Rescue Wall Street 
11.  Saving, Asset-Price Inflation and Debt Deflation (6 Charts)
12. Saving our Way into Poverty: The Political Implications 
Part III. The Global Crisis 
13. Trade and Payments in a Financialized Economy (4 Tables)
14. U.S. Quantitative Easing Fractures the Global Economy 
15. America’s Monetary Imperialism (1 Table)
16. How the Dollar Glut Finances America’s Military Build-up 
17. De-Dollarization and the End of America’s Empire 
18. Incorporating the Rentier Sectors into a Financial Model (5 Charts)
Part IV. The Need for a Clean Slate 
19.  From Democracy to Oligarchy: National Economies at the Crossroads 
20. Scenarios for Recovery 
INTERACTIVE ENDNOTES – Listed by Chapter (interactive in text only)
MICHAEL HUDSON Bio and Other Books by Michael Hudson
_________________

*****
Acknowledgements 
 
I am grateful to Steve Keen, Henry Liu, Dirk Bezemer and Yves Smith for 
the discussions we have had over the years in clarifying the chapters and 
basic argument put forth in this book and to my Modern Monetary Theory 
colleagues Randy Wray, Stephanie Kelton and Marshall Auerbach at the 
University of Missouri (Kansas City). 
For over ten years my Gang8 colleagues Geoffrey Gardiner, Gunnar 
Tomasson and Arno Daastol (for many years my webmaster) have joined in 
an ongoing critique of how orthodox schools retain the Ricardian tradition of 
describing how economies would work without free credit creation and debt. 
That is of course why these schools (like Ricardo himself) have received 
backing from the financial sector, which seeks to make its product — debt — 
invisible to economists, politicians and the general public. 
In addition to setting this book in type, Cornelia Wunsch has been a part 
of this project from the beginning, and has provided the most important 
editorial guidance and encouragement. David Kelley, my fellow advisor to 
Congressman Dennis Kucinich, has egged me on to focus my argument more 
clearly. 
Starting in 2005, Lewis Lapham gave me a popular forum for my ideas in 
Harpers, for which Nigel Holmes provided the illustrations for the “The New 
Road to Serfdom” article. He also illustrated the compound interest charts in 
Chapter 2. Alex Cockburn at CounterPunch and Michel Chossudovsky at 
Global Research provided me with popular electronic forums for my 

reporting of current events. Yves Smith at Naked Capitalism and Stephanie 
Kelton at UMKC’s New Economic Perspectives have published my articles 
and provided discussants that have shaped some of these chapters. 
In New York the late Bob Fitch, Bertell Ollman, Xulin Dong and Sjjabri 
Oncu have read and given me instructive feedback on most of the chapters in 
this book. My colleagues Jeff Sommers (along with Dirk Bezemer noted 
above) have co-written articles with me on the neoliberal disaster in Latvia. 
In Japan, Bill Totten has provided much help, and in the Basque Country, 
Joseba Felix-Tobar has integrated my theories with my UMKC colleagues. 
Pacifica Network broadcasters Bonnie Faulkner, Amy Goodman and Suzi 
Weissman have conducted interviews that have led me to state my ideas more 
forcefully. Likewise at i-tulip, Eric Janszen has been a good source of back-
and-forth discussion over the years. 
Karl Fitzgerald at Prosper Australia in Melbourne has served as my web-
master for michael-hudson.com for the past few years. Lynn Yost has been 
an indefatigable friend and editor, and Keith Wilde has been reading my 
articles for many years. 
In Germany, Frank Schirrmacher and Nils Minkmar at the Frankfurt All-
gemeine Zeitung have pushed me to discuss the political implications of my 
financial analysis, while Martin Bartels and my colleagues at the Boeckler 
Stiftung meetings in Berlin have helped spur me to define my theories more 
clearly. Most recently, Rob Johnson has invited me to present my summary 
paper (Chapter 20 in the present volume) at the April 2012 meetings in Berlin 
of the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET). 
I could not have completed this book without the tender care and nurturing 
given by my wife Grace, who has fought valiantly to keep me distraction 
free. 
_________________

*****
Preface
 
This treatise on economic theory traces how industrial capitalism has 
turned into finance capitalism. It claims that the finance, insurance and real 
estate (FIRE) sector has created a kind of “balance sheet wealth” not by new 
tangible investment and employment, but financially in the form of debt 
leveraging and rent-extraction. Such rentier gains are an overhead that is 
overpowering the economy’s ability to pay. As a result, the present state of 
the economy is one of austerity rather than the expanding markets envisioned 
in earlier epochs. Much like in a radioactive decay process, we are passing 
through the short-lived and unstable phases of a Bubble Economy and casino 
capitalism that now threaten to settle into leaden austerity and debt deflation. 
This situation confronts society with a choice: either to write down debts 
to a level that can be paid (or indeed, to write them off with a Clean Slate), or 
to permit creditors to foreclose, concentrating property in their own hands 
(including whatever assets are in the public domain to be privatized) and 
imposing a combination of financial and fiscal austerity on the population. 
This scenario will produce a shrinking debt-ridden and tax-ridden economy. 
The latter is the path that the Western nations are pursuing today. It is the 
opposite path from that which classical economists advocated and which 
Progressive Era writers expected. Their optimistic focus on technological 
potential was thwarted by the political stratagems of the vested rentier 
interests fighting back against the classical idea of free markets and economic 
reforms to free industrial capitalism from the legacy of medieval and even 

ancient privileges and essentially corrosive, antisocial behavior. 
This is not a natural or inevitable form of evolution. It is a detour from the 
kind of economy and indeed free market that classical economists sought to 
create. With roots in the 13th-century Schoolmen discussing Just Price, the 
labor theory of value was refined as a tool to isolate economic rent as that 
element of price that had no counterpart in actual or necessary costs of 
production. Banking charges, monopoly rent and land rent were the three 
types of economic rent analyzed in this long classical tradition. These rentier 
charges were seen as unnecessary and exploitative special privileges carried 
over from the military conquests that shaped medieval Europe. A free market 
was defined as one free of such overhead. 
This classical view of free markets as being free of an unearned “free 
lunch” was embodied in the Progressive Era’s financial and tax reforms. But 
the rentiers have fought back. The financial sector seeks to justify today’s 
deepening indebtedness on the ground that it “creates wealth” by debt 
leveraging. The banks’ product is debt overhead, after all. The problem is that 
this leaves debt deflation in its wake as debtors try to pay by reducing their 
consumption and investment. A shrinking economy falls further into arrears 
in a debt spiral. 
The question today is whether a new wave of reform will restore and 
indeed complete the vision of classical political economy that seemed to be 
shaping evolution a century ago on the eve of World War I, or whether the 
epoch of industrial capitalism will be rolled back toward a neofeudal reaction 
defending rentier interests. What is up for grabs is how society will resolve 
the legacy of debts that can’t be paid. Will it let the financial sector foreclose, 
and even force governments to privatize the public domain under distress 
conditions? Or will it write down debts to what can be paid without 
polarizing wealth and income, without dismantling government and 
privatizing the public domain, and without turning tax policy over to 
financial lobbyists pretending to be objective technocrats? 
Part I provides a perspective on the financial sector’s rise to dominance 
over the industrial economy. It reviews how classical economists developed 
the tools to measure how banks and money managers have come to play role 
that landlords did in Physiocratic and Ricardian theory: as beneficiaries of 

feudal privileges that oblige society to pay them for access to credit as well as 
land. As land ownership has been democratized, new buyers obtain credit to 
purchase homes and office buildings by pledging the rental income to 
bankers. About 80% of bank loans in the United States, Britain and other 
English-speaking countries are real estate mortgages, making land the major 
bank collateral. The result is that mortgage bankers receive the rents formerly 
taken by a hereditary aristocracy in postfeudal Europe and the colonies it 
conquered. 
 
Part I. Fictitious Capital and Economic Fictions 
 
Chapter 1, “Two Traditions of Financial Doctrine,” describes the long line 
of analysis that has recognized that there are many ways to structure financial 
markets — productive rather than parasitic ways. It was presented in August 
2000 in Narvik, Norway at Eric Reinert’s “The Other Canon” foundation. In 
keeping with the group’s advocacy of protective tariffs to promote high 
value-added industries characterized by increasing returns, this paper 
describes the tradition of steering banking systems to finance industrial 
capital formation with productive credit. Germany and France put in place 
industrial banking systems in conjunction with government protection of 
heavy industry (largely armaments, to be sure) and social reforms such as 
pension systems, public health and national transport systems. 
I was unable to convince the attendees at the Norwegian meeting to 
include the financial dimension of industrial reform in their canon, so this 
paper is published here for the first time. I had no greater success in getting 
commercial publishers to accept the history of banking and finance that I was 
writing. As one editor explained to me, warning that the financial bubble 
would collapse was like trying to sell a book about how everyone would have 
bad sex after the age of forty. 
Academically, I ran into the fact that the long tradition distinguishing 
between productive and unproductive credit and indeed the role of debt has 
been excluded from the economics curriculum. The anticlassical school has 
replaced Progressive Era financial analysis with a happy-face view in which 
finance only adds to economic activity by providing credit, never corrodes it 

with debt — as if one party’s credit were not another’s debt! 
These market structures and broad economic patterns that classical 
political economists placed at the center of their analysis are treated as 
“exogenous” by today’s academic mainstream. Monetarist teachings omit the 
study of how nations have shaped banking practice to finance growth. Free 
trade doctrine and a profinancial ideology of deregulation go together: “free 
markets” for predatory behavior and unearned income. Today’s mainstream 
Washington Consensus accordingly advocates free trade and minimal public 
regulation or taxation. These policies are capped by privatization and a “flat 
tax” on employment, while untaxing real estate, property and high income 
brackets. 
The older path — by which today’s successful lead nations caught up with 
others and then achieved dominance — pursued active protectionist industrial 
and agricultural policy and state intervention. This tradition advocates 
government subsidy of investment in infrastructure, education, research and 
development, progressive taxation of income and of rentier returns (land rent, 
financial returns and monopoly gains), and a financial system that encourages 
tangible capital formation. 
Critics of free trade and financial deregulation have defined the proper aim 
of national policy to be active regulation and tax policy to shape markets so 
as to maximize capital formation, in ways that raise productivity and living 
standards. This is achieved by public investment in basic infrastructure, 
tariffs and subsidies to promote capital formation, education, research and 
development, capped by steering the banking system towards productive 
credit creation to finance industrial capital formation. 
By rejecting the classical distinction between productive and unproductive 
labor and credit, today’s national income accounts classify rentier gains as 
“earnings” on a par with wages and profits, adding to national product rather 
than simply being transfer payments. This approach treats all wealth as being 
earned as part of the production process, not extracted from the economy in 
the form of a free lunch (“economic rent”) by rentiers. 
Pro- and anti-government approaches both lead to central planning, but in 
different sets of hands. Economists writing in the tradition from European 
mercantilism through 19th-century American, German and French 

protectionism to Progressive Era reformers, Social Democratic parties and the 
New Deal shared a broad approach to public planning. In practice, every 
market is planned and organized by some parties or others, ever since the 
Neolithic rhythms of agricultural planting and harvesting. The euphemism 
“free market” means central planning by the banks and high finance — by 
Wall Street, the City of London, Frankfurt, the Paris Bourse and centers 
further eastward. Their plan involves untaxing rentier income and wealth, 
headed by land-price gains (the “unearned increment”) and financial 
deregulation. This shifts the allocation of capital and policy planning out of 
the hands of government into those of the banking sector. 
This financialization of the economy (and indeed, of the political system) 
is more centralized than public planning by elected officials. And whereas 
government planning tends to be long-term, financial planning under 
neoliberalized conditions is hit-and-run. Whereas government planning is 
supposed to promote capital formation and full employment, today’s 
financial planning makes returns by stripping assets, inflating asset-prices 
(the Bubble Economy) and minimizing the return to labor relative to rentier 
returns. 
Chapter 2, “Mathematics at the Root of the Crisis,” reviews how 
economists through the ages have been aware that interest-bearing debt 
grows by purely mathematical principles independent of the economy’s 
course and ability to pay. Contrary to textbook free-market theory, interest 
rates are not based on the expenses of creditors or linked to the production of 
real output. Interest is a transfer payment, much like a tax — a charge without
a corresponding cost of production, paying for the privilege of creating bank 
credit electronically in today’s world. It is predatory rather than productive, 
adding to price without reflecting intrinsic cost-value. It is a form of 
economic rent — although not one that Ricardo discussed when he limited 
the concept to landlords rather than to the banking sector or monopolies. 
Chapter 3, “How Economic Theory Came to Ignore the Role of Debt,” 
shows how Ricardo untracked the analysis of debt’s effects by treating the 
economy as if it operated on barter. It may seem surprising that his labor 
theory of cost-value (and the role of rent reflecting the excess of prices and 
income over such costs) followed a tradition that was applied to banking 
since the Canon Law of the 13th century. But his objective was to claim that 

debt and finance do not really matter. As the leading bank theorist of his day 
— and in effect the Parliamentary lobby for Britain’s banking class — 
Ricardo logically should have been the last person to treat the economy as if 
it operated on barter, without credit or debt. After all, the preceding century 
had a rich discussion of how Britain’s public debt was burdening the 
economy with taxes to carry its interest charges. Ricardo disagreed, and 
argued that paying debts or other capital transfers can never cause an 
economic crisis. It was landlords receiving groundrent that threatened to 
bring industrial capitalism to a halt, not bankers extracting interest. 
For more than a century mainstream economic models have treated money 
simply as a veil, and credit as oiling the wheels of commerce. This ignores 
the burdensome effects of financialization, which become invisible (that is, 
“exogenous”). More money or credit are presumed to affect price relations as 
“counters” symmetrically across the economy, but do not change the 
distribution of wealth and income or create a debt burden. The reality is that 
credit and debt intrude into the economy, altering asset prices (the valuation 
of real estate, stocks and bonds) relative to wages and current prices. New 
credit bids them up; paying back debts — with interest — drains money from 
the economy as a whole. Yet the national income and product accounts treat 
banking on a par with industry, as part of the productive sector. Interest is 
treated as payment for providing a service (credit creation) — part of the 
economy’s surplus (the financial sector’s “earnings,”) not a charge against it. 
Despite the problems of interest expanding into the productive economy, 
Marx expected banking to become subordinate to the needs of industry on the 
way to becoming socialized in time. 
Chapter 4, “The Industrialization of Finance and the Financialization of 
Industry,” describes his hope that industrial capitalism would mobilize the 
financial sector to serve its needs. But instead of achieving a symbiosis with 
industry, as seemed to be the wave of the future in the form of German and 
Central European industrial banking, finance has followed Anglo-American 
banking practice and found its major market in the rent-extracting activities 
of real estate and monopolies. 
The ensuing debt problems are not recognized in today’s depiction of how 
economies operate. 

Chapter 5, “The Use and Abuse of Mathematical Economics,” describes 
how the academic mainstream has embraced unrealistic models simply 
because more complex scope and realistic methodology cannot produce the 
neatly determined equilibrium solutions — highly favorable to rentier 
interests — that have so trivialized post-classical economics over the past 
century. 
Chapter 6 closes Part I by summarizing the changing view of the character 
of economic crises caused by rentiers, from Ricardo and Marx to today’s 
Bubble Economy culminating in uncollectible debts, junk mortgages and bad 
gambles in Wall Street’s financial casino. The banking sector’s demand for 
government bailouts is turning the financial problem into a fiscal problem so 
serious that it threatens to sink economies in something worse than a merely 
cyclical downturn. A Lost Generation subjected to debt deflation is more 
descriptive than the trivializing term Great Recession. If it were merely a 
cycle, there would be a more or less natural recovery. But that is being 
blocked as economies are forced to choose between saving the banks and 
high-income investors from suffering a loss (by keeping the debt overhead on 
the books and taking bad debts onto government balance sheets) or writing 
down the debts so as to pave the way for recovery. 
Western economies stand at a critical turning point. What blocks them 
from freeing themselves from their debt overhead is a political problem: The 
credit that has bid up asset prices was created largely on the base of wealth 
owned by the richest 1% — and they have gained control of ostensibly 
democratic governments. Between 1979 and 2004 the 1% raised their share 
of the returns to wealth in the United States — interest, dividends, rents and 
capital gains — from 38% of the national total to 58%. Little of this wealth 
was created industrially by building factories to employ labor to produce 
goods and services to sell at a markup. Investors sought “total returns” 
mainly in the form of capital gains, not current income. The government 
encourages this by taxing capital gains at only a fraction of the rate levied on 
wages and profits. So the vast overgrowth of financial overhead is largely 
autonomous from “real” economic growth. The result is that much as 
environmental pollution causes global warming, new credit has been 
extended to bid up real estate and other asset prices, “heating up” the bubble 
economy. 

For Marxists there is a certain irony in this. The financial crisis that 
plagues today’s world does not stem primarily from the “real” economy. 
Little of the credit that has bid up prices for real estate, stocks and bonds 
came from savings generated from productive investment employing or 
exploiting labor (except to loot its pension funds). It was created largely 
electronically, on computer keyboards. The banking system has been 
decoupled from the real economy. The financial sector’s independent and 
self-referential expansion path is independent of the “real” economy’s 
surplus, or its ability to support this overhead. Financial returns are made in 
extractive ways, as a subtrahend from the surplus created by labor and 
tangible capital, rather than funding capital accumulation. Productivity is 
raised by working labor harder and exploiting it more, not by technology. 
Hegel was right: the owl of wisdom flies at night. Only at the end of an 
epoch can its dynamics be seen for what they are and where they have been 
leading. Most people only want to think about a financial crash after it has 
happened. Only then does a pressing reason arise to realize that the economy 
does not need to be structured in this way, and that the time has come to 
contemplate alternatives. 
 
Part II. From Inflated Debts to Debt Deflation 
 
This section juxtaposes the Financial, Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) 
Sector to the “Real” Economy. It focuses on the analysis of debt deflation in 
today’s world — the rising debt overhead and speculative dynamics that have 
led to today’s “postindustrial” crash. Asset-price inflation leads to 
increasingly fictitious financial claims. They are fictitious because they are 
uncollectible without pushing the economy into widespread foreclosures and 
privatization that transfers property and infrastructure into the financial 
sector’s hands. This is what the European Central Bank is now orchestrating 
in Ireland, Greece and Italy, following neoliberal policies in Iceland and 
Latvia. 
Chapters 7 and 8 describe the symbiosis between banking and real estate 
that is unique to the 20th century. In contrast to Ricardo’s expectation that 
banking would retain its early focus on international commerce — and hence, 

on industrial capital formation to provide foreign markets with British 
exports in exchange for raw materials — banking has found real estate to be 
the key, along with its traditional market in creating monopolies and trusts. 
Some 80% of bank loans in the United States and Britain are mortgages, and 
consequently they account for 70% of the economy’s interest payments. 
This has reversed the major thrust of classical economic reform seeking to 
tax land rent, “de-privatizing” it from the old landed aristocracies. As 
recently as the Progressive Era at the turn of the 20th century, the most 
immediate threat seemed to be that economies would pay a rising share of 
income to these absentee landlords (and monopolists) as economic rent. Land 
prices would rise because the growing population would raise the man/land 
ratio (with little new land area being supplied), and because of rising 
prosperity in general. This would enable landowners and infrastructure 
monopolists (especially the railroads) to concentrate society’s rising wealth in 
their own hands, enjoying the “unearned increment” of rising land prices. 
Although site values, status and prestige reflected not just the land itself but 
public infrastructure investment in roads and public transportation, the 
proximity to schools and to cultural or commercial centers, private owners 
fought attempts to tax this “free lunch” as the basis of modern fiscal systems. 
But acquiring property required a bank loan. This meant that a property’s 
value depends on how much a bank will lend prospective buyers. 
Chapter 7, “Property is worth whatever a bank will lend against it,” 
explains how real estate has been financialized. The great price run-up 
accordingly reflected not simply the “real” factors discussed by economists 
focusing on an economy as it would exist without banking and finance 
(which of course does not describe any real modern economy!), but the terms 
on which banks lend: the interest rate at which property rents are capitalized 
into bank loans; the amortization rate (how long it takes to pay off a 
mortgage); the down payment, and most recently, the degree of 
criminalization and fraud as “liars’ loans” gave a spurt to housing prices in 
the United States. By 2007 one needed to take into account the portfolio of 
tricks that banks use to assign high value to properties without much regard 
to their actual market price or the ability of borrowers to repay the loan out of 
their income. 

Because real estate is the largest asset category in modern private sectors, 
some 80% of “capital gains” actually take the form of rising land prices. 
Chapter 8, “The Real Estate Bubble at the Core of Today’s Debt-leveraged 
Economy,” charts banking’s symbiosis with real estate. Most of the rise in 
wealth for most families has stemmed from the debt-leveraged price of their 
homes. The same is true for commercial real estate, and for financial 
investments throughout the economy. Financialization has created an 
enormous rise in the value of assets on nations’ balance sheets. But it also has 
created an enormous rise in debts — which remain in place when asset prices 
crash, causing Negative Equity. 
The tax system encourages this debt pyramiding. Interest and depreciation 
absorb most of the cash flow, leaving no income tax due for most of the post-
1945 period. Most important, capital gains are taxed at a much lower rate 
than are current earnings. Investors do not have to pay any capital gains tax at 
all as long as they invest their gains in the purchase of new property. 
This tax favoritism to real estate — and behind it, to bankers as mortgage 
lenders — has spurred a shift of U.S. investment away from industry toward 
speculation, mainly in real estate but also the stock and bond markets. 
Today’s financialized economies carry their debt burden by borrowing 
against capital gains to pay the interest and taxes falling due. 
Since the 1980s corporate raiders have adopted the real estate speculator’s 
motto, “Rent is for paying interest.” They promise their financial backers and 
junk-bond holders that corporate cash flow is for paying interest. To the 
extent that banking and high finance have interfaced with industry since the 
1980s, it has been largely to “financialize” companies — by funding 
corporate raiders to buy out stockholders and introduce short-term 
management practices. 
Chapter 9, “Junk-Bonding Industry,” describes how today’s debt-driven 
financial system is both inflationary and deflationary. It is inflationary in a 
novel way: Credit produces capital gains by supplying increasingly easy low-
interest financing for borrowers to spend on bidding up property and stock 
market prices. Companies forego tangible investment in order to increase 
their share prices by buying back their stock and even borrowing to pay 
higher dividends. 

The media welcomed this asset-price inflation as constituting a new form 
of wealth creation – as long as asset prices rather than wages or consumer 
prices are being inflated. But credit is debt, and debt needs to be paid — 
absorbing income that otherwise would be spent on goods and services. The 
result is debt deflation. 
The tax laws encourage debt leveraging by permitting interest on takeover 
loans and related speculation to be tax deductible. The stock market has 
become a vehicle for replacing equity with debt. This is the opposite trend 
from what Saint-Simon and subsequent 19th-century theorists of industrial 
banking sought to promote. Money is made not by what Marx described as 
making money (M) to hire labor to produce commodities (C) to sell at a 
markup (M´) but by avoiding the production process altogether by M–M´, 
making money “work.” 
But money doesn’t work in the sense that labor or tangible capital expends 
effort to produce commodities. Credit is debt, and debt extracts interest. 
Financial salesmen who promise investors, “Make your money work for you” 
actually mean that society should work for the creditors — and that means for 
the banks that create credit. 
The effect is to turn the economic surplus into a flow of interest payments, 
diverting revenue from tangible capital investment. As the economy’s 
reproductive powers are dried up, the financialization process is kept going 
by easing credit terms and lending — not to produce more goods and 
services, but to bid up prices for the real estate, stocks and bonds being 
pledged as collateral for larger and larger loans. 
Giving tax deductibility to this indebtedness aggravates the federal budget 
deficit, forcing a shift of taxes onto consumers and producers. This has given 
financializers an excuse to propose privatizing Social Security to send public 
retirement contributions into the stock market, via wage set-asides turned 
over to money managers. 
Chapter 10, “Privatizing Social Security to Rescue Wall Street,” describes 
how such proposals reflect those of Pension Fund Capitalism in the 1950s. 
The financial myth was that pension funds would finance capital investment 
and employment to fuel a steady upgrade. If the world worked in the way 
these happy-face models suggest, we all would be living lives of leisure now 

— not working harder and longer just to break even. Turning retirement 
savings over to financial managers has made the saving process part of 
finance capitalism, not industrial capitalism. After the dot.com bubble 
crashed in 2000, the incoming George W. Bush administration sought to 
channel Social Security set-asides into the stock market to create a new wave 
of capital gains. 
The key to understanding the financial sector’s strategy is that its activities 
and revenue do not constitute a part of economic growth, but a subtrahend, 
paid out of the economic surplus. At first the influx of credit (other parties’ 
debts) inflates asset prices (but not necessarily commodity prices or wages), 
but ends in debt deflation. 
Chapter 11, “Saving, Asset-Price Inflation, and Debt Deflation,” describes 
my analysis of debt deflation as the major cause of crises. The exponential 
growth of debt service absorbs the economic surplus, diverting spending 
away from the purchase of goods and services. This undercuts the economy, 
leading savings to be invested increasingly in interest-bearing loans rather 
than in tangible capital formation. Since the 2007 crash, the National Income 
and Product Accounts report paying down debts as “saving” (the negation of 
a debt is positive “saving”). This debt repayment now plays the role that 
hoarding and non-spending played in Keynesian economics in the 1930s. 
Chapter 12, “Saving our Way into Poverty,” describes the purpose of this 
financialization. Corporate industry, real estate and the economy at large is 
viewed as a vehicle to securitize cash flow or surplus revenue to pay out as 
interest and dividends — and most of all, to generate“capital gains.” From 
the bank marketing director’s vantage point, the aim is to capitalize all 
income flows into debt service. For the first time in history, large numbers of 
people — and government managers — have come to believe that the way to 
get rich is by running into debt, not staying out of it. 
The motivation for taking on debt is to buy assets or claims rising in price. 
Over the past half-century the aim of financial investment has been less to 
earn profits on tangible capital investment than to generate “capital” gains 
(most of which take the form of debt-leveraged land prices, not industrial 
capital). Annual price gains for property, stocks and bonds far outstrip the 
reported real estate rents, corporate profits and disposable personal income 

after paying for essential non-discretionary spending, headed by FIRE-sector 
charges. 
 
Part III. The Global Crisis 
 
Inasmuch as interest is a cost of production and enters into the cost of 
living, financialized economies become more high-cost and hence 
uncompetitive. Yet the dynamic of globalization in today’s world is 
predominantly financial. The explanation is the ability of U.S. banks to create 
“free” credit, now that the dollar has been unlinked from gold — combined 
with the consequent and simultaneous de-linking of the international financial 
system and central bank reserves from the constraint that previously existed 
from time immemorial. 
Chapter 13, “Trade and Payments in a Financialized Economy,” explains 
how debt leveraging raised the price of housing, while financializing pension 
funding and Social Security was diverting so much revenue away from 
commodity markets that debt-leveraged economies were unable to compete 
internationally. 
Chapters 14 through 16 explain how the United States is in the leading 
position to create credit and debt without limit or constraint, enabling its 
banking and financial system to become the main source of the global 
financial bubble. Since the gold standard ended in 1971 as a result of U.S. 
military spending in Vietnam and other countries, the main sources of dollars 
pouring into the world’s central banks are U.S. overseas military spending 
and financial takeover investment. 
Chapter 14, “How U.S. Quantitative Easing fractures the global 
economy,” explains how this makes the global central bank monetary base 
essentially confrontational in nature. Financial aggression today achieves 
what military conquest did in times past. The result can only be to impoverish 
economies. 
Chapter 15, “America’s Monetary Imperialism: Dollar Debt Reserves 
without Constraint,” explains how central banks have little option but to 
recycle their inflow of dollars back into loans to the U.S. Government. The 

result is that rather than causing a crisis and forcing the Federal Reserve to 
raise interest rates (as other central banks were obliged to do prior to 1971), 
the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit serves to finance the Treasury’s 
domestic budget deficit. Since the Treasury-bill standard has replaced the 
gold exchange standard, a U.S. payments deficit enables the government to 
lower interest rates rather than raise them. The United States has ended up as 
the only economy able to set a monetary policy exclusively with domestic 
gains in mind — mainly the subsidy of bank lending and capital gains to 
sustain its bubble economy. 
Foreign countries have long found this system unfair. For one thing, it 
makes U.S. foreign military spending the foundation of global monetary 
reserves. 
Chapter 16, “The ‘Dollar Glut’ Finances America’s Global Military Build-
up,” describes this phenomenon. 
Chapter 17, “De-dollarizing the Global Economy,” describes the moves to 
create a more symmetrical and equitable alternative led by the BRICs. 
Chapter 18, “Incorporating the Rentier Sectors into a Financial Model,” 
explains my model of debt deflation, based on viewing the FIRE sectors as 
overhead, living off the economy rather than contributing to its surplus. 
 
Part IV. The Need for a Clean Slate 
 
Chapter 19, “From Democracy to Oligarchy” analyzes the political 
consequences of my financial analysis. It traces the various stages through 
which finance capitalism has become increasingly unstable, culminating in 
the Bubble Economy’s collapse into Negative Equity and polarization 
between creditors and debtors. To enforce austerity, the financial sector needs 
to subvert democracy as in the United States, or replace it with outright 
centralized oligarchy as in Greece, Italy and other countries ruled by 
“technocrats” on behalf of the creditors. 
Chapter 20, “Scenarios for Recovery,” summarizes the basic theme of this 
book: Financialized economies face chronic depression if they do not write 
down the debt overhead they have run up. I review the range of policies 

needed to write down the debts and restructure the financial system so that a 
Bubble Economy is not restored. 
The political problem that blocks nations from scaling down debts is the 
fact that the financial sector has gained control of economic policy and 
planning. Its managers are willing to plunge economies into depression and a 
shrinking spiral of debt deflation rather than relinquish their creditor claims. 
A long-standing tactic to block reform is to promote economic theories 
saying that no reform is necessary. This pits the 1% against the 99% — and 
gives them a vested interest in promoting junk economics. When they say 
that “There is No Alternative,” they mean to achieve this by ensuring that 
there is no discussion of alternatives. That is why the history of economic 
thought has been dropped from the economics curriculum, and an anti-
government, dumbed-down individualistic travesty put in its place. 
___________________

*****
Sources
 
Early drafts of the key chapters in this book have been published over the 
past decade so as to get my main points into circulation in a timely fashion, 
and to receive feedback for how best to present ideas (which seemed to many 
like premature financial pessimism at the time) on why and how the 
worldwide Bubble Economy had to collapse. The result is something like a 
Dickens serial published out of order, with the most important new points 
first so as to institutionalize my basic approach. 
An early version of Chapter 1, “Two Traditions of Financial Doctrine,” 
was delivered in Narvik, Norway in August 2000 organized by Erik Reinert 
to mark the founding of his foundation, “The Other Canon.” 
An early version of Chapter 2, “The Magic of Compound Interest,” was 
published as “The Mathematical Economics of Compound Interest: A Four-
Thousand Year Overview,” Journal of Economic Studies 27 (2000):344–363, 
and revised more recently in the Post-Autistic Economic Review. Nigel 
Holmes provided illustrations for my discussion of compound interest.
An earlier version of Chapter 3 was published on “How economic theory 
came to ignore the role of debt” was published in the real-world economics 
review, issue no. 57, 
http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue57/Hudson57.pdf 
Chapter 4, “Marx on the Industrialization of Finance Capital — and the 
Financialization of Industry,” was published earlier as “Marx to Goldman 
Sachs: The Fictions of Fictitious Capital, and the Financialization of 

Industry,” Critique 53 (Vol. 38 /3: August 2010), pp. 419–444. 
An early version of Chapter 5, “The Use and Abuse of Mathematical 
Economics,” was presented at a 1997 meeting of the German Historical 
School in Heilbronn and published in the Journal of Economic Studies 27 
(2000): 292–315, and an updated version was later published in the real-
world economics review 55 (December 2010), pp. 2–22. 
Chapter 7, “A Property is Worth what a Bank Will Lend,” originally was 
published as “The New Road to Serfdom: An illustrated guide to the coming 
real estate collapse,” Harpers, vol. 312 (no. 1872, May 2006): 39–46, and 
“Tax the Land,” Harpers, vol. 317, (no. 1902, November 2008): 40–42. 
Chapter 8, on “Real Estate at the Core of Today’s Debt Leveraged 
Economy,” was presented to the 2006 Boeckler Foundation conference in 
Berlin devoted to heterodox post-Keynesian economics, and then published it 
in the inaugural issue of the Chinese journal published by the School of 
Marxist Studies in Beijing as “The Transition from Industrial Capitalism to a 
Financialized Bubble Economy,” World Review of Political Economy 1/1 
(Spring 2010), pp. 81–111. 
Chapter 10, “Privatizing Social Security to Fuel Asset-Price Inflation,” 
originally was published as “The $3.7 trillion Pyramid: Why Social Security 
Won’t Be Enough to Save Wall Street,” Harpers, vol. 310 (no. 1859, April 
2005), pp. 35–40. 
I presented Chapter 11, “Saving, Asset-Price Inflation, and Debt 
Deflation,” at a meeting of heterodox economists at the University of 
Missouri (Kansas City), which is the core of Minskyan and other non-
mainstream analysis. It is published in L. Randall Wray and Matthew 
Forstater, eds., Money, Financial Instability and Stabilization Policy (Edward 
Elgar, 2006), pp. 104–124. I am grateful to Edward Elgar for permitting me 
to reprint it here. 
Chapter 13, “Trade and Payments in a Financialized Economy” was first 
published as “Trends that can’t go on forever, won’t: financial bubbles, trade 
and exchange rates,” in Eckhard Hein, Torsten Niechoj, Peter Spahn and 
Achim Truger (eds.), Finance-led Capitalism? (Marburg: Metropolis-Verlag, 
2008), pp. 249–272. 

Chapter 14, “U.S. ‘quantitative easing’ is fracturing the global economy,” 
Real-World Economics Review 55, (December 2010), pp. 8294. 
Chapter 15, “America’s Monetary Imperialism,” Global Dialogue 5 
(2003):73–81. 
Chapter 16, “The ‘Dollar Glut’ Finances America’s Global Military Build-
up,” in Global Research (March 29, 2009). De-Dollarization 
Chapter 17, on De-Dollarization. My expanded Financial Times articles 
on the emergence of the BRICs, International Economy, i-tulip. 
Chapter 18 summarizes my model of financialization. I presented a 
preliminary analysis at the Boeckler Foundation meetings in Berlin in 
October 2011. 
Chapter 20 was presented at the Institute for New Economic Thinking 
(INET) conference in Berlin on April 13, 2012. 
________________

*****
Introduction: Today’s Financial Crisis And 
the Crisis in Economic Theory
 
“Did nobody see this coming?” asked Queen Elizabeth after the 
September 2008 financial meltdown spread from Wall Street to the City of 
London and on to the Paris Bourse, Frankfurt and Tokyo. Many people saw 
that the dancing would end, of course.1 But Wall Street salaries and bonuses 
reflect one’s quarterly performance, so nobody was going to call a halt. A 
person only needs to make a fortune once in a lifetime, after all, and this was 
it — the years leading up to 2008. As long as the dancing was speeding up in 
a frenzy like Ravel’s Bolero, standing on the sidelines would have meant 
losing status by letting rival money managers report better returns. Short-term 
returns, to be sure, but the financial sector lives in the short run. Whatever 
one could grab was a free gift out of the bailouts that governments gave after 
September 2008 on the pretense (or naïve hope) that saving the banks would 
save the economy as it careened toward collapse. Most bankers were more 
realistic. They took the money and ran, seeing that the game in fact is over. 
More optimistic economists and “public servants” follow Treasury 
Secretary Tim Geithner and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke in 
believing that the economy can be saved by squeezing out enough personal 
and corporate income to keep the debts afloat — as if it can pay without 
shrinking (or even while shrinking). Governments are giving bonds and 
central bank credit to save banks and bondholders — the wealthiest 1%. The 
losses and negative equity are to be shifted onto the public balance sheet, 

making “taxpayers” bear the burden — the 99%. 
What needs to be asked is why there is no recovery despite governments 
giving the banks so much money. When the Federal Reserve provided a 
torrent of bank reserves at 0.25% interest with its Quantitative Easing policy 
in summer 2011, why didn’t this low interest rate succeed in inducing new 
investment and reviving real estate prices as promised? Why are property 
markets still shrinking as the Great Recession succumbs to Debt Deflation?
If these anomalies cannot be explained, then the current neoliberal logic is 
part of the problem. Obstructing discussion of alternatives, it insists that there 
is no need for large debt write-downs to cure today’s financial malaise, 
except perhaps a few pragmatic “haircuts.” Economies are supposed to 
stabilize automatically, not be driven out of balance by predatory lending. 
The solution is to let austerity work to squeeze out (“free”) enough income to 
enable debts to be carried and for government budgets to balance — by 
cutting spending if sufficient revenue is not forthcoming.
 
How Financial “Solutions” Make the Debt and Fiscal Problems Worse 
 
Much as junk science ignores environmental pollution and denies global 
warming, junk economics denies that what is stifling today’s recovery is debt 
pollution. Any “solution” based on keeping the unpayably high debt overhead 
in place must cause debt deflation and economic shrinkage. Austerity 
increases default rates, plunging the economy (and hence, banks) into 
negative equity and reducing tax revenue as economies try to squeeze out 
enough more debt service to prevent defaults. Arrears mount up at compound 
interest, causing a wave of foreclosures that must end in a cascade of 
bankruptcies, and further declines in property prices —  causing even larger 
public deficits, more debt arrears and foreclosures.  This leads to anti-
austerity riots by debtors while creditors press for privatization selloffs under 
distress conditions.
When one finds wrongheaded policies continued for decades on end 
(today’s financial orthodoxy is the same that endorsed many decades of 
destructive IMF austerity “stabilization” programs), there always is a special 

interest benefiting. Neoliberalism supports the interest of banks seeking to 
extract debt service against alternatives to rescue the real economy from 
over-indebtedness. “There Is No Alternative” (TINA), said Margaret 
Thatcher. More giveaways to the financial sector are urged to “restore 
confidence,” defined as renewed borrowing to bid asset prices back to their 
former Bubble levels. 
Something has to give. The coming few generations will struggle over 
whether it will be the “real” production and consumption economy or the 
financial sector’s claims on it. 
The financial sector is leading in this battle, and hopes to make its gains 
irreversible. Banks hold a trump card by threatening to plunge the economy 
into crisis if they do not get their way, reversing the past eight-century trend 
toward more humanitarian pro-debtor laws. 
The creditors’ winning streak has proceeded so far since 1980 that it may 
take a half-century at least to reverse their power grab, because the task is 
much harder now than it was a hundred years ago. The flowering of classical 
economics into the Progressive Era familiarized public discourse sufficiently 
to almost resolve the rentier problem by the eve of World War I. But the 
rentiers fought back, insisting that debt cannot cause a serious problem (as if 
all credit were productive!), and mounting an attack on the idea that 
governments can play a positive economic role as regulators of finance or its 
major customers (real estate and monopolies), or as a rival public-option 
investor in infrastructure. Predatory monopolists and political insiders have 
sought to monopolize the public domain, using a financial squeeze to force 
governments to accept their self-serving “solution” — one that makes matters 
worse.
The problem with their business plan is that bank profits and speculative 
gains are extracted from the economy, not additions to real output. Indeed, 
with interest rates ranging up to 29% for credit cards and distress levels for 
European government debtors, where is there room for growth in a recovery 
in economies growing by only about 1% annually? The 99% are getting 
poorer and deeper in debt, while the 1% is getting richer. This polarization is 
the opposite of the more progressive distribution of income and wealth that 
was occurring throughout the 20th century prior to 1980.

Politicians follow economists (and their major campaign contributors) in 
being in a state of denial. Rather than acknowledging that the economy is 
insolvent, they greet each new upward zigzag of statistics as a sign of 
recovery. But the financial sector, which now (2012) accounts for 40% of 
U.S. corporate profits, is requisitioning most growth on behalf of the top 1%. 
Congress’s 2008 Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and much larger 
Federal Reserve and Treasury bailouts saved the super-rich financial elite 
while leaving the rest of the economy deeply in debt to the 1% of taxpayers. 
They took 93% of U.S. income growth in 2010. And of this growth, 37% 
“went to just the top 0.01%, a teaspoon-size collection of about 15,000 
households with average incomes of $23.8 million.”2 
Many observers express surprise that financial and fiscal austerity is 
stifling rather than helping recovery for the 99%. But what is happening is 
simply a replay of the IMF “conditionalities” imposed on hapless Third 
World debtors from the 1960s onward, which added the term “IMF riot” to 
the English language. Voters are told that the way to recover is to bleed the 
body politick, not nourish markets with public infrastructure and social 
spending. A false alarm is sounded that government budget deficits will 
increase consumer prices — with no discussion of how private-sector credit 
deflates economies. The problem is that credit is debt — and paying debt 
service to bankers and bondholders (and various grades of loan sharks) leaves 
less income available to spend on goods and services. So debt deflation is 
today’s major problem, not inflation.
 
A New Diagnosis of Today’s Economic Crisis
 
Policies to deal with debt problems have a long pedigree. Long before 
Christian and Islamic denunciations of usury, and even before the Jewish 
Jubilee year of debt forgiveness that Jesus sought to revive, Sumerian and 
Babylonian Clean Slates freed debtors from bondage and prevented land and 
wealth being concentrated in the hands of foreclosing creditors. Starting some 
time before the first royal proclamations are documented c. 2450 BC in 
Sumer, the Near Eastern takeoff kept the debt overhead within the economy’s 
ability to pay for thousands of years.

The Industrial Revolution recognized the problem of savings and debts 
mounting up at compound interest. With an almost religious fervor Saint-
Simon and his followers in 19th-century France advocated that banks shift 
their lending away from interest-bearing loans to equity-based investment, 
taking their returns as a share in profits rather than a stipulated interest 
charge. Marx described the periodic business crashes of his day as a result of 
interest-bearing debt building up. To elaborate his analysis, he collected the 
most noteworthy warnings of how the mathematics of compound interest 
grew inexorably to exceed the economy’s ability to pay (see Chapter 2).
Most reformers have a faith that economic rationality will overcome blind 
alleys and failures to realize potential. They expect that their reforms will be 
adopted because global competition will favor economies that make them. 
Retaining a faith that the material forces of history would lead banking to 
finance industrial capital formation, Marx was an optimist when it came to 
the long run. After all, finance ultimately has to make its money off the “real” 
economy. Interest can only be paid out of economic growth, or else it shrinks 
markets and creditor claims collapse (see Chapter 4).
The question is whether finance will promote economic growth and rising 
living standards, or create unproductive credit and use government to enforce 
creditor claims by imposing austerity reducing large swaths of the world 
population to debt peonage. The longer we look back in time, the more 
clearly we find this issue defined. During World War I, for example, British 
economists debated whether German industrial banking, based on equity 
financing and long-term relationship with clients, was superior to the more 
hit-and-run Anglo-Dutch-American merchant banking that had evolved out 
of trade financing (see Chapter 1). After the Allies defeated Germany, 
banking in most countries took the Anglo-American path. The stock market 
has remained a game for insiders rife with fraud. Banking has focused on real 
estate mortgages and takeover loans for properties and companies already in 
place.
In the 1920s, John Maynard Keynes warned that the tangle of Inter-Ally 
arms debts and German reparations would collapse the international financial 
system as a result of trying to pay foreign exchange far beyond its ability to 
do so. He distinguished the “transfer problem” – trying to pay debts 
denominated in foreign currency — from the domestic “budgetary problem” 

of financing government deficits in local currency monetized by the central 
bank.3 Today’s German fear that central bank credit creation is dangerously 
hyper-inflationary fails to recognize that all hyperinflations have resulted 
from balance-of-payments deficits collapsing exchange rates, thereby raising 
import prices and hence domestic prices. Never in history has hyperinflation 
resulted from governments monetizing domestic spending.
Debt had receded as a central problem by the time World War II ended. 
There were few civilian products to buy during war, so families emerged in 
1945 with substantial liquidity and little debt. They wanted houses and 
appliances, automobiles and refrigerators, and the proliferation of products 
offered by the new technology. Credit was needed to finance this postwar 
takeoff, and it was natural for bankers to make their money financing new 
consumer spending and real estate.
Loans were made carefully until the 1980’s. A 30% down payment 
typically was required to get a mortgage, which was to be amortized over 
thirty years — almost an entire working life. By 2008 banks were giving out 
zero-down-payment mortgages with no amortization, “interest only” loans — 
at exploding interest rates after three years. Until the 1980’s, most bank 
guidelines called for housing costs not to absorb more than a quarter of the 
debtor’s income. Today the ratio is over 40%. A property’s price is whatever 
banks were willing to lend, so these constraints prevented the price of 
housing from rising much above the cost of renting. Banks capitalized rental 
values at the going rate of interest, which rose steadily for thirty-five years, 
from 1945 to 1980. The rising rate lowered the multiple by which rental 
income could be capitalized into bank loans (see Chapter 7). So the great 
explosion in housing prices — and hence, living costs — has occurred since 
1980.
The path toward more reckless lending was led by the “monetarist” 
Chicago School. This seems ironic at first sight, because they follow the 
Austrians in drawing a picture of the economy as if it operates on barter. 
Prices are considered only a “veil,” and so money also is only a set of 
“counters,” not a financial system of credit and debt. Instead of relating credit 
to the dynamics of debt, they focused narrowly on the correlation between the 
money supply (variously measured) and commodity prices — but not asset 
prices! Yet most money is spent in the capital markets by “investing ” in real 

estate, stocks and bonds, not paid for goods and services. Heavily endowed 
by the financial sector, monetarism’s “learned ignorance” — or as Thorstein 
Veblen expressed it, an educated incapacity to understand economic 
problems — has become mainstream and gained control of the major refereed 
journals, where they have imposed a tunnel vision where the role of debt is 
concerned. 
 
How Debt Service Affects the Cost of Living, Doing Business, and the 
Balance of Payments 
 
Taking much the same line that Britain’s Bullionists voiced after the 
Napoleonic Wars ended in 1815, Milton Friedman’s followers followed the 
logic of David Ricardo in downplaying the idea that debt or international 
payments transfers could pose serious problems. Ricardo’s labor theory of 
value had no room for this debt overhead. It was as if economies operated 
debt-free and on barter (see Chapter 3). This “ignore debt” approach reflected 
his interest as a bond broker and role as Parliamentary spokesman — today 
we would say lobbyist — for the banking class in countering the widespread 
opposition to public debt.
In Book V of The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith had described how 
each new borrowing to finance Britain’s seemingly endless wars with France 
was funded by a specific tax to pay its interest charge. Malachy Postlethwayt 
and others explained how this rising debt overhead (and the taxes to carry it) 
threatened to price British producers out of world markets by increasing the 
cost of labor and hence of doing business. 
When asked in Parliament about the effect of “capital transfers” such as 
military subsidies or debt payments to foreign creditors (the Dutch were 
heavy investors in Britain’s Crown Corporations), Ricardo insisted that all 
such payments set in motion self-equilibrating adjustments that returned the 
payments outflow back to the country where they originated. There could be 
no balance-of-payments or foreign debt crisis. 
The same logic implicitly applies to domestic debt: Payments to bankers 
are spent back into the economy. As modern discussions trivialize the idea, 

“we owe the debt to ourselves,” so consequently it doesn’t matter that, on 
balance, the 99% owe debt to the 1%.
The assumption that rentiers spend their income in the domestic economy 
is an old story. Malthus said that landlords buy coaches and fine clothes, and 
hire coachmen and other servants. This led Keynes to credit him with 
emphasizing the role of demand in the circular flow of income. But financiers 
recycle most of their receipt of debt service into new loans, which extract yet 
more interest. Their consumption spending is mainly on luxury real estate, 
fine arts trophies and jewelry. When the supply of safe investments is 
exhausted, they lower their standards and lend more to less credit-worthy 
borrowers — and turn to buy whatever trophies remain available. 
Reminiscent of Baudelaire’s quip, “The devil wins at the point where the 
world believes that he doesn’t exist,” finance capital prefers to drop the debt 
overhead from sight. Post-Ricardian analysis of how income was distributed 
among labor (wages), landowners (groundrent) and industrial or commercial 
capital (profits) did not take account of the payment of interest to bankers 
(Ricardo’s own class!). Interest is treated as “profit” earned by producing the 
bankers’ product: the debt taken on by borrowers. Treating the banks’ 
privilege of debt creation as tangible industrial investment conflates money 
and credit as a “factor of production,” so that interest, penalties and fees 
appear as part of the production process, not external to it. But if credit 
creation and its financial charges are a result of monopoly privilege 
extraneous to production (in contrast to the cost of industrial plant and 
equipment ultimately reducible to labor) then the National Income and 
Product Accounts (NIPA) are an exercise in double counting.
The NIPA do not include asset-price gains, that is, “capital” gains, most of 
which reflect rising prices for land, stocks and bonds, and the capitalized 
value of monopoly privileges. Friedman credited the Canadian-American 
astronomer and economist Simon Newcomb for first formulating the 
Quantity Theory of Money in algebraic terms. But his own monetarism 
stripped away the dimension of debt that Newcomb had stressed in discussing 
America’s Civil War financing. A nation fights war with its men, weapons 
and other current goods and services, Newcomb wrote. Financing wars on a 
pay-as-you-go basis, out of taxes as Adam Smith urged, falls on current 
taxpayers (at that time, mainly the wealthy), not future taxpayers obliged to 

pay bondholders. However, running up government debt created a future 
transfer of payments from Western U.S. taxpayers to Eastern bondholders, 
whose grandchildren would receive payments of interest and principal.4 
Public borrowing thus forces the government to tax the future economy to 
pay debt service to a financial class. This tax adds to the break-even cost of 
doing business. 
The United States avoided this by printing Greenbacks to monetize the 
Civil War’s budget deficits. That is what central banks were founded to do 
(except for today’s European Central Bank). This was no more inflationary 
than private credit being spent into the economy.
The focus of most 19th-century discussion was on public debt, but the 
same logic applies to the private sector. Debt financing imposes interest and 
kindred financing charges that increase the break-even price that must be 
covered. Employees also must earn enough to cover financial charges on 
their credit-card debt, education loans and other bank loans, as well as on the 
mortgage debt that inflates housing prices. As financial charges rise to absorb 
more corporate cash flow, real estate rents and wages, debt-burdened 
economies find themselves priced out of world markets. International trade 
competition now reflects financial, insurance and real estate (FIRE) charges 
more than the price of bread and other basic commodities (see Chapter 13).
The analysis of debt along these lines helps explain why economies 
polarize as creditors in the top 1% of the economic pyramid receive debt 
service as financial tribute from the bottom 99%. It also explains why the 
solutions being proposed by policy makers to keep the debt overhead (and 
hence, payments to the financial sector) on the books are so dysfunctional. 
And the fact that today’s academic curriculum excludes this line of analysis 
helps explain why so many observers announce their surprise when 
economies buckle under the debt overhead. 
Central banks are trying to re-inflate property prices back to their former 
Bubble levels in hope of helping banks escape from negative equity. The idea 
is to lower interest rates and provide looser credit to help the economy 
“borrow its way out of debt.” When this doesn’t work, as in Ireland (where 
property prices have fallen by two-thirds), the government takes bad bank 
loans directly onto the public balance sheet. This public debt requires taxes to 

pay interest to creditors providing the bailout money to sustain the financial 
system as is. Without the ability to simply monetize new debt (for instance, in 
“cash for trash” swaps as in the United States), carrying charges on this debt 
must be paid out of higher taxes. This imposes fiscal austerity on top of 
financial austerity. The internal contradiction here is that squeezing out more 
revenue to pay bondholders shrinks the economy, and hence its ability to pay 
taxes and debt service. The crisis deepens as national budgets and bank 
balance sheets fall further into deficit.
Such seeming backfiring (which “nobody could have foreseen”) is not 
accidental. It serves the financial sector by rationalizing government bailouts 
for the 1% at the expense of the 99%. Earlier writers warned that such 
policies raise costs by burdening the economy with more regressive taxation. 
But to the financiers making fortunes at public expense, it pays to dull 
popular understanding of how financial systems inflate the debt overhead. 
The resulting blind spot reduces protest against government policy makers 
who sacrifice the “real” production and consumption economy to financial 
predators. 
 
The Financial Threat to Democracy
 
This book describes why the situation must worsen until society deals with 
its debt overhead in the way that every successful economy has done: by 
writing down debts to the ability to pay. In administrative practice this 
usually means writing them off altogether — along with the savings that 
indebt the economy on the “oligarchic” asset side of the balance sheet.
The traditional path of least resistance has been to wipe out savings and 
debts together in a convulsion of bankruptcy. The 1929 and 1931 crashes led 
to the 1931 moratorium on German reparations and Inter-Ally debts. The 
Mexican and subsequent Latin American insolvencies led to the Brady Plan 
sovereign debt write-downs in the 1980s. But by far the most important 
example was the 1948 Allied Currency Reform in Germany. It annulled 
domestic debts (on the ground that most were owed to former Nazi creditors) 
except those owed by employers to employees as part of their normal 
paycheck obligations, and basic working bank balances. By rendering 

Germany debt-free and hence without the cost of carrying it’s a financial 
overhead, this led to the nation’s Economic Miracle.
As part of dismantling the Nazi economy’s web of savings and debts, 
however, the Allies imposed Anglo-American commercial bank practice to 
replace Germany’s industrial ordo banking rooted in the Bismarck era. And 
in time the European Central Bank (ECB) was formed under rules that 
impose a financial straitjacket on government monetary and fiscal policy. 
Financial planning is relinquished to bankers, whose tunnel vision is leading 
to a continent-wide austerity. Indeed, the emerging post-2008 financial 
oligarchy has used the sovereign debt crisis as an opportunity to attack 
democracy. Instead of managing the Euro to promote economic growth and 
raise living standards, economies are drained to make bankers and 
bondholders whole. Economies are being impoverished to pay domestic and 
foreign bankers and financial gamblers. Keeping debts on the books means 
keeping their interest payments and penalties, capped by pressure on 
governments to privatize assets that remain in the public domain. Much like 
the theology of “saving appearances” in the convoluted but unrealistic 
mathematics of medieval astronomy, what is saved is the idea that the debt 
overhead can be paid without stifling the economy’s production and spending 
power. The 21st century thus threatens to roll back the 20th century’s gains, 
by artificially nurturing the financial overgrowth rather than pruning it down 
to size. And it is being done to serve today’s authoritarian financial theology.
The Greek word hubris meant overgrowth, as in that of bushes or other 
vegetation. In humans it connotes overweaning pride, with the classic 
connotation of injuring others. “Pride goes before destruction, a haughty 
spirit before a fall,” says the Bible (Proverbs, 16:18). But in today’s world 
hubristic greed seeks to postpone the fall — by shifting financial injury onto 
the economy.
Hyman Minsky explained how the business cycle is basically a financial 
cycle, characterized by increasingly risky bank credit. Lending standards are 
loosened as debt service grows so large that borrowers no longer are able to 
amortize their loans, and ultimately not even to pay the interest. At this point 
(which Minsky called the Ponzi phase of the credit cycle) banks postpone 
default by lending their customers the money to pay whatever amounts are 
falling due. The effect is to add the interest onto the debt principal. The 

process continues until banks or their regulators realize that the loan balances 
are largely fictitious, exceeding the debtors’ ability to pay.
Since 2008, governments have kept this debt overgrowth in place even at 
the cost of plunging economies into austerity. They are creating new public 
debt and swapping it for toxic financial waste to bail out banks for loans gone 
bad. The pretense is that without taking these losses onto the public balance 
sheet, the financial system would “freeze up.” But most banks still have 
enough assets to reimburse insured “plain vanilla” depositors and maintain 
basic credit-clearing functions. So there is no intrinsic need for governments 
to save bank stockholders and most risk-taking counter-parties from loss. 
What is being saved is the system’s “fat,” not the bone.
A large contributor to this problem is the decision to make interest 
payments tax deductible. The policy gives a tax advantage for investors to 
acquire asset ownership by borrowing rather than by direct purchase. It 
reflects an epoch when credit was an intrinsic cost of commercial trade. But 
most bank credit now is extended to buy real estate or take over companies, 
not to finance the production, sale and shipping of products. The main objects 
of bank credit are property, mineral wealth and monopoly privileges (now 
headed by privatized infrastructure), not new tangible capital formation.
What has contributed most seriously to making rent-seeking privileges the 
major object of bank credit creation instead of new production and capital 
formation is the anti-classical policy of slashing taxes on land rent and 
natural resource rent, as well as on asset-price gains (“capital” gains in asset 
prices) and short-term financial speculation (“carried interest”). The resulting 
economic polarization has created special interests that raise the national cost 
structure by steering the economy more deeply into debt. Household and 
business budgets are squeezed while government social programs are cut 
back. Industry and labor bear the loss as austerity reduces spending, even as 
debts to the financial sector increase its gains and enable the wealthy to 
acquire (privatize or “grabitize”) more property at distress prices. 
The financial sector’s hijacking of public policy is crowding out the 
spending needed to pull economies out of their downturn. The Eurozone has 
taken the extreme position of rejecting a central bank doing what the Bank of 
England, Federal Reserve and other central banks were created to do: 

monetize government deficits. Instead of helping to pull the economy out of 
depression, the ECB demands that debt-strapped governments add a tax 
burden to the debt overhead, so as to limit the budget deficit while creating a 
hemorrhage of bank subsidies. The fiscal burden is shifted on to the overall 
economy while finance is un-taxed. And to top matters, the ECB finally did 
create money after this policy led to government insolvency in 2011. It did so 
not to rescue the economies of Ireland, Greece or Italy, but to create a public 
bailout facility to refinance the bad debts held by German, French and other 
banks.
So the world finds itself drawn into a new form of economic warfare. 
Waged by finance against industry as well as labor, it also is against 
government – at least, democratic government, which is turned into a vehicle 
to extract revenue and sell off assets to pay a creditor oligarchy. The trick is 
to convince voters to support a policy that shrinks the economy and throws 
government budgets into deficit, adding a fiscal crisis on top of the debt crisis 
— which the financial sector sees as an opportunity to turn nations into a 
grab bag for assets and further control.
The effect is to make financialized economies higher-cost and hence less 
competitive — and less able to pull themselves out of depression by 
exporting more. Competitive advantage shifts to less debt-ridden economies, 
especially those whose real estate is less debt leveraged and public 
infrastructure provides basic services at cost or at subsidized rates. Politically, 
this means economies whose financial sectors have not gained enough power 
to capture the state, its central bank and regulatory agencies — or the 
academic economics curriculum, for that matter. 
But financialized globalization seeks to widen the web of debt throughout 
the world, achieving what formerly was won by military force. In the name of 
“wealth creation” the financial sector has euphemized and transformed 
political ideology to such a degree that most countries are applauding the 
most predatory grab of the public domain (government enterprises, land and 
mineral rights) since the Enclosure Movements of the 16th through 18th 
century in England, and earlier military conquests of the New World and 
most of Europe. 
What is not recognized is that the effect of financializing an economy is 

much the same as levying tribute following armed conquest. Property 
ownership is transferred, on terms that block governments from taxing 
revenue that is “expensed” as interest or escapes through tax-avoidance 
transactions with offshore banking centers. Sell-offs of public monopolies 
such as roads and other infrastructure are turned into opportunities for rent 
extraction. This turns the economy into a set of tollbooths as user-fees raised 
on labor, industry and other non-financial “real” activity. Revenue is “freed” 
of anti-monopoly rules and price regulation, and even from taxation as 
property taxes are cut to leave more revenue “free” to be paid as debt service.
The Progressive Era did not envision that campaign financing would make 
politics part of the “market economy” by enabling the FIRE sector to buy 
political support for its debt leveraging. Government was supposed to 
regulate high finance, not cater to it. But the financial sector’s influence has 
become dominant by appropriating the central bank, Treasury and other 
agencies capable of remunerating it (or blocking public attempts to tax or 
regulate it). These financialized arms of government are filling the vacuum 
created by limiting the government’s social welfare role. Rather than 
investing in infrastructure, central bank money creation and borrowing are 
limited to bailouts, subsidies and tax cuts for banks and their major 
customers. 
These developments threaten the United States and Europe with losing 
their democracy. What remains of Progressive Era agencies and programs are 
being shrunk by starving them of tax revenue. In the words of Grover 
Norquist, the parts of government not under FIRE-sector control should be 
shrunk to a small enough size to be put in a bathtub and drowned. 
Government’s post-democratic role is to use public taxing and debt-creating 
authority to remunerate the financial sector, while privatizing property and 
what remains of the Commons. 
Financial lobbyists seek to tie the hands of government and disable its 
ability to regulate banks and their major clients, and above all to create its 
own money and to tax what the classical economists called unearned income 
(economic rent) and financial gains. Attempts to tax property and asset-price 
gains are resisted, especially attempts to provide (or maintain) public options 
such as supplying banking services as basic infrastructure (as in the old Post 
Office banks). Internationally, bankers demand that governments pay 

creditors by privatizing whatever assets can be sold. Buyers borrow the 
purchase price from the banks, expensing their revenue as tax-deductible 
interest payments. These privatization policies together cause a fiscal squeeze 
that forces governments even further into dependency on bankers and 
bondholders.
A perverse financialized kind of circular flow has been created. Income 
formerly paid as taxes and public user fees ends up being paid to privatizers, 
who pass it on to their financial backers as interest. Part of this revenue is 
used to buy political support to free it from taxation, including lobbying to 
purchase political favors from lawmakers in today’s pay-to-play system — 
and to deter regulation of predatory lending or prosecution of fraud. Tax 
favoritism for debt leveraging raises the economy’s price structure — not as a 
result of “more money chasing goods,” but because privatized monopolies 
impose “tollbooth” charges for services that governments formerly provided 
free of cost (as in roads), at subsidized rates (postal service) or at minimum 
cost. Prices for privatized monopolies include interest charges, financial fees 
and dividends, high executive salaries and public relations costs to advocacy 
groups to plead their case to the people that all this is more efficient than 
public ownership.
What is deemed “efficient” is to shift planning out of public hands to those 
of bankers. Yet public policy aims (or is supposed to aim) at raising output, 
employment, capital formation and living standards. Financialized planning 
is short-term, and aims to capitalize the economic surplus into debt service at 
the going rate of interest. The business plan of finance capital is to expand 
interest and amortization charges to the point where they absorb all 
disposable consumer income over and above essentials, all business cash 
flow and real estate rent over and above break-even costs, and government 
revenue over basic police and other necessary functions. 
And then the economy collapses! How else can matters end when debt 
obligations grow exponentially as interest charges mount up? Debts grow at 
compound interest, swollen by penalties on arrears. Unpaid bills are added 
onto the debt balance, until foreclosure time arrives, transferring property to 
creditors under distress conditions. Vulture funds clean up.
The dynamic has happened before, most notoriously in the Roman Empire 

after 133 BC when creditors used violence against the Gracchi and other 
reformers. Violence and corruption are essential tactics to impoverish the 
economy while creating more billionaires at public expense. The $13 trillion 
in Bush-Obama bailout giveaways after September 2008 endowed a power 
elite that threatens to rule the rest of the 21st century if no reforms occur 
along the lines advocated by classical political economy, the Progressive Era, 
New Deal and, most recently, Modern Monetary Theory (MMT).
Economic reformers a century ago found it necessary to create a new 
academic discipline, “sociology,” to avoid the narrow-mindedness that 
Bertell Ollman calls “market mystification.”5 But economists theorizing 
along sociological lines are now classified as “institutionalists” and relegated 
to the basement of the social sciences. Mainstream textbooks leave out the 
role of gunboats, fraud and unearned income. They describe a hypothetical 
world characterized by diminishing marginal utility (no mention of greed or 
wealth addiction) and diminishing returns (while productivity soars in the 
real world). Managers are held to need more salaries to “induce” them to 
create wealth — that is, corporate profits, by cutting salaries for their 
employees to “lower labor costs.” Every increase in employment is supposed 
to raise wages (“the demand for labor”), thereby making economies less 
competitive (rather than raising their productivity as a result of better 
schooling, diets and so forth). 
Treating markets merely as clearing mechanisms to balance quantities 
supplied and quantities demanded, applying grade-school mathematics to find 
a hypothetical equilibrium point, distracts attention from how “wealth 
creation” is achieved by insider dealing, tax favoritism and outright fraud as 
the financial sector disables public agencies in an increasingly polarized 
economy. We can best understand the Thatcherism and Reaganomics of the 
1980s by looking at their dress rehearsal: the U.S.-sponsored military regime 
in Chile after 1973. The Chicago Boys realized that in order to create a “free 
market” controlled by their constituency, the bankers, it is necessary to 
control the press and educational system to neutralize opposition. Operation 
Condor pressed this social engineering to the point of exiling or killing those 
who disagreed with the Chicago program. Their guiding principle was the 
same as that of Stalin: “No person, no problem.” That is what TINA meant in 
practice: “No alternative ideas, no problem.” Labor union leaders and 

journalists, professors and politicians were murdered throughout Latin 
America and even in the United States for opposing the financial oligarchy’s 
power grab and the economic theory to rationalize this usurpation. Wealth 
was concentrated in the hands of rentiers most willing to indulge in violence 
and what the Russians have called “grabitization.”
So we are brought back to the role of gunboats and force, political 
lobbying to buy politicians, mass media promising that the path to get rich 
most easily is to take on as much debt as possible, and an academic 
curriculum saying that this is more efficient than public investment or 
operating a less highly debt-leveraged economy. It is as if the real world’s 
power grab by the financial oligarchy does not properly belong in scientific 
analysis. Failure of academic models to acknowledge it produces an ideology 
that falsifies the way the world really works. 
What is needed to save democracy from turning into oligarchy is to 
recognize how predatory this financial strategy has become, and how far 
today’s lending has diverged from productive credit. This classical distinction 
has been dropped — indeed, expurgated — from the academic curriculum. 
Debt crises such as the West is now experiencing are treated as if they are 
“exogenous” or an anomaly, not the policy result of financial conquest. 
This political (and academic) capitulation to finance capital leads one to 
question the Progressive Era’s faith that the material imperatives of industrial 
development will steer social evolution upward. Industrial capital was 
expected to seek profits by expanding investment. Banks were supposed to be 
the brains, allocating credit where economic gains were highest — gains that 
would enrich society as a whole.
But the opposite is occurring — not an economy of abundance but one of 
austerity and debt peonage. Socialists who stand on the sidelines repeating 
the rhetoric of class war between industry and labor (a conflict that never has 
disappeared, to be sure) miss the threat to labor and industry posed by banks 
joining with rentiers from the real estate and insurance sectors and 
monopolies. This makes criticism of financial malstructuring neither left nor 
right wing. It spans the political spectrum, because the entire economy is 
threatened by the austerity that results from financial dynamics operating 
unchecked — and ultimately bankrupts the banking sector itself.

 
PULL QUOTES
 
[PULL QUOTE 00-1]
The question is whether finance will promote economic growth and rising 
living standards, or create unproductive credit and use government to enforce 
creditor claims by imposing austerity reducing large swaths of the world 
population to debt peonage. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-2]
The problem is that credit is debt and paying debt service to bankers and 
bondholders (and various grades of loan sharks) leaves less income available 
to spend on goods and services. 
So debt deflation is today’s major problem, not inflation. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-3]
German fear that central bank credit creation is dangerously hyperinflationary 
fails to recognize that all hyperinflations have resulted from balance-of-
payments deficits. Never in history has hyperinflation resulted from 
governments monetizing domestic spending. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-4]
Interest is treated as “profit” earned by producing the bankers’ product: the 
debt taken on by borrowers. Treating the banks’ privilege of debt creation as 
tangible industrial investment conflates money and credit as a “factor of 
production,” so that interest, penalties and fees appear as part of the 
production process, not external to it. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-5]
As financial charges rise to absorb more corporate cash flow, real estate rents 

and wages, debt-burdened economies find themselves priced out of world 
markets. International trade competition now reflects financial, insurance and 
real estate (FIRE) charges more than the price of bread and other basic 
commodities. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-6]
Financialized globalization seeks to widen the web of debt throughout the 
world, achieving what formerly was won by military force. — Michael 
Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-7]
Tax favoritism for debt leveraging raises the economy’s price structure, not 
as a result of “more money chasing goods,” but because privatized 
monopolies impose “tollbooth” charges for services that governments 
formerly provided free of cost (as in roads), at subsidized rates (postal 
service) or at minimum cost. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 00-8]
The effect of financializing an economy is much the same as levying tribute 
following armed conquest. — Michael Hudson
 
1 Dirk Bezemer, “Why some economists could see the crisis coming,” Financial Times, September 7, 
2009. For a roster of financial Cassandras see Alphaville, Financial Times, July 13, 2009: “Who saw it 
coming and the primacy of accounting,” posted by Tracy Alloway.
2 Steven Rattner, “The Rich Get Even Richer,” New York Times op-ed., March 26, 2012, based on 
data from Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, “The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and 
International Perspective,” http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/piketty-saezAEAPP06.pdf
3 I summarize his views in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt: A History of Theories of 
Polarization v. Convergence in the World Economy (2nd ed. ISLET 2010), Chapter 16, pp. 313–336.

4 I discuss Newcomb’s life and writings in America’s Protectionist Takeoff, 1815–1914: The 
Neglected American School of Political Economy (ISLET, 2010).
5 As Ollman (p.c.) has expressed his criticism to me, the problem is that economists think of markets 
“simply as a venue for TRANSACTIONS. The key is, what is being transacted? If it is goods, how are 
they produced and how is their price determined, how is credit or payment arranged, and on what 
terms. The RESULT of how the overall system operates appears in “the market.” But that’s not where 
you start. That’s like starting with Union Square for the farmers’ market in New York. It focuses on an 
individual buyer and seller — not on wholesalers, transportation, fees charged out of revenues, or farm 
inputs, taxes, etc.” See “Market Mystification in Capitalist and Market Socialist Societies,” in Bertell 
Ollman ed., Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists (Routledge 1998).

ENDNOTES – Introduction
_____________

**********

PART I: Fictitious Capital and Economic 
Fictions
 
 
“Did nobody see this coming? Why did nobody notice it?” 
— Queen Elizabeth II, during a visit to the London School of Economics, 
November 4, 2008.
 
“Now let me state at the outset what role the Department plays and does not 
play in addressing these challenges [record fraud in investment banking and 
securities].
The Department of Justice investigates and prosecutes federal crimes. … 
As a general matter we do not have the expertise nor is it part of our mission 
to opine on the systemic causes of the financial crisis. Rather the Justice 
Department’s resources are focused on investigating and prosecuting crime. 
…
Our efforts to fight economic crime are a vital component of our broader 
strategy, a strategy that seeks to foster confidence in our financial system, 
integrity in our markets, and prosperity for the American people.”
— U.S. Attorney General, Eric Holder, testifying before the Financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), January 14, 2010.  Cited by UMKC Prof. 
Bill Black, in “The High Price of Ignorance,” 
<http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2011/11/bill-black-the-high-price-of-
ignorance.html>, November 7, 2011.
____________________

*****
1. Two Traditions of Financial Doctrine
Today’s leading nations have achieved their global advantage as a result 
of a strategy based on industrial and agricultural innovation employing well 
educated, highly paid, high-productivity labor. A tradition whose roots 
extend back to before the Industrial Revolution has advocated public 
infrastructure investment, subsidies to key industries, and encouragement to 
skilled immigrants, as well as protectionist economic policy. This tradition 
also called for national control of banking and financial systems to steer 
money and credit creation to promote tangible capital formation as a 
precondition for achieving international competitiveness and indeed, 
leadership. 
When setting out to re-couple banking and credit to tangible capital 
formation today, it is not necessary to re-invent the analytic wheel. The logic 
was clarified even before the nineteenth century’s blossoming of heavy 
industry. French economists from John Law through Colbert advocated 
economic planning financed by an industrial banking system. After the 
Napoleonic reforms, the Saint-Simonians inspired a virtual industrial 
religion. Their ideals underlay the Credit Mobilier, founded in 1852, and 
shaped Marx’s ideas of how banking needed to be transformed to finance 
industrial capitalism.
In its financial dimension the “Other Canon” tradition recognizes that 
credit is not inflationary if it is used to employ new labor productively. But 
tight money and economic austerity deter capital investment, research and 

development. This leads to currency collapse and rising prices to the extent 
that it depresses production. Banking policies need to steer credit along lines 
that encourage industrial and human capital formation in order to encourage a 
prosperity in which money and credit — and investment — increase output 
more than product prices or asset prices. 
The guiding idea is that loans should finance direct investment in 
productive enterprise, not enable borrowers merely to bid up real estate and 
stock market prices by using credit for speculation, corporate raiding, 
takeovers and management buyouts. Without drawing a distinction between 
productive and unproductive lending along these lines, the price 
consequences of increasing money and credit cannot be gauged. In this 
respect the tradition of industrial financial systems recognizes the linkages 
that exist between industrial policy, tax strategy and national monetary and 
banking systems. By relating credit increases not merely to prices but to new 
hiring, purchasing power and output, it designates the proper role for banks, 
insurance companies and stock markets as being to mobilize savings and 
credit to upgrade technology, social infrastructure, employment and 
productivity. 
Domestic control of banking and insurance therefore is needed not only to 
steer credit most efficiently to maximize capital formation and production 
while raising living standards, but also to help avoid financial dependency on 
the leading credit-creating nations. In addition, to save economies from 
having to pay even more domestic currency as foreign-debt service when the 
exchange rate declines (as a result of balance-of-payments outflows to 
foreign creditors as a result of credit dependency, and to foreign food and 
industrial exporters as a result of import dependency), the financial reform 
movement advises that loans should be extended in local currency rather than 
dollarized. The exchange rate also needs to be protected from financial 
inflows pushing it up and making home manufactures more expensive in 
world markets. 
This pro-industrial financial doctrine has spanned the political spectrum 
from right to left, religious to secular. The broad approach of Sir James 
Steuart and Rev. Josiah Tucker in 18th-century Britain was applied after the 
Napoleonic Wars by anti-Bullionists led by Henry Thornton and Thomas 
Tooke. In the United States, Alexander Hamilton’s 1791 Report on 

Manufactures emphasized the need for a national bank to finance industry 
(although early attempts along these lines engaged largely in land deals). 
From Henry Clay and Calvin Colton through subsequent protectionists, a new 
national bank charter became a major plank of Whig and then Republican 
party platforms. After the 1907 financial panic a National Monetary 
Commission was created and urged America to emulate the large German 
investment banks. As matters turned out, however, the Federal Reserve 
System was created in 1914 under a Democratic administration that favored 
decentralization and British-type merchant banking. In academia, Thorstein 
Veblen contrasted financial engineering to industrial engineering, and 
emphasized the pecuniary economy’s financial dimensions and its links to 
land speculation. His institutionalist approach was elaborated by John 
Commons, while Harold Moulton pioneered the study of financial 
macroeconomics at the Brookings Institution.
Industrial banking principles were most firmly grounded in the 
Reichsbank and other large German banks, while the German Historical 
School and “State Socialists” (academic “Socialists of the Chair”) 
emphasized the financial dimension of large-scale industrial development. 
Rudolf Hilferding’s Finance Capital (1910) elaborated Marx’s approach to 
reflect twentieth-century conditions, and was followed by socialists such as 
Vladimir Woytinsky as the world economy succumbed to the Great 
Depression. In Britain, John Hobson and H.S. Foxwell wrote along similar 
lines, and in the 1920s, John Maynard Keynes analyzed the debt burden 
imposed by lending and financial speculation. Joseph Schumpeter, and later 
his student Hyman Minsky, theorized about how to finance industrial 
innovation and capital formation in contrast to the existing tendency of 
business upswings to culminate in “Ponzi schemes” and stock market bubbles 
as their final phase. 
As a logical counterpart to distinguishing between productive and 
unproductive labor and spending (i.e., investment vs. consumption), classical 
economists contrasted productive from unproductive debt. The term 
“productive” meant productive of profit, which was considered to be 
necessary to induce capital to be invested in any given undertaking rather 
than elsewhere. Productive labor or spending accordingly was employed to 
produce or trade goods for sale at a price covering the capitalist’s wage 

outlay and capital expenditures and yield normal profit. By contrast, money 
spent hiring servants or doctors, lawyers and other professionals for 
consumption purposes was viewed as economic overhead (“unproductive 
consumption”), as were employees in not-for-profit sectors (religious 
officials, government bureaucrats and so forth).
Along parallel financial lines, productive loans provided resources for 
borrowers to employ to earn enough profit to repay the debt with its 
stipulated interest. The merchant borrowed money to conduct his trade, and 
the industrial capitalist might borrow to build factories and plant, machinery 
and other means of production to create goods sold at a profit. Adam Smith 
estimated the natural rate of profit to be twice the interest rate, so that the 
gross profit would be divided evenly between the creditor as a silent partner 
and the entrepreneur.
By contrast, consumer borrowing represented an unproductive form of 
debt. Its interest charges had to be paid out of the income the debtors earned 
elsewhere or, ultimately, by their selling off assets to pay the creditor. 
Government debt likewise was unproductive, at least to the extent that its 
proceeds were used to wage wars that destroyed property rather than created 
capital out of the profits made from the loan. Government borrowing to 
defray social welfare costs also represents what the classical economists 
would have called unproductive borrowing. 
Some forms of credit and public spending thus are more desirable than 
others. Helping speculators bid up the price of real estate already built, and of 
equities in companies already in existence, merely funds and an overgrowth 
of debt as borrowers seek to ride the wave of asset-price inflation.
It is primarily in the United States and Britain that opponents of financial 
regulation have denied any need to channel credit systems along “productive” 
lines. Indeed, they deny that credit and foreign “capital transfers” (military 
spending or private capital flight) can create an imbalance, thanks to self-
stabilizing equilibrium tendencies. A common thread along this line runs 
from Ricardo and his contemporary Bullionists to today’s monetarists. In the 
1920s, Jacques Rueff in France and the Swedish-U.S. economist Bertil Ohlin 
denied that the debt service imposed by German reparations could cause 
serious financial disruption. A similar approach led to Frederick Hayek, 

Milton Friedman and subsequent Chicago School opponents of government 
activism, as well as to the IMF’s austerity programs that squeeze out short-
term surpluses to finance foreign-debt service and capital flight rather than 
tangible capital formation.1 This approach does not recognize debt service as 
causing problems for the exchange rate or deflating output levels, or that 
regulatory actions may encourage credit to be allocated along “productive” 
lines. Just the opposite, such actions are held only to be destabilizing. 
When currencies come under pressure as a result of capital flight, 
monetarists advocate raising interest rates so as to borrow enough money to 
stabilize exchange rates. This policy is endorsed even at the cost of 
depressing the economy. Raising interest rates increases the cost of debt-
financed capital investment, thereby slowing its growth. Meanwhile, austerity 
keeps prices low (and hence, the purchasing power of debt service high). As 
the domestic market shrinks and over-capacity emerges, lending money or 
investing abroad becomes more remunerative than investing it in new 
factories, plant and equipment at home.
The Industrial Revolution found itself confronted with banking systems 
designed to fund national war debts, not investment in factories, machinery 
and innovation. In continental Europe, protective tariffs and government 
investment in transport and other public utilities went hand in hand with 
industrial banking. By contrast, British and U.S. merchant banking looked at 
collateral rather than at the means of production that could be newly created 
with credit.
Ultimately at issue was whether financial systems should fund capital 
formation or real estate and stock market bubbles. Today’s deregulatory 
orthodoxy does not distinguish corporate takeover funding or land 
speculation from tangible capital investment. And yet despite the rising 
importance of capital gains in total investment returns monetarist orthodoxy 
views money almost solely in reference to commodity prices rather than 
correlating it with asset prices — or, for that matter, with the debt overhead. 
Already in the 18th century, political economists explained why monetary 
policy should avoid deflation. Populations needed adequate purchasing power 
to buy the goods and services the economy was potentially able to produce. 
In 1767, in the process of countering David Hume’s early version of the 

quantity theory of money, Steuart denounced austerity policies of the sort that 
the IMF imposes on debtor countries today. Economists who deplore today’s 
decoupling of financial markets from industrial capital formation thus can 
find a long pedigree of what Schumpeter called filiations in the writings of 
Law, Tucker and Steuart, the anti-Bullionists and Saint-Simonians. These 
writers analyzed the adverse impact of monetary deflation in their discussions 
of the role of money and credit in setting labor and industry to work, 
increasing output, and attracting capital and immigrants (especially skilled 
labor) from other countries.
What is remarkable is that the pedigree of plans to harness banking 
systems to finance industrial capital formation remains untaught today. The 
economic curriculum has been captured by a monetarist orthodoxy that 
excludes an analysis of the problems caused by monetary austerity, high 
interest rates, and the debt overhead that is aggravated by decoupling bank 
lending and stock markets from the financing of tangible investment.
 
The Political Arithmeticians and Their View on Financing Industry 
 
Inasmuch as nations without gold or silver mines were obliged to run trade 
surpluses to pay for their imports of monetary bullion, monetary theory was 
linked inherently to trade theory. At issue was what policies were best suited 
to drawing in money from abroad so as to set the wheels of commerce and 
industry in motion.
Thomas Mun, Charles Davenant, Steuart and other writers whom Smith 
called mercantilists went far beyond the idea of merely mercantile 
“marketplace” analysis. The term they often used to describe themselves was 
Political Arithmetic. They used economic statistics and quantifiable 
relationships to demonstrate that more money and credit were likely to 
finance increased production under the conditions existing in the 18th 
century. This increased output absorbed the growth in spending power, so 
that prices did not need be inflated when money flowed in to pay for a rising 
volume of exports.
One of the most important common denominators of Political 

Arithmeticians seeking to build up national industry was the perception that 
the power to earn gold was more important than the supply of gold itself. 
Britain and the Netherlands (Spain’s former colony) had watched Spain and 
Portugal dissipate the gold they had taken from the New World. Although 
they were themselves least endowed with mines or other natural resources, 
they had put in place an active industry that had drawn the world’s wealth to 
their shores. This view had become popular by the time Governor Keith of 
Massachusetts expressed it in 1738: … although Spain, by possessing the 
Mines of Mexico and Peru, may be said to be richer in that respect than any 
other Nation; … and tho’ it may furnish the Spaniards with all the Product of 
other Mens Labour, which the most exquisite Luxury can desire, in the main 
it destroys Industry, by encouraging Sloth and Indolence, which inevitably 
must introduce both a Neglect and Contempt of the Arts and Sciences; 
whereas an industrious Commonwealth, who keeps her subjects employed in 
Manufactures, and Foreign Trade, by continually furnishing Spain with such 
Things as there is a constant Demand for, to supply that People’s 
Conveniency, and feed their Pleasures, must needs in Return command as 
great a share of Spanish Bullion as they want; so that in fact the Spanish 
Riches consist in digging up Gold and silver out of the Earth for other People, 
whose superior Skill and Industry, in applying it to its proper Use, absolutely 
determines the Value of that Kind of Wealth; which, if it be not kept in 
continual Motion and employed in Trade, never fails to enervate the Owners 
…2
In much the same vein Tucker explained that it made a great difference 
whether Britain earned bullion from broadly based industry employing a 
large proportion of the population, or whether this money came merely from 
commerce or piracy without industry, as Spain and Portugal had looted their 
colonies.3 An anonymous pamphlet writer observed in 1782 that the effect of 
monetary inflows depended on “how that wealth was acquired, whether by 
force or labour, by foreign conquest or internal industry.” In just the opposite 
way from the mechanisms assumed by today’s IMF austerity programs for 
debtor economies, he explained: 
Each addition to the quantity of productive stock will create new demands 
for labour, and add new spurs to industry and ingenuity. The annual produce 
of the nation and the course of its power will be thus rapidly increased.4 

Only if this money were merely “acquired by foreign conquests, and paid 
in tribute to the public treasury” would its effects be similar to those 
suggested by Hume. The balance of trade and price relationships thus 
depended mainly on a nation’s political and social institutions. 
Economists writing in this tradition saw that the consequences of a 
monetary inflow depended on the extent to which it was used to employ 
labor. These writers did not assume an automatically fully employed 
economy. Hence, monetary inflows could have the effect on spurring output, 
not merely working to raise prices. Already in 1650, William Potter wrote 
that: “An encrease of money cannot possibly occasion an encrease in the 
price of commodities,” because it would raise output proportionally.5 
By the same token, a shrinking money supply would not necessary lower 
prices in the same ratio. To the extent that tight money caused 
unemployment, it would lower output, leaving fewer goods and services 
available to absorb the economy’s purchasing power. This would raise prices 
even as production fell, as Law pointed out in 1705: Most People think 
scarcity of Money is only the Consequence of a Balance due [that is, a trade 
deficit]; but ‘tis the Cause as well as the consequence, and the effectual way 
to bring the Balance to our side, is to add to the Money.6 
Plentiful money and a domestic credit system erected on this base was a 
precondition for putting labor to work and inducing capital investment. 
Hume himself noted in his 1752 essay “Of Money”: In every kingdom, 
into which money begins to flow in greater abundance than formerly, 
everything takes a new face; labour and industry gain life; the merchant 
becomes more enterprising, the manufacturer more diligent and skillful, and 
even the farmer follows his plough with greater alacrity and attention.7 
A growing supply of money and income thus worked to increase 
employment and output before prices increased. As Vickers summarizes 
Hume’s views: 
What we should call an elasticity of supply is postulated … The inflation 
initially is a profit inflation, rather than a price inflation. Rises in turnovers 
and profits are realized, rather than rises in prices. Changes occur in the 
‘manners and customs of the people.’8

Steuart devoted Chapter 28 of his Principles of Political Oeconomy to 
criticizing the limitations of what has been called the price-specie flow 
adjustment mechanism as postulated by Hume: the idea that an increase in 
the money supply will raise prices proportionally, discouraging exports while 
making imports more attractive, until the trade balance returns to equilibrium. 
For economies suffering serious trade deficits, a monetary drain and falling 
prices were likely to be buffeted by the waves of financial crisis depressing 
their production levels below the break-even point, throwing them into 
bankruptcy. Producers could not operate at a loss for long in the face of 
falling prices and still remain in business, nor could employment be 
maintained when wages fell below subsistence levels. “If a certain number of 
inhabitants be employed in a necessary branch of consumption, there must be 
a certain demand preserved for it,” Steuart pointed out. Rather than 
recovering its former balance, the balance of trade and payments might 
stabilize at a lower level of employment, population and economic activity.
Tucker, Steuart and their contemporaries were well aware of the fact that 
workers, especially skilled labor, followed the international flow of money 
and prosperity. Hume’s friend James Oswald wrote to him in 1749 that 
although a monetary inflow and its associated quick demand, in the first 
instance, tends to raise the rate of wages, yet, as it is corrected by the 
attraction of new inhabitants, it only produces permanently that good effect, 
while the want of it in poor countries destroys the manufacture themselves, 
and sends out the manufactures.9 
Hume’s essay “Of the Balance of Trade” acknowledged that “a diminution 
of specie” is “in time commonly attended with the transport of people and 
industry.” For nations running a trade and related balance-of-payments 
surplus, wrote Steuart, no sooner will demand come from abroad, for a 
greater quantity of manufactures than formerly, than such demand will have 
the effect of gradually multiplying the inhabitants up to the proportion of the 
surplus above mentioned, provided the statesman be all along careful to 
employ these additional numbers, which an useful multiplication must 
produce, in supplying the additional demand.10
As long as employment, investment and productivity kept pace with rising 
monetary stocks and wages, there need be no increase in the general price 
level, and hence no falling off of exports. Steuart accordingly concluded that 

“the riches of a country [i.e., its money supply] has no determined influence 
upon prices” that could be stated with certainty, “a fact which Mr. Hume has 
attended … on one occasion, although he has lost sight of it on several 
others.”11 Or, as Schumpeter has put this thought in more recent times, “any 
satisfactory theory of the money supply implies a theory of the economic 
process in its entirety.”12
The reason why modern academic orthodoxy has shunted aside the ideas 
of Law, Tucker, Steuart and their like-minded contemporaries is reflected in 
Hayek’s denigrating observation that “The suggestive and interesting, but 
essentially wrongheaded chapters on money in James Steuart’s Political 
Oeconomy had no very wide influence.”13 Yet in their day they were felt so 
widely that when Smith brought his Wealth of Nations to the same Scottish 
publisher that had printed Steuart’s work, he avoided using the title, 
“Principles of Political Economy,” to which classical economic treatises for 
the next century by Ricardo, John Stuart Mill and their contemporaries would 
return. Smith adopted the tactic that subsequent neoliberal orthodoxy would 
use with regard to the classical, protectionist, socialist and other economists 
who sought to steer banking and financial systems to fund tangible capital 
formation rather than just “make money from money”: simply ignore them, 
and write a censorial history of economic thought as if they did not exist: If 
the eye offend thee, pluck it out.
For more than two centuries monetarist writers have focused on the 
relation between money and prices alone, taking for granted the existing level 
of employment and production. Under the assumption of practically full 
employment, the effect of monetary inflows can only be to push up prices. 
Treating prices as the only variable, the monetarist approach assumes as 
given what the Other Canon views as the topic of major interest: the role to 
be played by public policy and social institutions. What was most interesting, 
the anti-monetarists pointed out, was how monetary inflows and credit could 
set underemployed labor and undercapitalized industry in motion.
This is the approach that Britain, the United States, Germany and France 
adopted as policy in their most successful formative centuries. Yet monetarist 
historians (most notoriously Jacob Viner) have written this tradition out of 
their surveys of economic thought. Today’s students are taught Hume’s 
partial version of the quantity theory of money without reference to the 

qualifications stressed by Tucker, Oswald and Steuart. They are not taught 
that in the Bullion Debate, and again in the 1920s debate over German 
reparations and debt-servicing capacity, monetarist theories of the balance of 
payments were the losing side analytically. The deflationary monetary 
policies promoted by financial interests have been imposed throughout the 
20th century, but led to widespread depression and crisis in the 1930s, and 
again since the 1960s for debtor countries subjected to the International 
Monetary Fund’s austerity programs.
This monetarist doctrine reflects a methodology that has become today’s 
orthodox “market fundamentalism,” or politically in Chile and Russia, as 
“market authoritarianism.” And, to cap matters, the Chicago School has 
interwoven free-trade theory with a pro-creditor “hard money” advocacy of 
privatization and “dollarization” for trade-dependent debtor economies. 
By contrast, a common denominator may be traced through protectionist, 
socialist and other doctrines of government planning in aiming to modernize 
industry, agriculture and labor skills. Especially when voiced by economists 
in nations seeking to “catch up,” such writers have tended to be pro-debtor in 
the sense that they would subordinate debt claims to the objective of 
maximizing society’s productive powers over time. The basic approach has 
been advocated in the 20th century most notably by Keynes and the 
American New Deal macro-economists and institutionalists. 
Nowhere are institutional structures given more emphasis than in the 
financial sphere. As Tucker, Steuart and other early writers noted, money and 
banking are highly embedded in legal and political structures. For this reason 
most advocates of this approach exemplify what the German writer Georg 
Friedrich Knapp called the State Theory of Money in 1906. This approach 
also called chartalism or cartalism) views money as a government creation, 
inasmuch as governments imbue credit-money with value by accepting it in 
payment for taxes or other public fees. In addition, bank reserves rest 
ultimately on holdings of government securities, and deposits are guaranteed 
by the state.
Creditary doctrines are inherently historical in character, inasmuch as 
financial systems are products of fiscal and legal institutions. Before 
reviewing specific doctrines of how best to structure an economy’s financial 

institutions, I therefore will first review the role of government in shaping 
financial systems, juxtaposing the broad institutionalist vantage point to the 
monetarist “Chicago” view. 
 
How Central Banks Turn Public Debt into Credit-Money
 
Finance was one of the last dimensions to be incorporated into modern 
theories of economic development. Even among economists who recognized 
the degree to which growth in production and employment needed credit, 
there was little discussion prior to the 19th century of how to mobilize 
banking systems specifically to finance industrialization. What ultimately 
was needed was to distinguish productive lending for tangible capital 
investment from parasitic lending that aimed at making money merely by 
“zero-sum” means such as building up an interest-yielding debt overhead 
willy-nilly. 
The essence of any credit system is its ability to provide monetary means 
of payment beyond the accumulation of gold and silver bullion. Promises of 
future payment — IOUs — circulate as credit-money. As a practical matter, 
to be sure, bank notes and bank checks are backed not only by the bank’s 
own loan portfolio, but by collateral pledged in the form of marketable assets. 
Mortgage loans are secured by the real property whose purchase is being 
financed, while merchants pledge their goods in shipment to secure the bank 
(along with its depositors and recipients of its bank notes and checks) against 
the risk of non-payment. 
The great challenge for financial systems has been to extend credit to fund 
new means of production, out of whose revenue the loan can be repaid. Such 
lending represents the most productive form of credit, but has been the last to 
develop historically. Collateral-based lending came first, and remains the 
foundation for credit provided to most private-sector borrowers. Even today, 
bankers are fearful of extending loans against means of repayment not yet in 
existence. Their notorious conservatism leads them to prefer lending against 
collateral they can seize to pay the loan balance in case of default. The 
tendency thus is to look backward at what already has been produced, not 
forward at what may be achieved by a productive use of credit. 

Industrial banking required a system of paper credit as a precondition, and 
this is where central banks come into the picture. However, they were not 
created in the first instance to supply credit for industrialization. Their initial 
objective was to finance government deficits, mainly war spending. In a 
nutshell, public credit was developed as an alternative to borrowing from the 
international bankers of the day, e.g., Italian banking families in late feudal 
Europe, and Dutch and other foreign investors in later centuries.
In retrospect it seems inevitable that credit-money based on 
uncollateralized promises to pay out of future revenue would be based in the 
first instance on government tax revenue. Rulers levied new taxes to pay each 
new loan, or at least to carry its interest charges. These borrowings were not 
productive, as their proceeds were not used to build up the economy’s 
productive powers and hence its ability to pay. Just the opposite: War loans 
almost invariably were burdensome, for their proceeds were used to wage 
territorial wars that destroyed rather than creating property. No early loans 
were made to finance public capital formation, except for what incidentally 
happened to be associated with military armaments.
In addition to the power to levy taxes, governments have the unique ability 
to print promissory notes as currency (or to coin money) and to create a 
demand for it by declaring it legal tender as a means of paying taxes, other 
public fees or charges, and all debts generally. This imbues government debt-
money with a tax-payment value, which in turn determines its general 
purchasing power over goods and services. Gradually it came to be 
recognized that this paper currency — in essence a readily assignable form of 
government debt — could be used in place of gold and silver coinage, that is, 
commodity-money. Nations did not need to run trade and payments surpluses 
to ensure sufficient coinage to sustain employment and investment if they 
managed their public debt and fiscal system adroitly to create a credit 
superstructure.
It is not the purpose of this survey to write a capsule summary of 
economic history, except to trace the evolution of banking and financial 
theory as it relates to the mobilization of savings or creation of credit to 
promote economic development. Industrial credit doctrines emerged only in 
the nineteenth century, many centuries after European merchant banking was 

catalyzed by the Crusades and the vast influx of gold that followed the 
looting of Constantinople in 1215, and the even greater influxes following the 
colonization of the New World. 
From time immemorial religion and war have been the crucibles from 
which monetary systems have emerged. The monetary metals were given 
sanction as religious contributions, while temples oversaw the weights and 
measures in which the means of payment were denominated, and served as 
safe-keeping havens for savings at the civic level as early as Mesopotamian 
times. Wars forced realms into debt, from lowly peasant cultivators up to 
rulers, topped in time by Europe’s feudal monarchs and modern 
governments. From these war debts have stemmed the proliferation of taxes 
to carry their interest charges — and hence, postwar deflation. At least 
ancient Mesopotamian rulers chose the less destructive alternative of clean 
slates to wipe away the rural debt overhead.
Two medieval Church orders, the Templars and Hospitallers, developed 
far-flung systems to help knights transfer their money from one place to 
another along the Crusade routes and, over the longer term, pilgrimage routes 
from one shrine to the next. Travelers could draw on accounts established on 
an embryonic form of the modern credit card, on the basis of credit to be paid 
off later, after their return back home. Or, the Templars were able to receive 
payments in one of their local branches and to pay out an equivalent amount 
in another land, charging an agio fee for this money-changing and transfer. 
Even larger were the donations of property to these orders, in return for 
which the donors usually asked for the equivalent rental value for their lands 
as long as they remained alive. Much as lending had helped break down the 
traditional communal sanctions against alienating land in ancient 
Mesopotamia, so the process recurred in medieval Europe, especially as the 
lands being turned over were for a sanctified Christian purpose. Making the 
land transferable opened the floodgates to what in time became a widespread 
forfeiture of land to creditors.
It was fairly easy to elaborate the Crusades’ banking services to provide 
trade credit as a specific application of international money transfers. As the 
purpose of loans became more secular, private families (starting with those 
most closely linked to the Church) elaborated such banking to provide trade 
credit and, as a byproduct of lending to rulers, war loans as well. Mercantile 

credit financed the shipment of goods from one place to another, pledging the 
credit guarantees of wealthy banking families behind export sales and orders. 
Mercantile IOUs were as yet far from becoming a currency used by the 
population at large. Their use was restricted to the commercial sphere and the 
even larger flow of royal payments to Rome. From the thirteenth through 
fifteenth centuries, royal finances dovetailed into Church finances via the 
transfer of Peter’s Pence and other contributions. It was largely to systematize 
this flow of religious tribute that merchant bankers helped organize European 
trade in wool and textiles. England paid an equivalent value of the money 
owed to Rome in wool, which the bankers sent to Flanders and other weaving 
centers to be woven into finished textiles. 
Kings were the largest customers for loans, for the simple reason that they 
were the most able to raise the funds to repay them. Down to the time of 
Napoleon the monarchs of Britain and France borrowed vast sums to wage 
territorial wars. To finance this almost constant warfare they levied a 
widening array of taxes, whose proceeds were pledged to their creditors. The 
typical procedure was to levy a new tax to carry the interest costs of each new 
loan. A proliferation of taxes ensued, reflecting the rising expenses of warfare 
and its capital-intensive warships, canons, and the cost of hiring mercenaries. 
But as the wars interrupted trade flows, the ability to pay usually was 
reduced, and bankers often came to regret their loans. This risk element came 
to a head with Edward III’s French campaigns.
By the late 17th century, England and France had approached the limits of 
their ability to borrow and tax. A supplementary source of revenue was found 
by creating monopolies as Crown Corporations and selling them to private 
buyers. England’s government sold the East India Company a trade 
monopoly in 1600, followed by other mercantile monopolies, against which 
Adam Smith protested as their earnings were squeezed out in the form of 
higher prices charged to British consumers. After the 1688 “Glorious 
Revolution,” England replaced its Stuart dynasty with a more liberal 
“reform” regime. In need of money, it looked at its assets and means of 
raising new credit in ways that would not involve yet heavier taxes or 
consumer prices. 
The solution was to create the first modern central bank: the Bank of 

England, which in 1694 was sold the monopoly of issuing bank notes, whose 
value the government underwrote by agreeing to accept them in payment of 
taxes. The Bank’s Charter forbade goldsmiths from issuing notes of their 
own, as the Bank took over this practice. For this privilege the government 
was paid £1.2 million, or rather, was loaned this amount by the Bank’s 
founders. The Bank issued paper currency backed by reserves consisting of 
the original £1.2 million that had been invested in royal debt. 
By the 19th century a central principle of the Other Financial Canon had 
become familiar: The essence of money no longer consisted only of gold and 
silver bullion as an asset to be bartered for other goods or services. Public 
debt-notes could be spent as currency, at least for paying taxes, and by 
extension for other transactions of equal worth. The value of this money did 
not stem so much from its purchasing power over goods and services as from 
the degree to which governments monetized their debts and the way they 
levied taxes. The descriptive theory explaining these phenomena came to be 
called the State Theory of Money, as noted above. It views modern money is 
an embodiment of public debt — just as international monetary reserves take 
the form of U.S. Treasury debt held by the world’s central banks. 
This character of money does not bear directly on the present paper’s 
central topic of how to link the financial system to the dynamics of capital 
investment and technological modernization. However, it provides a 
necessary institutional background to recognize that money and credit are 
something more than merely “counters” by which trade and exchange are 
contracted. “Money” is the embodiment of public and private debt. This 
balance-sheet aspect of modern financial systems forms the essence of 
creditary analysis.
To be sure, industrial modernization was not the objective of state credit-
money in its formative centuries. Governments spent tax proceeds and 
borrowed money to wage wars, not to sponsor technological innovation, 
except for relatively modest subsidies to promote science and technology, 
largely with a military application in mind. But for the most part, capital 
investment and modernization were left to the private sector. 
It was a task in which the banking and financial system found little interest 
in playing. From early antiquity, handicraft workshops had been financed by 

the large public institutions (most characteristically by the temples and 
palaces of Mesopotamia) or by the households of chieftains or other wealthy 
individuals — but never on credit. Searching through antiquity’s records, the 
classical historian Moses Finley found not a single “productive” loan for 
direct investment, only trade credit and usurious distress lending.
No industrial credit had yet developed at the time Adam Smith wrote The 
Wealth of Nations, although by 1762 the Duke of Bridgewater had run up 
what was then an astronomical debt to finance his canal-building activities. 
But Smith’s Scottish contemporary James Watt could have told him that 
organizing a factory to manufacture steam engines was so much more costly 
than pin making as to require outside financing. Neither Watt nor other 
inventors were able to borrow from banks the early funds needed to introduce 
their inventions, but had to rely on their own families and circle of friends. 
However, as technology played little role in Smith’s analysis, neither did its 
financial requirements, as shown by his words of advice:
What a bank can with propriety advance to a merchant or undertaker of 
any kind, is not either the whole capital with which he trades, or even any 
considerable part of that capital; but that part of it only, which he would 
otherwise be obliged to keep by him unemployed, and in ready money for 
answering occasional demands.14
In other words, financing was provided for moving goods already 
produced to market, but little more.
Banking institutions were mercantile, able to finance sales of goods 
already produced (through bills of exchange) but not their manufacture, as 
this could not be done simply by discounting bills for immediate payment. 
Bankers only were familiar with procedures to evaluate the borrowing 
capacity of enterprises whose assets could be fully collateralized and rapidly 
liquidated, or which could pledge a known and easily foreseeable income, as 
was the case with real property. The automobile had to wait over half a 
century to obtain financing.15 As the financial historian George Edwards has 
summarized: 
The investment banking houses had little to do with the financing of 
corporations or with industrial undertakings. The great investment houses 
bitterly opposed the numerous corporate issues which were floated in 1924 

and 1825.… The investment houses for a long time refused to take part even 
in the financing of the British railways.16
Not liking competition, bankers opposed the extension of credit beyond 
the narrow commodity-money base they alone possessed. This threatened to 
deny manufacturing the funding needed to finance the Industrial Revolution’s 
capital investment. Manufacturers turned increasingly to the stock and bond 
market, and adopted the practice already established and legitimized by 
governments in issuing long-term notes rather than relying on short-term 
bank loans. (In recent decades the same phenomenon has occurred in the 
United States, as large corporations now issue their paper directly rather than 
going through the banks for credit.)
This narrow focus of bankers merely on what they could take as interest 
rather than on what their funding might create led American advocates of 
industrialization to oppose their activities outright, as they were more likely 
to be predators than helpers. The first major American economist, Daniel 
Raymond expressed his belief that: Every money corporation is prima facie 
injurious to national wealth, and ought to be looked upon by those who have 
no money with jealousy and suspicion. They are, and ought to be considered, 
as artificial engines of power, contrived by the rich for the purpose of 
increasing their already too great ascendancy and calculated to destroy that 
natural equality among men which God has ordained and which government 
has no right to lend its power in destroying. The tendency of such institutions 
is to cause a more unequal division of property and a greater inequality 
among men than would otherwise take place.17
The Canadian-American astronomer and monetary theorist Simon 
Newcomb observed that money in itself could not produce goods and 
services, but it was needed to employ labor and pay for needed economic 
inputs. In his Critical Examination of our Financial Policy during the 
Southern Rebellion (1865), he wrote: “The military power of a nation is 
measured by the amount of industry which it can divert into the channels of 
war,” that is, by the size of its economic surplus in the form of military 
hardware and support of soldiers. “The question now is, Does money increase 
the amount of skill and labor which can be thus turned into the channels of 
war?” Newcomb’s answer was no. However, the issue of fiat money could 
enable governments to pay for military service and technology, diverting 

output (and the labor to produce it) to government use by displacing civilian 
spending on food, clothing and other necessities.18 
If money is debt, then it involves at least a contingent payment from 
debtors to creditors, starting with the debtor governments who issue money 
and bonds. Newcomb saw that the major problem caused by financing wars 
by bond issues rather than by levying taxes on a pay-as-you-go basis lay in 
the fiscal strains conveyed to posterity. A bond issue could not really transfer 
the war’s cost onto future generations. That was just a figure of speech. In an 
analysis that might equally well be applied to today’s Social Security debate, 
he explained: The generation that wages the war must be the one to shed its 
blood, feed its armies, and cast the shot and shell which its armies are to use. 
Food, clothing, shot and shell are the real expenses of war. In running to debt 
for these articles, we do indeed bequeath to posterity the work of raising the 
money to pay for them. But posterity not only raises the money, but also 
receives the pay, so that we may as logically say that posterity gets paid for 
the war as to say that it pays for it.19 
This observation contains the balance-sheet kernel of creditary economics: 
One party’s savings represent another’s debt, just as one party’s tax payment 
ends up in the pockets of some beneficiary of government spending. This 
means that the consequences of any given public debt and tax policy depend 
on who owes whom. Newcomb accurately predicted that the policy of 
financing wars by loans would cause “an antagonism of interests between the 
East and the West” based on the fact that these geographic sections “may 
have entirely different pecuniary interests.”20 The Civil War led to taxes 
being collected from America’s Western states to pay the Eastern 
bondholders who held some 80% of the war bonds. The West responded by 
advocating inflationary policies to relieve itself of the debt burden, not only 
of government bonds but of the mortgages entered into during the 
inflationary Civil War episode. And as Newcomb had forecast, the East 
sought deflationary monetary policies, much as today’s U.S. creditors have 
done vis-à-vis third debtor countries obliged to pay their debts in the manner 
that the Western states had done after America’s Civil War, by exporting 
raw-materials and — even more drastically — by selling off their raw 
materials patrimony and other natural endowments in what is, in essence, a 
forfeiture of these assets to global creditors.

Newcomb observed that as an alternative to taxation or issuing war bonds, 
the government paid for war material — and troops — by printing 
greenbacks.21 These were essentially debt notes. Indeed, Newcomb observed 
that a public debt of any proportion could be discharged overnight simply by 
printing the words “legal-tender” on each bond and circulating the paper as 
money, although he disapproved of so drastic a policy.
Henry Carey, the most influential American economist of the day, argued 
against a speedy return to specie payments on the ground that this would 
entail monetary deflation that would injure the nation’s industrialists, who 
tended to be net debtors. He found the major flaw in Newcomb’s reasoning to 
lie in the assumption of what today is called the neutrality of money. If the 
backing of money was the government’s ability to levy taxes and regulate the 
money supply — and hence the pace of inflation or deflation — then 
monetary analysis had to proceed beyond general price indices to analyze 
what Newcomb himself had begun to analyze: the problem of which classes 
and geographic sections paid taxes, and who received their proceeds (that is, 
who the bondholders were). The policy conclusions for evaluating monetary 
deflation or inflation depended on the identity of the creditors and debtors in 
terms of their geographic and industrial profile.22 
In the process of developing his monetary and public debt analysis, 
Newcomb developed a mathematical statement of the Quantity Theory of 
money. The basic set of relationships had been stated in plain English by 
Hume and his generation, but not in mathematical symbols, which our own 
epoch treats as the criterion for truly scientific formulation. This already had 
been done by Wilhelm Roscher in 1854, although in German, hardly a 
language recognized by Anglo-American historians of economic thought. 
What is especially noteworthy is that Newcomb was much more careful than 
subsequent theorists to specify how limited was the sphere of money being 
analyzed. Represented by the symbol V, standing for the Volume of money, 
it consisted only of “industrial circulation,” which he defined as the market 
output of goods and services, excluding financial transactions. Newcomb was 
careful to explain that this monetary equation applied only when we exclude 
from the monetary flow all such transfers as loaning money, or depositing it 
in a bank, because these are not balanced by reverse transfers of wealth or 
services.23

Of course, such capital transactions represent the major demand for money 
in all modern economies. Each day the equivalent value of an entire year’s 
national income or gross national product passes through the New York 
Clearing House and its counterparts in London, Paris, Frankfurt and Tokyo. 
These facts make the quantity theory not so relevant, as most money is spent 
on bonds, stocks, real estate and their interest and dividend payments, as well 
as for taxes and other public charges.
The value of national debt-money reflects the taxing power of 
governments and the currency’s purchasing power over property, goods and 
services. What gives this money its value is the government’s acceptance of it 
in payment of taxes and other public fees, not from its commodity backing in 
bullion. The combination of fiscal policy and bank regulation determines the 
volume of credit and how savings are recycled, overshadowing labor costs in 
determining international trade competition. Taxes, interest and rent are not 
“factor costs,” for they are not paid to factors of production for direct inputs. 
They are rather in the character of overhead. As such, they are best thought of 
as transfer payments.
 
The Role of Financial Reform in the Economic Optimism of the Nineteenth 
Century
 
It was French and German theorists who pioneered the theory of credit 
that was needed to finance the Industrial Revolution. In France, the Saint-
Simonians described the need to create an industrial credit system aimed at 
funding means of production rather than military destruction. In Germany, 
Bismarck’s “state socialism” found its financial expression in the Reichsbank 
and other great industrial banks, whose long-term financing formed part of 
the “holy trinity” of banking, industry and government planning. The 
common denominator among the various new theorists was an emphasis on 
the institutional character of money, and on its dual balance-sheet character 
as an embodied debt as well as an asset to its holder. 
There are two ways that a loan can be repaid. If its proceeds are invested 
to produce a profit, the lender can receive interest out of the venture’s 
proceeds. Otherwise, the borrower must reduce his own consumption or sell 

off his assets to pay the debt charges. The great question confronting the 
heavy-industrial epoch on the eve of the 19th century and its Steam 
Revolution was whether the financial system would stifle or serve the spread 
of industrial technology and productivity.
The idealistic spirit of early industrial and banking reform shines through 
the 19th century. The Saint-Simonian reformers attracted supporters ranging 
from socialists to investment bankers, winning government backing for their 
policies under France’s Third Empire. Outside of France, Saint-Simon’s 
influence extended to socialists such as Karl Marx, John Stuart Mill and 
Christian Socialists in many countries, as well as industrialists in Germany 
and protectionists in the United States and England. The common 
denominator of this broad political spectrum was the recognition that an 
efficient banking system was needed to finance industrialization, on which a 
strong national state and military power depended. At issue was what kind of 
market the economy would have, for this would determine how it would use 
its resources and wealth, as mediated by the financial system.
Despite the fact that Britain was the home of the Industrial Revolution, it 
was French and Germans who moved banking theory into the industrial stage 
in their drive to help their nations catch up. It was their countries’ relative 
backwardness that led their policy makers to step back and view matters from 
a broad perspective rather than merely continuing existing pre-industrial 
practices. By contrast, English and Dutch merchant banking had been so 
successful that these countries were easily able to maintain their established 
practices. Merchant bankers were experienced in lending against collateral 
and discounting sales orders, while the Bank of England’s directors became 
adept at maintaining the value of sterling by raising interest rates to attract 
short-term funding when needed. But neither group had much to say about 
how to supply industrial credit. 
By the 1820s, in the aftermath of the dislocations caused by resumption of 
normal trade relations after the Treaty of Ghent ended the Napoleonic Wars 
in 1815, it was becoming clear that banking and credit structures were 
determining which economies would end up in control of the Industrial 
Revolution’s immense gains of productive powers and wealth. The French 
had a particular reason to focus on financial reform. They had lost their war 
with England largely through Napoleon’s inability to master the techniques 

of transferring payments internationally to support French troops and allies. 
The nation’s financial system had not evolved much since the pre-
Revolutionary ancien regime. The ground for a sophisticated analysis had 
been prepared by Physiocracy under Francoise Quesnay and his Tableau 
Economique, a progenitor of national income accounting and planning. But 
what really was needed were actual banking institutions to extend long-term 
industrial credit to economies whose major financial activity hitherto had 
been usury and lending to the government. To modernize the nation’s 
finances, the doctrines of Saint-Simon and his followers provided the guiding 
philosophy that found institutional expression in 1852 with the Crédit 
Mobilier.
Today’s “free” market advocates are undiscriminating supporters of the 
financial sector’s domination of the economy, without regard for how savings 
and credit are invested. Their “value free” economics claims that it would be 
wrong to define one way of making money as being better or more socially 
beneficial than any other way. Attempts to prevent investors from 
maximizing returns, regardless of how these are achieved, would make 
markets inefficient, they, so the ideal of “market socialism” — shaping or 
“tweaking” markets to behave in certain desired ways by subsidies and tax 
policy — is a chimera. 
Today’s orthodox canon repeats this mantra again and again, to the point 
where it has drowned out all discussion of how to distinguish between 
productive and unproductive forms of credit, investment and employment. 
Governments are told that they should not endorse any particular mode of 
recycling savings or extending credit as opposed to any other mode, but 
should let bankers and financiers make money wherever they find 
opportunities most remunerative.
Spreading this pro-creditor value-free doctrine via the world’s finance 
ministries and central banks, Chicago School monetarists speak of free 
markets as liberating wealth from public regulation and oversight. Yet the 
19th-century market reformers were quite different. To them, the aim of freer 
markets was to replace privilege with merit, and also to replace the debt 
burden by mobilizing money-capital to invest in upgrading industry, 
technology and what today is called human capital. The proper role of 
government was to coordinate productive bank lending while checking the 

tendency of “passive” wealth to take parasitic forms. This is why French 
socialists and early Marxists stood in the forefront of market reformers, 
although the “market” they had in mind was different from that endorsed 
today by market evangelists. 
The Saint-Simonian movement illustrates how much more far-reaching the 
industrial reformismers sought to abolish economic inequities and market 
“imperfections” as compared to today’s neoliberal market advocates. Like 
many well-born aristocrats throughout history, the Count Claude-Henri de 
Saint-Simon (1760–1825) came to attack inherited privilege as tending to 
turn wealth into a passive, parasitic rentier burden on society. Heirs sought to 
live in the easiest way, off rent and interest rather than actively investing their 
inheritance. Saint-Simon’s 1819 satire Parabole, published when he was 
nearly sixty years old, depicted the governing classes living off their 
unearned inheritance rather than earning their fortunes through personal merit 
and ability.
Two years later he published Du Système Industriel. This attracted 
numerous followers, of whom the most effective were Prosper Enfantin 
(1796–1864) and Saint-Amand Bazard (1791–1832), who really created the 
Saint-Simonian school after their master’s death in 1825. Their ideas were 
summarized in: Doctrine de Saint-Simon, Exposition, Premiere année (1828–
29). Bazard was a follower of the politician-general Lafayette, under whom 
Saint-Simon had served in the American War of Independence. 
The Saint-Simonians became the intellectual heirs of Lafayette’s circle 
seeking to replace the pre-Revolution society based on status and privilege 
with one based on merit. “Almost every one who is well known of the 
generation which dates from 1830 belonged more or less to the school of 
Saint-Simon,” observed Charles Gide in his biographical article on Saint-
Simon for Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political Economy. Saint-Simon’s 
followers included the social theorist Auguste Comte, the economist Michel 
Chevalier, the socialist Pierre Leroux, the engineer Lesseps — whose plans 
for canals elaborated ideas initiated by Saint-Simon — and the brothers 
Emile and Isaac Pereire, who founded the Crédit Mobilier. 
In a public letter to the Chamber of Deputies in 1830, Enfantin and Bazard 
summarized their doctrine that the economic system should reward merit 

rather than inherited privilege. “The followers of Saint-Simon believe in the 
natural inequality of men, and look on this inequality as the basis of 
association, as the indispensable condition of social order. All they desire is 
the abolition of every privilege of birth without exception, and as a 
consequence the destruction of the greatest of all these privileges, the power 
of bequest, the effect of which is to leave to chance the apportionment of 
social advantages, and to condemn the largest class in number to vice, 
ignorance, and poverty. They desire that all instruments of labour, land, and 
capital, which now form, subdivided, the inheritances of private owners, 
should be united in one social fund, and that this fund should be operated on 
principles of association and by a hierarchy, so that each one will have his 
task according to his capacity, and wealth according to his work.”
It was in industry that talent was deemed best able to show its abilities. 
But talent needed money to back it, and this is where a reformed financial 
system was needed. Each city was to be headed by a mayor acting as chef-
industriel (head of industry), in charge of who would receive what means of 
production and income. These industrial chiefs would be appointed by yet 
higher economic “priests,” who would hold theocratic power over society. In 
this doctrine lay the seeds of a rather cultish socialism as well as centralized 
government dirigisme.
In any economy most wealth and assets are inherited, mainly in the form 
of real estate, bonds and stocks yielding rent, interest and dividends. Saint-
Simonian reformers claimed that these tributary claims on society’s income 
and output did not perform an active, productive function. They were a form 
of overhead, a legacy of the dead hand of the past stemming from the 
Norman military conquest of France in feudal times, the hereditary nobility 
that the French Revolution had overthrown politically, but not yet 
economically. It would be the task of 19th-century doctrines of social 
progress, capped by the social welfare legislation that coped with the Great 
Depression in the 1930s, to tax such wealth and use the proceeds for public 
purposes. 
It would seem at first glance that this desire to replace inherited wealth 
and position with a meritocracy would be shared by today’s market 
reformers, yet they have not pressed their reforms in this direction. Just the 
opposite. At their urging, taxes have been reduced since 1980 (and indeed, 

since World War II), above all on real estate and finance capital. (Outright 
abolition of the wealth tax was a central plank in the Republican 2000 U.S. 
presidential election campaign.) As seen from a 19th-century perspective, 
today’s “trickle-down” mode of progress and reform (one hesitates to call it 
modern) would be deemed anti-progressive by un-taxing inherited wealth, 
landed property and other sources of unearned income.
Early advocates of industrialization sought to bring governments out of the 
feudal era by shifting their role from that of supporting an idle aristocracy to 
coordinating reforms in the ways society employed and accumulated wealth. 
In this respect today’s canon of orthodoxy has inverted the “original” free 
market canon by advocating the downsizing of government by cutting taxes, 
above all those which fall on wealth (such as the estate tax) and on the 
financial sector rather than on labor.
Most important, today’s postindustrial orthodoxy sees little value in 
upgrading manufacturing. What it welcomes as a “new” era — the “service 
economy” — is beginning to look like a relapse into real estate concentration 
in the context of a growing debt overhead, vesting new hereditary interests as 
wealth is concentrated in the hands of financial families and institutions. 
Appropriation of property, or, at least its income, by means of loans and 
credit has replaced the feudal epoch’s “primitive accumulation” by military 
seizure. This is the opposite of what 19th-century industrial optimists hoped 
to bring about.
The financial innovations advocated by the Saint-Simonians were more 
far-reaching than the principles advocated by today’s market reformers. 
Paramount among their financial reforms was the desire to ensure that 
lending would be productive, not usurious as in past epochs. They criticized 
existing patterns of lending and financial investment for indebting the rest of 
society without putting in place new means of production to enable this debt 
to be paid off. To rectify matters the Saint-Simonians urged that government 
coordinate industrial planning.
Every economy is planned by someone or other. The question is who is to 
do the planning? Today’s world is run by financial planners working for 
investment banks, commercial banks and institutional investors, with 
macroeconomic policy handled by central banks and Treasury Departments, 

over whose appointees Wall Street and other financial centers wield veto 
power. The chief executive officers of major corporations are concerned 
mainly with financial strategy, not industrial engineering, labor relations or 
sales. So running a corporation has become essentially a financial task. The 
objective is to raise the company’s stock price by such strategies as using 
earnings to buy one’s own equity, planning corporate takeovers and raids 
(“mergers and acquisitions”), arranging debt pyramiding with creditors, and 
orchestrating intra-conglomerate pricing on a global scale so as to take profits 
in international tax havens. Such planning in today’s environment is more 
likely to downsize operations and scale back research and development than 
to expand production and employment.
These financial objectives are not what optimists had in mind, in an epoch 
when the Industrial Revolution still seemed to hold enough promise to attract 
idealists to analyze its potential. Saint-Simon, early socialists and the large 
German banks that flowered in the Bismarck era held that finance was needed 
to play a central role by funding technological innovation. The essence of the 
state-sponsored planning they endorsed was that its time frame was long-
term. By contrast, the short run effectively has become the long term for 
today’s market fundamentalists. Research and development are downsized so 
as to leave more income to pay dividends and interest, while the debt burden 
is made heavier by deflationary pro-creditor policies that keep economic 
expansion on a short-term leash.
The Saint-Simonians saw the Industrial Revolution as introducing a new 
type of “economic man” in the form of the industrial capitalist (“travailleur”). 
In contrast to the Schumpeterian entrepreneur, he was more in the character 
of a financial engineer seeing where credit could best be applied. He also was 
more than just the “projector” of John Law’s day, in seeing the field of credit 
as being direct industrial investment, not merely speculative or mercantile 
gains. But it was bankers who were glorified above all as the future 
organizers and promoters of industrialism. According to the compilation 
Religion Saint-Simonienne, Economie politique et Politique (Paris: 1831: 
98), “the banks perform the role of capitalists in their transactions with those 
travailleurs, to whom they loan money,” enabling these “industrious people” 
to obtain financing for their enterprise (ibid.: 45; significantly, Marx quotes 
these passages in Capital III: 714). Charles Pecqueur’s Theorie Nouvelle 

d’Economie Sociale et Politique (Paris 1842: 434) urged that production be 
ruled by what the Saint-Simonians called the Systeme general des banques.
It was left to Emile Pereire (1800–1875) to begin putting such a system in 
place. A leading Saint-Simonian in the 1830s, he built France’s first railway 
line (running from Paris to St. Germain), and later developed other routes. He 
contributed a number of essays to the Saint-Simonian Revue Encyclopedique, 
collected in his 1832 Considérations sur les Finances de la France et des États 
Unis. In 1852 he formed the Société Génerale du Crédit Mobilier as a joint-
stock bank with his younger brother Isaac (1806–1880), who explained the 
institution’s financial philosophy in Le Rôle de la Banque de France et 
l’Organisation du Crédit en France (1864) and La Politique Financière 
(1879). Their guiding principle was to supplant the usurers of past epochs by 
providing low-cost long-term credit that would enable industrialists to buy 
machinery and expand production. In particular they sought to replace the 
banking families who hitherto had monopolized French finance.
In discussing the pro-finance view’s pedigree it would not be fair to 
neglect its early blind spots. The major problem with any attempt to shape 
markets from above is insider dealing. All successful economies are “mixed 
economies,” with public oversight and market incentives co-existing. 
Without proper checks and balances one gets “crony capitalism” or its 
Soviet-style bureaucratic counterparts. Nowhere is this need for mutual 
checks and balances more clear than in the fate of Crédit Mobilier, whose 
close connections with the government of Napoleon III prompted it to 
indulge in fatal speculation that drove it bankrupt in 1867, and into 
liquidation in 1871.
The reasons for the bank’s failure are instructive of the inherent tension 
between the two financial philosophies discussed in this paper. Rather than 
extend loans directly to its customers, the Crédit Mobilier invested in stocks 
and bonds issued by these companies. “The institution was in effect a 
gigantic holding company engaged in financing and managing industrial 
enterprises,” notes one financial historian.24 “The securities of the controlled 
companies were used as assets on which the Crédit Mobilier issued its own 
securities, to be sold to the public. For a number of years the Bank was highly 
successful, and performed notable service in promoting railroads and public 
utilities.” It had close relations with Louis Napoleon as Emperor.

Its underlying logic was to provide long-term equity capital and bond 
financing rather than short-term debt. The idea was that external financing 
would give industry freedom from the short-term constraints imposed by 
conservative banking practice in the past. But this freer supply of credit 
proved to be the bank’s undoing, precisely because equity is more responsive 
to the debtor’s earning power than is a straight debt, whose interest and 
amortization payments are fixed. When business conditions turned down 
under the Crédit Mobilier’s arrangements, it suffered as creditor along with 
its debtors. The idealism of this harmony of interests was intended to keep 
the debt burden in check. But it led to the bank’s collapse, as it could not in 
turn make its depositors or creditors share in its own losses. This was 
especially the case as the Crédit Mobilier became essentially a pyramid 
scheme, borrowing at a low rate of interest and investing in securities whose 
returns were expected to be higher. When the economy was thriving, this 
worked, but over the course of every business upswing a time comes when 
this is no longer the case. In France, this happened in 1866.
Subsequent financial scandals plagued the large international capital 
investments of the nineteenth century, headed by the Suez and Panama 
Canals (both of which had been early Saint-Simonian projects), America’s 
railway land giveaways to the robber barons, and their subsequent stock and 
bond waterings that gave high finance a bad name generally. The moral is 
that as aggregations of finance capital and the ability to extend credit grow 
larger, more concentrated and more closely linked to government and favored 
industrial customers, the banking system tends to become parasitic and even 
corrupt. 
If the bank managers do not succumb to such temptations from inside the 
system, parasites attack from outside. So large a supply of institutional 
savings was mounting up in America in the 1980s that Drexel Burnham’s 
crew of corporate raiders seemed a godsend when they began to issue high-
interest junk bonds to finance their clients’ corporate raids and takeovers. 
When the dust settled, this exercise had left debt-burdened and even bankrupt 
companies in their wake, bankrupted much of the Savings and Loan Industry 
and the Federal S&L Deposit Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) at a cost of 
some $300 billion. Simultaneously in Japan, “convoy banking” provided 
another example of insider dealing to finance a real estate bubble. An 

unparalleled share of bank loans went to speculators, schemers and criminals. 
The bursting of the Asian Bubble in 1998 revealed financial systems were 
lacking proper checks and balances — and lacking a better alternative use of 
savings.
Today’s market orthodoxy has inverted the 18th- and 19th-century 
reformers’ spirit, by endorsing financial gain-seeking indiscriminately, even 
when credit is channeled into parasitic rather than productive lines. No doubt 
a 19th-century industrial optimist would be surprised at the extent to which 
the objective of today’s financial institutions is not to fund industry, but to 
load it down with debt; not to finance public investment, but to dismantle and 
privatize it. These distortions in today’s monetarist policies have stripped 
away the dimension of moral authority with which the Saint-Simonians, 
socialists, German bank theorists and other advocates of industrial progress 
sought to achieve, in contrast to what to today has become the mainstream.
 
Marx’s Optimistic Views on Industrial Finance Capitalism
 
Engels attributed Marx’s hopes with regard to the prospects of industrial 
banking to the ideas of Saint-Simon adding that Marx spoke “only with 
admiration” of his “genius and encyclopedic brain.”25 Marx believed that 
Saint-Simonians such as Charles Fourier and Auguste Comte were being 
romantically utopian in their hope to reconcile capital and labor rather than 
basing their system on the class conflict. This political disagreement led him 
to speak sarcastically of Saint-Simon’s “world-redeeming credit-phantasies,” 
yet he in fact shared Saint-Simon’s financial optimism. This optimism is 
revealed most explicitly in his assertion that the banking and credit system 
“signifies no more and no less than the subordination of interest-bearing 
capital to the conditions and requirements of the capitalist mode of 
production.”26 
In describing the virtue of credit as being to free society from the need to 
rely on usurers’ hoards, Marx expressed the leading principle of nineteenth-
century industrial bank reform. What made industrial bank credit different 
“from usurer’s capital” was “the totally changed character of the borrower … 
He receives credit in his capacity as a potential capitalist.”

Marx believed that banking institutions would take their shape from the 
mode of production. Industrial capitalism’s irresistible dynamic material 
force would transform lending practices so as to finance production on an 
expanding scale, thereby going far beyond the old-fashioned usury and even 
beyond the Anglo-American merchant-banking philosophy. In his 1861–63 
drafts for what would become the later volumes of Capital, Marx called the 
banking system “the most artificial and the most developed product turned 
out by the capitalist mode of production.”27 And in his statement that, “On 
the whole, interest-bearing capital under the modern credit-system is adapted 
to the conditions of the capitalist mode of production,” he seemed to be 
describing something that already had become a fait accompli. The parasitic 
usury of former epochs was being transformed into productive lending to 
finance the expansion of industry.
In this belief, to be sure, Marx stated criteria for the characteristics of a 
productive financial system with remarkable clarity for his time. His analysis 
shows that already in his day the anti-inflationary obsession of monetarist 
politics had become apparent. Instead of promoting the thriving market 
needed to expand industrial capital investment, he warned, creditors 
demanded legislative policies to protect the economic value of their loans by 
imposing a deflationary austerity. If successful, he warned, this policy would 
stifle industrial capital’s need for expanding markets. “The value of 
commodities is therefore sacrificed, for the purpose of safeguarding the 
phantastic and independent existence of this value in money,” he wrote in a 
passage that anticipated the arguments of Keynes in the 1930s. “As money-
value it is secured only so long as money itself is secure. For the sake of a 
few millions of money many millions of commodities must therefore be 
sacrificed,”28 along with employment and investment. 
It should be noted that when Marx drafted his financial ideas, German 
banking had not yet really taken off. The raw material he had at hand was 
primarily the Saint-Simonian theorizing in France, and British banking 
practice. Financial distortions such as stock waterings and overcapitalization 
as a general policy by financial robber barons lay in the future. Marx thus 
focused on what he hoped would become a logical industrial banking policy. 
Subsequent Marxists, of course, wrote in an epoch in which finance 
capitalism was taking on a life of its own, increasingly parasitic on the 

industrial core. But in the 1860s it appeared that industry would shape 
financial evolution, not the other way around. 
Yet Marx also recognized that usury existed as an ancient practice 
independent of the mode of production, and growing by its own dynamics of 
compound interest. Usurer’s capital “does not confront the laborer as 
industrial capital,” but “merely impoverishes this mode of production, 
paralyzes the productive forces instead of developing them,” and prevents the 
social productivity of labor from developing. “Usury centralises money 
wealth … It does not alter the mode of production, but attaches itself as a 
parasite and makes it miserable. It sucks its blood, kills its nerve, and 
compels reproduction to proceed under even more disheartening 
conditions.”29 But usury did not change the mode of production; it merely 
transferred the ownership of assets over to usurers, making life harder for the 
laborer.
Nonetheless, Marx believed that any conflict of interest between financial 
and industrial capital would be settled in favor of the latter. “This violent 
fight against usury, this demand for the subordination of the interest-bearing 
under the industrial capital,” he elaborated (ibid.: 707), is but the herald of the 
organic creations that establish these prerequisites of capitalist production in 
the modern banking system, which on the one hand robs usurer’s capital of 
its monopoly by concentrating all fallow money reserves and throwing them 
on the money-market, and on the other hand limits the monopoly of the 
precious metals themselves by creating credit-money.30
Marx acknowledged the old reliance on usurers for credit would survive 
for “such persons or classes … as do not borrow in the sense corresponding 
to the capitalist mode of production.”31 But the great financial achievement 
of industrial capitalism was (or would be) to create a superior outlet for 
lending at interest than the consumer usury and war lending that 
characterized pre-industrial banking. Productive lending would provide credit 
on the basis of evaluating the borrower’s ability to repay the creditors by 
investing the proceeds productively, not merely to pledge (and in due course, 
forfeit) the collateral. The credit system, properly institutionalized, thus truly 
would become society’s means of planning the future.
To be sure, it would have to be a future whose economic growth would be 

able to keep up with the compound interest rate, as banks would keep on 
reinvesting their loan repayment proceeds in new lending to bring more and 
more capital into being. That was the essence of industrial capitalism’s 
expansive force, and Marx believed that its surplus-producing powers would 
be up to the task. The “hard-money” system that represented the legacy of 
usury-capital — a system essentially synonymous with today’s monetarism 
— no longer would be able to block society from achieving its technological 
potential once banking system came into being. Industrial capitalism would 
catalyze an industrial banking system to provide itself with productive, low-
interest credit.
 
Germany’s Linkage between Banking, Heavy Industry and Government under 
Bismarck
 
Nearly all historically minded economists shared this optimistic view of 
finance capital’s subordinate role. The German Historical School pointed to 
the fact that interest rates tended to fall steadily with the progress of 
civilization; at least, rates had been falling since medieval times. Credit laws 
were becoming more humanitarian, and the debtors prisons described so 
graphically by Charles Dickens were being phased out throughout Europe, 
while more lenient bankruptcy laws were freeing individuals to start afresh 
with clean slates. Public debts in Europe and North America were on their 
way to being paid off during the remarkable war-free century 1815–1914. 
Savers and investors were seeking out heavy transport, industry, mining and 
real estate to fund, mainly through the bond market. The consensus among 
economists was that the debt burden would be self-amortizing. Debt 
problems were curing themselves, by being co-opted into a socially 
productive credit system.
Industrial banking policies reached their highest expression in Germany, 
where the Reichsbank and large private banks developed close linkages with 
the government and heavy industry. Developing cross-holdings in the stocks 
of their major customers, these banks undertook much of the planning needed 
to guide long-term strategic development. The ensuing debate concerned how 
governments could best use financial policy to promote industrialization. 

Although Britain had taken the lead in the Industrial Revolution, banking 
had played little role in funding it. British and Dutch merchant banking 
extended short-term loans on the basis of collateral such as bills for 
merchandise shipped (“receivables”) and inventories, but did not undertake 
much long-term lending to finance investment in factories or other direct 
investment. As noted above, James Watt and other innovators were obliged to 
raise investment money from their families and friends rather than from 
banks.
Even today most corporate direct investment is financed out of internally 
generated earnings, not bank loans. Apart from mortgage lending and auto 
financing, most bank credit is short-term. As matters have turned out, 
emperors of finance subdued captains of industry. What is striking is how 
unlikely the prospect of a corrosive and unproductive debt overhead appeared 
a century ago. 
Germany’s banking philosophy followed largely from the country’s 
relative poverty and backwardness as compared to England. Whereas British 
banks continued to focus on mercantile financing rather than industrial 
financing, German banks played a leading role in planning their economy’s 
industrialization. The British economy had grown so large and specialized 
that its banks performed specialized functions. But the German banks from 
the outset engaged in a broad range of activities (“mixed banking”). Edwards 
observes that they stressed investment operations and were formed not so 
much for receiving deposits and granting loans but rather for supplying the 
investment requirements of industry. The main reason for the development of 
mixed banking was the lack of capital which forced industry to turn to the 
banks for assistance.32
The basic profile of Germany’s supply and demand for funds was unique 
for the time. “A considerable proportion of the funds of the German banks 
came not from the deposits of customers but from the capital subscribed by 
the proprietors themselves. In this respect the German banks differed from 
the British banks which derived the greater part of their funds from the 
depositors.” This feature prompted German banks to resist the excesses found 
in American finance of the period, as they only emitted bonds and stocks “to 
the actual cash value of the property of the corporation being financed.” 

U.S. financial manipulators, by contrast, engaged in “stock waterings” that 
“overfunded” companies by bond issues and borrowings far beyond their 
needs or capacity to carry. The difference was pocketed by the directors of 
these corporations — a practice that led much American industry to stay clear 
of banking and financiers out of self-protection. It was this practice that led 
Marx to criticize the idea that this problem was inherently economic rather 
than one of personal abuse and the absence of proper checks and balances. 
Those who say that there is merely a lack of means of payment, have 
either the owners of bona fide securities alone in view, or they are fools who 
believe that it is the duty and power of banks to transform all bankrupt 
swindlers into solvent and solid capitalists by means of pieces of paper.33
German practice steered remarkably clear of this problem. And in Austria, 
the Credit Anstalt für Handel und Gewerbe became a much more successful 
“step-daughter” of France’s Credit Mobilier than the parent had been. In 
France, however, economic policy had changed sharply after the Franco-
Prussian War (1871). An anti-Semitic reaction arose to the Jewish banking 
families that had dominated French finance, and in 1878 royalist leaders 
founded the Union Generale to “Christianize” banking. 
The Bank organized a group of business enterprises, and used the simple 
financial device of applying its funds to purchase its own stock and that of its 
controlled companies. The consequent rise in the price of these securities then
enabled the Bank to increase the capitalization of its companies, and the new 
funds were again used to purchase the outstanding securities.34
This increased the Bank’s shares from 1,000 in 1881 to over 3,000 in 
1882, but they then collapsed to 450 in just a few weeks. But the idea of 
financial manipulation for its own sake, decoupled from tangible wealth 
creation, had been established in principle and carries on until this day. It was 
a principle against which advocates of the Other Financial Canon would warn 
repeatedly in decades to come.
When war broke out in 1914, Germany’s rapid victories over France and 
Belgium seemed to reflect the superior efficiency of its financial system. To 
some observers the Great War appeared as a struggle between rival forms of 
financial organization to decide not only who would rule Europe, but also 
whether the continent would have laissez faire or a more state socialist 

economic system. In 1915, shortly after fighting broke out, the German 
Christian Socialist priest-politician Friedrich Naumann summarized the 
continental banking philosophy in Mitteleuropa. In England, Prof. H. S. 
Foxwell drew on Naumann’s arguments in two essays entitled “The Nature of 
the Industrial Struggle,” and “The Financing of Industry and Trade.”35
Foxwell quoted with approval Naumann’s contention that the old 
individualistic capitalism, of what he calls the English type, is giving way to 
the new, more impersonal, group form; to the discipline, scientific capitalism 
he claims as German. 
This conclusion followed from Naumann’s claim that: “Into everything 
today there enters less of the lucky spirit of discovery than of patient, 
educated industry. To put it otherwise, we believe in combined work.” 
Germany recognized more than any other nation that industrial technology 
needed long-term financing and government support. In the emerging 
tripartite integration of industry, banking and government, Foxwell 
concluded, financing was “undoubtedly the main cause of the success of 
modern German enterprise.”36 The nation’s bank staffs already included 
industrial experts who were forging industrial policy into a science. Bankers 
and government planners were becoming engineers under the new industrial 
philosophy of how governments should shape credit markets. In America, 
Thorstein Veblen voiced much the same theory in The Engineers and the 
Price System. 
The political connections of German bankers gave them a voice in 
formulating international diplomacy, making “mixed banking … the principal 
instrument in the extension of her foreign trade and political power.” But 
rather than recognizing the natural confluence of high finance, heavy industry 
and interventionist government policy, English common law opposed 
monopolies and other forms of combination as constituting restraints on 
trade, while Britain’s medieval guilds had evolved into labor unions that had 
embarked on a class war against industrial employers. Germany’s historical 
form of organization was the professional guild developed at the hands of 
masters, leading to industrial cartels.
Foxwell’s articles implied a strategy of capital working with governments 
to undertake military and diplomatic initiatives promoting commercial 

expansion. The economic struggle for existence favored growing industrial 
and financial scale, increasingly associated with government support. The 
proper task of national banking systems was to finance this symbiosis, for the 
laws of economic history were leading toward political centralization, 
national planning and the large-scale financing of heavy industry.
The short-term outlook of English merchant bankers ill suited them for 
this task. They based their loan decisions on what they could liquidate in the 
event of loan default, not on the new production and income their lending 
might create over the longer run. Instead of taking risks, they extended credit 
mainly against collateral available for seizure: inventories of unsold goods, 
money due on bills for goods sold to customers but not yet paid for, and real 
estate.
British bankers paid out most of their earnings as dividends rather than 
investing in the shares of the companies that their loans supposedly were 
building up. This short time horizon forced borrowers to remain liquid rather 
than giving them the leeway to pursue long-term strategies. Foxwell warned 
that British manufacturers of steel, automotives, capital equipment and other 
heavy industry were becoming obsolescent largely because the nation’s 
bankers failed to perceive the need to extend long-term credit and promote 
equity investment to expand industrial production. By contrast, German 
banks paid out dividends (and expected such dividends from their clients) at 
only half the rate of British banks, choosing to retain earnings as capital 
reserves and invest them largely in the stocks of their industrial clients. 
Viewing these companies as allies rather than merely as customers from 
whom to make as large a profit as quickly as possible, German bank officials 
sat on their boards and extended loans to foreign governments on condition 
that these clients be named the chief suppliers in major public investments.
To sum up, although Britain was the home of the Industrial Revolution, 
little manufacturing had been financed in its early stages by bank credit. Most 
industrial innovators were obliged to raise money privately. Britain took an 
early lead in stock market promotion by forming Crown corporations such as 
the East India Company, the Bank of England and the South Sea Company. 
And despite the collapse of the South Sea Bubble in 1720, the run-up of share 
prices in these monopolies from 1715 to 1720 established London’s stock 
market as a popular investment vehicle for the Dutch and other foreigners as 

well as for British investors. But industrial firms were not major stock 
issuers. The stock market was dominated by railroads, canals and large public 
utilities. 
Britain’s stockbrokers were no more up to the task of financing industrial 
innovation than were its banks, having an equally short-term frame of 
reference. After earning their commissions on one issue, they moved on to 
the next without much concern for what happened to the investors who had 
bought the earlier securities. “As soon as he has contrived to get his issue 
quoted at a premium and his underwriters have unloaded at a profit,” 
complained Foxwell, “his enterprise ceases. ‘To him,’ as the Times says, ‘a 
successful flotation is of more importance than a sound venture.’”37
Much the same was true in the United States. Rejecting the methodical 
German approach, the Anglo-American spirit found its epitome in Thomas 
Edison, whose method of invention was hit-and-miss, coupled with a high 
degree of litigiousness to obtain patent and monopoly rights. America’s 
merchant heroes were individualistic traders and political insiders who often 
operated on the edge of society’s laws to gain their fortunes by stock-market 
manipulation, railroad politicking for land giveaways, and insurance 
companies, mining and natural resource extraction. 
Neither British nor American banks were technological planners for the 
future. Their job was to maximize their own short-run advantage, not to 
create a better and more productive society. Most banks favored large real 
estate borrowers, along with railroads and public utilities whose income 
streams easily could be forecast. Manufacturing only obtained significant 
bank and stock market credit once companies had grown fairly large. By the 
1920s Britain’s joint-stock banks were broadly criticized for their failure to 
finance domestic industry, and for favoring international clients rather than 
domestic ones.38
 
The Symbiosis between the Financial, Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) 
Sectors
 
As the Industrial Revolution gained momentum, economists anticipated 

that banking and finance would be absorbed into the industrial system. The 
attention of economic theorists still remains focused on industrial technology 
and innovation, and the population shift from agriculture to urban industry. 
Textbooks (and lobbying exercises) depict bankers as extending credit to 
enable industrialists to build new factories and employ workers to produce 
more goods. Loans do not become problematic, but can be paid out of profits 
generated by the capital investment they finance. This appealing story is used 
to plead for special tax treatment for financial institutions on the ground that 
their credit creation adds to economic welfare. Interest is deemed as tax-
exempt expenditure, even when corporate raiders use predatory credit.
Yet the symbiosis that has emerged over the past century has been 
primarily between the financial, insurance and real estate sectors. The great 
bulk of assets in modern economies — and hence, collateral for bank loans 
— has been real estate. Some 70% of commercial bank lending in the United 
States and England takes the form of mortgage credit. The estimated market 
value of real estate exceeds the depreciated value of all the plant and 
equipment in the entire United States. Loan officers know that the bulk of 
growth in their bank’s loan portfolio will consist of mortgage loans. The 
more rapidly such credit is created, the more funds are channeled into new 
mortgage financing to bid up the price of real property, making such lending 
appear self-justifying, at least in the short and intermediate run.
Of the properties financed, land (the value of the site) typically represents 
about half the total, and all of the capital gain when the property is sold. And 
the great bulk of depreciation (capital consumption allowances) is reported in 
the real estate sector. This is because when an industrial machine wears out, it 
usually must be scrapped in order to keep up with the pace of technological 
advance. But buildings can be depreciated over and over again, thereby 
shielding their owners from income-tax liability (especially inasmuch as their 
interest charges are tax deductible). The upshot is that the tax system 
(especially in the United States) is much more favorable to real estate than to 
industry. It is easier to borrow against real property, and the total returns 
(after-tax earnings plus capital gains) are higher.
The financial industry has fought to support special tax breaks for real 
estate, recognizing that the money that is freed from the tax collector will be 
available to pay interest. Political contributions and lobbying efforts by real 

estate owners are followed by those of the financial sector, overshadowing 
those of manufacturing. Yet in lobbying for cuts in capital gains taxes, both 
the real estate and financial industries (backed by the insurance industry) 
present these gains as accruing to industry as a result of innovation, as if this 
typified modern capitalism. The reality is that most capital gains continue to 
accrue to real estate. It is only since about 1996 that, for the first time, stock-
market gains are beginning to overshadow the growth in real estate gains in 
the U.S. national balance sheet. The effect is equally corrosive and the 
reasons for this development are set out in chapter 8 below.
Why don’t economists call a spade a spade and come right out and start 
their analytic description of modern economies with a profile of where most 
wealth is accumulated, and the fact that it consists more of land-price gains 
than growth in manufacturing enterprise? The explanation is to be found in 
the fact that real estate is by no means as romantic as industry. Most people 
admire innovators and creators, but resent landlords — and usually also 
bankers and insurance companies as well, for being more parasitic than 
creative. There is a general awareness of the obvious fact that the growth in 
mortgage lending does not add to the supply of land, whose site value is 
created by public infrastructure investment and the general level of 
prosperity. In any case, the great bulk of property loans are for land and 
buildings already in place. The growth of real estate lending thus provides 
borrowers with credit to compete against each other to buy as many 
properties as they can, bidding up land prices in the process. The upshot is a 
bubble, not an industrial boom. 
Financial spokesmen argue that this kind of asset-based lending is , 
inasmuch as it provides real estate owners with properties that enable them to 
pay the interest charges and still (they hope) come out with a capital gain in 
the end. To help spur this large credit market, the financial lobby has joined 
hands with the real estate lobby in the United States to gain special tax breaks 
for real estate. 
Bankers know that whatever the tax collector does not take will be left 
available to pay interest to lenders. Developers bid against each other with 
regard to the size of the mortgage they will pay the lender, and hence the 
volume of mortgage debt service they will pay their banker out of rent. This 
bidding normally continues up to the point where all the available net rental 

income over costs is paid in the form of interest.
Mortgage lending commonly provides from 80% to 100% of the 
property’s purchase price (or even more as seen in the bubble Economy’s 
years leading up to the September 2008 crash). This is a highly leveraged rate 
— it has a high debt/equity ratio. This kind of mortgage debt pyramiding 
provided the model for junk-bond financing used by corporate raiders in the 
1980s, and for the flood of public assets being privatized in Britain, 
continental Europe and Third World countries. The distinguishing feature of 
such purchases of real estate, corporations or public entities already in place 
is that new loans are attached without creating new tangible investment. 
Instead of new tangible capital formation there is more typically a 
downsizing and carve-up as revenue is used to pay interest and amortization 
up to the maximum extent available over and above operating costs.
The fact is “post-industrial” practice made this dynamic quite different 
from that which optimists envisioned at the outset of the Industrial 
Revolution. Instead of mobilizing savings to fund new means of production, 
today’s banking system merely is loading the economy’s assets down with 
debt. What seems to be occurring is functionally akin to the pre-industrial 
mode of lending. The difference is that pre-industrial usury was dominated 
by individual family lenders, but the new post-industrial debt system is 
occurring on a large, corporate scale. It has merged with industry primarily to 
the extent that the financial sector has gained control of the economy’s 
manufacturing companies, treating them like real estate to squeeze out as 
large a rentier income as possible and then sell the companies off for a capital 
gain.
 
Asset-Price Inflation, Financial Bubbles and the Blind Spots of Monetarist 
Orthodoxy
 
In his preliminary discussion of the quantity theory of money, Simon 
Newcomb pointed out that most money in modern economies is spent on 
assets, not goods and services. Yet monetarism looks only at the linkage 
between money and commodity prices and wage rates, leaving asset prices 
out of account. The only linkage appears to occur in the impact of monetary 

tightness on interest rates: Higher (or lower) rates reduce (or raise) the value 
of bonds, stocks and real estate.
Today’s orthodoxy has so expurgated the analysis of capital asset-price 
gains that one looks in vain through today’s economic statistics for a 
meaningful time series of the economy’s largest category of assets: real 
estate, of which the largest component is the land or site value. In the United 
States, the balance sheets published by the Federal Reserve System are the 
result of political lobbying that vastly undervalues land. The reason 
presumably is because land-price (“capital”) gains represent a “free ride” that 
is difficult to justify in terms of the personal enterprise and innovation that 
underlies most textbook model-building. An illusion is created that assets are 
the result of manmade investment, not provided freely by nature and imbued 
with value by society at large. 
This distorted view has not helped economics become more empirically 
grounded. Rather, it has driven it to favor expository forms that use higher 
math without reference to actual statistics. This absence of an empirical check 
increases the likelihood of losing sight of the reality one is supposed to be 
describing. But of course, if the aim of economic theory is to lobby for 
particular interests as opposed to those of the economy at large, reality is not 
exactly the prime desideratum in the first place.
Analyzing the genealogy of financial bubbles thus has been left mainly to 
socialist, protectionist and other proponents of subordinating banking systems 
to finance tangible capital formation. Rather than viewing business cycles as 
occurring smoothly as a result of the automatic stabilizers postulated by the  
orthodox theory of Wesley Mitchell and the National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Hyman Minsky traces how productive lending at the start of the 
upswing gives way to bank loans that become increasingly risky. The final 
phase is “Ponzi” lending, in which the bank loan cannot be paid out of 
operating revenue, but is borrowed from the bank. In effect, the interest 
falling due is simply added on to the loan balance, presumably to be paid out 
of the capital gain that the borrower may (or may not) reap. This approach 
recognizes that today’s wealth-seeking has come to focus on capital gains, 
not profits. Indeed, the real estate industry has not reported profits to the 
income-tax collector since World War II. Savings and credit are not being 
invested in new tangible capital formation, but are channeled to increase 

prices for assets in place. 
Monetary pro-finance theory depicts interest charges as being paid out of 
profits (real estate rental cash flow. But for sectors seeking “total returns” 
mainly in the form of asset-price gains, the only way to keep the volume of 
bank loans solvent is for the financial bubble to keep on expanding. Under 
Ponzi-phase lending, the debtor is obliged to pay interest by selling (or at 
worst, forfeiting) the asset to pay off the loan, or must obtain the money 
elsewhere. Such sales end the run-up in property values, threatening to bring 
the system crashing down as a price-ratchet downward places the system in 
jeopardy — and with it, the economy’s volume of savings that have been 
recycled into such loans. Their market value falls below the level needed to 
cover existing savings deposits. This is what happened with the U.S. S&L 
crisis in the late 1980s. Bailing out the savers obliges the government either 
to increase its borrowing, or to raise taxes on non-savers (mainly labor).
The Japanese economy entered this phase in 1990 with the bursting of its 
real estate and stock market bubble. In view of the similarity between bubble 
economies operating in the Ponzi phase, it is reasonable to ask whether Japan 
may represent the economic future of today’s highly indebted economies in 
Europe and North America. To answer this question, it is necessary to 
measure debt-servicing capacity, and also the way in which new bank credit 
increases asset prices.
This is a line of investigation to which monetarist orthodoxy has paid little 
attention. It averts its eyes from the structural problems to which economies 
succumb as a result of foreign and domestic debt, and the shift of credit from 
productive to unproductive lending (including speculative loans extended in 
the hope that capital gains will continue to accrue to rescue borrowers and 
lenders alike). In past decades such crises were treated as anomalous; only 
the upswing was the norm. But today the entire world seems to be moving 
simultaneously into a debt-burdened state. 
This may leave the monetarist orthodoxy irrelevant, as its advocates deny 
in principle that chronic and structural financial malstructuring may occur. 
Yet today’s financial engineering (or what the Japanese called zaitech) is a 
form of malstructuring to the extent that it severs the banking and credit 
system from tangible capital formation.

By 2000, the U.S. and other leading economies have entered a Ponzi stage 
that has lasted remarkably long. Market prices for stocks, bonds and real 
estate have soared even as real wages have drifted downward and the 
economy’s largest firms have downsized their U.S. operations. In past 
business cycles, wages have recovered and consumer prices have risen. But 
today’s price gains have been contained almost entirely within the economy’s 
asset markets. This has caused an economic polarization between wealth-
holders and income earners that is almost unprecedented in modern times. It 
is becoming the distinguishing feature of what is being welcomed as a new 
post-industrial economy. Yet this economy finds remarkably little recognition 
in orthodox monetarist analysis.
 
The Role of Monetarist Doctrine in the Privatization of Public Infrastructure
 
Adam Smith criticized the royalist governments of his day for indulging in 
vainglorious territorial wars that burdened the economy with debt. He just as 
harshly criticized governments for financing these debts by creating and 
selling off (“privatizing”) monopoly privileges. The East India Company and 
other Crown corporations burdened consumers by charging extortionate 
prices. Seeking profits in this way (in what today would be called a zero-sum 
game) weighed down the nation’s cost structure.
The sanctioning of such public monopolies was hardly an example of 
industrial planning. It stemmed from Britain’s need to dispose of the 
enormous debts run up in the course of its almost constant wars with France 
in Europe, North America and India. These wars were seen to be 
economically corrosive not only as a result of the direct costs in terms of 
manpower and material, but also the postwar legacy of public debts that 
loaded down the economy with taxes to carry their interest charges. Britain’s 
policy of exchanging these bonds by creating monopoly privileges — which 
were sold off for payment in the form of these war bonds — creating vested 
mercantile interests at odds with the rest of the economy and its industrial 
competitiveness. This was the essence of Smith’s opposition to mercantilism. 
He was so pessimistic as to the ability and willingness of governments to act 
positively that he denounced the most industrially minded political 

economists as well, focusing more on tax policy.
Two centuries ago “the funding system” was held widely to be the 
handmaiden of belligerent policies. Adam Smith pointed out that populations 
would balk if they were taxed to finance wars on a pay-as-you-go basis, but 
were less sensitive to the costs of war when governments resorted to 
borrowing. This perception led him to oppose public debts, as one of the 
surest financial and fiscal reforms to promote peace.
Industrial banking theory and Modern Monetary Theory (MMT) likewise 
seek to free labor and capital from the burden of public debt and the taxes 
levied to carry it. Toward this end, a fiscal dimension of financial reform has 
dealt with tax policy. From antiquity through feudal times, governments 
financed their budgets from rental revenues generated by assets in the public 
domain: the land and subsoil mineral rights, forests and fisheries. More 
recently, public utilities representing natural monopolies (roads, railroads and 
airlines, telephone, radio and television systems using the electromagnetic 
spectrum, power and water systems, etc.) were created in the first instance to 
provide economies with low-cost essential inputs. Users typically were 
charged for these services at the government’s supply price, often at 
subsidized rates.
Privatization promises to manage these services more efficiently, while 
removing the operating costs of public agencies from the government budget. 
In the process, however, it removes their revenue and turns it over to 
institutional investors as interest and dividends. Public services formerly 
provided at the government’s supply price or at subsidized rates (or even 
free) will be priced at a uniform rate set high enough to cover profit payouts, 
interest and other financial charges, as well as substantial raises for the chief 
executives. 
Foreign creditors and owners of these privatized enterprises (along with 
wealthy domestic investors) remit their interest and dividends abroad, 
breaking the circular flow of spending within the home economy. The effect 
is to dollarize what formerly were public services denominated in domestic 
currency. Local price structures are subordinated to those of the globally 
dominant economies whose governments are most active in shaping world 
markets.

A major rationale for privatization has been to undertake the investment 
needed to keep up with global technology. But public telecommunications 
and transport systems or other utilities may be managed at least as 
economically as privately owned ones. There is no intrinsic reason why 
private and public ownership should pursue different management policies. 
The differences stem from political rather than economic constraints. 
Upgrading equipment and providing new services requires funding which in 
principle can be repaid out of the user-fees charged or costs saved. But 
today’s neoliberal orthodoxy seeks to deprive governments of the right to 
borrow or create the money needed to expand and modernize.
“Latecomer” nations such as Germany and much of continental Europe in 
the 19th century, Latin America and Asia undertook government investment 
in public utilities and rent-yielding oil and mineral resources. Yet so great an 
opposition grew to government spending in general, and public debt in 
particular, that the major public enterprises faced budgetary constraints that 
blocked them from borrowing to modernize at the rate needed to keep 
competitive with those of other countries. Telephone, television and radio 
systems, power and water companies, bus companies, railroads and airlines, 
as well as nationalized industries such as steel in Britain and other countries 
were starved for capital as a result of an indiscriminate categorizing of all 
government borrowing as unproductive and hence potentially inflationary. 
Revenues for government enterprises were consolidated into the overall 
budget so that they could not be used to meet their own investment needs or 
those of other public agencies.
This constraint has created an unnecessary behavioral dichotomy between 
private and public ownership. There is no inherent reason why public utilities 
and other infrastructure, minerals and land should not generate the same 
returns for government as for private owners. Most savings from privatization 
result from shifting to non-union labor and cutting services to low-volume 
users. Public managers could follow these policies that if given authorization 
to do so, but there is still a popular desire for governments to stick to 
traditional social values. So strong is the ideological schizophrenia that it is 
considered unrealistic to expect voters to endorse public agencies to do what 
privatizers are expected do. It has been deemed necessary to relinquish the 
potential cost savings inherent in public ownership in order to let private 

managers (often the same individuals who ran these enterprises in the public 
sector) make “economic” decisions, that is, ones too unpopular to be applied 
by officials who are accountable to voters. Socially minded politics and an 
increasingly asocial economics thus have developed two different ideologies.
Privatizing the revenue generated by public enterprises or natural resource 
rents in the public domain involves both a fiscal and a financial sacrifice. 
Relinquishing these revenues obliges governments to make up the difference 
by taxing labor and tangible non-financial capital. Owners of the resources 
and enterprises being privatized will tend to leverage their cash flow as 
collateral to borrow money to buy yet more such assets. Their hope is that 
stock-market prices for the privatized enterprises will rise by more than the 
interest charges they must pay. Owners and managers who take their returns 
in the form of capital gains pay lower taxes than investors who earn profits 
by direct investment. Also, the borrowings that private managers make to 
leverage their own equity investment converts erstwhile taxable earnings into 
non-taxable income. This aggravates the fiscal deficit while diverting savings 
away from funding new tangible investment. A debt-ridden bubble economy 
oriented toward capital gains and asset price inflation replaces the old 
industrial economy.
Denying the distinction between productive and unproductive debt, 
today’s neoliberals rationalize all private-sector debt as producing an 
economic benefit, assumed to be equal to the value of the interest charge. 
Except for government debt, any given type of credit is deemed as productive 
as any other form. Public debt alone is considered unproductive in the sense 
of being inflationary, as if it has no counterpart in output. This ideology 
reflects an anti-government social philosophy that endorses and extremist 
“market fundamentalism” and economic austerity whose “value-free” 
deregulatory policies have paved the way for financial systems to inflate 
stock market and real estate bubbles as readily as to fund tangible capital 
formation.
Selling public infrastructure and key industrial and banking sectors to pay 
foreign debts (or simply to lower income and wealth taxes) leads to future 
payment outflows that further lower the rate at which a country’s labor and 
exports exchange for those of creditor nations with more assertive market 
regulation.

 
Summary: How Industry-Oriented Banking Philosophy Differs from Today’s 
Monetarism
 
Money is not merely a veil, a set of counters passively reflecting economic 
activity in prices and wage levels that rise or fall in keeping with changes in 
the money supply. It was recognized clearly enough in the 19th century that 
money and credit may put industry and labor in motion before prices begin to 
rise. Wages may increase, but productivity may rise even more, keeping 
prices stable. Monetary deflation not only lowers prices by reducing demand, 
it leads to unemployment and makes the burden of debt-service heavier. 
Instead of lowering prices and making exports more competitive over the 
intermediate and long runs, reduced output makes the deflationary or debt-
burdened country even more dependent on foreign suppliers. A falling 
exchange rate may initiate the kind of self-feeding decline that results from 
IMF austerity programs. This basic pattern is not a new phenomenon. It was 
warned against already in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Given the experience and theoretical advances that had been achieved by 
the end of the 19th century, one may ask why serious economists would 
advocate such destructive policies today. One part of the explanation is to be 
found in their political assumption that the economic system’s primary 
objective should be to stabilize the value of debt — that is, claims on the 
economy for interest and amortization — rather than permitting the economic 
value of these claims to be eroded by rising wages or commodity prices. This 
value judgment juxtaposes creditor interests to the rest of the economy.
Creditor nations have shown a desire to make debtor countries dependent 
on them, carrying their debts by producing exports of a type that do not 
compete with creditor-nation industries. These exports consist primarily of 
raw materials and low-wage products produced by a labor force that does not 
require higher education for high-technology production. The upshot is that 
to the extent that debtor countries grow, most of their surplus is transferred as 
interest payments. Their key assets are attached by the growing debt 
overhead, or into remitted as dividends as debtors agree to sell off their 
natural resources and public monopolies to raise the money to try and reduce 

their foreign debt burden. Yet the remission of interest, earnings and 
dividends causes the cumulative balance-of-payments deficit and its 
associated foreign debt to grow exponentially over time, beyond the ability to 
be paid.
A crisis erupts at the point where there is general recognition that the 
volume of debts has grown too large to be paid, that is, to be paid without 
transferring ownership and political control to the creditor nations. This 
forces a policy choice between whether to repay the debt at the cost of losing 
domestic self-dependence, or letting the debts go. Wealthy nations often 
write off their debts at this point, but debtor countries are constrained from 
doing this by the threat of international sanctions — and also by their 
ideological reliance on the economic and financial doctrines accepted by the 
creditor nations. There is not yet widespread recognition of the extent to 
which these economic doctrines are self-serving, least of all in the Finance 
Ministries and central banks of debtor countries where economic policy-
making is concentrated.
The problem of international debt poses the question of just what kind of 
monetary and credit base is most liberating by fostering new investment and 
employment. Already by the 18th century, today’s creditor nations sought to 
break free of financial dependency on other nations, and to keep the interest 
payments in their own domestic economies by supplementing gold and silver 
commodity-money with paper debt money and bank credit. In the leading 
nations, this money rested on the foundation of government debt via central 
banking systems whose reserves were invested in this debt, that is, lent to 
governments. This is the system started by the Bank of England in 1694.
Early economists recognized that there are numerous categories of using 
money: not only to buy goods and services, but also to pay debt service and 
taxes, and an even larger use: to buy stocks and bonds or financial assets and 
real estate. Early formulators of the Quantity Theory of Money had a broader 
scope than today’s monetarism in recognizing the limited scope of theories 
that related money and credit only to commodity prices, not to bond, stock 
and real estate prices.
Industrial banking reform criticizes this approach on two grounds. First, it 
points out that most money is spent on financial assets and other assets (as 

well as debt service and fiscal transactions, which may be viewed as a debt to 
the state). Second, it recognizes that many prices are beyond the ability of 
domestic monetary policy to influence. For instance, international oil prices 
are set by the global market, independent of any country’s monetary policy, 
except possibly that of the United States by virtue of its large size.
A financial-fiscal reform approach realizes the linkage between savings 
and debt: Except for savings invested in equity (common stock) and hard 
assets, most are lent out, and hence find their counterparts in debtor 
obligations to the saver-creditors. Furthermore, most of the interest on such 
savings is reinvested (“recycled”) in yet new lending. The effect is for the 
mass of savings/debts to grow autonomously and exponentially, under its 
own steam, without regard for the economy’s ability to pay. This is what 
makes debt crises inevitable.
The process is self-feeding, so that the financial system polarizes the 
economy. The larger the debt overhead grows to overshadow the “real” 
economy, the more its flow of interest and amortization tends to be channeled 
into unproductive lines. The rising ratio of interest to national income deflates
the domestic market for goods and services, making direct investment less 
profitable.
Looking through history, one must conclude that financial systems do not 
automatically evolve and mutate to optimize society’s technological 
potential. Today’s credit institutions are developing in ways that threaten to 
be incompatible with maximizing industrial potential, by diverting savings 
and credit away from financing productive enterprise to corrosive or, at best, 
zero-sum activities that benefit particular debtors. Politicians find that their 
campaign contributions may be maximized by cutting taxes for the wealthiest 
brackets, and then financing the ensuing fiscal deficit by borrowing the 
money back from them. Instead of funding new means of production, 
“bubble” credit is being extended to real estate speculators, corporate raiders 
and others to bid up the price of real estate and corporate stock or other assets 
already in place. Such credit may seem productive at first glance, in the sense 
that asset-price inflation may enable the borrowers to repay the loan with 
interest. But this is achieved at the price of increasing the economy’s debt 
overhead, raising its fixed costs accordingly

If industry has not broken with the Chicago School’s financial philosophy 
to advocate some modern version of the ideas voiced already by Saint-
Simonians writers, it is largely because the goals of today’s industrial 
corporations have become increasingly financial in character. Financial 
strategists rather than industrial engineers now run most manufacturing 
companies. Wall Street controls “Main Street,” not the other way around as 
was expected by early observers of the Industrial Revolution. It is the essence 
of today’s “postindustrial” economy that finance capitalism has absorbed 
industrial capitalism and subordinated its drive for profits via new tangible 
capital investment, employment, research and development with a drive to 
obtain financial gains. The picture revealed by today’s national income and 
product accounts and balance-sheet analysis shows that “capital gains” now 
consist largely of bubble gains from rising stock, bond and real estate prices, 
not rising flows of earnings.
Corporate industry has been taken over so thoroughly by the financial 
sector that there is little industrial voice left as such. Wall Street does not 
reflect the drives of industrial capital, but rather those of finance-capital. 
Contra Marx, these two drives have diverged rather than converged. Just as in 
the late 17th century the goldsmiths (as proto-monetarists) fought against the 
Bank of England, so monetarist policies are now stifling industrial potential 
and raising the specter of the industrial epoch sinking back into the ancient 
usury problem.
Industrial capital may claim to share a certain harmony of interests with 
labor, including hopes for a prosperous home market, and for labor 
productivity brought about by higher educational and living standards. 
Industry as well as labor face a common enemy in the form of finance capital 
and the austerity programs it favors. Globalism of the Washington Consensus 
and Chicago School variety threatens to load existing assets down with debt, 
absorbing profits and stifling new employment.
Since 1971, when America withdrew from the London Gold Pool and 
thereby severed the traditional linkage between debt-money and gold, 
economies have dealt with their debt problem by trying to inflate their way 
out of debt. But credit is debt, so this means “borrowing one’s way out of 
debt.” That is the internal contradiction of today’s financialized economy. 
The inflation tends to be concentrated in the financial and real estate markets, 

in the form of asset-price inflation even in the face of wage deflation and 
commodity-price inflation. Increasingly, financial and real estate investors — 
the economy’s “savers” — seek returns in the form of capital gains (asset 
price inflation) rather than current income. Interest rates may fall as the core 
economies (those in control of their own financial systems and money 
supply) are flooded with liquidity, while dependent economies (especially 
dollarized economies outside of the United States, such as Russia) are 
deflated and made even more dependent on raw materials exports. The 
withdrawal of revenue to pay foreign investors deflates economies, reducing 
their ability to create their own credit systems to inflate their way out of debt, 
as this debt is dollarized and hence immune from domestic monetary policy. 
In this way financial control is concentrated in the creditor nations and lost by 
the debtor countries.
Monetarist orthodoxy does not discuss or even acknowledge this financial 
polarization. This leaves academic economists discussing a hypothetical 
parallel universe. So one can understand why many political economists late 
in the 19th century began to prefer to call their discipline sociology or even 
anthropology. 
The problem ultimately is methodological and philosophical, concerning 
the proper scope of economic thought. The economic tragedy of our time is 
the decoupling of banking, the stock market and the rest of the financial 
sector from the funding of new capital formation. This phenomenon only can 
be analyzed by distinguishing between wealth and overhead. And any such 
distinction rests ultimately on a concept (or set of concepts) dividing the 
economy’s employment, investment and lending into categories of 
“productive” and “unproductive,” or “earned” or “unearned” income.
This was the essence of classical political economy. For over a century, 
the neoclassical (that is, anti-classical) counter-revolution has insisted that all 
economic activity is productive. This philosophical approach understandably 
is preferred by the most unproductive sectors, and by recipients of what the 
classical economists called unearned income (or “economic rent”), wishing to 
claim that their wealth and revenue is as justifiably earned as all other forms.
That was not the view of the Saint-Simonians, who pointed to the extent to 
which wealth was inherited rather than created by its owners. It was not the 

view of Adam Smith, who described landlords as loving to reap where they 
had not sown. It was not the view of Ricardo and subsequent rent theorists 
who showed that rent was a “free ride,” an element of price that found no 
counterpart in costs defrayed by the rent recipient.
If industry has not broken from the Chicago School’s financial 
philosophy, it is because the goals of today’s industrial corporations have 
become increasingly financial in character. Manufacturing companies are 
now being run by financial rather than industrial engineers. Wall Street 
controls “Main Street,” not the other way around. It is the essence of today’s 
“postindustrial” economy that finance capitalism has absorbed industrial 
capitalism and subordinated its drives for profits with a drive to obtain 
financial returns, including capital gains (that is, asset-price gains) from 
channeling credit into securities and real estate markets. Thus, contra Marx, 
the dynamics of finance capital have diverted from those of industrial capital 
to the point of stifling industrial potential and raising the specter of plunging 
the industrial epoch back into the ancient usury problem that nineteenth-
century observers believed was becoming a thing of the past.
Looking through history, one must conclude that financial systems do not 
automatically adjust and mutate to optimize society’s technological potential. 
Today’s credit institutions are developing in ways that threaten to be 
incompatible with maximizing industrial potential, but to divert savings and 
credit away from financing productive enterprise to corrosive or, at best, 
zero-sum gambling activities that benefit particular corporate raiders, 
aggressive companies or real estate operators who pledge earnings and rents 
to their bankers, hoping to ride the wave of asset-price inflation. Instead of 
funding new means of production whose revenues are able to repay the loan 
with interest, “bubble” credit is extended to these borrowers to bid up the 
price of corporate stock, real estate and other assets already in place.
If asset price inflation were real wealth creation, we would all be 
prosperous by now, not falling into negative equity as economies succumb to 
debt deflation.
Chart 1 follows: Financial Strategies – Predatory versus Productive 
(Monetarist Orthodoxy vs. Pro-Industrial Finance)


PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 01-1]
Money and credit are something more than merely ‘counters’ by which trade 
and exchange are contracted. ‘Money’ is the embodiment of public and 
private debt. This balance-sheet aspect of modern financial systems forms the 
essence of creditary analysis. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 01-2]
The economic tragedy of our time is the decoupling of banking, the stock 

market and the rest of the financial sector from the funding of new capital 
formation. — Michael Hudson 
1 I contrast the narrow monetarist approach taken by Ricardo and other Bullionists to that of the Anti-
Bullionists in Ch. 14 of my Trade, Development and Foreign Debt. How Trade and Development 
Concentrate Economic Power in the Hands of Dominant Nations (2nd, rev. and ext, ed.) [Dresden: 
ISLET 2009], esp. p. 280; those of Rueff and Ohlin vs. Keynes and Moulton in Ch. 16; and the IMF’s 
pro-creditor doctrines of financial austerity in Chs. 17 and 18.
2 William Keith, History of the British Plantations in America (London 1738: 34 f.)
3 Josiah Tucker, Four Tracts on Political and Commercial Subjects [1774] (2nd ed. Gloucester 1776: 
21–26).
4 Anon., Political Observations on the Population of Countries (London 1782: 19–23).
5 Potter, The Key to Wealth (1650: 10), quoted in Douglas Vickers, Studies in the Theory of Money: 
1690–1776 (Philadelphia 1959: 21).
6 Law, Money and Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying the nation with Money (Edinburgh 
1705: 115f.)
7 Hume, Political Discourses, in E. Rotwein, ed., David Hume: Writings on Economics (Madison, 
Wis.: 1970: 34 f.)
8 Op. cit.: 228.
9 Oswald to Hume, October 10, 1749 (in ibid.: 195 and 77).
10 Principles, I.: 268.
11 Principles, I: 405.
12 Schumpeter, History of Economic Analysis (New York 1954: 286.)

13 Hayek, introduction to the 1939 reprint of Henry Thornton, Enquiry into the Nature and Effect of 
the Paper credit of Great Britain (London 1802). Hayek does not explain how Steuart’s ideas were 
wrong.
14 Vol. I, Book II, ii
15 David Beasley, The Supppression of the Automobile: Skullduggery at the Crossroads (New York, 
Greenwood Press, 1988).
16 Georg Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (London 1938):16 f. 
17 Thoughts on Political Economy (Baltimore 1820): 429.
18 Simon Newcomb, A Critical Examination of our Financial Policy during the Southern Rebellion 
(New York 1865): 37–44. I summarize his ideas in America’s Protectionst Takeoff 1815–1914. The 
Neglected American School of Political Economy (ISLET 2010): 215–225.
19 Newcomb, ibid.:37–44. I summarize his ideas in America’s Protectionist Takeoff: 1815–1914 
(ISLET 2010): 215–225.
20 Ibid.: 66 ff.
21 Ibid.: 114.
22 Newcomb discussed Carey’s economic views in his review article on “Carey’s Principles of Social 
Science,” North American Review 103 (1866): 573–580.
23 Newcomb, Principles of Political Economy (New York 1885): 347, 322, 339, 344, 390–94. His 
version of the modern quantity theory, MV=PO (or PT) was K×P = V×R, where K represented the 
industrial circulation (the output of goods and services, today signified by O for output or T for 
transactions), P the price level, V the volume of money (M for money in today’s formulation), and R 
the rapidity of circulation (today called V for velocity). 
24 George W. Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (1938): 51.
25 Capital, vol. III (Chicago 1909): 710, fn 116.

26 Ibid.: 704 f.
27 Capital, vol. III: 712)
28 Ibid.: 607.
29 Ibid.: 699 f.
30 Ibid.: 707.
31 Ibid.: 704 f..
32 Edwards, op. cit.: 68. 
33 Capital III: 606.
34 Edwards 1938: 85. 
35 Economic Journal 27 (September and December 1917), pp. 323–27 and 502–15.
36 Ibid.: 514.
37 Ibid.
38 Lloyd George called them “the stronghold of reaction.” See Thomas Johnston, The Financiers and 
the Nation (London 1934: 138). Ernest Bevin, G. D. H. Cole and other members of the British Labour 
Party criticized banks in The Crisis (London 1931). See also G. D. H. Cole, The Socialisation of 
Banking (London 1931), and John Wilmot, Labour’s Way to Control Banking and Finance (London 
1935). The Labour Party’s proposed solution was to nationalize the Bank of England, and in 1933 
recommended the socialization of the joint-stock banks as well. Keynes was sympathetic in his article 
on “A New Economic Policy for England,” Economic Forum, Winter 1932–33: 29–37.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 1
_______________

*****
2. The Magic of Compound Interest: 
Mathematics at the Root of the Crisis
 
Money is saved and reinvested in the expectation that it can grow without 
end. But are enough debtors able to pay to enable savings to keep on growing 
on an economy-wide scale? Ever since interest began to be recorded in 
ancient Mesopotamia, the defining financial character of economies has been 
the tendency for debts to multiply so rapidly that large numbers of debtors 
have had to settle their obligations by selling or forfeiting their property. 
Throughout most of recorded history such asset transfers are so widespread 
as to transform the distribution of land and other wealth.
Perception of the problems caused by debts/savings growing at compound 
interest on an economy-wide scale is obscured if one takes merely an 
individualistic approach. From the vantage point of bankers and other 
lenders, all that seem to matter are the computer printouts of the debts owed 
to them, the yield on each obligation and the dates on which payments are 
scheduled to fall due. Each loan is paid off in one way or another, after all. 
Retirees and some other savers live off their interest and dividends, but banks 
and insurance companies, pension and retirement funds, mutual funds and 
trusts seek to “keep their money working for them,” plowing their receipts of 
debt service back into new loans and investments there is little analysis of 
how their customers are to pay these debts, much less how the economy can 
carry its debt overhead. And there is an assumption that debts are taken on 
voluntarily, not mounting up as arrears or borrowed out of necessity — or 

simply out of the need to obtain home ownership, an education or pay for 
emergencies. 
As the process is essentially an exponential function, the dynamics of 
interest-bearing debt can be understood only through mathematics. The laws 
governing the growth of debt were at the core of religious doctrines of the 
ancient Near East, of Judaism, early Christianity and Islam. Matters hardly 
could have been otherwise in light of the role played by rural usury in the 
expropriation of families from their land, reducing them to bondage to their 
creditors.
Economic models that neglect the self-multiplying character of debt will 
miss the source of today’s most pressing financial problem: the tendency of 
debts to grow more rapidly than the economy’s ability to carry them. 
Formulae describing the growth of savings put out at interest — the mirror 
image of what debtors owe — date back some four thousand years. 
One can see why the long-term dynamics expounded by Ricardo and 
Malthus led economics to be called the Dismal Science. It was dismal 
because it described economies sinking into a state of entropy as population 
growth pressed against the limits of land and capital under conditions of 
diminishing returns — the idea that each additional unit of labor produces 
less output. There was little anticipation that labor output per man-hour 
would soar in agriculture and mining as much as in industry.1
The Dismal Science shows no such pessimism when it comes to debts 
mounting up at interest. The mathematical principles of how societies run 
more deeply into debt are the same as those that describe the exponential 
buildup of savings, but they seem to have eluded notice. I believe that the 
reason is that a realistic logic implies a need for public intervention to 
challenge creditor claims. Debts are viewed from the vantage point of 
creditors to whom savings are owed, but not in terms of the economy’s 
ability to pay. Such one-sided theorizing avoids confronting the price that 
societies must pay as they strive to carry an increasingly top-heavy financial 
overhead, owing sums that seem to be soaring off toward infinity.
 
What the Babylonians Recognized but Modern Economists Overlook

 
Four thousand years ago mathematics played a major role in training 
Sumerian and Babylonian scribes. Most were employed in palace and temple 
bookkeeping, and their schoolbook exercises emphasized manpower 
allocation problems such as calculating how many men were needed to 
produce a given amount of bricks or dig canals of a given size. Model 
exercises also dealt with the expected growth of herds and the doubling times 
of money lent out at interest.
When the prime commercial lending rate of U.S. banks peaked at 20% in 
1980 it touched what had been the normal commercial rate for silver from 
Sumer c. 2500 BC through the Neo-Babylonian epoch in the first millennium. 
By the time Alexander the Great conquered the Near East in 331 BC the rate 
had remained remarkably stable at the equivalent of 20% for more than two 
thousand years. It was not set with any particular reference to profit levels or 
other means to pay, but simply was a matter of mathematical convenience, 
reflecting the Mesopotamian way of computing fractions by division into 
60ths. A bushel of barley was divided into 60 “quarts,” and a mina-weight of 
roughly one pound was composed of 60 shekels. Paying interest at the rate of 
1⁄60 each month added up to 12⁄60 per year, or 20% in decimal notation. A 
mina lent out at this rate would produce 60 shekels in five years, doubling the 
original principal.
A model Babylonian scribal exercise from circa 2000 BC asks the student 
to calculate how long it will take for a mina of silver to double at the normal 
rate of one shekel per mina per month.2 The answer is five years at simple 
interest — the common time period for backers to lend money to traders. 
Assyrian loan contracts from about 1900 BC called for investors to advance 
two minas of gold, getting back four minas in five years.
The same idea is expressed in an Egyptian proverb: “If wealth is placed 
where it bears interest, it comes back to you redoubled.”3 Another popular 
image compared making a loan to having a baby. The word for “interest” in 
every ancient language meant a newborn, either a goat-kid (máš) in 
Sumerian, or a young calf — tokos in Greek or foenus in Latin. The “kid” or 
“calf” paid as interest was born of silver or gold, not from borrowed cattle as 
some modernist economists once believed, missing the metaphor at work.4 

Rather, the reproduction of numbers was viewed in sexual terms. What was 
born was the “baby” fraction of the principal, 1⁄60. Only when these accruals 
of interest had grown to be as large as their parent, after the fifth year, were 
they deemed “adult” enough begin having new interest “babies” on their 
own, for everyone knows that only adults can reproduce themselves. Thus, 
compounding began only after the principal had reproduced itself — 
“matured” — by the time 60 months had passed.
How long could the process go on at these rates? A relevant scribal 
problem asks how long it will take for one mina to become 64, that is, 5. The 
solution involves calculating powers of 2 (22 = 4; 23 = 8 and so forth).6 A 
mina multiplies fourfold in 10 years, eightfold in 15 years, sixteenfold in 20 
years, and 64 times in 30 years. The 30-year period consisted of six five-year 
doubling periods.
It will be noted that these Babylonian examples are composed from the 
vantage point of lenders and investors, not the debtor. Once the debt is 
repaid, the transaction is over as far as the borrower is concerned. The money 
is not simply left to accumulate. Investors who wanted to keep their money 
multiplying had to draw up new loan contracts. This meant taking their gain 
(assuming that the venture was successful) and finding a new borrower or 
trade venture. With the passage of time it must have become harder to find 
enough ventures to absorb the savings that were mounting up.
Successful traders and merchants normally were able to pay such rates out 
of their business gains. If the ship was robbed by pirates or sunk, or if the 
caravan was robbed, the lending laws of the epoch said that the merchant did 
not have to pay his backer. Commercial lenders shared in the risk of the 
merchants. But the volume of trade could not keep on multiplying 
exponentially. Interest accumulated in the hands of lenders more rapidly than 
they could find commercial opportunities.
Creditors found their major non-commercial market to be rural usury, and 
this is where the most serious problems occurred, especially when crops 
failed or military hostilities interrupted the harvest. Agricultural interest rates 
were more extortionate in this sector, typically 33-1/3%, reflecting the normal 
sharecropping rate of a third of the crop. Interest rates of 50% or even 100% 
might be charged, often for only short periods as creditors (mainly palace 

officials) demanded whatever they could get from cultivators in distress or in 
arrears in what they owed in fees to palace collectors. 
Matters were further aggravated by the fact that unlike the case with 
mercantile loans, cultivators bore most of the risk in rural lending. The loan 
usually took the form of prepayment against the crop, on which the palace’s 
share was estimated as if normally high yields would materialize. But the 
crop often turned out to be less, squeezing the cultivator, whose crop shortfall 
became a debt. Sharecroppers or others unable to break even or pay their 
stipulated rents or fees to the palace under these adverse conditions were 
forced to borrow out of need, and once they ran into debt it was hard to 
extricate themselves.
As rural loans were made primarily to enable cultivators to pay taxes or 
get by hard times, not to buy property or finance investment of their own. 
Inevitably, rural usury led to the forfeiture of land and crop rights. The way 
to obtain property was by lending against it, not by borrowing money to buy 
it.
At the interest rate of 33-1⁄3%, Babylonian agricultural debts doubled in 
three years. A frequent practice was for debtors to pay interest by pledging 
their family members as bondservants to work for their creditors. § 117 of 
Hammurapi’s laws (c. 1750 BC) stipulated that such bondservants be freed 
after three years, apparently recognizing that at this point the creditor had 
received labor services equal in value to the original debt. The law stipulated 
at this point the loan should be deemed to have been paid and the pledge 
should be liberated to rejoin her (or his) family. The implication is that 
doubling the debt principal represented a moral and practical limit. 
At no time in history has output grown at sustained rates approaching the 
33-1⁄3% rate of interest charged for agricultural loans, or even the 20% 
commercial rate. When the loan proceeds were used to pay tax arrears or for 
consumption, interest charges ate into the cultivator’s modest resources, 
obliging him to raise sums beyond his ability to produce and thus enabling 
creditors to obtain the debtor’s family members as bondservants, followed by 
the land itself. This threatened to expropriate the citizen army members 
traditionally free cultivators on the land.
 

Sterile Money and Insatiable Usury
 
Greek records point to the charging of interest in the Aegean around 
750BC, probably being introduced by Syrian (“Phoenician”) traders.7 
Following Egyptian decimalized practice, Greek interest rates typically were 
set at 10%. This made the doubling time for loans ten years. But although this 
was only half the Mesopotamian rate, it did not save cultivators from running 
into such serious problems that debt revolts occurred. Sparta’s “Lycurgan” 
reforms went so far as to ban the use of precious metals as money and made 
the land inalienable, and hence safe from forfeiture for debt arrears.
By the 7th century the oligarchies in Corinth and other cities were 
overthrown and driven into exile by popular leaders (“tyrants”) who 
cancelled the debts of their supporters and redistributed the land of the exiled 
families. One of the last cities to experience a debtors’ revolt was Athens, 
where Solon lay the foundations for economic democracy by banning debt 
bondage in 594 BC. But Greek cities subsequently drew the line, and some 
even obliged their administrators to pledge not to cancel the population’s 
debts.
By the 3rd century, BC, Sparta’s formerly egalitarian economy was 
polarizing between large landowners and families who had lost their property 
through debt foreclosure. Some families had become wealthy and lent to 
those in need, with the loans collateralized by their lands. This 
disenfranchised much of Sparta’s citizen-army. Toward the end of the 
century, kings Agis and Cleomenes tried to save matters by canceling the 
population’s debts, but by this time the power of vested interests had grown 
strong enough to exile both rulers. Cleomenes was murdered, and Sparta’s 
final reformer, Nabis, was overthrown by neighboring oligarchic cities, 
calling on Rome for aid.
The Etruscans, Romans and other Italians seem to have adopted the 
practice of charging interest on debt from Greek and Near Eastern traders 
around 750 BC. Probably reflecting the division of the year into twelve 
months, they used the duodecimal system of fractions based on dozens. The 
Roman pound was divided into twelve troy ounces, and the legal rate of 
interest was set at 1⁄12 (8-1⁄3%). This was the lowest major rate in antiquity, 

but it nonetheless proved to be beyond the ability of cultivators to pay, 
especially when they were called away from their land to fight in the almost 
constant warfare of the period. 
As civilization’s center moved west from the Near East to Greece and then 
to Italy, the decline in interest rates resulted from the mathematical system of 
fractional weights and measures rather than from declining productivity or 
profit rates. Despite this decline (and hence the longer time it took for a debt 
to double), the debt burden became increasingly serious as the early practice 
of royal debt cancellations became a thing of the past. Livy, Diodorus and 
Plutarch described how Rome’s creditor oligarchy shifted taxes onto the less 
prosperous classes, pushing them into bankruptcy and ultimately destroying 
the money economy itself, bringing on a Dark Age that reverted to local 
subsistence production in which the Christian Church emerged to ban usury 
outright.
Aristotle’s Politics (I.10 at 1256, c. 330 BC) pointed out how 
inappropriate was the metaphor of debts reproducing themselves, because 
silver was sterile: “The taking of interest is contrary to nature, because money 
by nature cannot produce anything and is intended only to serve the purpose 
of exchange,” that is, as a means of payment. In contrast to the reproductive 
power of animals, money’s appropriate function was to be a means to 
facilitate trade, not to intrude into property relations. One might say that the 
“real” economy was organic; the money economy and its debt relations were 
inorganic and purely mathematical. This is why the expansion path of 
interest-bearing debt diverged from that of the underlying economy. Rural 
usurers broke up society’s natural balance — and in the process its military 
foundation — by charging exorbitant interest rates, ending up with the 
impoverished debtor’s property. 
The idea that money was sterile explains the frequent literary depiction of 
usurers as old homosexuals, incapable of reproducing themselves. When Livy 
(VIII.28) wrote his history of Rome, he probably knew only the bare fact that 
in 326 BC the Papirian law abolished the right of creditors to keep their 
debtors literally in bonds. In the melodramatic Stoic fashion of his day, he 
drew on an established archetype to compose a dramatic scenario for the 
events leading up to Rome’s debt revolt. He portrayed the Roman crowd 
rioting to protest a lustful usurer, Lucius Papirius, who had abused a boy left 

in his charge as a debt pledge, “regarding the boy’s youthful bloom as added 
interest on his loan.” When the boy rejected the creditor’s advances, Lucius 
ordered him to be stripped and beaten. Mangled by the blows, the boy rushed 
into the street and complained loudly of the usurer’s lust and brutality. A vast 
crowd gathered, inflamed with pity for his youth and outrage for the wrong, 
and considering too the conditions under which they and their children were 
living, and they ran into the Forum and from there in a compact body to the 
senate house. Forced by this sudden outbreak, the consuls convened a 
meeting of the senate, and as the members entered the senate house the crowd 
exhibited the lacerated back of the youth and flung themselves at the feet of 
the senators. The strong bond of credit was on that day overthrown through 
the mad excesses of one individual. The consuls were instructed by the senate 
to lay before the people a proposal ‘that no man be kept shackled or in the 
stocks, except such as, having been guilty of some crime, were waiting to pay 
the penalty; and that the goods but not the person of the debtor should be the 
security for money lent.’ 
Personified as sterility, usury appeared as antithetical to the normal social 
reproductive process. The moral of Livy’s story was that rather than creating 
families, creditors broke them up by seizing their members as pledges, as 
well as foreclosing on their subsistence lands. On the broadest plane of 
analysis money cannot really reproduce itself; only the tangible, living 
economy can do that. The point of intersection between usury and the living 
organic economy occurs when money-loans must be paid out of the 
reproduction of crops and herds, or other output and revenue. Although the 
money that creditors lend out is not itself productive, borrowers need it to pay 
for the resources they need to be productive, including the expense of 
providing for their families in emergency conditions.
The poverty caused by usury at the bottom of the economic scale found its 
counterpart in splendor at the top, for although money itself was sterile, it 
enabled usurers to draw society’s wealth into their own hands. Yet as they 
turned life into a scramble for metal, they were as mean with themselves as 
they were with others. Some usurers spent lavishly to gain approval, but more 
often they acted miserly and did not even spend money on themselves, 
sacrificing their own worldly enjoyment to an insatiable, increasingly 
compulsive property acquisition for its own sake. Wealth addiction became 

the natural counterpart to the exponential growth of debt. 
Greek dramatists portrayed the limitless greed for money as a disease of 
the psyche. In Aristophanes’ last play, Ploutos (388 BC), the character 
Karion remarks that a person may become over-satiated with food — bread, 
sweets, cakes, figs and barley — but no one ever has enough wealth. His 
friend Chremelos agrees:
 
Give a man a sum of thirteen talents, 
and all the more he hungers for sixteen. 
Give him sixteen, and he must needs have forty, 
or life’s not worth living, so he says. (lines 189–193)
 
As the French classicist Jean-Pierre Vernant paraphrases this thought: 
Ultimately, wealth has no object but itself. Created to satisfy the needs of life, 
as a mere means of subsistence, it becomes its own end, a universal, 
insatiable, boundless craving that nothing will ever be able to assuage. At the 
root of wealth one therefore discovers a corrupted disposition, a perverse 
will, a pleonexia — the desire to have more than others, more than one’s 
share, to have everything. In Greek eyes, ploutos (wealth) was bound up with 
a kind of disaster,8 above all with hubristic behavior whose defining 
characteristic was not just the egoism of wealth but the injury its holders did 
to their victims, most characteristically through usury.
Self-enrichment through usury made money in an asocial way, one that 
was compulsive rather than warm, self-referential and metallic rather than 
interactive in an organic way. “Woe to you who add house to house and join 
field to field till no space is left and you live alone in the land,” declaimed the 
prophet Isaiah. Since Mesopotamian times the way to acquire property (and 
labor) most quickly was through usury and foreclosure, but creditors would 
live alone once they had cleared the land of everyone by foreclosing on their 
subsistence holdings. Usury became the economics of autism, a narcissistic 
social-personality defect that low-surplus communities could not afford and 
indeed took pains to prevent from developing among their own members.
 

The Exponential Doubling and Redoubling of Debt
 
For thousands of years religion paid more attention to the problems caused 
by the exponential growth of debt than do modern economists. Under 
Babylonia’s “divine kingship,” rulers were expected to “restore order” by 
canceling rural debts, liberating bondservants and redistributing lands that 
had been forfeited to creditors or sold under duress. This practice was echoed 
in Judaism’s Jubilee Year (Leviticus 25), while throughout Greece a more 
secular cry arose for cancellation of the debts and redistribution of the land. 
Early Christianity denounced usury, as did the Koran and medieval Canon 
Law. 
Martin Luther depicted the growing mass of usurious claims on the poor 
and the rest of society as the “great huge monster … who lays waste all … 
Cacus,” who “would eat up the world in a few years.” The monster was 
epitomized as a usurer scheming “to amass wealth and get rich, to be lazy and 
idle and live in luxury on the labor of others.” Once Cacus got hold of a man 
and imbued him with the insatiable desire for money-wealth, the victim 
became in turn a villain, a “usurer and money-glutton” who “would have the 
whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him 
lies, so that he may have all to himself, and every one may receive from him 
as from a God, and be his serf for ever.… For Cacus means the villain that is 
a pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything.”9
John Napier’s 1614 Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis descriptio 
juxtaposed exponential number series to their simple arithmetic expansion. 
Ninety pages of tables were added to 57 pages of explanatory text that 
introduced the word “logarithm,” literally “the number of the ratios” (from 
Greek arithmos, “number,” and logos, “word, logic, ratio”). The technique 
greatly simplified calculations involving exponential functions, including 
those of interest-bearing debt as well as navigational and astronomical 
problems. Napier’s second book on logarithms, the Robdologia (1617), 
illustrated the exponential principle by means of a chess-board on which each 
square doubled the number assigned to the preceding one. A subsequent 
economic writer cast this principle into the form of a Persian proverb telling 
of a Shah who wished to reward the inventor of chess, a subject, and asked 

what he would like. The man asked “as his only reward that the Shah would 
give him a single grain of corn, which was to be put on the first square of the 
chess-board, and to be doubled on each successive square; which, to the 
surprise of the king, produced an amount larger than the treasures of his 
whole kingdom could buy.”10
 
Illustration follows: Doubling Numbers – “The Miracle of Compound 
Interest”
 

A poetic application of this mathematical idea appears at the outset of 
Shakespeare’s A Winter’s Tale, published a few years before Napier. The 
metaphor of “a cipher … standing in a rich place” indicates the logarithmic 
exponential by which a debt multiplied as it mounted up unpaid at compound 
interest.11 The passage has caused speculation on how and when 
Shakespeare might have known Napier or his circle, but the most striking 
point is how many dramatists and novelists have paid more attention to debt 
than do modern economists. The novels of Dickens, Balzac and their 
contemporaries as well as early British drama are filled with debt imagery, 

reflecting the role it played in nearly everyone’s life.
Although political economy became a popular genre, it dealt only 
peripherally with debt relations without really integrating them into its core. 
However, one of Adam Smith’s contemporaries, the Anglican minister and 
actuarial mathematician Richard Price, graphically explained the seeming 
magic of how debts multiplied exponentially. His 1772 Appeal to the Public 
on the Subject of the National Debt described how 
Money bearing compound interest increases at first slowly. But, the rate of 
increase being continually accelerated, it becomes in some time so rapid, as 
to mock all the powers of the imagination. One penny, put out at our 
Saviour’s birth at 5% compound interest, would, before this time, have 
increased to a greater sum than would be obtained in a 150 millions of Earths, 
all solid gold. But if put out to simple interest, it would, in the same time, 
have amounted to no more than 7 shillings 4½d.12
In his Observations on Reversionary Payments, first published in 1769 and 
running through six editions by 1803, Price elaborated how the rate of 
multiplication would be even higher at 6%: A shilling put out at 6% 
compound interest at our Saviour’s birth would … have increased to a greater 
sum than the whole solar system could hold, supposing it a sphere equal in 
diameter to the diameter of Saturn’s orbit.13
 
Illustration follows: Unsustainable – The Exponential Growth of Money
 

 
Rather naïvely, Price suggested that Britain’s government make use of this 
exponential principle to pay off the public debt by creating a sinking fund 
that itself would grow at compound interest. The idea had been proposed a 
half century earlier by Nathaniel Gould, a director of the Bank of England. 
Parliament would set aside one million pounds sterling to invest at interest in 
a sinking fund, where it would build up the principal by reinvesting the 
dividends annually. The idea is familiar today when people reinvest their 
stock market gains. In a surprisingly short period of time, Price promised, the 
fund would grow large enough to enable the government to extricate itself 
from its entire debt — by establishing financial claims on the rest of the 
economy! “A state need never, therefore, be under any difficulties, for, with 
the smallest savings, it may, in as little time as its interest can require, pay off 
the largest debts.”14
What Price had discovered was how the exponential growth of money 
invested at interest multiplies the principal by plowing back the dividends 
into new saving. It is the explanation for how savings snowball in the hands 
of bankers, bondholders and other savers who keep on reinvesting their 
dividends. At its root is the principle taught to Babylonian scribes four 

thousand years ago, when the compound interest phenomenon was just 
getting underway on a large scale. 
Today, interest is compounded annually, quarterly and even daily by 
banks, and it is done automatically rather than obliging savers to go out and 
find new credit-worthy borrowers. The major difference is that in Babylonia 
compounding began only after five years had passed, and at the expiration of 
each loan or investment the creditor had to draw up a new loan document. 
This meant finding a new borrower whose enterprise seemed likely to 
generate the money to pay the doubled sum available to be lent out. Price’s 
proposed compound-interest fund was expected to keep on accruing ad 
infinitum, on the assumption that there always would be enough opportunities 
to find remunerative projects. 
Economic history provides a corrective sense of proportion by showing 
that in the two thousand years since the birth of Christ the European economy 
has grown at a compound annual rate of 0.2%, far less than the level at which 
interest rates have stood in recent times. The proceeds of much of this growth 
have had to be allocated to pay debt service, absorbing the revenue that 
otherwise would be available for direct investment and enhancement of living 
standards. This shrinks the “organic” or “real” economy’s ability to produce a 
surplus to pay creditors, invest and increase consumption. Economies, like 
individuals, ultimately may be bankrupted by their inability to pay 
compounding interest charges on a mathematical or “inorganic” financial 
expansion path that has no limit. 
Something has to give. The political fight in nearly every economy for 
thousands of years has been over whose interests must be sacrificed in the 
face of the incompatibility between financial and economic expansion paths. 
Until quite recently, creditors have lost, for the simple reason that never in 
history has any economy been able to turn a penny — or any other sum — 
into a surplus large enough to pay creditors a solid sphere of gold reaching 
out to Saturn’s orbit. This is the point that modern economists and futurists 
fail to appreciate. No doubt many people saved pennies back in Roman times, 
and indeed, hundreds of talents of silver and gold were lent out at high rates 
of interest. Yet nobody had accumulated a vast volume of gold nearly as 
large as the earth itself, or even as large as a city block. The volume of gold 
in the world today could fit into a single large fortress.15

The inference is that what savers hope to obtain in interest cannot 
materialize in practice. Financial claims run ahead of the economy’s ability to 
produce and pay. Expectations that interest payments can keep on mounting 
up are “fictitious,” as Marx and other 19th-century critics put it. When 
indebted economies and their governments cannot pay, bankers and investors 
call in their loans and foreclose, causing the kind of crises that distinguish 
modern business cycles and, in the past, always have wiped out savings along 
with the bad debts. 
The reality is that the accrual of savings (that is, debts) is constrained by 
the economy’s ability to carry these debts. Recognizing that no society’s 
productive powers could long support interest-bearing debt growing at 
compound rates, Marx poked fun at Price’s calculations: The good Mr Price 
was simply dazzled by the enormous quantities resulting from geometrical 
progression of numbers.… he regards capital as a self-acting thing, without 
any regard to the conditions of reproduction of labour, as a mere self-
increasing number, subject to the growth formula: 
 
Surplus = Capital (1 + interest rate) n  16
 
No wonder Adam Smith found that no nation in history had paid off its 
public debt, and that Britain’s tax revenues had become “a fund for paying, 
not the capital, but the interest only, of the money which had been borrowed 
…” As for the political idea of a sinking fund, Smith pointed out that it is a 
subsidiary fund always at hand to be mortgaged in aid of any other doubtful 
fund, upon which money is proposed to be raised in any exigency of the 
state.17
To ambitious monarchs or parliamentary leaders, the fund would be an 
irresistible temptation as governments simply would turn around and re-
borrow an equivalent sum for whatever was set aside to pay off the debt, or 
indeed whatever was needed to finance yet new wars.
In 1798, a generation after Price put forth his argument for a sinking fund, 
the Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus drew the contrast between geometric and 
arithmetic rates of growth in the way that most economic students recognize 

today. Picking up his fellow minister’s imagery, Malthus asserted that 
populations tended to grow “geometrically” unless checked by natural forces 
such as famine, disease or war, while the means of subsistence — the 
populations of animals and plants consumed by humans — could grow only 
“arithmetically” at a simple rate of interest. It followed that social programs 
to provide more money for the poor would be self-defeating, because they 
would have more children (“multiply their numbers”), pressing against the 
limits of subsistence and forcing their living standards back down to 
minimum survival levels.18
The financial proposals that made readers familiar with Malthus’s contrast 
are all but forgotten today. Few economists remember that the mathematics 
of compound vs. simple interest was first applied to the rates at which 
savings and debts double and redouble. Malthus’ idea that fertility rates 
would rise to reflect higher income levels has not materialized, but the 
financial principle described by Price remains apt: Owing to the recycling of 
interest receipts into new lending, what grows geometrically are savings (i.e., 
debts on the liabilities side of the balance sheet), not population.
Private individuals soon tried to make use of the compound interest 
principle. Peter Thelluson, a wealthy Swiss merchant and banker who had 
settled in London around 1750, set up a trust fund that was to accumulate and 
reinvest its income for a hundred years and then be divided among his 
descendants. His £600,000 estate was estimated to yield £4500 per year at 7½
% interest, producing a final value of £19,000,000, over thirty times the 
original bequest.
Thelluson’s will was contested in litigation that lasted 62 years, from his 
death in 1797 to 1859. Under William Pitt the government calculated that at 
compound interest — even as low as 4% — the trust would grow so 
enormous as to own the entire public debt by the time a century had elapsed. 
This prompted legislation known as Thelluson’s Act to be passed in 1800, 
limiting such trusts to just twenty-one years’ duration. By the time all the 
lawyers were paid, “the property was found to be so much encroached on by 
legal expenses that the actual sum inherited was not much beyond the amount 
originally bequeathed by the testator.”19
But the savings of the living have continued to mount up. The banker 

Geoffrey Gardiner observes that in the late 1970s, the burgeoning oil 
revenues of the producers were further gilded by the addition of high interest 
earnings. At their highest British interest rates had the effect of doubling the 
cash deposits of the oil-producers in only five years, or 16.3 times in twenty 
years! … The wisdom of an earlier age, which had led to the passing of 
‘Thelluson’s Act’ to discourage the establishment of funds which 
compounded interest indefinitely, had been forgotten.20
This is essentially the principle voiced by Francis Bacon in his famous 
essay on usury: Usury bringeth the treasure of a realm into few hands, for the 
usurer, being at certainties, and the other at uncertainties, in the end of the 
game most of the money will be in the box, and a State ever flourisheth 
where wealth is more equally spread.21 
It was echoed in 1840 by the French socialist Proudhon’s axiom that the 
financial “power of Accumulation is infinite, [yet] is exercised only over 
finite quantities.” “If men, living in equality, should grant to one of their 
number the exclusive right of property; and this sole proprietor should lend 
one hundred francs to the human race at compound interest, payable to his 
descendants twenty-four generations hence, — at the end of 600 years this 
sum of one hundred francs, at 5%, would amount to 107,854,010,777,600 
francs; two thousand six hundred and ninety-six times the capital of France 
(supposing her capital to be 40,000,000,000, or more than twenty times the 
value of the terrestrial globe!”22 Hopes to increase human welfare through 
higher economic productivity would be stifled, Proudhon warned (in good 
Saint-Simonian fashion), if the self-expanding power of interest-bearing 
claims were not checked by policies to replace debt with equity investment.
 
Socialist Analyses of the Dynamics of Compound Interest
 
The instability that is caused as the exponential growth of interest-bearing 
claims overwhelm economies has been analyzed mainly by socialists and by 
rather crankish writers at the right wing of the political spectrum. It seems 
that only reformers out of the mainstream have been willing to cast doubt on 
the viability of savings loaned out without constraint, for it challenges the 
sanctity of debt. What ultimately is at stake is whether debt convulsions are 

inevitable, and whether the debts in fact can be paid. 
We are speaking of nothing less than the feasibility of economic 
redemption. To recognize that debts and savings grow independently of the 
capacity to pay is to throw into question the assumption that savings invested 
in loans can be redeemed. Most economists have shied away from 
suggestions that unlike merely cyclical self-correcting wavelets, financial 
crises tend to grow worse until insolvencies wipe out savings that have been 
badly invested. There is a preference for praising the saving/debt process, 
although people are beginning to question whether governments should go so 
far as to bail out savers at the top of the economic pyramid. 
Bankruptcy has long been the financial consequence of savings being 
recycled into real estate, stock market holdings and bonds that lose their 
value. A century ago crashes would have wiped out both sides of the balance 
sheet, bad financial claims and liabilities together. But today’s defaults 
threaten the ability of banks to pay their depositors, and of insurance 
companies to pay their policy holders, on a scale that is without precedent. 
There is a growing reluctance to write off bad loans, even at the cost of 
keeping debt- and savings-ridden economies insolvent. The most recent 
example is Japan, whose savings were placed in speculative real estate and 
stock market loans in the Bubble Years of the 1980s. To write off these bad 
loans would involve writing off the savings that are their balance-sheet 
accounting counterparts. The price Japan has paid for not coming to terms 
with the fact that these debts have lost their backing has been to remain mired 
in depression since the early 1990s, with over 60% of its tax revenues 
devoted to debt service (as of 2000).
The financial dynamics unfolding today were foreseen a century ago. 
Marx called money lent out at interest a “void form of capital,”23 and 
described high finance as based on “imaginary” or “fictitious” capital. It was 
fictitious because it consisted not of the means of production but of bonds, 
mortgages, bank loans and other financial claims on the means of production. 
It was fictitious because in the end its demands for payment could not be met. 
Attempts to service the rising debt burden deflated the market for 
commodities, causing gluts that led to crises in which businesses scrambled 
for money and the banks themselves were caught short and failed. Interest 
charges ate into profits, deterring investment in plant and equipment by 

diverting revenue to economically empty financial operations. A growing 
wedge of disposable personal and business income was absorbed by debt 
service, leaving less to be spent on goods and services. In these respects 
financial capital was antithetical to tangible physical capital.
Marx described productive capital investment by the formula M–C–M´, 
signifying money (M) invested to produce commodities (C) that would sell 
for yet more money (M´). But the growth of “usury capital” — mortgage 
lending, personal loans, credit card debt, trade finance, government bond 
financing for war deficits — all this consisted of the disembodied M–M´, 
making money simply from money itself in a sterile operation. Yet despite 
this sterility, finance capital achieved dominance over tangible industrial 
capital in the foreclosures that followed in the wake of crashes. Transfers of 
property from debtors to creditors were inevitable as the growth of financial 
claims surpassed the ability of productive power and earnings to keep pace. 
Debt deflation occurs when purchasing power is removed from the 
spending stream of labor and business by siphoning debt service (interest and 
amortization) from their incomes, and using government tax revenues to pay 
bondholders rather than to spend it on public spending or infrastructure 
investment, education, health and other social welfare. As the domestic 
market shrinks, labor and business have less ability to repay their debtors. In 
this deteriorating situation people tend to save even more (if they can), to 
protect themselves against their prospective loss of income or loss of a job, 
much as Japan’s consumers saved more as their economy fell into depression 
in the 1990s. Their fears became a self-fulfilling prophecy as the economy 
slowed further, causing even more real estate and business loans to go bad.
Yet, as chapter 4 below describes in greater detail, having analyzed 
finance capital’s tendency to grow exponentially, Marx did not incorporate 
this idea into his long-term system. Having provided a compendium of 
historical citations recognizing the self-expanding character of money-capital 
multiplying at compound interest, he announced that finance capital would be 
subordinated to the dynamics of industrial capital rather than growing to 
dominate it. “In the course of its evolution, industrial capital must therefore 
subjugate these forms and transform them into derived or special functions of 
itself.” With an optimistically Darwinian Victorian ring he wrote that the 
destiny of industrial capitalism was to mobilize finance capital to fund its 

economic expansion, rendering usury an obsolete vestige of the “ancient” 
mode of production. “Where capitalist production has developed all its 
manifold forms and has become the dominant mode of production,” Marx 
concluded his draft notes for Theories of Surplus Value, “interest-bearing 
capital is dominated by industrial capital, and commercial capital becomes 
merely a form of industrial capital, derived from the circulation process.”24 
The financial problem would take care of itself as industrial capitalism 
mobilized savings more productively than ever before had been the case.
European and North American public debts did indeed seem to be on their 
way to being paid off during the relatively war-free century 1815–1914. As 
savings were mobilized to fund heavy transport, industry, construction and 
mining, the economy’s debt burden actually seemed likely to be self-
amortizing by being linked to industrial capital formation. As the 
Technocracy Study Course published by Technocracy, Inc. — one of the 
movements of the 1920s and ‘30s that retained emphasis on the importance 
of compound interest — put matters:
 
The physical expansion of industry was, in a period from the Civil War to 
the World War, a straight compound interest rate of growth at about 7% per 
annum. During that period, the debt structure was also extending at a similar 
rate of increment. Since the World War … the rate of physical expansion has 
been declining, and physical production has been progressively leveling off. 
Thus, for the period prior to the World War there was a close correspondence 
between the rate of growth of the debt structure, and of the physical industrial 
structure. Since the World War, while the physical structure has been leveling 
off in its growth, the debt structure, not being subject to the laws of physics 
and chemistry, has continued to expand until now the total long- and short-
term debts are only slightly less than the entire wealth, or monetary value of 
all the physical equipment. As time progresses this discrepancy between the 
rate of growth of the physical equipment and that of debt must become 
greater, instead of less. The implications of this will be interesting to 
consider.25
The Technocracy Inc. movement based its financial views on “the 
Compound Interest Property of Debt,” according to which “debt is expected 

to generate more debt, or to increase at a certain increment of itself per 
annum,” around 5% over the long term. But like Marx, having drawn 
attention to this dynamic, the Technocrats dropped matters there, without 
formulating a positive policy recommendation. 
Other economic reformers managed to ignore financial problems 
altogether. Yet the statistics compiled by Thorold Rogers in Six Centuries of 
Work and Wages (1885: 539 ff.) indicated that English labor had lived as 
well on the eve of the discovery of America in the mid-15th century as in the 
late 19th-century factory towns.26 The surplus was accruing to the owners of 
wealth. Reflecting the political success of Marxian socialism as compared to 
the sectarianism of other movements, there was a growing denunciation of 
industrial capitalists rather than financiers or landlords.
 
Flürscheim and Bennett Put Compound Interest at the Center of Their 
Economic Analysis
 
A number of obscure financial writers in the 1890s found the most serious 
threat to prosperity to be the growth of interest-bearing debt. The problem on 
which they foundered was what to do about it. Banning interest outright 
appealed only to a few religious fundamentalists. Some reformers called for 
government banking, whose earnings would finance public spending while 
keeping the credit monopoly out of private hands.
Another proposal that has attracted lasting (if cultish) attention was to 
steadily reduce the value of money and financial claims by imposing a 
monetary stamp duty that would offset the interest yielded by such 
investments. This financial tax would have the advantage of freeing the rest 
of the economy — labor and capital — from taxation. Thanks to Keynes, the 
best remembered advocate of this policy is the Swiss-German Silvio Gesell. 
His money tax was inspired by Henry George’s land tax. Together, he 
pointed out, the money and land tax would mobilize all the economy’s rentier 
income to support the community rather than an exploitative class.
Gesell was influenced by the German-American Michael Flürscheim, who 
had been Henry George’s major European collaborator. His Clue to the 

Economic Labyrinth was published in Australia by Marx’s British publisher, 
Swan Sonnenschein. Other critiques of interest bearing debt — most notably, 
J.W. Bennett’s A Breed of Barren Metal (1895) and John Brown’s Parasitic 
Wealth (1898) — were printed by Marx’s U. S. publisher, Charles H. Kerr. 
Bennett and Brown agreed with land reformers that the economy’s surplus 
was being siphoned off in the form of rentier income, but pointed out that 
most land rent ended up being taken by creditors in the form of interest, 
which also absorbed a rising share of industrial and monopoly profit. 
Along with the fight over deflationary gold policies (in opposition to the 
free coinage of silver), the debt problem propelled monetary issues to the 
forefront of economic reform for the next two decades. A spate of books 
were inspired by the financial panic of July 1893 that led banks and 
commercial houses to suspend payment, throwing millions of American 
workers into the streets as factories were closed. The deflationary aftermath 
saw mortgage charges bankrupt farmers as the government rolled back prices 
to the point where the price of gold had stood prior to the Civil War inflation. 
Prices for crops and other goods fell, but debts were fixed in value, making it 
harder for them to pay. 
Bennett described a rentier caste drawing the world’s wealth into its hands 
as the inventive powers of industry were outrun by the inexorable 
mathematics of compound interest, “the principle which asserts that a dollar 
will grow into two dollars in a number of years, and keep on multiplying until 
it represents all of the wealth on earth.” The most serious economic problem 
facing America, he explained, was that under the laws of interest and rent the 
capitalists of the country … each year receive an amount of wealth so large 
that they are able to save from it a sum greater than the yearly net increase of 
the wealth of the nation.27
Bennett emphasized that the problem with saving was not merely that 
money saved was not spent on current goods and services, but that it was lent 
out at interest. Economies became more unstable as “interest-bearing wealth 
increases in a ratio which is ever growing more and more rapid,”28 leaving 
few assets unattached by debt. John Brown (1898: 81f.) explained how 
rapidly this process occurred:
At 10% the principal is doubled every seven years, so that in less than a 

century the interest is 16,384 times the principal, and after that the principal 
increases at such a stupendous rate that the figures soon become 
unmanageable. At 5% the principal doubles every fourteen years, just half as 
rapidly as at 10%. Interest accumulates in a geometric ratio, while savings 
increase arithmetically. Thus if $10 is saved up, say every seven years, in 140 
years the principal will amount to $200. If, however, $10 is put into a bank at 
10% interest every 7 years, at the end of 140 years the principal will have 
become over $20 millions of dollars!29
Here, he concluded, “is the subtle principle which makes wealth parasitic 
in the body of industry — the potent influence which takes from the weak 
and gives to the strong; which makes the rich richer and the poor poorer; 
which builds palaces for the idle and hovels for the diligent.”30
These dynamics explained the financial crises that plagued economies 
“whose financial systems are founded on rent and interest-taking.” Creditors 
called in their loans when they saw how risky business conditions had 
become as a result of the growth of debt, producing scallop-shaped upswings 
followed by abrupt crashes — “a trade depression every ten years or oftener 
and panics every twenty years,” Bennett explained, as “there are not available 
assets to meet [creditor] demands and at the same time keep business 
moving.”31
The mathematics of compound interest also explained “the extremely 
rapid accumulation of wealth in the hands of a comparatively few non-
producers,” as well as “the abject poverty of a large percentage of the 
producing masses.”32 Interest charges were responsible for “the failure of 
improved machinery to better the conditions of the producing masses in a 
degree at all commensurate with the increased producing power which it has 
given to the laborer,” Bennett elaborated. “The financial group becomes rich 
more rapidly than the nation at large; and national increase in wealth may not 
mean prosperity of the producing masses.”33 Countering Frederick Bastiat’s 
banal claim that everyone was paid according to the economic service 
performed, he pointed out that non-producers received “much the largest 
salaries,” for “one’s income is often in inverse ratio to the service which he 
does his fellow men.”34 
Much as had occurred in Rome and other civilizations that succumbed to 

usury, the accrual of financial fortunes — or more to the point, their failure to 
find their counterpart in new tangible capital investment — threatened to 
undermine the American economy … and lead to its decay and final 
destruction.
There is not enough wealth produced to meet all of these obligations. 
Either the current expenses of production cannot be paid or the fixed charges 
of rent and interest cannot be met. If current expenses are not paid, 
manufacturing plants deteriorate, fixed capital is encroached upon, wages are 
reduced and laborers thrown out of employment. Current obligations are not 
met. The business man finally becomes bankrupt, or the wage-workers 
become bankrupts and outcasts depending on charity for support. If interest is 
not paid, then the wealth hypothecated for the loan is appropriated by the 
lender, and the borrower, failing to meet his obligations, becomes a 
bankrupt.35
Rather than seeing finance in an inherently symbiotic relationship with 
tangible activity, Bennett and Brown hoped that economies might operate 
without charging interest. But how could businesses get by without credit? 
Could credit be advanced without interest being charged? If not, how could 
short-term credit be prevented from mounting up to unmanageable 
proportions over time as loans were rolled over rather than repaid, or simply 
had their interest accruals added on to the debt balance? “If interest-taking is 
right,” argued Bennett, then “compound interest-taking is right.… And what 
makes matters worse, it is not one dollar that is assumed to have the power of 
indefinitely increasing, but several billions of dollars.”36 
In the long run economies would have to succumb, while polarizing along 
the way: 
A syndicate of less than one hundred American capitalists, if allowed to 
collect interest on their capital at a low rate and re-invest for 150 years or 
less, would at the end of that time own the earth and all real and personal 
property thereon. This is a simple mathematical proposition, capable of exact 
demonstration, and any one who doubts the truth of this statement may set all 
doubts at rest by computing compound interest on one and one-half billions 
of dollars for one hundred and fifty years, at 5% per annum.37
These financial critics went beyond orthodox economists by showing that 

interest-bearing debt grew by its own mathematical laws. But they were 
unable to propose a way in which the expansion paths of physical production 
and interest-bearing claims might co-exist so that debts and the ability to pay 
grew at similar rates. The idea of an interest-free system — or the need for 
debt cancellations — was too radical for most people to contemplate. It was 
more popular to advocate general strikes or outright revolution to seize the 
means of production and expropriate the proprietors — or at least to tax them 
— than to set about designing a financial system that somehow might avoid 
credit crises.
If these financial critics writers are forgotten today, it is because most 
reformers focused on more immediate problems such as ameliorating the 
oppressive conditions of factory life and urban poverty, legislating standards 
for public health and safety in the workplace, and breaking up or regulating 
the emerging trusts and monopolies. Little popular momentum to restructure 
the financial system could arise until a more acceptable alternative could be 
found than banning interest (Bennett and Brown) or depreciating money’s 
value (Gesell and the subsequent Social Credit movement).
One of the most thoroughgoing expositions of the problems caused by 
compound interest was by the advocate of land and debt reform, Michael 
Flürscheim: 
It is true that the employer is the sponge which sucks up the profit, the 
greater value (Mehrwerth, as Marx calls it) of labor’s product, but only to 
yield it to the rent and interest lords, as well as to the middlemen, who 
together press it out of him as quick as he gets it, barely leaving him on the 
average the hard earnings of his own work, and, what is worse, taking the 
power from him of increasing production to its full potentiality.”38 
Contrasting finance to physical capital, he called on labor and industry to 
attack “the real enemy,” the financial interests that who ended up with most 
industrial profit in the form of debt charges, as well as most of the rent 
collected by landlords — profits and rents squeezed out of labor and 
consumers.
The above brief summary shows that already a century ago some writers 
were able to describe dynamics that seem quite modern today, yet have struck 
monetarist economists as anomalous rather than inherent problems. Financial 

claims for payment, Flürscheim explained, constituted the bulk of the world’s 
capital, not factories and other industrial means of production: When an 
orator or writer has to reply to a socialist’s attack upon capital as the 
oppressor of labor, he points to what orthodox economy calls capital, and 
speaks of our wonderful progress due to our improved means of production 
and distribution, whereas his antagonist thinks of Government bonds, of land 
monopoly, of mining rights, of all kinds of tribute claims selling at Exchange 
for certain amounts, and not at all falling under the orthodox definition of 
capital, though representing that capital which people principally have in 
view when they use the term.39
The reality was that finance capital stood at odds with — and subdued — 
industrial capital and other physical capital. The problem lay not in the 
personal character of bondholders and bankers, but in the impersonal 
mathematics of compound interest that led savings to build up in ways that 
indebted society’s economic assets. “All exertions, all improvements in the 
methods and tools of labor, the strictest economy, the severest self-denial, are 
powerless to compete with the rapidity of self-increase possessed by capital 
placed at compound interest, and they cannot keep up with its demands.” 
To illustrate the dynamic at work, Flürscheim composed an allegory in 
which the Spirit of Invention was pitted against the Demon of Interest and his 
offspring, Compound Interest, in a battle to see whose powers were stronger. 
The Spirit of Invention had an army of tools and machines, water power, air 
and wind power, fire and steam power to drive machinery. But Flürscheim 
asked whether its minions really would bring about a golden era, or whether 
this power could be conquered by finance capital and made to serve it by 
producing an economic surplus for its own use, as financial tribute, rather 
than serving mankind in the form of higher living standards.40  
The strategy of Compound Interest followed what Napier had described 
centuries earlier, in 1617.The moral was that no matter how greatly 
technology might increase humanity’s productive powers, the revenue it 
produced would be overtaken by the growth of debt multiplying at compound 
interest. Strictly speaking, it is savings that compound, not debts themselves. 
Each debt is settled on an individual basis in one way or another, but 
creditors recycle their interest and amortization into new interest-bearing 
loans. The only problem for savers is to find enough debtors to take on new 

obligations. “What is compound interest?” Flürscheim asked. “Is it anything 
else than the fresh investment of earnings of capital?” The major source of 
loanable funds is repayments on existing loans, re-lent to finance yet new 
debts. Individual loans are repaid, but there is no diminution in the volume of 
savings. Rather, interest receipts swell the volume of savings.
J. P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller are reported to have called the 
principle of compound interest the Eighth Wonder of the World. Flürscheim 
described Napoleon as having voiced a similar idea upon being shown an 
interest table and remarking: “The deadly facts herein lead me to wonder that 
this monster Interest has not devoured the whole human race.” 
Flürscheim commented: “It would have done so long ago if bankruptcy 
and revolution had not been counter-poisons.” And that is just the point, of 
course. Something must give when the mathematics of interest-bearing debt 
overwhelms the economy’s ability to pay. For awhile the growing debt 
burden may be met by selling off or forfeiting property to creditors, but an 
active public policy response is needed to save the economy’s land and 
natural resources, mines and public monopolies, physical capital and other 
productive assets from being lost to creditors. 
Political responses to this problem are aggravated by the fact that the 
largest and most powerful creditors often are foreigners. Finance capital is 
much more cosmopolitan than land and industrial capital, and more mobile 
even than labor. The mathematics of savings/debt leads not only to domestic 
antagonism, but shapes global diplomacy by pitting international creditors 
against debtor economies. In this ultimate showdown global finance is 
arrayed against national government autonomy. This is the key to 
understanding international relations from the papal Italian bankers of the 
14th century in debtor countries such as England through today’s IMF, World 
Bank and WTO maneuverings.
In the early decades of the 20th century such problems still seemed 
distant, despite Britain’s role as the world’s banker. Even the 1907 financial 
crash, which hit the United States hardest, did not create a crisis in economic 
theory. The financial problem appeared to be technical and monetary in 
character, solvable by providing yet more credit (and hence, increasing the 
volume of debt) so as to expand the money supply beyond the tight limits 

imposed by gold supplies (“specie”). A lender of last resort, the Federal 
Reserve System, was created in 1914. What really saved the day was the use 
of debt — government bonds and commercial bills-of-payment — as reserves 
for the banking system’s credit creation.
For a century of peace, rising infrastructure investment had buoyed the 
savings/debt expansion by expanding productivity and raising incomes 
throughout the world. But World War I was about to break out, and its 
demands for destructive rather than productive investment ushered in a new 
line of financial theorizing, starting with the Inter-Ally debts and German 
reparations that were the Great War’s financial legacy. It was these debts that 
would pose the Transfer Problem (the limits of how much could be paid from 
one national currency to another, “hard” currency), bringing on the Great 
Depression and in short order World War II.
 
The “Magic of Compound Interest”
 
The mathematics of compound interest dictate that debt service on the 
economy’s rising ratio of savings and debts to income will tend to grow to 
the point where debt service absorbs an amount equal to the entire available 
economic surplus. Unless growth in savings — that is, the economy’s debt 
overhead — finds its counterpart in a parallel growth in the ability to pay, 
more income must be squeezed out to pay interest on the rising volume of 
debt. 
Germany after World War I is an example. It was able to pay reparations 
and other foreign debts only by borrowing new money. The “cure” for its 
debt problem thus turned out to be yet more debt, even as the economy’s 
productive enterprises were stripped to pay creditors. Such “do it with 
mirrors” exercises can only succeed temporarily, because their underlying 
principle is that of a chain letter. By absorbing revenue that is needed to 
finance tangible direct investment, payment of debt service makes it 
increasingly difficult for economies to carry their debts. 
Market mechanisms are able only to enforce a state of financial chaos, 
giving the appearance of being rational only in the sense that each element of 

this chaos can be assigned a price. There is no a priori mathematical solution 
that can explain the outcome. When trends intersect, the economy’s crash 
point must be determined politically.
The solution will be shaped by the fact that financial power tends to 
transform itself into political power, and also into legal and even cultural 
power as it seeks to shape the electorate’s perceptions in ways that serve its 
own objectives. On the most abstract level, society’s shape is being 
transformed by the principle of compound interest working out its power 
politically, fiscally and in the intellectual plane of academic economics. In 
this respect finance has an intrinsic personality and an implicit evolutionary 
strategy, even if this world-view is not fully conscious. 
It is not a pleasant view and that is why so many people avert their eyes. 
Banks and large institutional investors are coming to welcome crises as 
affording a grab-bag of new opportunities, now that they have mobilized 
government support for their initiatives.
The result is a new kind of class war, with new — financial — modes of 
exploitation. Today’s global dynamics can be viewed as a struggle for 
domination (if not outright survival) between an alien financial dynamic that 
has been introduced into the world’s industrial core, much like a new species 
introduced to an island environment with no natural checks. In this respect 
the proliferation of debt/savings is much like the mathematics of ecological 
pollution. We might think of it as debt/savings pollution swamping the 
economic environment while stifling “real” (that is, non-financial) growth. 
In his book Consilience, Edward O. Wilson points out how impossible it is 
for the world’s financial savings to grow at compound interest ad 
infinitum.41 To demonstrate how rapidly the limit may be approached, he 
cites “the arithmetical riddle of the lily pond. A lily pod is placed in a pond. 
Each day thereafter the pod and then all its descendants double. On the 
thirtieth day the pond is covered completely by lily pods, which can grow no 
more.” He then asks, “On which day was the pond half full and half empty? 
The twenty-ninth day.”
By the time people feel obliged to argue over whether the financial glass is 
half empty or half full, we are on the brink of a financial crisis in which 
something must give — usually labor’s income and savings. Exponential 

growth is not sudden. It may be slow, but it is inexorable. It also is unnatural, 
for the natural shape of economic phenomena is an S-curve, not an upward 
exponential sweep toward infinity.
Whether or not the predatory behavior of financial institutions causes a 
political crisis depends on how aware the population is with regard to what is 
happening. It is the task of financial lobbies, and the politicians and academic 
economists they support, to distract the population to other concerns. And it 
is the task of junk economics to promote the myth that economies tend 
naturally to return to equilibrium and equity when left alone, not to polarize 
in ways that favor rentiers and enable them to take over government, 
education, the popular press and cultural norms generally.
The financial sector’s planners themselves recognize that the global 
economy is now living in this immediately pre-crash “last day.” That is why 
they are taking the bailout money and run. If the crisis still seems distant to 
the rest of society, it is because people still think in terms of the entropic 
equilibrium mathematics that most economic model-builders employ rather 
than thinking exponentially.
The Inability of Financial Checks to Keep the Exponential Growth of 
Debts (and Savings) in Line with the Ability to Pay out of Economic Growth
Thelluson’s Act of 1800 represented an attempt to provide a “moral and 
legal check” on the rate of reproduction of interest-bearing savings, to borrow 
a term from Malthusian population theory. Malthus himself had borrowed 
Price’s imagery of how compound interest led to the exponential growth of 
debt, so it is fitting that financial dynamics should find demographic 
parallels. After all, Malthus warned, it was the principle of compounding that 
spurred populations to multiply more rapidly than food production. This idea 
was implicit in the passage of Thelluson’s Act, but few economists picked up 
on it.
Malthus held (wrongly) that fertility rates would increase and families 
would have more children if their incomes rose or the Poor Laws provided 
them with more means of subsistence. The actual tendency is for fertility 
rates to decline as incomes rise over time. Economists seemed on stronger 
ground in theorizing that supply pressures on food, raw materials and labor 
raise costs during the course of the business cycle, eroding the profits and 

cash flow out of which debts can be paid. Companies nonetheless must pay 
their debts, even as interest charges absorb their (shrinking) profits. Their 
losses create risky conditions in which a desperate demand for credit arises 
just to raise the money to pay bills. Interest rates increase as profits and 
incomes fall. 
A point is reached where the financial bubble bursts, bringing the volume 
of debt back in line with the ability to pay. Such defaults and bankruptcies are 
the financial equivalent of the Malthusian checks of starvation and mortality. 
Much as the pace at which populations grow is determined by fertility 
relative to death rates, so the rate at which savings (and their mirror image, 
the economy-wide volume of debt) double and redouble is determined by the 
rate of interest subject to the financial check of bankruptcy. Interest rates 
alone thus do not determine the overall growth of savings, just as fertility 
rates alone do not determine the overall rate of demographic growth.
The checks cited by Malthus — war, pestilence, famine and starvation, as 
well as the moral check of abstinence — find their counterpart in the 
financial dynamics of savings and debts. Poverty is associated with high 
mortality rates as large proportions of children die in poor societies. High 
fertility rates occur as families compensate by having many children — but 
not by enough to increase the overall population. Likewise in the financial 
sphere, where the risks of default and bankruptcy are high, interest rates rise. 
As Adam Smith noted, the rate of interest often is highest in countries going 
fastest to ruin. But savings are wiped out by poverty and by the financial 
counterpart to emigration, in the form of capital flight. The flow of savings 
and of populations is from poor to rich countries.
Warfare has been a great spur to the growth of public debt, but it also has 
been accompanied by inflations that have wiped out much of the debt burden, 
as well as peoples’ savings. (To be sure, postwar deflations have reversed this 
process.) Corporate takeovers, the financial equivalent of raiding and looting, 
also have increased the volume of debt, at high interest rates in the form of 
junk bonds. On the other hand, such credit likewise has suffered high default 
rates.
Malthus criticized the Poor Laws for encouraging the growth of 
population by giving the poor enough income to survive, marry and have 

children. The equivalent financial subsidy takes the form of government 
bailouts for banks and savers. This sustains the growth of savings — financial 
claims on the economy — by preventing the wipeouts that normally bring 
debts back in line with the economy’s capacity to pay. Wealthy savers and 
financial institutions become public wards, much as the welfare systems of 
past centuries subsidized the poor. Modern critics have called such 
guarantees Moral Hazard, and urged governments to stop the practice, which 
is just the opposite of a Moral Check to the growth of savings and debt.
One form of voluntary restraint might take the form of fiscal and 
regulatory policies that encourage equity rather than debt financing, or that 
require interest payments to be made out of after-tax rather than pre-tax 
income. Similar moral checks include the religious sanctions against interest-
taking found in Islam. But today’s fiscal policies encourage debt financing 
rather than equity investment, while the usury laws that held down interest 
rates in past centuries have been abandoned. Today’s governments act to 
forestall tight labor markets by raising interest rates, with the intention of 
deterring new investment and hiring, so as to hold wages down by 
maintaining a margin of unemployment. This increases the power of finance 
over labor.
Central bank policies that raise interest rates to slow new direct investment 
and hiring make economies even less able to carry their debt burden. In this 
respect the buildup of savings and encouragement of debt financing 
encourages a buildup of financial returns rather than tangible capital 
investment. Thus is antithetical to the goal of promoting high wages and 
rising labor productivity. The rate of interest is permitted to govern the 
doubling times of savings without the moral, political and religious checks 
that have rolled back the growth of financial overhead throughout history. 
there is only one ultimate solution: Debts that cannot be paid, won’t be. The 
open question is, will this tear economies apart as the financial sector fights 
against this fate?
 
PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 02-01]

“The point of intersection between usury and the living organic economy 
occurs when money-loans must be paid out of the reproduction of crops and 
herds, or other output and revenue. Although the money that creditors lend 
out is not itself productive, borrowers need it to pay for the resources they 
need to be productive, including the expense of providing for their families in 
emergency conditions.” — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 02-02]
“Owing to the recycling of interest receipts into new lending, what grows 
geometrically are savings (i.e., debts on the liabilities side of the balance 
sheet) …” — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 02-03]
“Debt deflation occurs when purchasing power is removed from the spending 
stream of labor and business by siphoning debt service (interest and 
amortization) from their incomes, and using government tax revenues to pay 
bond holders rather than to spend it on public spending or infrastructure 
investment, education, health and other social welfare.” — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 02-04]
“The principle which asserts that a dollar will grow into two dollars in a 
number of years, and keep on multiplying until it represents all of the wealth 
on earth …” — J. W. Bennett (1898)
[PULL QUOTE 02-05]
“Market mechanisms are able only to enforce a state of financial chaos, 
giving the appearance of being rational only in the sense that each element of 
this chaos can be assigned a price. There is no a priori mathematical solution 
that can explain the outcome. When trends intersect, the economy’s crash 
point must be determined politically.” — Michael Hudson

1 This is done because only the assumption of damping functions can provide determinate a priori 
mathematical solutions to economic exercises — as if it were mathematics that makes economics a 
science, not the realism of its assumptions. I survey the unrealistic use of mathematics by economists in 
chapter 5 below.
2 The example comes from a Berlin cuneiform text VAT 8528. Karen Rhea Nemet-Nejat, Cuneiform 
Mathematical Texts as a Reflection of Everyday Life in Mesopotamia (New Haven 1993, AOS Series 
Vol. 75) provides a bibliography. Most of these exercises are schoolbook problems, not statistics 
resulting from real-life examples, but precisely for this reason their principles illustrate the relationships 
being expounded.
3 Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, II: 135.
4 I discuss the sexual mathematical imagery of antiquity’s words for interest in “How Interest Rates 
Were Set, 2500 BC–1000 AD: Máš, tokos and fænus as metaphors for interest accruals,” Journal of the 
Economic and Social History of the Orient 43 (Spring 2000): 132–161.
5 This arithmetic exercise comes from VAT 8525. It is discussed by Hildegard Lewy, “Marginal Notes 
on a Recent Volume of Babylonian Mathematical Texts,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 67 
(1947): 308 and Nemet-Nejat, op. cit.: 59f.
6 This arithmetic exercise comes from VAT 8525. It is discussed by Hildegard Lewy, “Marginal Notes 
on a Recent Volume of Babylonian Mathematical Texts,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 67 
(1947): 308 and Nemet-Nejat, op. cit.: 59f.
7 I suggest a scenario for how this diffusion is likely to have occurred in “Did the Phoenicians 
Introduce the Idea of Interest to Greece and Italy — And if So, When?” in Gunter Köpcke, ed., Greece 
Between East and West: 10th–8th Centuries BC (Berlin: 1992): 128–143. For a defense of the still 
controversial idea that the charging of interest began in Mesopotamia’s temples and palaces, see 
“Reconstructing the Origins of Interest-Bearing Debt and the Logic of Clean Slates,” in Michael 
Hudson and Marc Van De Mieroop, eds., Debt and Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East (CDL 
Press: Bethesda, Md., 2002).
8 Jean-Pierre Vernant, Origins of Greek Thought (Ithaca, New York 1982):  82.
9 The passage occurs in Luther’s 1540 Wittenberg pamphlet, An die Pfarrherren wider den Wucher zu 
predigen [“That the priests should preach against usery”]. Although Marx footnoted this passage in 
Capital (Vol. I, London 1887: 604 and Vol. III, ch. xxiv: 463 f.), it is missing from Vol. 45 of Luther’s 
works (Fortress Press, 1962) dealing ostensibly with his economic writings. That so important a 
denunciation of interest would be omitted attests to the cognitive dissonance with which denunciations 

of interest strike modern secular and religious minds. Yet from the Bronze Age onward, such 
denunciations have been in the forefront of all religions in societies where interest has been charged to 
needy debtors.
10 Quoted in Michael Flürscheim, A Clue to the Economic Labyrinth (Perth and London 1902): 330 ff.
11 Expressing gratitude for the nine months of hospitality he has received, the character Polyxenes uses 
the florid metaphor of a burdensome debt that can never be repaid. The idea is that to take the time to 
thank his host properly would consume yet more time, using up yet more hospitality for which yet more 
thanks would be due in a never-ending series. (In this passage the words “without a burden” mean 
without debt.)
Nine changes of the watery star [the moon] hath been
The shepherd’s note since we have left our throne
Without a burden: time as long again
Would be fill’d up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore like a cipher,
yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one we-thank-you many thousands more that go before it.
12 Richard Price, Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the National Debt (London, 1772): 19.
13 Richard Price, Observations on Reversionary Payments (London, 1769): xiii, fn. a.
14 Ibid.
15 Consolidated Goldfields of South Africa used to emphasize in its annual reports that all the gold 
produced in the world to date, including antiquity, could fit into a cube just 15 meters on each side. 
Official global gold holdings as of March 2001 amounted to 28,560 metric tonnes. Each tonne contains 
32,151 troy ounces. At the price of $257.70 per ounce, this worked out to some $8.285.313 per tone, or 
$236.6 billion for the world’s central banks taken together. They are estimated to hold just 12% of the 
world’s total gold stocks, making the global total in private and government hands worth an estimated 
$1.9 trillion. This is only a small proportion of global debt.
16 Karl Marx, Grundrisse notebooks (1973):  842  f., incorporated into Capital  III: xxiv).
17 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, Bk. V. 
18 The demographic reality is that fertility rates taper off as incomes rise. Over time, breakthroughs in 

agricultural and mining technology have increased productivity in these sectors more rapidly than has 
occurred in manufacturing, so that food and other consumption goods have grown faster rather than 
more slowly than population.
19 Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political Economy, citing the Annual Register (1797) and Chambers’ 
Encyclopaedia vols. 8 and 10.
20 Geoffrey Gardiner, Towards True Monetarism (London 1993): 135.
21 Francis Bacon, On Usury, Essays (1625). 
22 P. J. Proudhon, What is Property, First Memoir, Eighth Proposition (New York, n.d.: 215).
23 In Volume III of Capital (ch. xxx) and Volume III of Theories of Surplus Value (both published 
posthumously from notes made in the early 1850s; Chicago 1909): 461.
24 Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value (Chicago 1971), III: 468.
25 Technocracy, Inc., Technocracy Study Course (New York 1934): 136 f. (italics in original).
26 Thorold Rogers in Six Centuries of Work and Wages (London 1885):  539  ff.
27 Ibid.: 151.
28 Ibid.: 49.
29 John Brown, Parasitic Wealth (Chicago 1898): 81f.
30 Ibid.
31 J. W. Bennett (1895): 93.
32 Ibid.: 80.
33 Ibid.: 102

34 Ibid.: 111.
35 Ibid.: 85.
36 Ibid.: 47f.
37 Ibid.
38 Michael Flürscheim, Clue to the Economic Labyrinth (Perth and London 1902) : 116.
39 Ibid.: 347.
40 Ibid.: 327–333.
41 Edward O. Wilson, Consilience (New York 1998): 313.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 2 
_________________

*****
3. How Economic Theory Came to Ignore 
the Role of Debt
 
Starting from David Ricardo in 1817, the historian of economic thought 
searches in vain through the theorizing of mainstream economists for an 
acknowledgement of how debt charges 
 
(1) add a non-production cost to prices, 
(2) deflate markets by diverting purchasing power that otherwise would be 
spent on goods and services, and thereby
(3) discourage capital investment and employment, and hence 
(4) put downward pressure on wages. 
 
What needs to be explained is why government, academia, industry and 
labor have not taken the lead in analyzing these phenomena that remain all 
but forgotten — indeed, carefully ignored — by the mainstream economics 
curriculum.
I suppose one would not expect the tobacco industry to promote studies of 
the unhealthy consequences of smoking, any more than the oil and 
automobile industries would encourage research into environmental pollution 
or the linkage between carbon dioxide emissions and global warming. So it 
should come as little surprise that the adverse effects of debt are sidestepped 
by advocates of the idea that bankers rather than government planners should 
allocate the economy’s resources and manage its development. Claiming that 
good public planning and effective regulation of credit markets is impossible, 
monetarists are silent with regard to how financial interests shape the 
economy to favor their own product: debt, growing at an exponential rate. 
Governments throughout the world now leave monetary policy to the 

Central Bank and Treasury, whose administrators are drawn from the ranks 
of bankers or their academic factotums or outright lobbyists. Naturally 
enough, they seek to shape financial policy in their own interests. Backed by 
the Chicago School’s advocacy of financial austerity, these doctrinaire 
financial planners oppose full-employment policies and rising living 
standards, not only as being inflationary but as consuming the economic 
surplus that is owed to creditors. The fear regarding inflation is that rising 
wages will increase prices, reducing the volume of labor and output that a 
given flow of debt service is able to command. The even more destructive 
fear is that rising wages will eat into the economic surplus that today’s 
financial doctrine believes should be capitalized at the going rate of interest 
and financialized, that is, pledged for debt service.
Inasmuch as monetary policy is made by the central bank rather than by 
the Department of Labor, governments choose to squeeze out more debt 
service even at the expense of employment and direct investment. The public 
domain is sold (on newly created credit, which the government could have 
created itself) off to pay bondholders, even as governments cut taxes that 
deepen budget deficits — which then are financed by running up yet more 
debt. Most of this new debt is bought by the financial sector (including 
international institutions) with money from the tax cuts they receive from 
governments that are ever more beholden to them. The policy is capped by 
shifting the fiscal burden onto labor, by un-taxing finance, real estate and 
other interest-paying sectors. 
The more economically powerful the FIRE sector becomes, the more it is 
able to translate this power into political influence. The most direct way has 
been for its members and industry lobbies to become major campaign 
contributors, especially in the United States, which dominates the IMF and 
World Bank to set the rules of globalization and debt proliferation in today’s 
world. Influence over the government bureaucracies provides a mantel of 
prestige in the world’s leading business schools, which are endowed largely 
by FIRE-sector institutions, as are the most influential policy think tanks. 
This academic lobbying steers students, corporate managers and policy 
makers to see the world from a financial vantage point.
Existing rules and practices are taken for granted as “givens” rather than 
asking whether economies benefit or suffer as a whole from a rising 

proportion of income being paid to carry the debt overhead (including 
mortgage debt for housing being bid up by the supply of such credit). Finance 
and banking courses teach how managers can obtain interest and asset-price 
gains by creating credit or using other peoples’ savings, not how an economy 
may best steer savings and credit to achieve the best long-term development.
One would expect views on debt and credit creation to be determined by 
whether one is a creditor or a debtor, an investor, government bureaucrat or 
economic planner writing from the vantage point of labor or industry. But 
despite the variety of interest groups affected by debt and financial structures, 
one point of view has emerged almost uniquely, as if it were scientific truth 
rather than the financial sector’s own self-interested spin. The discussion of 
finance and debt has been limited to monetarists with an anti-government ax 
to grind and vested interests to defend, and above all to promote financial 
deregulation.
This monetarist perspective has become more pronounced as industrial 
firms have been turned into essentially financial entities since the 1980s. 
Their objective is less and less to produce goods and services, except as a 
way to generate revenue that can be pledged as interest to obtain more credit 
from bankers and bond investors. These borrowings can be used to take over 
companies (“mergers and acquisitions”), to defend against such raids by 
loading themselves down with debt (taking “poison pills”), or to indulge in 
“wealth creation” by buying back their own shares on the stock exchange or 
simply to payout as dividends rather than undertaking new direct investment. 
IBM has spent about $10 billion annually for several years to support its 
stock price in this way. As these kinds of financial maneuvering take 
precedence over industrial engineering, the idea of “wealth creation” has 
come to refer to raising the price of stocks and bonds that represent claims on 
wealth (“indirect investment”) rather than direct investment in capital 
spending, research and development to increase production.
Labor no longer voices an independent perspective on such issues. Early 
reformers shared the impression that money and finance simply mirror 
economic activity rather than acting as an independent and autonomous force. 
Even Marx believed that the financial system would naturally evolve in a 
way that reflected the needs of industrial capital formation. 

Today’s popular press writes as if stock and bond prices and interest rates, 
reflect the economy’s business conditions rather than influencing them. There 
is little recognition of financial dynamics intruding into the “real” economy 
in ways that are antithetical to nationwide prosperity. Yet it is well known 
that central bank officials claim that full employment and new investment 
may be inflationary and hence bad for the stock and bond markets. This is 
why governments raise interest rates to dampen the rise in employment and 
wages. This policy holds back the advance of living standards and markets 
for consumer goods, reducing new investment and putting downward 
pressure on wages and commodity prices. As tax revenue falls, government 
debt increases. Businesses and consumers also are driven more deeply into 
debt. Ultimately, the monetarist world view thus is self-destructive. Yet it is 
widely applauded at each step along the way.
If today’s economy were the first in history to be distorted and depressed 
by such strains, economists would have some excuse for not being prepared 
to analyze how the debt burden increases the cost of doing business and 
diverts income to pay interest to creditors. What is remarkable is how much 
more clearly the dynamics of debt were recognized some centuries ago, 
before financial lobbying gained momentum. Already in Adam Smith’s day it 
was a common perception that public debts had to be funded by tax levies, 
impairing the economy’s competitive position by raising the price of living 
and doing business. 
 
Before Ricardo: How National Debts Were Seen to Impair Economic 
Competitiveness 
 
An important predecessor of Adam Smith, the merchant Mathew Decker, 
emigrated from Holland to settle in London in 1702. In the preface to his 
influential Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, 
published in 1744, he attributed the deterioration in Britain’s international 
competitiveness to the taxes levied to carry the interest charges on its public 
debt. These taxes threatened to price its exports out of world markets by 
imposing a “prodigious artificial Value … upon our Goods to the hindrance 
of their Sale abroad.” Taxes on food and other essentials pushed up the 

subsistence wage level that employers had to pay, and hence the prices they 
had to charge as compared to those of less debt-ridden nations. 
The tax problem thus was essentially a debt problem, which in turn 
reflected royal military ambitions. Eight centuries of warfare with France had 
pushed Britain deeply into debt. Interest on the government’s bonds was paid 
by levying excise taxes that increased prices. The cost of doing business was 
raised further by the high prices charged by the trading monopolies such as 
the East India Company (of which Decker himself had been a director) that 
the government created and sold to private investors for payment in its own 
bonds.
The system of funding wars by running into debt rather than on a pay-as-
you-go basis was called Dutch Financing because, as Adam Smith 
explained,1 “the Dutch, as well as several other foreign nations, [have] a very 
considerable share of our public funds.” In fact, they held more than half of 
these securities, including shares in major Crown corporations such as the 
East India Company and Bank of England, on which Britain paid a steady 
flow of interest and dividends that absorbed much of its trade surplus. “As 
Foreigners possess a Share of our national Funds,” Smith wrote (anticipating 
the complaint of global debtors ever since), “they render the Public in a 
Manner tributary to them, and may in Time occasion the Transport of our 
People, and our Industry.”
The economic popularizer Malachy Postlethwayt estimated that Seven 
Years War (1757–63) cost Britain £82 million. In the year the conflict broke 
out, his pamphlet on Great-Britain’s True System explained how the taxes 
levied to service the public debt had increased the nation’s cost structure: the 
Sum-Total of these Taxes is at least 31%. of the annual Expense of the whole 
People of England. Now, where is the Nation with which we can enter into a 
Competition of Commerce on equal Terms? And what Matter is the 1% or 
2% advantage we boast over some of our Rivals in the interest of Money, 
towards restoring the Equality between them and us?2
The economy’s financial problem was whether to lend its savings to the 
government (almost exclusively to finance wars) or invest them in industry 
and commerce. “The more the Nation runs into Debt,” Postlethwayt warned, 
“the more Money will be locked up in the Funds, and the less will there be 

employed in Trade.”3 Taxing the population to pay interest to public 
creditors would drain money that otherwise could be used to fund private 
investment. “Before such Debt took Place, every body possessed their whole 
Gains,” he added “If the present public Debt instead of being encreased, was 
paid off, the Profits of the Manufacturers, Tradesmen and Merchants, &c. 
would be all their own,” doubling their rate of profit. “This would be equal in 
every Respect to a Bounty to that Amount on all our Productions and 
Fabricks: with that Advantage we should be able to undersell our 
Neighbours; Our People would of Course multiply; Our Poor would find 
ample Employment; even the aged and infirm might then earn enough to live 
upon; new Arts and new Manufactures would be introduced, and the old ones 
brought to greater Perfection.”4
Inasmuch as paper credit was convertible into bullion, the outflow of 
capital and dividends reduced the monetary base for Britain’s credit 
superstructure. This threatened to leave the nation with no wherewithal to 
employ labor, and hence little domestic market for its own products. Like 
many of his contemporaries, Postlethwayt decried the remittance of debt 
service to Dutch investors on the ground that the outflow of bullion led to a 
monetary stringency, resulting in less production and higher prices.5 This is 
just what modern third world debtors have suffered for the past half-century 
under IMF austerity programs in order to pay their foreign-currency debts.
Even if all the debt were held at home, Postlethwayt warned, “it would not 
upon that account be less pernicious.” Taxpayers would pay the bondholders, 
who tended to spend their revenue unproductively. Even worse: 
 
Funding and Jobbing too often … introduces Combination and Fraud in all 
Sorts of Traffic. It hath changed honest Commerce into bubbling; our Traders 
into Projectors; Industry into Tricking; and Applause is earned when the 
Pillory is deserved.”6
 
He then described what modern analysts call the crowding-out 
phenomenon: 
 

The national Debts first drew out of private Hands, most of the Money 
which should, and otherwise would have been lent out to our skilful and 
industrious Merchants and Tradesmen: this made it difficult for such to 
borrow any Money upon personal Security, and this Difficulty soon made it 
unsafe to lend any upon such Security; which of Course destroyed all private 
Credit; thereby greatly injured our Commerce in general … ”7
 
These complaints seem so modern that one may ask why Postlethwayt has 
been so neglected all these years. He might have been speaking of today’s 
Latin American and Asian debtors in concluding that Britain’s wars and 
standing armies hath overwhelmed the Nation with Debts and Burthens, 
under which it is at present almost ready to sink; and it hath not only hindered 
those Debts from being paid off, but will daily contribute to enhance them; 
for while there is more to be got by Jobbing, than by dischargeing our Debts, 
all Arts will be used to encrease the new Debts, not to redeem the Old.8
The protests by Smith and Decker against the sale of public monopolies 
likewise anticipated today’s complaints that the monopoly profits, dividend 
payouts and interest payments by the former public utilities that Britain sold 
off to cope with its national debt problems in the 1980s and ’90s have 
increased the costs that consumers and industry must pay.
The great systematizer of mercantilist principles, James Steuart, pointed to 
to the international problems posed by Britain’s public debt: if we suppose 
governments to go on increasing, every year, the sum of their debts upon 
perpetual annuities, and appropriating, in proportion, every branch of revenue 
for the payment of them; the consequence will be, in the first place, to 
transport, in favour of the creditors, the whole income of the state, of which 
government will retain the administration.9
In view of what has happened to today’s debt-wracked economies, such 
warnings as those of Steuart were prescient. Britain’s government was 
threatened with the prospect of being turned into a mere collection agent for 
overseas bondholders and a rising financial interest at home. 
If public borrowing forced up interest rates and diverted money away from 
productive investment, agricultural and industrial productivity could not keep 
pace with the growth in debt-service charges. The implication was that wars 

eroded rather than built British international power, because the decisive 
levers in Anglo-French rivalry lay beyond the military battlefield, above all in 
the financial sphere. Higher debts and taxes threatened to increase Britain’s 
production costs and export prices, impairing its balance of trade regardless 
of the nation’s military victories. Bullion would flow out and industry would 
stagnate, leaving Britain without the monetary sinews needed ultimately to 
defend itself against nations growing economically stronger. 
 
Adam Smith’s Views on the Debt Issue 
 
Smith’s protest against government profligacy and taxation was essentially 
an argument against war debts. He saw that new wars could be financed only 
by running further into debt, as populations were unwilling to support them 
when they had to pay taxes to defray their costs directly on a pay-as-you-go 
basis and thus felt the full economic burden immediately. The landed gentry, 
whose members formed the cavalry and officer corps, supported wars out of 
patriotism but opposed the proliferation of public debts whose interest 
charges were defrayed by taxes that fell ultimately on their own property. 
When the barons had opposed royal taxation in medieval times, rulers 
avoided the tax constraint by borrowing from Italian bankers and other 
lenders. 
By the 18th century, governments had turned to more anonymous Dutch 
and domestic investors. This created a vested interest of bondholders. They 
portrayed their lending in as patriotic and economically productive a light as 
they could, claiming to provide capital to the nation. However, Smith wrote: 
 
“The opinion that the national debt is an additional capital is altogether 
erroneous.”10 Debt was the opposite of an engine of development. A nation’s 
real wealth lay in its productive powers, not its money or the buildup of 
financial securities, which were only the shadowy image of real wealth. In 
fact, Smith explained, the policy of funding wars by bond issues diverted 
money that taxpayers could use more productively for direct investment. 
Taxes to pay debt service were defrayed by the annual destruction of some 

capital which had before existed in the country; by the perversion of some 
portion of the annual produce which had before been destined for the 
maintenance of productive labour, towards that of unproductive labour.11
 
Smith thus joined Decker, Postlethwayt and other critics of the Funding 
System in observing that public debts forced up taxes to pay interest charges 
— money that otherwise would be “employed in maintaining productive 
labour.” Whereas industrial and commercial borrowers invested the proceeds 
to acquire capital whose earnings served to pay off the debt, governments 
borrowed to wage wars. A deteriorating economic spiral ensued as the taxes 
needed to carry these debts threatened to “diminish or destroy the landlord’s 
ability to improve his land, and induce the owner of capital to remove it from 
the country.”12
By the time Smith published The Wealth of Nations there seemed to be 
little likelihood of Britain paying down her national debt. Tax revenues had 
become “a fund for paying, not the capital, but the interest only, of the money 
which had been borrowed …” He warned that at some point the burden of 
war debts would drive the belligerent nation bankrupt: “Bankruptcy is always 
the end of great accumulation of debt.”13
Public bondholders felt little obligation to promote long-term investment 
for the nations to whose governments they lent money. Although “a creditor 
of the public has no doubt a general interest in the prosperity of the 
agriculture, manufactures, and commerce of the country, he has no interest in 
the good condition of any particular portion of land, or in the good 
management of any particular portion of capital stock.” All that creditors 
really cared about was the government’s power to levy taxes to raise the 
revenue to pay their debts. When the debt and tax burden had impoverished a 
country, they could remove their capital to other lands to repeat the process, 
as has happened again and again.
In sum, the ability of Britain’s government to wage war rested on its 
power to run up debt, which in turn rested on the power to tax. The struggle 
to free the economy from taxes involved freeing it from public debt, and this 
required constraints on royal ambitions. Tax charges were not direct 
production costs, but were the price to be paid for military self-indulgence 

financed by bonds and other borrowings or the sale of the public domain and 
monopolies. Such taxes and sell-offs threatened to grow as military 
technology was becoming more capital-intensive for shipbuilding and 
cannon, and as the field of conflict with France stretched to America. 
In this perception lay the seeds of the economic individualism of Adam 
Smith and many of his Whig contemporaries. If Britain were to secure a 
commercial advantage, it would have to reduce the taxes that had been 
imposed to carry its war debts. This entailed loosening the Old Colonial 
System so that economic competition would replace military and political 
coercion.
 
How Ricardo’s Value Theory Ignored the Impact of Debt and Interest 
Charges
 
The debt discussion peaked at a time before most modern readers imagine 
that economic theory began. It was the bond broker Ricardo who ended the 
discussion rather than moving it forward. His labor theory value focused on 
the direct costs of production, measured in labor time. Credit and interest 
charges did not appear in his model. Workers earned the subsistence wage, 
and capital was valued in terms of the labor needed to produce it. Land was 
provided freely by nature, and its natural fertility (and hence, economic rent) 
was not a cost of production. As for the taxes to which Ricardo referred in his 
1817 Principles of Political Economic and Taxation, they were the tariffs 
levied on agricultural products, not taxes levied to pay bondholders. Yet as 
the economic historian Leland Jenks has observed, Britain’s government paid 
out some three-fourths of its tax revenue as dividends to bondholders in the 
typical year 1783. “Nine million pounds were paid to rentiers when the entire 
annual turnover of British foreign trade did not exceed thirty-five 
millions.”14
By 1798, in the wake of the American and French Revolutions, William 
Pitt’s financial policy of borrowing rather than running government on a tax-
as-you-go basis imposed interest charges so heavy that, in Jenks’ words, the 
nation was mortgaged to a new class of society, the rentiers, the fundholders, 
for an annual sum of thirty million pounds, three times the public revenue 

before the revolutionary wars. The bulk of this sum was being collected in 
customs, excise and stamp duties, and constituted an engine by which wealth 
was transferred from a large consuming public to the much smaller number 
who owned consols,15 that is, government bonds with no fixed maturity, 
paying interest only — forever.
Prices for gold and other commodities had drifted upward after the paper 
pound’s convertibility into gold was suspended in 1798. This set the stage for 
postwar depression after the Napoleonic Wars ended in 1814 and the Bank of 
England decided to restore the convertibility of sterling currency into gold at 
the low prewar price level. Debtors had to repay their obligations in money 
that was becoming more expensive, giving bankers and bondholders a free 
ride. Seeking to avoid blame, they nominated Ricardo for a safe seat in 
Parliament to represent their interests. 
He set about to convince voters (still made up mainly of property holders) 
that the nation’s economic problems were not caused by debt deflation, but 
by the Corn Laws, as Britain’s agricultural tariffs were called. These high 
tariffs supported high domestic prices for agriculture on the logic that high 
food prices would support rental earnings that could be invested to increase 
output. Over time this would enable Britain to replace imports with higher 
domestic production levels. But Ricardo argued that higher prices merely 
would give protected industries a free lunch, above all in the form of land 
rent, assuming no investment of this revenue to enhance productivity. His 
value theory provided a way to measure this unearned income, the element of 
price that had no counterpart in cost outlays except for the least efficient, 
highest cost (zero-rent) producers.
Given the subsistence conditions of the day, wages reflected food prices. 
These in turn reflected agricultural productivity. As Britain’s population 
growth forced resort to poorer soils to produce the crops needed to feed it, 
producers on the most fertile land enjoyed a widening margin of market price 
in excess of their own low costs. The marginal supply price was determined 
by production costs on the least fertile soils, as long as protective tariffs 
blocked consumers from buying from lower-cost suppliers abroad.
Ricardo portrayed this agricultural cost differential — economic rent — as 
the paradigmatic form of unearned income, leaving interest charges out of his 

discussion. Economic rent was an element of price that had no corresponding 
cost of production for well-situated producers. The best way to minimize it, 
he explained, was for Britain to open its markets to foreign producers, so that 
low-yield high-cost soils would not need to be brought into cultivation. In 
exchange, foreigners would be asked to open their own markets to British 
manufactures. Each nation would produce what it was “best” at producing.
This tradeoff became the new objective of British diplomacy, whose 
market-oriented strategy replaced the Old Colonial System’s coercive 
prohibitions against colonial manufacturing. Underlying this new policy was 
the perception that if Britain were to undersell its potential rivals to become 
the workshop of the world, it needed to minimize the money wages it paid its 
labor. The work force could be fed least expensively by importing grain 
rather than supplying it with high-cost domestic production. From 1817 
through the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 the great political struggle in 
Britain therefore was between the free-trade Manchester School and the 
protectionist landed interest. In the United States, Germany and other 
countries the fight was between industrial protectionists and agricultural free 
traders who hoped to exchange their raw materials for relatively cheap British 
manufactures.
Ricardo was the first major economist to be a financier since John Law, 
who had managed France’s Mississippi Bubble a century earlier, in the 
1710s. At first glance it seems ironic that a bond broker should have 
developed classical trade theory in a way that viewed exchange essentially as 
barter rather than analyzing of how public and private-sector debt levels 
influenced production costs. Of all people who should have been aware of the 
financial elements of costing, it would seem that a bond broker would have 
had a comparative advantage in incorporating such considerations into his 
trade theory. Yet one looks in vain for a discussion of how debts and the 
taxes to carry them affected prices and international pricing. 
Today, global competitiveness in automotives, steel-making and other 
capital-intensive industries turns less on wage rates than on variations in the 
cost of financing investment — interest rates and debt/equity ratios, taxes, 
subsidies and land or rent charges. Yet such financial considerations do not 
appear as elements of production cost in Ricardo’s value theory, nor do they 
appear in today’s Chicago School monetarism that stands in line with 

Ricardian doctrine. By focusing on labor-time proportions, Ricardo implied 
that non-labor expenses such as interest did not really matter. 
As for taxes, they mattered to the extent that import tariffs forced up the 
price of labor’s food and other necessities, but there was no memory of the 
long analytic tradition that attributed taxes to the Funding System’s interest 
payments on the public debt. Hence, the policy conclusion of Ricardo’s 
comparative labor-time approach to international trade theory was not that 
nations should avoid going into debt, but that they should abolish their tariffs 
to lower prices. There was no discussion of how the terms of trade shift 
against debtor countries, throwing their labor into competition with that in the 
creditor nations.
This limited and biased approach took bond brokers and bankers off the 
hook from accusations that their debt charges impaired the nation’s well 
being. Furthermore, Ricardo’s advocacy of free trade and its consequent 
focus on specialization of production among countries in itself promised to 
create a growing commercial lending market and an even larger bond market 
to finance transport infrastructure such as railroads, canals and shipbuilding. 
No prior economist had claimed that public and private debt levels did not 
affect competitiveness. Yet this is what Ricardo’s trade and value theory 
implied by not acknowledging any impact of debt service on international 
competitiveness, despite the fact that the drain of bullion to pay foreign 
creditors required monetary stringency. In these respects he was like an 
individual viewing the world around him, but not seeing himself in the 
picture. He denied that paying foreign debts had any serious economic 
impact, depicting them as being self-financing by an automatic monetary 
adjustment process. This makes his theory well suited to rationalize the kind 
of deflationary austerity measures that are imposed today on hapless debtor 
countries and provides the conceptual foundation for modern IMF and World 
Bank austerity doctrines.
Inasmuch as money and credit are forms of debt, one would think that 
monetarists working for central banks, finance ministries and business 
schools would analyze the debt burden and its interest charges, but they chose 
to follow Ricardo’s shift of emphasis away from discussing its impact. Yet so 
powerful was his labor theory of value — powerful largely because of its 

abstraction, not its economic realism — that it led subsequent generations to 
speculate about how economies might function if debt and other non-labor 
costs had no effect on national competitiveness, living standards and the 
polarization of incomes and wealth. 
Europe’s 1815–1914 century of relative peace reduced the need for war 
financing, alleviating concerns about the public debt. The soaring productive 
powers of labor, capital and land enabled economies to carry higher levels of 
debt, financed readily by the growth of savings. The financial interests threw 
their weight behind industry. Opposing the landed aristocracy’s Corn Laws, 
economic theory focused on price competitiveness as determined by labor 
productivity (without relating this to wage levels),using food prices as a 
proxy for wage levels. Credit was depicted as financing capital formation, 
headed by public spending on railroads, canals and other internal 
improvements in Britain and overseas.
Landholders had not yet become a major market for lenders. Except for 
insiders, personal and mortgage debts were viewed more as emergency 
measures than as a catalyst to get rich quickly. For all but a few financial 
operators the practice of debt pyramiding — borrowing money to buy 
properties rising in price — would have to await the modern era of asset-
price inflation. There was little hint that financiers and real estate interests 
would join to form a rentier bloc. Nobody anticipated the degree to which 
urban real estate would develop into the banking system’s major loan market, 
in which developers, speculators, absentee owners and homeowners would 
pay most of the land’s net rental revenue to mortgage lenders.
 
From the Critique of Economic Rent to the Critique of Property Rights of 
Rentiers
 
Ricardo was the first major economist to portray protectionist landlords as 
having interests at odds with those of society at large. However, he believed 
that the rent problem — economic free rides — could be solved and British 
industrialization put on a firm footing by embracing free trade. His doctrines 
supported the flowering of trade credit and international investment, which 
were making quantum leaps forward in his day. 

The opposition of Ricardian value and rent theory to Britain’s vested 
interests, the landed aristocracy surviving from Britain’s feudal past, made 
his approach appear progressive. Adam Smith had remarked that landlords 
liked to reap where they had not sown, he also described their objective as 
being to promote prosperity inasmuch as they were the major beneficiaries of 
a thriving economy and growing population. Ricardo agreed that they were 
its major beneficiaries, but accused them of gaining passively via a free ride 
— economic rent. He believed that economic rent was caused by factors 
inherent in nature (e.g., fertility differentials), and that nothing could alter 
“the original and indestructible powers of the soil” responsible for the natural 
superiority of some lands to others. When Malthus argued that landowners 
would invest their rental income in the land to improve its yields so as to earn 
more revenue, Ricardo replied that even if landlords did this, it would not 
overcome the differentials in soil fertility responsible for causing economic 
rent. Overall productivity might rise if fertilizer or machinery were applied to 
the soil, but the yield proportions would remain unchanged! 
As resentment against the public debt and creditors waned, hostility 
toward landlords peaked. Yet although Ricardo accused protectionism of 
increasing rents, he did not challenge the property rights of landlords to 
receive them. He shifted the economic policy debate away from the interest 
problem to that of rent, but did not question the property rights of landed 
rentiers any more than those of financial rentiers. It was the philosophic 
radical John Stuart Mill, son of the Richardian economic journalist and 
popularizer James Mill, who made a more far-reaching argument against the 
right of landlords to receive rent that once had accrued to the public domain. 
For J.S. Mill such rent was the ultimate free ride. He believed that rents (most 
of which were collected from inherited lands) should be returned to the 
public domain as the tax base, as it had been in feudal times. 
This brought into question property rights as such, an inquiry that was 
pursued with the greatest intensity in France, and soon would be questioned 
even more radically by the Marxists. It was first in France, in the wake of the 
French Revolution’s overthrow of the monarchy and feudal aristocracy, that a 
more radical challenge to property would be made, including a challenge to 
the interest collected by the banking families that had emerged to create a 
new, post-feudal power.

 
Banking Theory and Industrialization
 
Although British banks were all in favor of the flourishing trade that pro-
industrial policies promised to bring about as Britain became the workshop of 
the world, they played little role in developing an industrial credit market. 
What they had done for centuries was to provide short-term trade credit, 
discount bills of exchange and transfer international payments. Such lending 
promised to grow as a result of the global specialization of production that 
Ricardo’s free-trade policies aimed to promote, but that was the extent of 
matters. Railroads, canals and other infrastructure used the stock and bond 
markets rather than banks for their long-term funding. Even so, Britain’s 
securities markets did not provide its industry with long-term credit to 
anywhere near the degree achieved by the financial systems developed in 
continental Europe.
The economic dislocations in all countries after 1815 made it clear that 
banking and financial structures would determine which nations would ride 
the crest of the Industrial Revolution. Stepping back to take a broad view of 
what their nations needed to catch up, it was French and German policy 
makers that moved banking theory into the industrial age (as discussed in the 
preceding chapter). 
If economies were to avoid systemic financial crisis, they would have to 
either carry the burden of financial claims accruing at compound interest, or 
periodically annul such claims. Most observers assumed that industry’s 
productive forces somehow would be up to the task. Captains of industry 
were expected to steer the ship of state while industrial engineers would do 
the planning. Rather than watering stocks to load down enterprises with 
“fictitious capital” and ruining the world’s colonial regions as they had done 
in Egypt and Persia, financiers would coordinate global industrialization. 
Financial systems would adjust to the underlying “real” economy, becoming 
a subordinate and derivative layer. Wealth creation would take the form of 
building up society’s means of production and employment, not merely 
inflate stock market prices (“paper wealth”).

 
The Post-Classical Reaction Analyzes Interest without Examining Money, 
Credit or Debt
 
Classical economic analysis was inherently political by virtue of dealing 
with society’s most basic dynamics. It sought to free economies from the 
legacy of feudalism, above all a landed aristocracy. To promote these reforms 
the labor theory of value served to isolate economic rent as constituting 
unearned income, an element of pricing that represented a free lunch rather 
than a cost involving productive effort. To the extent that rent and interest 
were not bona fide production costs, they were brought under fire as 
appropriate sources of taxation or outright nationalization of the rentier 
claims and property rights that produced them. 
These policy conclusions made it inevitable that an individualistic and 
anti-government reaction would arise against the reformist spirit of J. S. Mill 
as a halfway house to the revolutionary conclusions of Marx. The aim was 
nothing less than to change the topic.
The first big shots were fired in 1871, by Anton Menger in Austria and 
Stanley Jevons in Britain. Looking at the economy from a psychological 
vantage point that placed consumers rather than employers and businesses at 
the center, the Austrian individualists and British utilitarians based their 
perspective on individuals choosing what products to buy and whether to 
consume them in the present or defer their gratification to the future, in 
exchange for an interest payment.
The logical method was that of ceteris paribus, assuming that “all other 
things remaining equal.” This approach made it possible to avoid thinking 
about the financial dynamics that were shaping the 19th and early 20th 
centuries.The psychological theory discussed interest rates as reflecting the 
degree of impatience to consume goods in the present rather than in the 
future, without reference to the magnitude of debt that resulted. 
For starters, William Nassau Senior’s “abstinence” theory represented 
interest as payment for a sacrifice on the part of savers, a “return” to reward 
them for the “disutility” or “service” of not consuming their income on the 

spot but deferring their gratification. Everything appeared to be a matter of 
choice, not contractual necessity or economic need. Financial fortunes were 
created by the impatience of the poor. Left out of this picture were military 
conquest, enclosure of the public  domain, and inheritance of these grabs. 
The monetary implication was that money was something saved to be lent 
out. No reference was made to how bank credit was created, or to the 
forfeiture of property that ensued when things went wrong. Yet the world’s 
economies were being shaped by “things going wrong,” not according to the 
neat textbook models.
If credit can be created at will, there is no need for abstinence. Banks are 
corporate institutions, and have no psychology to consume, but accumulate 
profits without any diminishing psychic utility. A financially realistic theory 
would focus on the banking system’s credit creation and on the fact that 
governments are their major borrowers. Treasury bonds dominate financial 
markets and form the banking system’s reserves. It is for purely political 
reasons that governments borrow from banks and rentiers — owing most to 
the wealthiest ranks of the population — rather than taxing wealth more 
heavily or simply monetizing public debts. 
No gunboats appeared to enforce a creditor-oriented international 
diplomacy in this individualistic theorizing, nor were railway stock and bond 
waterings recognized. There was no coercion of debtors, and no unearned 
free lunch for rentiers and stock jobbers. Such considerations went beyond 
the measuring rod of utilitarian psychology, having disappeared into the 
miasma of ceteris paribus.
Adam Smith estimated that businessmen operating with borrowed funds 
would pay half their profits to their backers as interest. The interest rate thus 
would be half the rate of profit prior to interest charges. A century later the 
Austrian economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk reversed the causality, making 
profit rates depend on the rate of interest. He pointed out that businessmen 
would not tie up their money in a venture unless they could make more by 
investing in time-taking “roundabout” production techniques than they could 
make simply by lending out their money. On this basis the primary return to 
industrial and finance capital alike was interest. Profit reflected the time 
needed to plan and put in place complex capital investments, factoring in the 

time process by discounting investments at the rate of interest.
In the 1930s the Chicago economist Frank Knight explained that business 
profits represented the risk premium over and above the basic interest rate 
offered by risk-free bonds. Interest thus was made primary. Profit was treated 
as secondary, not as the system’s key dynamic as had been the case in 
classical political economy. There was no thought of asset stripping, or of 
today’s practice of corporate raiders coming in and slashing projects with 
long-term payouts, stopping research and development to take the money and 
run. The modern phenomenon of “financialization” makes no appearance in 
the abstract individualistic approach.
Theories of consumer preference for current over future consumption and 
other psychological reflections or profit-rate considerations do not require a 
discussion of the financial system, its volume of debt and the impact of its 
carrying charges on economic activity. There is no analysis of the 
phenomenon of compound interest, by which money breeds money.
To avoid “over-complicating” their analysis by taking into account the 
real- life phenomena of inflation and deflation, the polarization of wealth, and 
the ways in which debt service affects market demand and commodity prices, 
post-classical economists discussed production and consumption as if people 
lived in a debt-free barter economy. As Keynes described this new 
orthodoxy: Most treatises on the principles of economies are concerned 
mainly, if not entirely, with a real-exchange economy; and — which is more 
peculiar — the same thing is largely true of most treatises on the theory of 
money.16
Money was treated not as a political institution (e.g. to enable 
governments to pay their debts, or by governments giving value to money by 
accepting it as tax) but as a commodity whose value was determined by 
supply and demand. This assumed that money was a fixed volume that could 
easily be defined. Credit made little appearance. 
Keynes warned that it would be dangerous for economists “to adapt the 
hypothetical conclusions of a real wage economics to the real world of 
monetary economics.” The kind of thinking that underlay “real-exchange 
economics … has led in practice to many erroneous conclusions and policies” 
as a result of “the simplifications introduced.… We are not told what 

conditions have to be fulfilled if money is to be neutral.”17 
If money were not neutral, neither was the debt burden. Yet Milton 
Friedman theorized that: Holders of foreign currencies [such as U.S. dollars] 
want to exchange them for the currency of a particular country in order to 
purchase commodities produced in that country, or to purchase securities or 
other capital assets in that country, or to pay interest on or repay debt to that 
country, or to make gifts to citizens of that country, or simply to hold for one 
of these uses or for sale … Other things the same, the more expensive a given 
currency, that is, the higher the exchange rate, the less of that currency will in 
general be demanded for each of these purposes.18 
The implication is that countries will “choose” to pay less on their foreign 
debts as the dollars in which these debts are denominated become more 
expensive. But in reality they have no choice. Countries that try to pay less as 
the debt burden becomes more expensive to service are held in default and 
confronted with international sanctions, trade barriers and a loss of foreign 
markets. It is much the same when debtors have to pay their debts as 
domestic prices and incomes fall. The debt burden becomes heavier. Price 
and income deflation thus not only shifts the proportions around, the basic 
structure and distribution of wealth is altered as a result of inexorable debt 
obligations.
Few economists ventured to specify the highly unrealistic conditions that 
would have to be met in order for monetary and credit disturbances, debt 
service and asset prices to be neutral. With sardonic humor Keynes observed: 
The conditions required for the ‘neutrality’ of money, in the sense in 
which this is assumed in .… Marshall’s Principles of Economics, are, I 
suspect, precisely the same as those which will insure that crises do not 
occur. If this is true, the real-exchange economics, on which most of us have 
been brought up and with the conclusions of which our minds are deeply 
impregnated … is a singularly blunt weapon for dealing with the problem of 
booms and depressions. For it has assumed away the very matter under 
investigation.19
John H. Williams, Harvard professor and advisor to the New York Federal 
Reserve Bank on the balance of payments observed: About the practical 
usefulness of theory, I have often felt like the man who stammered and 

finally learned to say, ‘Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers,’ but 
found it hard to work into conversation.20 
Such criticisms could be levied with even greater force against economists 
who ignore the role of debt and the revenue that needs to be diverted to pay 
debt service.
Economists who recognized that payment of debt service was not a part of 
the “real” economy but a subtrahend proposed that it be excluded from 
national income and product accounts altogether. Alfred C. Pigou reasoned in 
The Economics of Welfare that these accounts should exclude income 
received by native creditors of the State in interest on loans that have been 
employed ‘unproductively,’ i.e., in such a way that they do not, as loans to 
buy railways would do, themselves ‘produce’ money with which to pay the 
interest on them. This means that the income received as interest on War loan 
— or the income paid to the State to provide this interest — ought to be 
excluded.21
One wonders what Pigou might have said about the American practice of 
railroad directors issuing bonds to themselves gratuitously with no real quid 
pro quo — “watering the stock.” 
Excluding debt service from national income and produce accounts 
(NIPA) meant that its deflationary impact on incomes and prices — that is, 
the diversion of revenue from the production and consumption processes to 
pay debt service — could not be measured. Price adjustments are factored in 
by a GDP “price deflator” but the degree to which paying debt service 
interferes with the circulation of revenue between producers and consumers is
lost — the phenomenon of debt deflation.
The limited analytic scope suggested by Pigou’s definition of economic 
welfare would be logical if the aim of economic accounts were only to trace 
the growth of output and consumption. But measuring debt deflation — the 
degree to which debt service absorbs the economy’s revenue — requires a 
calculation of all interest payments. To the extent that rentiers spend their 
interest receipts on consumer goods and capital investment, such spending 
would appear in the national production and consumption statistics. But this 
is a relatively small phenomenon — although it is the narrow point on which 
neoclassical utilitarian treatments of interest base themselves. To understand 

the dynamics of booms and depressions, debt pyramiding and economic 
polarization between creditors and debtors, it is necessary to include the 
effects of interest being plowed back into new lending, and thereby take into 
account the financial system as a whole. Yet this is not what Keynes himself 
did in discussing the rate of interest, saving and investment without 
integrating debt service into his income theory.
 
How Keynes Discussed Saving and Investment without Considering Debt 
Deflation
 
Keynes distinguished himself in the 1920s by defining the limits that 
existed to debt-servicing capacity, above all with regard to the Inter-Ally 
debts and German reparations stemming from World WarI.22 By 1931 he 
was pointing out that the burden of monetary indebtedness in the world is 
already so heavy that any material addition would render it intolerable.… In 
Germany it is the weight of reparation payments fixed in terms of money … 
In the United States the main problem would be, I suppose, the mortgages of 
the farmer and loans on real estate generally.23 
Keynes criticized deflationary monetary proposals as threatening to 
derange the financial superstructure of “national debts, war debts, obligations 
between the creditor and debtor nations, farm mortgages [and] real estate 
mortgages,” throwing the banking system into jeopardy and causing 
“widespread bankruptcy, default, and repudiation of bonds.” 
But by 1936 he was concerned mainly with the shortfall in consumption 
resulting from people’s propensity to save. Pointing out that new investment 
and hiring would not occur without stronger markets, his General Theory of 
Employment, Interest and Money described the solution to lie in getting 
people and governments to spend more. The countercyclical government 
hiring that he advocated would lead to budget deficits, which would have to 
be financed by debt. Yet the role of debt and its carrying charges was ignored 
in Keynesian macroeconomics. This loose end became a blind spot that has 
led to the most confusion among his followers.
Already in 1902, John Hobson’s Imperialism warned that growing debt 

levels would lead to underconsumption. Creditors would collect money at 
home and search for new fields abroad to lend at relatively high rates, to less 
debt-ridden economies most in need of public infrastructure and other capital 
investment. This dynamic, Hobson believed, was the taproot of a new form of 
imperialism, one that had become financial rather than military in character. 
Keynes took exception to Hobson’s underconsumptionist views. As late as 
1931 he viewed the problem of recovery as one of lowering interest rates to 
make direct investment more remunerative than buying bonds.24 Writing to 
Hobson, he expressed the hope that lower interest rates also would solve the 
problem of debt deflation, but admitted that public spending might be needed 
to fill the gap created by the diversion of revenue to service debts. Hobson’s 
point “that ‘money savings may continue to grow faster than they can be 
profitably invested’ would only be the case in the event of the rate of interest 
failing to fall fast enough,” Keynes believed. But if it fell to zero (as 
happened in Japan in the late 1990s and in the United States under the 
Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing program supplying reserves at 0.25% 
interest), the only solution would be “more spending and less saving.” 
Hobson reiterated that the rate of interest was only of limited efficacy. “In 
certain situations of boom or slump its action seems very slight and 
unreliable.25 
Keynes came to accept this position by the time he published the General 
Theory five years later. His description of the liquidity trap helped swing the 
political pendulum back toward government activism, using deficit financing 
to pump enough income into the economy to replace the purchasing power 
that debt service absorbed and saving withdrew from the private sector’s 
spending stream. In time, Keynesian liberalism would call for government 
spending to employ labor that would spend its income on goods, whose sale 
would provide profits for industrial investors. “The system is not self-
adjusting,” he wrote in 1933, “and, without purposive direction, it is 
incapable of translating our actual poverty into our potential plenty.”26 
Expenditures that pushed the U.S. Government budget $1 billion into deficit 
in 1931, he told an American audience, “are just as good in their immediate 
effects … as would be an equal expenditure on capital works; the only 
difference — and an important one enough — is that in the former case we 
have nothing to show for it afterwards.”27 The same was true of war 

spending, of course.
Keynes understood the financial sector as clearly as any economist of his 
day, yet he wrote in a way that diverted attention from the deflationary 
character of debt. Blaming high interest rates for inducing savers to buy 
financial securities that not find a counterpart in new direct investment, he 
went so far as to call for “euthanasia of the rentier.” He criticized Say’s Law, 
that production creates its own demand by paying employees and capital-
goods producers who, in turn, spent their income on what was produced. But 
he did not make clear what proportion of saving resulted from paying debt 
service; that is, he did not distinguish loan repayments from fresh 
discretionary saving. National income statistics today count paying off a debt 
as “saving,” because it is a negation of a negation (debt). And increasingly, 
saving takes the form of compulsory payments to creditors (see chapter 11 
below).
Having spent years emphasizing that debt payments are not a matter of 
discretion but reflect contractual obligations, Keynes dropped this idea in his 
General Theory. Much confusion has resulted from the Saving = Investment 
equation, as if all saving took the form of tangible direct investment in 
factories, machinery, construction and other means of production. His use of 
the word “hoarding” had connotations of money kept in a mattress, but its 
more prevalent forms were “indirect” investment in securities and debt pay-
downs. This role of debt and debt-service was not noted clearly by his 
followers in Britain, the United States or other countries.
In a 1934 article Keynes noted that anyone who rejected the idea that 
economies adjusted automatically to any external disturbance — in particular 
to debt problems — was labeled a crank. He placed himself in their ranks, 
and his General Theory acknowledged the writings of the Swiss-German 
economist Silvio Gesell as representative of this approach. On the other hand, 
he noted: 
 
The strength of the self-adjusting school depends on its having behind it 
almost the whole body of organised economic thinking and doctrine of the 
last hundred years. This is a formidable power.… It has vast prestige and a 
more far-reaching influence than is obvious. For it lies behind the education 

and the habitual modes of thought, not only of economists, but of bankers and 
businessmen and civil servants and politicians of all parties.”28 
 
Keynes acknowledged that he still had one foot in the orthodox tradition. 
In the end, all he could do was blame economists for not having developed “a 
satisfactory theory of the rate of interest” to serve as the regulator of saving, 
investment and employment. But how could this be done, without tracing the 
effect of interest rates on the doubling times of debts, the economy’s ability 
to pay, and the consequences of forfeiture under distress conditions?
 
Debt and Interest Rates Are Autonomous from the “Real” Production and 
Consumption Economy
 
Keynes was not the first economist pointing to savings as not being an 
unalloyed benefit. Marx had described how the “new aristocracy of finance, a 
new sort of parasites in the shape of promoters, speculators and merely 
nominal directors … demands … precisely that others shall save for him.”29 
The saving in this case takes the form of debt repayment with interest, much 
as British money lenders advertise that buying a home helps buyers save by 
building up equity via their mortgage payments each month. The liquid 
“savings” in the form of debt payment accrue to the lenders, not the debtors. 
But it was mainly fringe groups that warned of the collision course between 
the debt overhead and the “real” economy’s production and consumption 
trends. 
From the Austrians through Fisher and Keynes, economists sought to 
deduce the rate of interest on the basis of consumer utility and capital 
productivity. Their dream of integrating the determination of interest rates 
into price and value theory was something like trying to untangle the Book of 
Revelation. Their search to discover a neat mathematical solution, 
determinable in advance, culminated in Keynes’s attempts to formulate a 
“monetary theory of production” incorporating interest rates and money. 
Unfortunately, he was mixing apples and oranges. The source of confusion 
lay in the assumption that money and credit have a tangible, real cost of 

production that can be factored into a general, integrated theory of 
production, investment and employment.
In reality no such unified field theory is possible, because finance is 
autonomous from the production-and-consumption “real” economy. The 
government’s central bank administers interest rates and commercial banks 
may make reckless fraudulent loans.
At first glance it might seem that a “real” cost of interest might be imputed 
by calculating and pro-rating the administrative and overhead costs incurred 
by banks and other creditors, taking into account their loss ratios to assign 
appropriate risk premiums. But an analysis of their income and expense 
accounts shows how tautological such a measure would be. Salaries and 
bonuses, dividends and reserve funds or new projects (including mergers and 
acquisitions) reflect whatever revenue creditors obtain. Such pseudo-costs are 
after-the-fact, not foreseeable in advance in the sense that labor, materials and 
capital-goods costs are foreseeable.
The reality is that bank credit today has no cost of production beyond a 
modest administrative overhead. Interest rates have no determinate 
foundation in the “real” economy’s production and consumption functions, 
although they intrude into that system’s circular flow by siphoning off debt 
service, late fees — and public bailouts when the financial system becomes 
too “decoupled” from the “real” economy. Such financial charges cannot be 
assigned to labor or other “real” costs of production. The administered prices 
for interest and underwriting fees are akin to economic rent, out of which the 
financial sector’s bloated salaries and bonuses are paid. Utilitarian economics 
does not apply to looting.
The credit system’s dynamics are based on the flow of funds and terms of 
debt repayment. This system is no more intrinsically linked to the economics 
of production and consumption than is the weather. Where the financial and 
“real” spheres intersect, they do so in the way that comets intersect with the 
planetary system — sometimes with devastating collisions that abruptly alter 
trajectories. To extend the analogy to include compound interest, one should 
imagine the havoc that would be wreaked by comets whose mass was 
growing by x% in real terms each year, relative to the constant mass of the 
planets. The chance of crashes increases exponentially under such conditions, 

and their consequences become larger.
Mathematical sophistication is of little help when applied to what is 
assumed to be a debt-free economy. Without analyzing the degree to which 
wages, profits, rents and taxes are burdened by interest payments to creditors, 
economic theory will be unable to provide meaningful forecasts or policy 
recommendations. It was on this ground that Keynes chided economists for 
reasoning as if the world operated on a barter basis. They used ceteris paribus 
methodology to prevent monetary “distortions” from interfering with their 
analysis of wages, profits and rents, neglecting to add financial reality back 
into the picture they were drawing. The study of banking and credit was 
shunted aside into a sub-discipline, to be analyzed in isolation from “real 
exchange” problems. This missed the point that finance ultimately is more 
real than barter exchange, as money is the objective of businesses and 
consumers alike. And this characterization of a “real” economy and “real” 
index-deflated prices created the most distorted picture of how economies 
function (and, sometimes, collapse).
Finance and interest cannot be derived from production and consumption 
functions, but their impact on these functions can be traced, just as the impact 
of weather can be traced after the fact, but not explained as a product of 
economic conditions. A credit-based theory of pricing would start with the 
perception that debt service represents a rising share of the cost of producing 
and distributing goods and services. Today, the major factors determining 
international cost differentials are variations in the costing of capital — not 
only the rate of interest but also debt/equity ratios, loan maturities, 
depreciation and tax schedules. These are not production costs but are 
imposed from outside the real-cost system.
Matters are aggravated by the fact that goods and services are sold in 
markets where debt service absorbs a rising share of the revenue of labor, 
business, real estate and government. This causes debt deflation, reducing the 
economy’s ability to buy products, while rising debt service adds to 
production costs. No meaningful analysis of demand (or of the degree to 
which Say’s Law applies)  can be drawn up without taking into account the 
volume of debt service. 
Ignoring the role of debt leaves it free to devastate the economic system. 

Beaudelaire famously remarked that the devil would defeat humanity at the 
point where he was able to convince it that he did not really exist. Financial 
interests have promoted the idea that money and credit are merely a veil, 
passively reflecting economic life as “counters” rather than being determined 
by financial institutions actively steering and planning economies. The study 
of debt and its effects have all but disappeared from the curriculum. In an 
academic version of Gresham’s Law, the financial sector’s approach to the 
debt problem has driven other perspectives out of the intellectual 
marketplace. Policy-makers take the financial and banking system for granted 
rather than discussing what kind of a system best would serve society’s long-
term development and best cope with debts that grow too large to be paid 
without fatally polarizing economies between creditors and debtors. 
Posing the debt-repayment problem leads naturally into the analysis of 
what public responses are most appropriate. This line of analysis is anathema 
to the vested financial interests, and finds little support in academic economic 
departments (many of which depend increasingly on FIRE-sector 
endowments and subsidy). 
It trivializes the debt problem to treat it merely as one of finding an 
appropriately low rate of interest to equilibrate financial supply and demand, 
consumer preference and profit opportunities, as if there were some (low) rate 
of interest that will enable loans to be paid out of the productive investment 
of their proceeds or out of consumer incomes without default. The rality is 
that most loans are not invested in tangible capital formation that increase the 
borrower’s revenue and hence debt-paying capacity. And even if they were, 
the problem lies in the inexorable mathematics of compound interest. What 
needs to be examined is how to cope with the fact that interest accrues 
according to a autonomous mathematical principle with the inherent tendency 
of debts to multiply in excess of the economy’s ability to pay. Negative 
equity on an economy-wide basis is the consequence of the prior miraculous 
“wealth creation.” At this point the financial problem becomes political.
 
1 Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, vol. V, iii; Cannan ed.: 452.

2 Malachy Postlethwayt, Great-Britain’s True System (London 1757): 165.
3 Ibid.: 20f.
4 Ibid.: 52f.
5 Ibid.: 53.
6 Ibid.: 21. 
7 Ibid.: 69.
8 Ibid.: 22 f.
9 James Steuart, Principles of Political Œconomy (London 1767): II, 349 ff.
10 Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Vol. V, iii; Cannan ed., 460 ff.)
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.: 464 f.
13 Ibid.: 450 f.
14 Leland H. Jenks, The Migration of British Capital to 1875 (New York 1927): 14ff.
15 Ibid.
16 “A Monetary Theory of Production” (1933), in The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes 13: 
The General Theory and After (London 1973): 409 f. Along these lines Keynes criticized Alfred 
Marshall for stating explicitly in his 1890 Principles of Economics (pp. 61 f.) “that he is dealing with 
relative exchange values. The proposition that the prices of a ton of lead and a ton of tin are £15 and 
£90 means no more to him in this context than that the value of a ton of tin in terms of lead is six tons 
… ‘We may throughout this volume,’ he explains, ‘neglect possible changes in the general purchasing 
power of money. Thus the price of anything will be taken as representative of its exchange value 
relative to things in general’ [Keynes’s italics].… In short, though money is present and is made use of 

for convenience, it may be considered to cancel out for the purposes of most of the general conclusions 
of the Principles.” 
If money is ignored, then so are savings, debts and their carrying charges. The role of money as a 
medium in which to pay debts is missed entirely, as is the monetization of debt in the form of free 
credit creation.
17 Ibid.
18 Milton Friedman, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” Essays in Political Economics (Chicago 
1953), repr. in Caves and Johnson, eds., Readings in International Economics (Homewood, Ill. 1968): 
415 (italics added).
19 Keynes, op. cit.
20 John H. Williams, “The Theory of International Trade Reconsidered” (1929), repr. in Postwar 
Monetary Plans and Other Essays, 3rd ed. (New York: 1947): 134f.
21 Alfred C. Pigou, The Economics of Welfare (London 1920).
22 “An Economic Analysis of Unemployment” (1931, repr. 1973): 343–373.
23 Ibid.
24 1973: 356 f.
25 Letters to Hobson dated Oct. 2 and 14, 1931, in Keynes, Collected Writings, vol. 13 (1973): 330–
336.
26 Collected Writings (1973): 491.
27 Ibid.: 356 ff.
28 “Poverty in Plenty: Is the Economic System Self-Adjusting?” The Listener, Nov. 21, 1934 (Keynes, 
ibid.: 488).
29 Capital III: 519 f. 

ENDNOTES – Chapter 3
__________

*****
4. The Industrialization of Finance and the 
Financialization of Industry
 
In his draft notes on “Interest-Bearing Capital and Commercial Capital in 
Relation to Industrial Capital” for what became Vol. III of Capital and Part 
III of Theories of Surplus Value, Marx wrote optimistically about how 
industrial capitalism would modernize banking and financial systems. Its 
historical task, he believed, was to rescue society from usurious money 
lending and asset stripping, replacing the age-old parasitic tendencies of 
banking by steering credit to finance productive investment.
The commercial and interest-bearing forms of capital are older than 
industrial capital, but ... [i]n the course of its evolution, industrial capital must 
therefore subjugate these forms and transform them into derived or special 
functions of itself. It encounters these older forms in the epoch of its 
formation and development. It encounters them as antecedents … not as 
forms of its own life-process. ... Where capitalist production has developed 
all its manifold forms and has become the dominant mode of production, 
interest-bearing capital is dominated by industrial capital, and commercial 
capital becomes merely a form of industrial capital, derived from the 
circulation process.1
From antiquity through medieval times, investment was self-financed — 
and hence was undertaken mainly by large public institutions (temples and 
palaces) and by the well to do. It was the great achievement of industrial 
capitalism to mobilize credit to finance production, subordinating hitherto 

usurious interest-bearing capital to “the conditions and requirements of the 
capitalist mode of production.”2  “What distinguishes the interest-bearing 
capital, so far as it is an essential element of the capitalist mode of 
production, from usurer’s capital,” Marx wrote, is “the altered conditions 
under which it operates, and consequently the totally changed character of the 
borrower …”3
Marx expected the Industrial Revolution’s upsweep to be strong enough to 
replace this system with one of productive credit, yet he certainly had no 
blind spot for financial parasitism.4 Money-lending long preceded industrial 
capital and was external to it, he explained, existing in a symbiosis much like 
that between a parasite and its host. “Both usury and commerce exploit the 
various modes of production,” he wrote. “They do not create it, but attack it 
from the outside.”5 In contrast to industrial capital (tangible means of 
production), bank loans, stocks and bonds are legal claims on wealth. These 
financial claims do not create the surplus directly, but are like sponges 
absorbing the income and property of debtors — and expropriate this 
property when debtors (including governments) cannot pay. “Usury 
centralises money wealth,” Marx elaborated. “It does not alter the mode of 
production, but attaches itself to it as a parasite and makes it miserable. It 
sucks its blood, kills its nerve, and compels reproduction to proceed under 
even more disheartening conditions. ... usurer’s capital does not confront the 
laborer as industrial capital,” but “impoverishes this mode of production, 
paralyzes the productive forces instead of developing them.”6
Engels noted that Marx would have emphasized how finance remained 
largely predatory had he lived to see France’s Second Empire and its “world-
redeeming credit-phantasies” explode in “a swindle of a magnitude never 
witnessed before.”7 But more than any other writer of his century, Marx 
described how periodic financial crises were caused by the tendency of debts 
to grow exponentially, without regard for growth in productive powers. His 
notes provide a compendium of writers who explained how impossible it was 
in practice to realize the purely mathematical “magic of compound interest” 
— interest-bearing debts in the form of bonds, mortgages and commercial 
paper growing independently of the economy’s ability to pay.8 
This self-expanding growth of financial claims, Marx wrote, consists of 
“imaginary” and “fictitious” capital inasmuch as it cannot be realized over 

time. When fictitious financial gains are obliged to confront the impossibility 
of paying off the exponential growth in debt claims — that is, when 
scheduled debt service exceeds the ability to pay — breaks in the chain of 
payments cause crises. “The greater portion of the banking capital is, 
therefore, purely fictitious and consists of certificates of indebtedness (bills of 
exchange), government securities (which represent spent capital), and stocks 
(claims on future yields of production).”9 A point arrives at which bankers 
and investors recognize that no society’s productive powers can long support 
the growth of interest-bearing debt at compound rates. Seeing that the 
pretense must end, they call in their loans and foreclose on the property of 
debtors, forcing the sale of property under crisis conditions as the financial 
system collapses in a convulsion of bankruptcy.
To illustrate the inexorable force of usury capital unchecked, Marx poked 
fun at Richard Price’s calculations about the magical power of compound 
interest, noting that a penny saved at the birth of Jesus at 5% would have 
amounted by Price’s day to a solid sphere of gold extending from the sun out 
to the planet Jupiter.10 “The good Price was simply dazzled by the enormous 
quantities resulting from geometrical progression of numbers. … he regards 
capital as a self-acting thing, without any regard to the conditions of 
reproduction of labour, as a mere self-increasing number,” subject to the 
growth formula Surplus = Capital (1 + interest rate)n, with n representing the 
number of years money is left to accrue interest. The exponential all-
devouring usury “assimilates all the surplus value with the exception of the 
share claimed by the state.”11 That at least was the hope of the financial 
class: to capitalize the entire surplus into debt service. “Under the form of 
interest the whole of the surplus over the necessary means of subsistence (the 
amount of what becomes wages later on) of the producers may here be 
devoured by usury (this assumes later the form of profit and ground rent).” 
Although high finance obviously has been shaped by the Industrial 
Revolution’s legacy of corporate finance, institutional investment such as 
pension fund saving as part of the industrial wage contract, mutual funds, and 
globalization along “financialized” lines, financial managers have taken over 
industrial companies to create what Hyman Minsky has called “money 
manager capitalism.”12 The last few decades have seen the banking and 
financial sector evolve beyond what Marx or any other 19th-century writer 

imagined. Corporate raiding, financial fraud, credit default swaps and other 
derivatives have led to de-industrialization and enormous taxpayer bailouts. 
And in the political sphere, finance has become the great defender of 
deregulating monopolies and “freeing” land rent and asset-price gains from 
taxation, translating its economic power and campaign contributions into the 
political power to capture control of public financial regulation. The question 
that needs to be raised today is therefore which dynamic will emerge 
dominant: that of industrial capital as Marx expected, or finance capital?
 
Marx’s Optimism that Industrial Capital Would Subordinate Finance Capital 
 
Despite Marx’s explanation of how parasitic finance capital was in its 
manifestation as “usury capital,” he believed that its role as economic 
organizer would pave the way for a socialist organization of the economic 
surplus. Industrial capital would subordinate finance capital to serve its 
needs. No observer of his day was so pessimistic as to expect finance 
capitalism to overpower and dismantle industrial capitalism, engulfing 
economies in parasitic credit such as the world is seeing today. Believing that 
every mode of production was shaped by the technological, political and 
social needs of economies to advance, Marx expected banking and high 
finance to become subordinate to these dynamics, with governments 
accommodating forward planning and long-term investment, not asset-
stripping. “There is no doubt,” he wrote, “that the credit system will serve as 
a powerful lever during the transition from the capitalist mode of production 
to the production by means of associated labor; but only as one element in 
connection with other great organic revolutions of the mode of production 
itself.”13 Governments for their part would become socialist, not be taken 
over by the financial sector’s lobbyists and proxies.
Discussing the 1857 financial crisis, Marx showed how unthinkable 
anything like the 2008-09 Bush-Obama bailout of financial speculators 
appeared in his day. “The entire artificial system of forced expansion of the 
reproduction process cannot, of course, be remedied by having some bank, 
like the Bank of England, give to all the swindlers the deficient capital by 
means of its paper and having it buy up all the depreciated commodities at 

their old nominal values.”14  Marx wrote this reductio ad absurdum not 
dreaming that it would come true in autumn 2008 as the U.S. Treasury paid 
off all of A.I.G.’s gambles and other counterparty “casino capitalist” losses at 
taxpayer expense, followed by the Federal Reserve buying junk mortgage 
packages at par. 
Marx expected economies to act in their long-term interest to increase the 
means of production and avoid over-exploitation, under-consumption and 
debt deflation. Yet throughout his notes for what became Capital and 
Theories of Surplus Value, he described how finance capital took on a life of 
its own. Industrial capital makes profits by spending money to employ labor 
to produce commodities to sell at a markup, a process he summarized by the 
formula M–C–M´.  Money (M) is invested to produce commodities (C) that 
sell for yet more money ( M´). But usury capital seeks to make money in 
“sterile” ways, characterized by the disembodied (M–M´). Growing 
independently from tangible production, financial claims for payment 
represent a financial overhead that eats into industrial profit and cash flow. 
Today’s financial engineering aims not at industrial engineering to increase 
output or cut the costs of production, but at the disembodied M–M´ — 
making money from money itself in a sterile “zero-sum” transfer payment.
As matters have turned out, the expansion of finance capital has taken the 
form mainly of what Marx called “usury capital”: mortgage lending, personal 
and credit card loans, government bond financing for war deficits, and debt-
leveraged gambling. The development of such credit has added new terms to 
modern language: “financialization,” debt leveraging (or “gearing” as they 
say in Britain), corporate raiding, “shareholder activists,” junk bonds, 
government bailouts and “socialization of risk,” — as well as the “junk 
economics” that rationalizes debt-leveraged asset-price inflation as “wealth 
creation” Alan Greenspan-style. 
 
Fictitious Capital
 
Bankers and other creditors produce interest-bearing debt. That is their 
commodity as it “appear[s] in the eyes of the banker,” Marx wrote. Little 
labor is involved. Calling money lent out at interest an “imaginary” or “void 

form of capital,”15 Marx characterized high finance as based on “fictitious” 
claims for payment in the first place because it consists not of the means of 
production, but of bonds, mortgages, bank loans and other claims on the 
means of production. Instead of consisting of the tangible means of 
production on the asset side of the balance sheet, financial securities and bank 
loans are claims on output, appearing on the liabilities side. So instead of 
creating value, bank credit absorbs value produced outside of the rentier 
FIRE sector. “The capital of the national debt appears as a minus, and 
interest-bearing capital generally is the mother of all crazy forms …”16  
What is “insane,” he explained, is that “instead of explaining the self-
expansion of capital out of labor-power, the matter is reversed and the 
productivity of labor-power itself is this mystic thing, interest-bearing 
capital.”17
Financialized wealth represents the capitalization of income flows. If a 
borrower earns 50 pounds sterling a year, and the interest rate is 5%, this 
earning power is deemed to be “worth” Y/I, that is, income (Y) discounted at 
the going rate of interest (i): 1,000 pounds. A lower interest rate will increase 
the capitalization rate — the amount of debt that a given flow of income can 
carry. “The forming of a fictitious capital is called capitalising. Every 
periodically repeated income is capitalised by calculating it on the average 
rate of interest, as an income which would be realised by a capital at this rate 
of interest.” Thus, Marx concluded: “If the rate of interest falls from 5% to 
2½%, then the same security will represent a capital of 2,000 pounds sterling. 
Its value is always but its capitalised income, that is, its income calculated on 
a fictitious capital of so many pounds sterling at the prevailing rate of 
interest.” 
Finance capital is fictitious in the second place because its demands for 
payment cannot be met as economy-wide savings and debts mount up 
exponentially. The “magic of compound interest” diverts income away from 
being spent on goods or services, capital equipment or taxes. “In all countries 
of capitalist production,” Marx wrote, the “accumulation of money-capital 
signifies to a large extent nothing else but an accumulation of such claims on 
production, an accumulation of the market-price, the illusory capital-value, of 
these claims.” Banks and investors hold these “certificates of indebtedness 
(bills of exchange), government securities (which represent spent capital), 

and stocks (claims on future yields of production)” whose face value is 
“purely fictitious.”18 This means that the interest payments that savers hope 
to receive cannot be paid in practice, because they are based on fiction — 
junk economics and junk accounting, which are the logical complements to 
fictitious capital.
Finance capital sees any flow of revenue as economic prey —  industrial 
profit, tax revenue, and disposable personal income over and above basic 
needs. The result is not unlike the “primitive accumulation” by armed 
conquest — land rent paid initially to warrior aristocracies. And much as the 
tribute taken by the military victors is limited only by the defeated 
population’s ability to produce an economic surplus, so the accrual of interest 
on savings and bank loans is constrained only by the ability of borrowers to 
pay the mounting interest charges on these debts. 
The problem is that the financial system, like military victors from Assyria 
and Rome in antiquity down to those of today, destroys the host economy’s 
ability to pay.
 
The Falling Rate of Profit as Distinct from Financial Crises
 
Focusing on profit as reflecting the industrial exploitation of wage labor, 
many students of Marxism have read only Vol. I of Capital. Many make an 
unwarranted leap from his analysis of wage labor to assume that he was an 
underconsumptionist. The capitalist’s desire to pay employees as little as 
possible (so as to maximize the margin they would make by selling their 
products at a higher price) is taken as a proxy for the financial dynamics 
causing crises, discussed in Vol. III of Capital.
Marx’s analysis did note the problem of labor’s inability to buy what it 
produces. “Contradiction in the capitalist mode of production,” he wrote: “the 
labourers as buyers of commodities are important for the market. But as 
sellers of their own commodity — labour-power — capitalist society tends to 
keep them down to the minimum price.”19 To avoid a glut on the market, 
workers must buy what they produce (along with industrialists buying 
machinery and other inputs). Henry Ford quipped that he paid his workers the 

then-high wage of $5 per day so that they would have enough to buy the cars 
they produced. But most employers oppose higher wages, paying as little as 
possible and thus drying up the market for their products. 
This was the major form of class warfare in Marx’s day, but it was not the 
cause of financial crises, which Marx saw as being caused by internal 
contradictions on the part of finance capital itself. Interest charges on rising 
debt levels absorb business and personal income, leaving less available to 
spend on goods and services. Economies shrink and profits fall, deterring 
new investment in plant and equipment. Financial “paper wealth” thus 
becomes increasingly antithetical to industrial capital, to the extent that it 
takes the predatory form of usury-capital — or its kindred outgrowth, 
financial speculation — rather than funding tangible capital formation.
In developing his model to analyze the flows of income and output among 
labor, capital and the rest of the economy, Marx’s starting point was the first 
great example of national income accounting: Francois Quesnay’s Tableau 
Économique (1758) describing the circulation of payments and output in 
France’s agricultural sector, labor, industry and the government. As a surgeon 
to the king, Quesnay saw this circulation of income as analogous to that of 
blood within the human body. However, his Tableau neglected the need to 
replenish stock — the seed and other output that needed to be set aside to 
plant the next season’s crop. Marx noted that much as rural cultivators 
needed to defray the cost of replenishing their seed-corn, industrialists needed 
to recover the cost of their capital investment in plant, equipment and kindred 
outlays, in addition to receiving profits. 
This recovery of capital outlays is called depreciation and amortization. 
Marx expected it to rise relative to profits, in order to reimburse investment in
capital equipment (and by logical extension, research and development). This 
is what he meant by the falling rate of profit. Just as bondholders recover 
their original capital principal (a return of financial capital) quite apart from 
the interest, so capitalists must recover the cost of their original investment.
Marx expected technology to become more capital-intensive in order to be 
more productive. His “falling rate of profit” referred to the rising depreciation 
return of capital to reflect this recovery of costs. Plant and equipment needed 
to be renewed as a result of wearing out or becoming technologically 

obsolete and hence needing to be scrapped even when it remains physically 
operative. As Joseph Schumpeter emphasized in his post-Marxist theory of 
innovation, technological progress obliges industrialists either to modernize 
or be undersold by rivals. 
This rising capital-intensiveness is not a cause of crises. As Marx argued 
in Book II of Theories of Surplus Value against Ricardo’s views on the 
introduction of machinery, it creates a demand for more capital spending and 
hence employs more labor, averting an under-consumption crisis. However, 
financial crises still occur (Marx pointed to eleven-year intervals in his day) 
as a result of the interest-bearing savings of the wealthy lent out to 
government, business and (mainly since Marx’s day) real estate and 
individuals, erupting when debtors are unable to pay this self-expanding 
financial overhead of “anti-wealth.”
No concept has confused students of Marxism more than this seemingly 
straightforward idea.20 At issue is the shifting composition of cash flow: 
earnings before interest, depreciation and amortization (ebitda). To the extent 
that depreciation and amortization rise (or as industry becomes more highly 
debt leveraged), less profit is reported to the tax authorities and recorded in 
the National Income and Product Accounts. Marxists who attribute a crisis of 
capitalism to declines in reported rates of profit overlook the fact that the real 
estate, mining and insurance sectors wring their hands all the way to the bank 
with tax-deductible cash flow counted as “depreciation.”
 
How Real Estate, Mining and Debt-Leveraged Business Exemplify a Pseudo-
Falling Rate of Profit
 
The largest sector in today’s economies remains real estate. Land is the 
single largest asset, and buildings report most depreciation. To be sure, this is 
a travesty of economic reality inasmuch as it reflects a distorted set of tax 
laws that permit absentee investors to depreciate buildings again and again, 
as if they wear out and lose value through lack of upkeep (despite landlords 
being legally required to maintain rental properties intact), or by 
obsolescence (even as construction standards cheapen). These depreciation 
writeoffs occur at rising prices each time a property is sold at a capital gain 

(most of which reflects the land’s rising site value). 
This pretense — along with the tax deductibility of interest — has enabled 
real estate investors to declare virtually no taxable income for more than a 
half century since World War II. It is as if a bond- or stock-holder could 
avoid paying income tax on interest and dividends by getting a tax credit as if 
the bond or stock were becoming worthless — and for each new buyer to 
repeat this charge-off, as if the asset loses value with each sale even as its 
market price rises! To cap matters, “capital gains” (some 80% of which 
typically occur in the real estate sector) are taxed at only a fraction of the rate 
levied on “earned” income (wages and profits), and are not taxed if they are 
spent on buying yet more property.
These tax dodges benefit property owners — and behind them, bankers, 
because whatever the tax collector refrains from taking is “free” to be paid as 
interest for yet larger mortgage loans. This makes financial interests the 
ultimate beneficiaries of distorted tax accounting. Such tax favoritism for the 
FIRE sector is fictitious tax avoidance, capitalized into “capital” gains. This 
obviously is not what Marx meant by the falling rate of profit. In his day 
there was no income tax to inspire such “junk accounting.” The aim of 
permitting buildings to be depreciated again and again is not to reflect 
economic reality but to save real estate investors from having to declare 
taxable earnings (“profit”). And thanks to the notorious depletion allowance, 
the oil and mining sectors likewise operated free of income taxation for many 
decades. Insurance and financial companies are permitted to treat the buildup 
of liquid reserves as an “expense” against hypothetical losses. The function 
of these giveaways is to shift the fiscal burden off land and minerals, oil and 
gas, real estate and debt-leveraged industry. 
When an ostensibly empirical statistical map (or the economic theory 
behind it) diverges from reality, and a tax policy diverges from broad social 
objectives, one invariably finds a special interest at work subsidizing it. In 
this case the culprit is high finance as untaxed property revenue is free to be 
capitalized into larger debts. And as it has regressed to what Marx described 
as usury capital, it has allied itself with real estate and rent-extracting 
monopolies. Instead of nationalizing them or taxing their economic rent and 
“capital” gains, today’s tax system favors rentiers. 

 
The Financial and Industrial Antipathy to Post-Feudal Rent-Seekers
 
The financial sector’s alliance with manufacturing rather than real estate in 
David Ricardo’s day is rooted in medieval European banking as it emerged at 
the time of the Crusades. Christian sanctions against usury were broken down 
by a combination of the prestige of the major creditors — Church orders, 
followed by bankers tied to the papacy — and that of their leading borrowers: 
kings, to pay Peter’s Pence and other tribute to Rome, and increasingly to 
wage war. 
As creditors, the Templars and Hospitallers pioneered the transfer of funds 
across Europe. Next to royal borrowing the major market for credit was 
foreign trade, which flowered with the revival of economic activity fueled 
largely by the gold and silver looted from Byzantium in 1204. This business 
prompted the Churchmen to define a fair price for bankers to charge for the 
international transfer of funds — agio. This became the major loophole in 
which money lending could occur, most notoriously in a fictitious 
“international” arrangement via the “dry exchange.” These financial practices 
— war lending to kings for spending abroad, and money changing as 
commercial activity revived  — made banking cosmopolitan in outlook. 
The Napoleonic Wars (1798–1815) impeded trade, and hence its import 
and export financing. France’s naval blockade had the effect of a protective 
tariff wall. Britain’s landlords increased crop production, albeit at a rising 
cost. Conversely, other countries built up their own manufacturing. 
Resumption of foreign trade after the Treaty of Ghent restored peace in 1815 
caused economic crises for these newly vested interests. Imports threatened 
to undercut the prices that British landlords received, reducing their land 
rents, prompting them to press for agricultural tariffs — the Corn Laws. 
Meanwhile, British manufactures undersold foreign production, prompting 
American and French industrialists to press for tariff protection. Britain, the 
United States, France and Germany thus experienced a fight between free 
traders and protectionists.
Having grown wealthy during Britain’s rise as a manufacturing power, its 
bankers looked forward to a resumption of trade financing, with Britain 

serving as “workshop of the world” —  and banker to it. David Ricardo, the 
leading advocate for Britain’s bankers, lobbied for free trade and an 
international specialization of production, not national self-reliance. The 
resulting tariff fight culminated in 1846 with repeal of the Corn Laws. Unless 
Britain imported low-priced crops, Ricardo argued, rising domestic food 
prices as a result of diminishing returns on Britain’s limited soil area would 
prevent British industry from exporting competitively — and hence, would 
not be able to expand trade financing from British banks.21
Debt appeared nowhere in Ricardo’s labor theory of value. He was silent 
when it came to the original analysis of cost value — the medieval 
Churchmen’s concept of Just Price with regard to agio charges. Adam Smith, 
Malachy Postlethwayt and other writers had focused on the extent to which 
the taxes levied to pay interest on the national debt increased the cost of 
living. James Steuart had pointed to the exchange rate problems caused by 
sending money abroad for debt service (mainly to the Dutch) or military 
spending and subsidies. Ricardo would have none of this. He insisted before 
Parliament that banking never could cause an economic problem! “Capital 
transfers” from military spending, debt service and international investment 
would be automatically self-financing. 
This was the genesis of today’s “free market” deregulatory theory. 
Ignoring the debt dimension, Ricardo became the doctrinal ancestor of Milton 
Friedman’s Chicago School of monetarists. The difference is that whereas 
they insist that there is no such thing as a free lunch, he defined economic 
rent as unearned income. “Ricardian socialists” extended the concept of 
economic rent to a full-fledged attack on landlordism. The Ricardian 
journalist James Mill advocated Britain’s “original” Domesday Book 
principle that groundrent should be the tax base. His son, John Stuart Mill, 
became a leading advocate of nationalizing the economic rent that landlords 
made “in their sleep” and the “unearned increment” of rising land prices.
The drive to break the power of landed aristocracies in Britain, France and 
other countries became the major political fight from the century spanning 
1815 and World War I. It was basically a class struggle between capital and 
landowners. The demand “that rent should be handed over to the state to 
serve in place of taxes,” Marx explained, “is a frank expression of the hatred 
the industrial capitalist bears towards the landed proprietor, who seems to 

him a useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of bourgeois 
production.”22 By taxing the land’s rental income and that of subsoil 
minerals provided freely by nature, industry could free itself from the sales 
and excise taxes that raised the cost of living and doing business. 
Since the 13th century the labor theory of value had been refined as a tool 
to isolate the elements of “empty” pricing that had no counterpart cost of 
production. Rent and interest were a vestiges of medieval privilege from 
which industrial capitalism sought to purify itself. Its idea of free markets 
was to liberate society from the overhead of groundrent, monopoly rent and 
interest, bringing land and finance into the public domain  — “socialize” 
them by transforming banking and finance capital to serve the needs of 
industrial capitalism. 
Marx expected industrial capitalism to pave the way for socialism by 
freeing Europe (and in time, its colonies and the continents of Asia, Africa 
and Latin America) from the carry-over of land rent imposed originally by 
military force, and from financial usury capital. The tacit assumption was that 
industrial financial systems would play as progressive a role in these regions 
as they were expected to do in the core. The Communist Manifesto credited 
the bourgeois economics of land taxers and kindred reformers in France and 
Britain with seeking to move society beyond the feudal mode of production. 
However, it criticized Europe’s revolutions of 1848 for stopping short of 
helping labor. The fight to tax the land’s rent — as the Physiocrats had 
sought to do with their Single Tax (L’Impôt Unique) and as Mill, Cherbuliez, 
Hilditch, Proudhon and other reformers advocated — was basically a fight by 
industry (and its financial backers) to minimize the cost of feeding labor, not 
to raise wages and living standards or improve working conditions. Most 
reformers left private property in place, limiting their aims to freeing markets 
from the rake-off of economic rent by landlords and monopoly privileges, 
and only secondarily from the interest charged by bankers and usurers. 
Marxists accordingly criticized “utopian” socialists and anti-socialist 
individualists such as Henry George for dealing only with the land issue or 
naïve monetary reforms without addressing labor’s fight to improve its 
working conditions and ultimately to free itself from private property in the 
means of production. Arguing against followers of George, Louis Untermann 
noted that in Germany, Ferdinand Lassalle found in Ricardian economics an 

implicitly socialist program, but “never indulged in any illusions as to the 
efficacy of that Single Tax idea for the emancipation of the working class.”23 
This required a government that would play an active role promoting labor’s 
interests vis-à-vis industrial capital, not only through regulatory reforms but 
by outright state ownership of the means of production under working-class 
control.
 
The Argument over How Productive an Industrial Role High Finance Would 
Play 
 
The 1815–1914 century was relatively free of war. America’s Civil War 
was the most devastating. But instead of borrowing from bankers, the North 
issued its own greenback currency. This success prompted bankers 
throughout the world to redouble their propaganda for “hard money,” as if 
bank credit was inherently sounder than public money creation. Subsequent 
development does not support this claim. 
The Franco-Prussian War saddled France with a reparations debt that it 
was able to finance without causing any great disturbance. Economists 
attributed the decline of interest rates over time to the world becoming more 
secure. Public spending was increasingly for infrastructure to support 
industrial progress. There was heavy arms spending, to be sure, especially on 
navies, but it aimed largely to build up industry in a three-way alliance 
between industry, government and high finance. Governments and the large 
banks were emerging as national planners via their allocation of credit and 
public spending.
The most productive industrial financing practice emerging on the 
European continent, especially in Germany where banking developed the 
closest linkages with the government and heavy industry. The relative 
absence of large fortunes made a virtue of necessity. Germany’s lag in 
industrial development obliged its banks and government agencies to take a 
long-term view based on building up strength over time. Rather than 
following British and Dutch banks by making straight interest-bearing loans 
against collateral already in place, the Reichsbank and other large banks 
engaged in a broad range of activities (“mixed banking”), including equity 

cross-holdings with their major customers. (After World War II, Japan’s 
cash-starved economy and widespread destruction likewise led its banks to 
establish close debt-equity relationships with their customers in order to 
provide sufficient liquidity to build for the future.)
Germany’s rapid victories over France and Belgium after war broke out in 
1914 were widely viewed as reflecting the superior efficiency of its banking 
system. To some observers the Great War appeared as a struggle between 
rival forms of financial organization, to decide not only who would rule 
Europe but also whether the continent would have laissez faire or a more 
state-socialist economy. In 1915, shortly after fighting broke out, the German 
Christian Socialist priest-politician Friedrich Naumann summarized the 
continental banking philosophy in Mitteleuropa. In England, Herbert Foxwell 
drew on Naumann’s arguments in two essays published in the Economic 
Journal in September and December 1917,24 quoting with approval 
Naumann’s contention that “the old individualistic capitalism, of what he 
calls the English type, is giving way to the new, more impersonal, group 
form; to the discipline, scientific capitalism he claims as German.” In the 
emerging tripartite integration of industry, banking and government, finance 
was “undoubtedly the main cause of the success of modern German 
enterprise.”
What is striking is how unlikely the prospect of corrosive and 
unproductive debt appeared a century ago. To be sure, Turkey and Egypt 
were ruined by foreign debt, and massive fraud and insider dealing occurred 
in ambitious projects such as the Panama and Suez Canals. But the logic of 
far-reaching financial reform was formulated with evangelical fervor, most 
notably in France. Count Claude-Henri de Saint-Simon’s Du Système 
Industriel (1821) inspired an ideology based on the perception that successful 
industrialization would require a shift away from interest-bearing debt to 
equity funding. Banks would be organized much like mutual funds.
Glorifying bankers as the future organizers of industry, the Saint-
Simonians saw the Industrial Revolution as introducing the capitalist 
travailleur, a financial engineer judging where credit could best be applied.25 
Prominent Saint-Simonians included the social theorist Auguste Comte, the 
economist Michel Chevalier, the socialist Pierre Leroux, and the engineer 
Ferdinand Lesseps whose plans for canals elaborated ideas initiated by Saint-

Simon. Outside of France their influence extended to Marx, John Stuart Mill 
and Christian Socialists in many countries. “Marx spoke only with admiration 
of the genius and encyclopedic brain of Saint-Simon,” noted Engels.26
In 1852, Emile Pereire and his younger brother Isaac formed the Société 
Génerale du Crédit Mobilier as a joint-stock bank. Their aim was to provide 
low-cost long-term equity financing for industrialists to expand production, 
replacing the Rothschilds and other banking families who had monopolized 
French finance by. However, as government insiders got into the game they 
corrupted the institution. The Austrian Credit Anstalt für Handel und 
Gewerbe became a more successful application of Credit Mobilier principles. 
Banking in the English-speaking countries remained more in the character 
of what Marx described as usury capital. British and Dutch practice had long 
used debt leverage to establish royal monopolies, e.g., as when the Bank of 
England’s monopoly of money issue was obtained in exchange for payment 
in government bonds. (U.S. bankers do much the same to today’s debtor 
countries, threatening them with financial crisis if they do not relinquish 
financial control of the public domain to global banks.)
Based on capitalizing existing income streams as collateral, Anglo-Dutch 
banking seemed obliged either to modernize along more industrial lines or 
make its economies financially obsolete. Foxwell warned that British steel, 
automotives, capital equipment and other heavy industry was in danger of 
becoming obsolescent largely because the nation’s bankers failed to 
understand the need to extend long-term credit and promote equity 
investment to expand industrial production.
The problem had its roots in the conditions in which British banking took 
shape. At the time Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of Nations, neither his 
Scottish contemporary James Watt nor other inventors were able to obtain 
bank loans to introduce their discoveries. They had to rely on their own 
families and friends, as industrial credit had not yet developed. Banks issued 
bills of exchange to finance the shipment of goods once these were produced, 
but not their manufacture. Procedures were in place to discount bills for 
immediate payment, and to evaluate the borrowing capacity of enterprises 
whose assets could be quickly liquidated, or well attested income streams that 
could be capitalized to carry bank loans, as in the case with real property. The 

preferred collateral was real estate, along with railroads and public utilities 
with a stable income stream.
The Duke of Bridgewater ran up immense personal debts to finance his 
canals by 1762, to be sure, but these were secured by mortgages against his 
property. But early innovations such as the automobile had to wait over half a 
century to obtain financing. “The investment banking houses had little to do 
with the financing of corporations or with industrial undertakings. The great 
investment houses bitterly opposed the numerous corporate issues which 
were floated in 1824 and 1825,” summarizes one financial historian. “The 
investment houses for a long time refused to take part even in the financing 
of the British railways.”27
British bankers were prone to insist that companies they controlled pay out 
most of their earnings as dividends and remain highly liquid rather than 
providing enough financial leeway for them to pursue a long-term investment 
strategy. By contrast, the major German banks paid out dividends at only half 
the rate of British banks, retaining their earnings as a capital reserve invested 
largely in the stock of their industrial clients. Treating their borrowers as 
allies rather than merely trying to make a profit as quickly as possible, they 
expected their customers to invest their profits in expanding production rather 
than paying them out as dividends. 
Britain’s bond and stockbrokers were no more up to the task of financing 
industrial innovation than were its banks. The fact that manufacturing 
companies could obtain significant funding only after they had grown fairly 
large prompted broad criticism of Britain’s joint-stock banks by the 1920s for 
their failure to finance industry and their favoritism toward international 
rather than domestic clients.28 Much as American “activist shareholders” do 
today after earning their commissions on an issue, they moved on to the next 
project without much concern for what happened to the investors who had 
bought the earlier securities. “As soon as he has contrived to get his issue 
quoted at a premium and his underwriters have unloaded at a profit,” 
complained Foxwell in 1917, “his enterprise ceases. ‘To him,’ as the Times 
says, ‘a successful flotation is of more importance than a sound venture.’”29
Defeat of Germany and the Central Powers in 1917 paved the way for 
Anglo-Dutch banking principles to become ascendant. Wall Street from the 

outset had followed the practice of hit-and-run stock manipulations and short-
term financial extraction of the sort that Marx and other Progressive Era 
writers believed was becoming a thing of the past. U.S. railroad barons and 
financial manipulators were notorious for issuing “watered stock” to 
themselves, “overfunding” companies with bond borrowings beyond their 
needs or capacity to carry. The directors of these corporations pocketed the 
difference — a practice that led much American industry to stay clear of 
banking and Wall Street out of self-protection.
Neither economists nor futurists anticipated that economic practices might 
regress. The working assumption is that a positive evolution would occur to 
more productive forms. But the banking practices of finance capitalism have 
regressed toward short-term predatory lending. Reversing an eight-century 
trend, financial laws have become more creditor-oriented. The tax system 
also has become regressive, reversing the Progressive Era’s financial-fiscal 
program by un-taxing property and wealth, shifting the fiscal burden onto 
labor and industry.
 
The symbiosis of finance capital with real estate and monopolies rather than 
industry
 
Marx expected industrial capital to use its rising power over governments 
to nationalize land and use its rent as the basic fiscal revenue. But it has been 
the banks that have obtained the lion’s share of land rent, capitalizing it into 
interest-bearing loans to new buyers.
Landed aristocracies no longer dominate the political system, yet fiscal 
favoritism for real estate has never been stronger, precisely because property 
ownership has been democratized — on credit. Real estate accounts for some 
70% of bank lending in Britain and the United States, making it by far the 
major market for bank loans, not industry and commerce as anticipated a 
century ago. This explains why the financial sector now stands behind real 
estate interests as their major lobbyist for property tax cuts. Mortgage interest 
now absorbs most of the land’s “free” rental value, which is capitalized into 
debt overhead rather than serving as the tax base.

Voters have come to believe that their interest lies in lowering property 
taxes, not raising them. Homes are the major asset for most households, and 
real estate remains the economy’s largest asset. Land is still its largest 
component — and some 80% of “capital” gains in the U.S. economy are 
land-price gains Site values are increased by public investment in streets, 
water and sewer facilities and transportation hubs, in school systems, by 
zoning restrictions, by the general level of prosperity, and most of all, by 
whatever bankers will lend.
 
Six variables are at work: 
(1) lower interest rates for capitalizing land rent into mortgage loans, 
(2) lower down payments, 
(3) slower rates of amortization (that is, giving borrowers longer to pay off 
the mortgage), 
(4) “easier” credit terms, i.e., looser standards for “liar’s loans” and kindred, 
the more credit can be extended to bid up real estate prices. Meanwhile, 
banks recycle their interest income into new loans — and also into campaign 
contributions to politicians who pledge to 
(5) lower property taxes, leaving more rental income to be paid to banks as 
interest to carry yet larger mortgage loans. Debt leveraging inflates property 
prices, creating 
(6) hopes for capital gains, prompting buyers to take on even more debt in the 
speculative hope that rising asset prices will more than cover the added 
interest, which is paid out of capital gains, not out of current income.30
 
Recent years are the first time in history that homeowners and indeed, 
entire economies have imagined that the way to get rich was to run deeper 
into debt, not to pay it down. Home ownership is the defining criterion for 
belonging to the middle class. Some two-thirds of the British and U.S. 
populations now own their own homes, and upward of 90% in Scandinavia. 
This diffusion of property ownership has enabled the propertied and financial 
interests to mobilize popular opposition to taxes on commercial and rental 

real estate as well as homes. (California’s Proposition 13 is the most 
notorious case in such demagogy.)
Government moves to check rentier interests are depicted as “the road to 
serfdom.” Yet untaxing property and finance obliges governments to make up 
these tax cuts by raising taxes that fall on consumers and non-FIRE-sector 
business. This shrinks the economy, lowering its ability to pay the rent 
needed to pay the bankers on their mortgage loans. So we are brought back to 
the problem of debt deflation and the capitalization of interest charges into 
higher prices.
An income profile for the typical U.S. wage earner shows the degree to 
which the cost of living now reflects FIRE sector costs more than prices for 
commodities produced by labor. Some 40% of blue-collar wage income in 
the United States typically is spent on housing. (Recent attempts by the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. to reduce the proportion absorbed by 
mortgages to 32% have encountered strong bank opposition.) Another 15 
percent or so is earmarked to pay other debts: student loans to get the 
education required for middle class employment, auto loans to drive to work 
(from the urban sprawl promoted by tax shifts favoring real estate 
“developers”), credit card debt, personal loans and retail credit. FICA 
paycheck withholding ostensibly for Social Security and Medicare (a 
euphemism for the tax shift off the higher income brackets) absorbs 11% of 
payroll costs, and income and sales taxes borne by labor add another 10% to 
15%.
This leaves only a third of wage income available to spend on food and 
clothing, transportation, health care and other basic needs. This has 
transformed the character of global competition, yet it is cognitive dissonance 
as far as academic theories of international trade and investment are 
concerned. Economics theorizing remains shaped by Ricardo’s success at 
diverting attention away from the debt and financial overhead as a main 
economic problem.
This is not how matters were supposed to turn out for Progressive Era 
reforms of industrial capitalism. The fight to minimize rentier rake-offs in the 
form of economic rent from land, commercial monopolies, banking and 
kindred rent-seeking “tollbooth” privileges has failed. It has failed largely 

because of the symbiosis between the financial sector and the rent-seekers 
that have become its major customers as access to bank credit has been 
democratized. 
On the broadest social level, the ostensible “free market” lobbying effort 
sponsored by banks to shift the property tax onto labor and industry has 
become a campaign against government itself. The aim is to shift planning — 
along with public enterprises and their revenue — out of the hands of public 
agencies to those of Wall Street in the United States, the City of London, the 
Paris Bourse, Frankfurt, Hong Kong, Tokyo and other financial centers.
The problem is that the vantage point of financial planners is more short-
term than that of government. And being short-term, it is extractive, not 
productive.
 
Finance Capital’s Raid on Industry
 
Marx defined “primitive accumulation” as the seizure of land and other 
communally held assets by raiders and the subsequent extraction of tribute or 
rent. Today’s financial analogue occurs when banks create credit freely and 
supply it to corporate raiders for leveraged buyouts or to buy the public 
domain being privatized. Just as the motto of real estate investors is “rent is 
for paying interest,” that of corporate raiders is “profit is for paying interest.” 
Takeover specialists and their investment bankers pore over balance sheets to 
find undervalued real estate and other assets, and to see how much cash flow 
is being invested in long-term research and development, depreciation and 
modernization that can be diverted to pay out as tax-deductible interest. 
Whatever is paid out as income taxes and dividends likewise can be turned 
into tax-deductible interest payments. The plan is to capitalize the target’s 
cash flow (ebitda) into payments to the bankers and bondholders who 
advance the credit to buy out existing shareholders (or government agencies). 
For industrial firms such leveraged buyouts (LBOs) are called “taking a 
company private,” because its stock ownership is no longer publicly 
available.
Permitting interest to absorb the revenue hitherto paid out as taxes and 

(after-tax) dividends to stockholders is diametrically opposite to replacing 
debt with equity funding as Saint-Simon and subsequent reformers hoped to 
bring about. The logical end — and the dream of bank marketing departments 
— is for all cash flow — earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and 
amortization — is to be paid out as interest, leaving nothing over for taxes, 
capital renewal and modernization to raise labor productivity and living 
standards. All land rent, corporate profit, tax revenue and personal income 
over and basic spending is to be pledged to banks and bondholders as 
interest.
Under such conditions fortunes are made most readily not by industrial 
capital formation but by indebting industry, real estate, labor and 
governments, siphoning off the economic surplus in interest, other financial 
fees, bonuses, and “capital” gains. Populations willingly go into debt as it 
appears that gains can be made most easily by buying real estate and other 
assets on credit — as long as asset prices rise at a pace higher than the rate of 
interest. 
Today’s financial investors aim at “total returns,” defined as earnings plus 
capital gains — with increasing emphasis on the latter gains in real estate, 
stocks and bonds. Industrial companies increasingly are “financialized” to 
produce such gains for investors, not to increase tangible capital formation. 
The “bubble” or Ponzi phase of the financial cycle aims to create the 
financial equivalent of a perpetual motion machine, sustaining an exponential 
debt growth by creating enough new credit to inflate real estate, stock and 
bond prices at a rate that (at least for a while) enables debtors to cover the 
interest falling due.31 As a recent popular phrase puts it, financial collapse is 
staved off by the indebted economy trying to “borrow its way out of debt.”
This asset-stripping dynamic, which Marx characterized as usury capital, 
is antithetical to that of industrial capital. Based on the liabilities side of the 
balance sheet, financial securities take the form of anti-wealth — legalized 
claims on the means of production and income earned productively. The 
underlying dynamic is fictitious, because it cannot remain viable for long. It 
sustains interest payments by stripping assets, leaving the economy with less 
ability to produce a surplus out of which to pay creditors. And indeed, the 
financial sector destroys life on a scale similar to military conquest. Birth 
rates fall, life spans shorten and emigration soars as economies polarize.

This is the “free market” alternative to Progressive Era and socialist 
reforms. It typifies the IMF austerity plans that epitomize centralized 
planning on behalf of the global financial sector. Yet pro-financial ideologues 
depict public ownership, regulation and taxation as the road to serfdom, as if 
the alternative endorsed by Frederick Hayek, Ayn Rand and Alan Greenspan 
were not a road to debt peonage. And the endgame of this dynamic is a 
financial crash, wiping out savings that have been lent out beyond the 
indebted economy’s ability to pay. 
It is at this point that the financial sector wields its political power to 
demand public bailouts in a vain attempt to save the preserve the financial 
system’s ability to keep on expanding at compound interest. Much as 
environmental polluters seek to shift the cleanup costs onto the public sector, 
so the financial sector demands cleanup of its debt pollution at taxpayer 
expense. The fact that this is now being done in the context of ostensibly 
democratic politics throws a leading assumption of political economy into 
doubt. If economies tend naturally to act in their self-interest, how did the 
financial sector gain such extractive power to raid and dismantle industry and 
shed its tax burden? 
If Darwinian models of self-betterment are to explain the past century’s 
development, they must show how creditors have translated their financial 
power into political power in the face of democratic Parliamentary and 
Congressional reform. How has planning become centralized in the hands of 
Wall Street and its global counterparts, not in the hands of government and 
industry as imagined almost universally a century ago? And why has Social 
Democratic, Labour and academic criticism become so silent in the face of 
this economic Counter-Enlightenment?
The answer is, by deception and covert ideological manipulation via “junk 
economics.” Financial lobbyists know what smart parasites know: The 
strategy is to take over the host’s brain, to make it believe that the free 
luncher is part of its own body. The FIRE sector is treated as part of the 
economy, not as draining the host’s nourishment. The host even goes so far 
as to protect the free rider, as in the 2008–09 bailouts of Wall Street and 
British banks at “taxpayer expense.” 
When such growth culminates in financial wreckage, banks demand public 

bailouts. They claim that this is necessary to enable them to resume lending. 
But they will not lend more against property already so deeply indebted that 
it remains in negative equity. Hoping to turn the crisis into an opportunity for 
further financial incursions into the industrial economy, bank lobbyists 
propose that governments help indebted homeowners and real estate investors 
avoid default by cutting property taxes yet further — shifting the fiscal 
burden yet more onto labor and non-financial business. Tax cuts on wealth 
are promoted as if they will be invested rather than used to pay the financial 
sector more interest or be gambled on currencies and exchange rates, interest 
rates, stock and bond prices, credit default swaps and kindred derivatives.
Economic evolution does not necessarily follow the path of greatest 
efficiency. The oligarchic, creditor-oriented Roman Empire collapsed into the 
Dark Age, after all. Financially destructive policies may overwhelm 
technological potential. Bubble-type prosperity is based on debt-leveraged 
asset-price gains at the expense of the economy at large. Rising housing 
prices raise the cost of living, while rising stock and bond prices increase the 
cost of buying a retirement income — leaving pension funds unable to make 
good on their promises. 
 
Pension-Fund Capitalism and other Financial Modes of Exploiting Labor
 
Finance capital’s modes of exploiting labor go far beyond that of 
industrial capital employing it to sell its products at a profit, and even beyond 
simple usurious lending to labor (above all for housing). Most innovative has 
been the appropriation of labor’s savings via pension funds and mutual funds. 
In the 1950s, General Motors and other large companies offered to contribute 
to funds to pay pensions in exchange for slower growth in wages. This policy 
(which Peter Drucker patronizingly called “pension-fund socialism”)32 
turned over wage set-asides to professional money managers to buy stocks 
and junk bonds to make financial gains — but not in a manner that 
necessarily promotes industrial capitalism. Money would grow through the 
proverbial “magic of compound interest,” making money purely from money 
(M–M´).
The dream is to manage labor’s savings on a commission basis, steering it 

to inflate stock and bond prices. And indeed, pension-fund savings did fuel a 
stock market run-up from the 1960s onward. In the process, they provided 
corporate raiders and other financial managers with funds to use against labor 
— and against industrial capital itself. Pension fund managers played a large 
role in the junk bonding of industry in the 1980s. And finding themselves 
graded on their performance every three months, fund managers back raiders 
who seek to gain by downsizing and outsourcing labor. They typically find 
their fortune (and even job survival) to lie in using pension savings not in 
ways that increase employment, improve working conditions or invest in 
productive capital formation, but in making gains purely by financial means 
— corporate looting that strips assets to pay dividends and increase short-
term stock prices, or simply to pay off creditors. 
Meanwhile, the largest sellers of stocks have been managers and venture 
capitalists “cashing out” by selling into a market fueled mainly by labor’s 
wage set-asides. Pension funds thus turn out to play a key role in enabling 
finance capitalists to realize their gains — only to be their fate to be left 
holding an empty bag in the end. Selling off stocks to pay retirees creates an 
outflow of funds from the stock market that reverses the initial price run-up.
“Money manager” capitalism aims to financialize Social Security and 
Medicare along similar lines, sending a new tsunami of public funds into the 
stock market to produce capital gains.33 A dress rehearsal for this plan was 
staged in Chile after its 1973 military coup. The Chicago Boys who advised 
the junta called it “labor capitalism,” a cynical Orwellian term that Margaret 
Thatcher adopted for her program of privatizing Britain’s public utilities. 
(The “labor” here represents the exploited party, not the beneficiary.) A slice 
of its wages is withheld and turned over to the employer’s financial affiliate 
(the banco for the Chilean grupos). When a high enough pension reserve is 
accumulated, the employer transfers it to the banco or kindred affiliate in an 
offshore banking center, leaving the industrial employer a bankrupt shell.
The actuarial fiction is that corporate, state and local pension funds (and 
Social Security) invested financially can grow exponentially by enough to 
pay for retirement and health care. This goal cannot be met in practice, 
because the “real” economy is unable to grow at a rate required to support the 
growth in debt service. Widespread awareness of this fact has led to the 
corporate ploy of threatening bankruptcy if unions do not agree to replace 

defined-benefit pensions with defined-contribution programs in which all that 
employees know is how much is docked from their paycheck, not what they 
will end up with. General Motors went bankrupt as a result of its inability to 
fund the pensions guaranteed by their defined-benefit plans. 
Financial claims rise exponentially, beyond the economy’s ability to pay. 
Bubble economies try to postpone the inevitable crash by inflating prices for 
real estate, stocks and bonds by enough to enable debtors to take out higher 
loans against the property they pledge as collateral. Governments balance 
their budgets by privatizing public enterprises, selling “tollbooth” privileges 
on credit to buyers who bid up their prices by debt leveraging. Financial 
underwriters reap commissions and insiders making a killing as sales prices 
for stocks are underpriced to guarantee first-day price jumps. (Mrs. Thatcher 
perfected this ploy, making unprecedented fortunes for early players and 
underwriters in the privatization game.)
A crash occurs at the point where this disparity is widely recognized. To 
bankers, the antidote is to lend enough new credit to re-inflate prices real 
estate and other assets, enabling new buyers to borrow the credit to buy 
property from defaulters. Rather than scaling back the U.S. economy’s over-
indebtedness, for instance, the Treasury and Federal Reserve have bailed out 
the banks to save them from taking a loss on debt write-downs.34 The dream 
is to keep the compound interest scheme expanding ad infinitum. But the 
pretense that fictitious finance-capital claims can be paid must be dropped at 
the point where financial managers desert the sinking financial ship. Their 
last act before the bubble bursts is the time-honored practice of taking the 
money and running — paying themselves as large bonuses and salaries as 
corporate treasuries (and public bailouts) allow. 
 
Conclusion
 
Finance capitalism has become a network of exponentially growing 
interest-bearing claims wrapped around the production economy. The internal 
contradiction is that its dynamic leads to debt deflation and asset stripping. 
The economy is turned into a Ponzi scheme by recycling debt service to make 
new loans to inflate property prices by enough to justify yet new lending. But 

a limit is imposed by the shrinking ability of surplus income to cover the debt 
service falling due. That is what the mathematics of compound interest are all 
about. Borrowing to make speculative gains from asset-price inflation does 
not involve tangible investment in the means of production. It is based simply 
on M–M´, not M–C–M´. The debt overhead grows exponentially as banks 
and other creditors recycle their receipt of debt service into new (and riskier) 
loans, not productive credit.
Half a century of IMF austerity programs has demonstrated how 
destructive this usurious policy is, by limiting the economy’s ability to create 
a surplus. Yet economies throughout the world now base their pension 
planning, medical insurance, state and local finances on a faith in compound 
interest, without seeing the inner contradiction that debt deflation shrinks the 
domestic market and blocks economies from developing. 
What is irrational in this policy is the impossibility of achieving 
compound interest in a “real” economy whose productivity is being eroded 
by the expanding financial overhead raking off a rising share. Meanwhile, a 
fiscal sleight-of-hand has taken Social Security and Medicare out of the 
general budget and treated them as “user fees” rather than entitlements. This 
makes blue-collar wage earners pay a much higher tax rate than the FIRE 
sector and the upper income brackets. FICA paycheck withholding has 
become a forced “saving in advance,” ostensibly to be invested for future 
“entitlement” spending but in practice lent to the Treasury to enable it to cut 
taxes on the higher brackets. Instead of financing Social Security and 
Medicare out of progressive taxes levied on the highest income brackets — 
mainly the FIRE sector — the dream of privatizing these entitlement 
programs is to turn this tax surplus over to financial managers to bid up stock 
and bond prices, much as pension-fund capitalism did from the 1960s 
onward. 
A century ago most economic futurists imagined that labor would earn 
higher wages and spend them on rising living standards. But for the past 
generation, labor has used its income simply to carry a higher debt burden. 
Income over and above basic needs has been “capitalized” into debt service 
on bank loans used to finance debt-leveraged housing, and to pay for 
education (originally expected to be paid out of the property tax) and other 
basic needs. Although debtors’ prisons are a thing of the past, a financial 

characteristic of our time is the “post-industrial” obligation to work a lifetime 
to pay off such debts. Meanwhile, the FIRE sector now accounts for 40% of 
U.S. business profit, despite the tax-accounting fictions cited earlier.
Financial lobbyists have led a regressive about-face toward an economic 
Counter-Enlightenment. Reversing an eight-century tendency to favor 
debtors, the bankruptcy laws have been rewritten along creditor-oriented lines
by banks, credit-card companies and other financial institutions, and put into 
the hands of politicians in what best may be called a financialized democracy 
— or as the ancients called it, oligarchy. Shifting the tax burden onto labor 
while using government revenue and new debt creation to bail out the 
banking sector has polarized the U.S. economy to the most extreme degree 
since statistics began to be collected. 
The Progressive Era expected planning to pass into the hands of 
government, not those of a financial sector at odds with industrial capital 
formation and economic growth. Nearly everyone a century ago expected 
infrastructure to be developed in the public domain, in the form of public 
utilities whose services would be provided freely or at least at subsidized 
rates in order to lower the price of living and doing business. Instead, public 
enterprises since about 1980 have been privatized — on credit — and turned 
into tollbooth privileges to extract economic rent. Bankers capitalize these 
opportunities, which are sold on credit. Little is left for the tax collector after 
charging off interest, depreciation and amortization, managerial salaries and 
stock options. The resulting tax squeeze impoverishes economies, obliging 
governments either to cut back their spending or shift the fiscal burden onto 
labor and non-financialized industry.
The resulting financial dynamic is more like what Marx described as 
usury-capital than industrial banking. In the spirit of the Saint-Simonians he 
believed industrial capitalism to direct credit into productive capital 
formation, he expected that financial planning would pave the way for a 
socialist reorganization of society. Instead, it is paving the road to 
neoserfdom. Financial operators are using credit as a weapon to strip 
corporate assets on behalf of bankers and bondholders. Employees can afford 
homes and other property (and indeed, entire corporations) only by 
borrowing the purchase price — on terms that involve a lifetime of debt 
peonage, and indeed (in most countries) bearing personal liability for 

negative equity when housing prices plunge below mortgage levels. 
Government planning has become subordinate to the dictates of unelected 
central bankers and the International Monetary Fund imposing austerity 
programs rather than funding capital formation and rising living standards. 
Having analyzed finance capital’s tendency to grow exponentially, Marx 
nonetheless believed that it would be subordinated to the dynamics of 
industrial capital. With an optimistic Darwinian ring he shared the tendency 
of his contemporaries to underestimate the ways in which the vested interests 
would fight back to preserve their privileges even in the face of democratic 
political reform. He expected industrial capitalism to mobilize finance capital 
to fund its expansion and indeed its evolution into socialism, plowing profits 
and financial returns into more capital formation. It was the task of socialism 
to see more of this surplus spent on raising wages and living standards while 
improving the working conditions — and spent by government to freely 
provide an expanding range of basic needs, or at the very least at subsidized 
prices. Infrastructure spending and rising living standards thus would become 
the ultimate beneficiaries of capital formation, not landowners, monopolists 
or predatory finance.
This is not how matters have worked out. More of the economic surplus is 
being siphoned off as land rent and interest. Yet many of Marx’s followers 
conflate his analysis of industrial capital with the financial dynamic of 
“usurer’s capital.” The latter is not part of the industrial economy but grows 
autonomously by “purely mathematical” means, running ahead of the 
economy’s ability to produce a surplus large enough to pay the exponentially 
soaring financial overhead.35 And in contrast to his analysis of industrial 
capital, Marx explained why the financial overgrowth — recycling savings 
into new loans rather than investing them productively in tangible capital — 
cannot be sustained:
 
The credit system, which has its focus in the so-called national banks and 
the big money-lenders and usurers surrounding them, constitutes enormous 
centralisation, and gives to this class of parasites the fabulous power, not only 
to periodically despoil industrial capitalists, but to interfere in actual in a 
most dangerous manner — and this gang knows nothing about production 

and has nothing to do with it.36
 
Society therefore faces a choice between (1) saving the economy, by 
writing down debts to the ability to carry without stripping the economy; and 
(2) saving the financial sector, trying to preserve the fiction that debts 
growing at compound interest can be paid. For pensions and other public 
programs, for example, this means a choice between (1) paying them on a 
pay-as-you-go basis, out of the “real” economic surplus; and (2) the fictitious 
assumption that funds can earn annual returns of 8% or more to provide for 
labor’s retirement by asset-price inflation fueled by debt leveraging and 
purely financial maneuvering (M–M´).
If economic evolution is to reflect the inner logic and requirements of 
society’s technological capabilities, then finance capital must be subordinated 
to serve the economy, not to be permitted to master and stifle it. That is what 
John Maynard Keynes meant by what he gently called “euthanasia of the 
rentier.” In practice it means that governments must prevent property rents 
and other returns to privilege from being capitalized into bank loans.
To save society, its victims must see that asset-price inflation fueled by 
debt leveraging makes them poorer, not richer, and that financialization is the 
destroyer and exploiter of industrial capital as well as of labor. The objective 
of classical political economy was to bring prices in line with socially 
necessary costs of production. This was to be achieved in large part by taxing 
away economic rent in order to prevent it from being capitalized into loans to 
new buyers. Buying rent-extracting opportunities on credit increases prices 
for basic needs, turning society into a “tollbooth economy.” It also forces 
governments to compensate by raising taxes on labor and tangible capital.
Many Social Democratic and Labour parties have jumped on the 
bandwagon of finance capital, not recognizing the need to rescue industrial 
capitalism from dependence on neofeudal finance capital before the older 
conflict between labor and industrial capital over wage levels and working 
conditions can be resumed. That is what happens when one reads only 
Volume I of Capital, neglecting the discussion of fictitious capital in 
Volumes II and III and Theories of Surplus Value.
 

PULL QUOTES
 
[PULL QUOTE 04-01]
If economies tend naturally to act in their self-interest, how did the financial 
sector gain such extractive power to raid and dismantle industry and shed its 
tax burden? — Michael Hudson
1 Theories of Surplus Value, Part III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1971), p. 468. 
2 Capital, Vol. III (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1909), p. 710. All subsequent quotations from Capital are 
from this edition, unless specifically noted (as in footnotes 15 and 36).
3 Ibid., p. 705.
4 See for instance ibid., p. 700: “In place of the old exploiters, whose exploitation was more or less 
patriarchal because it was largely a means of political power, steps a hard money-mad parvenu.”
5 Ibid., p. 716.
6 Ibid., pp. 699 f. 
7 Ibid., p. 711 fn. 116.
8 It is only in the English-language translations of Marx’s Theories of Surplus Value III (1971, pp. 296 
f., 527–37) for instance, that one can find Martin Luther’s denunciation of usurers, not in Luther’s 
Works published by Fortress.
9 Capital III, p. 552.
10 In his Grundrisse notebooks (1973, pp. 842 f.) incorporated into Capital III (ch. xxiv), p. 463. 
11 Capital III, p. 699.

12 “Capitalism in the United States is now in a new stage, money manager capitalism, in which the 
proximate owners of a vast proportion of financial instruments are mutual and pension funds. The total 
return on the portfolio is the only criteria used for judging the performance of the managers of these 
funds, which translates into an emphasis upon the bottom line in the management of business 
organizations.” Hyman P. Minsky, “Uncertainty and the Institutional Structure of Capitalist 
Economies,” Working Paper no. 155, Jerome Levy Economics Institute, April 1996, cited in L. Randall 
Wray, “The rise and fall of money manager capitalism: a Minskian approach,” Cambridge Journal of 
Economics 33 (2009), pp. 807–828, and also in Wray, “Minsky’s Money Manager Capitalismand the 
Global Financial Crisis,” 2010, 
http://www.levyinstitute.org/pubs/conf_april10/19th_Minsky_PPTs/19th_Minsky_Wray.pdf.
13 Capital III (Chicago, 1905), p. 713.
14 Capital III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1958), p. 479.
15 Capital III, p. 461. 
16 Ibid., p. 547.
17 Ibid., p. 547.
18 Ibid., pp. 551 f. (Ch. xxix: The Composition of Banking Capital). The term fictitious capital passed 
into general circulation. In the United States it meant capitalized unearned income (“economic rent,” 
income without cost-value, mainly in the forms of groundrent and monopoly rent as well as financial 
extraction of revenue). Henry George picked it up in The Condition of Labor (1891), referring to the 
“fictitious capital that is really capitalized monopoly” (in The Land Question and Related Writings, 
New York, Robert Schalkenbach Foundation, 1982), pp. 201 f.). Book 3, Chapter 4 of George’s 
Progress and Poverty (1879) is titled, “Of Spurious Capital And Of Profits Often Mistaken For 
Interest.” 
19 Capital II (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1957), p. 532.
20 It often surprises both ends of the political spectrum to learn that it was Marx who firmly established 
depreciation as an element of value theory. As Terence McCarthy wrote in his initial English language 
translation of Marx’s Theories of Surplus Value (which he translated under the title of A History of 
Economic Doctrines, New York: Langland Press, 1952, p. xv): “As a logical consequence of his 
examination of Physiocracy, Marx was led to a study of the Economic Theory of Depreciation. So 
complete is his analysis of this aspect of income formation that, if Capital has been called the bible of 
the working class, the History might well be called the bible of the Society of Cost Accountants. … 

Over the whole society, failure to provide adequate depreciation reserves is, Marx implies, to negate 
economic progress and to begin consumption of that portion of the value of the product which Marx 
believes belongs neither to the laborers in industry, nor to their employers, but to the economy itself, as 
something which must be ‘restored’ to it if the economic process is to continue.”
21 I discuss Ricardo’s views and the more advanced response of his contemporaries in Trade, 
Development and Foreign Debt: How Trade and Development Concentrate Economic Power in the 
Hands of Dominant Nations (2nd ed. ISLET 2010 [available on Amazon.com]; orig. pub. London: 
Pluto Press, 1992).
22 The Poverty of Philosophy [1847] (Moscow, n.d.), p. 155. Theories of Surplus Value III, pp. 396-98 
quoted Antoine Cherbuliez, Richesse ou pauvrete (Paris: 1841), p. 128, whose title and content seems 
to have inspired Henry George’s Progress and Poverty (1879): “Rent thus would replace all state 
revenues. Finally industry, liberated, released from all fetters, would take an unprecedented leap 
forward …”
23 Socialism Vs. Single Tax. A Verbatim Report of a Debate held at Twelfth Street, Turner Hall, 
Chicago, December 20th, 1905. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Co., [1907], pp. 4 f.
24 H. S. Foxwell, “The Nature of the Industrial Struggle,” Economic Journal 27, pp. 323–27, and “The 
Financing of Industry and Trade,” ibid., pp. 502–15).
25 Capital III, p. 714, quoting Religion saint-simonienne, Economie politique et Politique (Paris: 1831, 
p. 98 and 45). Marx cites the 1831 compilation Religion saint-simonienne describing banks as enabling 
“industrious people” to obtain financing for their enterprise, and Charles Pecqueur, Theorie Nouvelle 
d’Economie Sociale et Politique (Paris 1842, p. 434) urging that production be ruled by what the Saint-
Simonians called the Systeme general des banques.
26 Capital III, p. 711 fn. 116. Saint-Simon’s weakness, according to Marx, was that of many land 
taxers, namely, his failure to see the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. He blamed 
this on the Fourierist desire to reconcile capital and labor, which Marx believed to be impossible.
27 George W. Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (1938), pp. 16f.
28 Lloyd George called them “the stronghold of reaction” (see Thomas Johnston, The Financiers and 
the Nation [London 1934, p. 138]). Ernest Bevin, G. D. H. Cole and other members of the British 
Labour Party criticized banks in The Crisis (London 1931). See also Cole, The Socialisation of 
Banking (London 1931), and John Wilmot, Labour’s Way to Control Banking and Finance (London 
1935). The Labour Party’s proposed solution was to nationalize the Bank of England, and in 1933 to 
recommend socializing the joint stock banks as well. Keynes was sympathetic in “A New Economic 
Policy for England,” Economic Forum, Winter 1932–33, pp. 29–37.

29 Ibid.
30 I chart these variables in Michael Hudson, “The New Road to Serfdom: An illustrated guide to the 
coming real estate collapse,” Harpers, Vol. 312 (No. 1872), May 2006):39-46.
31 Hyman P. Minsky accordingly called this the Ponzi phase of the financial cycle in “The Financial 
Instability Hypothesis,” Levy Institute Working Paper No. 74, May 1992, and Stabilizing an Unstable 
Economy (New York: McGraw-Hill Professional, 1986).
32 Peter Drucker, The Unseen Revolution: How Pension Fund Socialism Came to America (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1976). See also Drucker’s Post-Capitalist Society (New York: Harper Business, 1993), 
p. 77: “Pension fund capitalism is fundamentally as different from any earlier form of capitalism as it is 
from anything any socialist ever envisage as a socialist economy.”
33 I trace this campaign in “The $4.7 trillion Pyramid: Why Social Security Won’t Be Enough to Save 
Wall Street,” Harpers 310 (No. 1859, April 2005), pp. 35–40.
34 Since September 2008 the U.S. Federal Reserve has engaged in “cash for trash” swaps, accepting 
junk mortgages at their nominal “mark to model” values. The Treasury has printed bonds for their these 
swaps, and taken Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac onto its own balance sheet, giving public guarantees that 
“taxpayers” will make good on all losses.
35 Capital III, p. 700
36 Capital III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1958), p. 532.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 4
____________

*****
5. The Use and Abuse of Mathematical 
Economics
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
— Hamlet (Act I, Scene V)
“Whoever enters here must know mathematics.” That was the motto of 
Plato’s Academy. Emphasizing the Pythagorean proportions of musical 
temperament and the calendrical regularities of the sun, moon and planets, 
classical philosophy used these key ratios of nature as an analogue for 
shaping order in society’s basic proportions. The population’s optimum size, 
the city’s geometric shape and its division into equal “tribal” fractions for 
voting and fighting in the army were mathematically idealized. But there was 
little quantitative analysis of economic relations, and certainly no thought that 
unregulated market forces would assure social harmony. There was no 
statistical measurement of the debts that wracked the Greek and Roman 
economies, or of overall output, its distribution and value.
We now have such measures, but can we say that mathematics provides 
the key to understanding the major economic problems of our time? More 
specifically, has the marginalist and monetarist application of mathematics 
become so nearsighted as to lose sight of the economy’s structural problems?

The education of modern economists consists largely of higher 
mathematics, which are used more in an abstract metaphysical way than one 
that aims at empirically measuring society’s underlying trends. It is now over 
a century since John Shield Nicholson remarked that “The traditional method 
of English political economy was more recently attacked, or rather warped,” 
by pushing the hypothetical or deductive side … to an extreme by the 
adoption of mathematical devices.… less able mathematicians have had less 
restraint and less insight; they have mistaken form for substance, and the 
expansion of a series of hypotheses for the linking together of a series of 
facts. This appears to me to be especially true of the mathematical theory of 
utility. I venture to think that a large part of it will have to be abandoned. It 
savors too much of the domestic hearth and the desert island.1
If today’s economics has become less relevant to the social problems that 
formed the subject matter of classical political economy a century ago, its 
scope has narrowed in large part because of the technocratic role played by 
mathematics. This paper asks whether this has been an inherent and 
inevitable development. Has the narrowing of scope of economics since the 
anti-classical reaction of the 1870s — the so-called neoclassical revolution of 
William Stanley Jevons, Carl Menger, and later of Alfred Marshall and his 
followers, culminating in today’s Chicago School — been inherent in the 
mathematization of economics? Or, does it follow from the particular way in 
which mathematics has been applied?
What is the proper role for mathematics to play? Is there such a thing as 
bad mathematical economics? What kinds of problems do its formulations 
tend to exclude?
Mathematical Economics as Tunnel Vision
A clue to the modern role of mathematical model-building is provided by 
the degree to which higher mathematics was deemed unnecessary by 18th-
century moral philosophy and the political economy that emerged out of it. 
To be sure, the labor theory of value was formulated in quantitative terms 
from William Petty through Ricardo and Marx. Britain’s political 
arithmeticians used statistics, as did the German cameralists. The 

quantification of magnitudes gives concrete empirical expression to one’s 
logic. But statistical calculations of price indices or various formulae for 
measuring labor and capital costs are a far cry from model-building.
What has become the distinguishing feature of mathematical economics is 
its formulation of problems abstractly in terms of just a few selected 
functions, excluding all categories that cannot be expressed in its bare 
equations. Key dimensions of economic life have been neglected that need 
not logically have been omitted, such as land pricing. Despite the emphasis 
that Ricardo gave to rent theory, the land nationalization debate stimulated by 
John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer and Henry George, and the central role that 
Thorstein Veblen assigned to urban land in Absentee Ownership, land-price 
gains have been ignored by today’s price theory. Macroeconomic analysis 
likewise excludes asset-price gains (“capital gains”) from its definition of 
economic returns.
A significant role of mathematization has been to impose this narrowness 
on economic analysis. By focusing on how individuals spend their income on 
consumption goods, or defray such consumption by saving at an interest rate 
that allegedly reflects their “time preference” schedules, marginalist 
mathematics diverts the economist’s eye away from the methods used to 
acquire and build up wealth.
The big picture — society’s long-term transformation — is excluded from 
analysis on the ground that its dynamics cannot be sufficiently mathematized. 
Reiss has located the appropriate quotation from William Roscher: 
some scientists (attempted to) fit laws of economics in algebraic formulae 
… But, of course, the advantage of the mathematical mode of expression 
vanishes the more, the more complex the facts to which they are applied 
become.… In every description of the life of a nation the algebraic formulae 
would become so complicated that they render a continuation of work 
impossible.2
To be sure, there are ways to reason mathematically with regard to 
national economic development, and even to changes in the economic 
system. Brooks and Henry Adams suggested applying the idea of phase 
change that had been developed by the American mathematician Willard 
Gibbs.3 But this suggestion fell on deaf ears. The concern of modern 

mathematical economists is not with social evolution and changing the status 
quo, but with analyzing the workings of marginal phenomena within the 
existing status quo.
The earliest expounders of economic relationships in terms of abstract 
mathematical functions were virtually ignored in their own day primarily 
because political economy had not yet narrowed into individualistic 
consumerism or technocratic business planning. It remained an extension of 
moral philosophy and public policy-making. The technical problems with 
which the early mathematical economists dealt, such as psychological utility 
and price formation based on supply and demand, were still far from being 
deemed to be the highest concern. The marginalists would make a true 
breakaway by viewing the consumer rather than the producer/employer as the 
focal point of the economic system, and discussing the economy more from 
the vantage point of individual psychology than from that of national 
industrial and financial transformation.
The early mathematical economists concerned themselves with narrower 
topics such as price formation, business cost accounting and railroad 
planning. Gossen’s mathematical formulation of utility theory was not widely 
noticed precisely because he focused on problems hitherto considered too 
mundane to be deemed an essential part of political economy’s core. 
Likewise, von Mangoldt’s editor Kleinwaechter disparaged his mathematical 
illustration of the principles of price formation as “redundant ballast” in view 
of the fact that no statistical quantification was applicable. He expunged von 
Mangoldt’s graphic examples altogether.
As for Wilhelm Launhardt’s railway economics, it was considered too 
technical to be classified as political economy proper. His analysis did not 
deal with how railroads reduced transport costs, thereby benefiting the 
locational value of farmland, residential and commercial property along the 
trackway, making fortunes for real estate speculators. As any urban planner 
knows, this “external” effect of railways on land prices is so large as to 
overwhelm the narrow direct economies involved.
Early applications of mathematical notation and graphs to economic 
problems thus were ignored largely because they were deemed to be more in 
the character of engineering or merely technical business analysis than full-

fledged political economy. The most essential concerns of political economy 
and German National oekonomie were not amenable to streamlining in 
mathematical form. And indeed, while today’s mathematical economics 
serves technocrats and financial strategists, it imposes a nearsighted 
perspective that distracts attention from what formerly was most important, in 
order to focus on what is merely marginal. In this sense economics has been 
overly distilled into the microeconomics of price theory, along with a rough 
macroeconomic income and output statement.
This is not to say that the building blocks of classical political economy 
could not be expressed quantitatively. The concept of rent served as a 
measure of unearned revenue by defining it as the excess of price over cost-
value. Diminishing returns (or for the American protectionists, increasing 
returns) could be formulated mathematically, as could the productivity 
advantages of high-wage labor. What could not be treated with the 
mathematics then at hand was the political resolution of long-term structural 
strains. No chaos theory yet existed to deal with broad quantum leaps that 
occurred as political and institutional changes were introduced from outside 
the economic system. And as far as the dynamics of history were concerned, 
no mathematical formula could express the broad range of complexities that 
literary exposition could provide.
What made political economy the queen of the social sciences in the 19th 
century was its focus on the transformation of nations. It dealt with the 
policies most appropriate for their long-term social evolution — their legal 
and institutional structure, technology and financial organization. At issue 
was how economic institutions should be improved. The ceteris paribus 
methodology of marginalism did not deal with such broad contextual issues. 
It presupposed that the social structure remained constant, and then implied 
that no change was needed, as economies would respond to disturbances 
automatically by settling at a new equilibrium. Such an approach does not 
have much appeal to social reformers, environmentalists, political regulators 
or historians dealing with the structural aspects of economic development.
Marxism emerged as the preeminent alternative to the emerging 
marginalist economics largely because it was almost the sole survivor of 
classical political economy. In addition to retaining the classical breadth of 
scope and the idea of stages of development, Marx used irony and the idea of 

inner contradictions as a logical method of interpreting economic history. 
This was not a method that could well be expressed mathematically. 
Although Marx used arithmetic examples to illustrate the rates of profit and 
surplus value for enterprises employing differing proportions of labor and 
capital, this was not a mathematical model of the economy. The Communist 
Manifesto hardly could be expressed in mathematical formulae, and no 
Marxist tried to express dialectical materialism mathematically.
It has taken a hundred years to drive out what formed the most vital 
concerns of classical political economy: the shape of social evolution, the 
strains it tends to develop and the indicated responses by the state. As long as 
these concerns remained paramount, there would be little reason to celebrate 
the first users of mathematical functions as having made a great 
breakthrough. Their “discovery” would have to await the time in which 
economics narrowed its scope and dropped its concerns with long-term 
transformation.
The role of political economy in the 19th century was precisely to indicate 
the most appropriate policies for self-direction. That is what made it political 
economy. But as economics became increasingly technocratic, it dropped the 
political dimension. And as it has narrowed and come to take the institutional 
and political environment for granted, the mathematical formulation of 
economic functions has come to be used as the criterion for acceptable 
theorizing. The role of mathematics in fact has been to exclude problems that 
are more than marginal. A basic condition for regression analysis to be 
applied, for instance, is a constant social and political environment.
In this way mathematical economics has become the ultimate vehicle to 
make the policy trivialization of economics politically acceptable, 
establishing status quo economics as a pseudo-science by virtue of using 
mathematical symbolism. As Wolfgang Drechsler has quipped: mathematics 
has helped enthrone irrelevance as methodology. The key aspect of the 
mathematization of economics has been its logical necessity of stripping 
away what the new economic orthodoxy sought to exclude from the classical 
curriculum: the socially sensitive study of wealth, how it is acquired, and 
how its distribution (indeed, its polarization) affects social development.

The Semantics of Mathematical Equilibrium Theory
If mathematics is deemed to be the new language of economics, it is a 
language with a thought structure whose semantics, syntax and vocabulary 
shape its user’s perceptions. There are many ways in which to think, and 
many forms in which mathematical ideas may be expressed. Equilibrium 
theory, for example, may specify the conditions in which an economy’s 
public and private-sector debts may be paid. But what happens when not all 
these debts can be paid? Formulating economic problems in the language of 
linear programming has the advantage of enabling one to reason in terms of 
linear inequality, e.g., to think of the economy’s debt overhead as being 
greater than, equal to, or less than its capacity to pay.
An array of mathematical modes of expression thus is available to the 
economist. Equilibrium-based entropy theory views the economy as a 
thermodynamic system characterized by what systems analysts call negative 
feedback. Chaos theories are able to cope with the phenomena of increasing 
returns and compound interest, which are best analyzed in terms of positive 
feedback and intersecting trends. Points of intersection imply that something 
has to give and the solution must come politically from outside the economic 
system as such.
What determines which kind of mathematical language will be used? At 
first glance it may seem that if much of today’s mathematical economics has 
become irrelevant, it is because of a fairly innocent reason: it has become a 
kind of art for art’s sake, prone to self-indulgent game theory. But almost 
every economic game serves to support an economic policy.
Broadly speaking, policies fall into two categories: laissez faire or 
interventionist public regulation. Each set of advocates has its own preferred 
mode of mathematical treatment, choosing the approach that best bolsters 
their own conclusions. In this respect one can say that mathematics has 
become part of the public relations apparatus of policy-makers.
The mathematics of socialism, public regulation and protectionism view 
the institutional environment as a variable rather than as a given. Active state 
policy is justified to cope with the inherent instability and economic 
polarization associated with unregulated trade and financial markets. By 

contrast, opponents of regulation select a type of equilibrium mathematics 
that take the institutional environment for granted and exclude chronic 
instability systems from the definition of economic science, on the ground 
that they do not have a singular mathematical solution. Only marginal 
problems are held to be amenable to scientific treatment, not quandaries or 
other situations calling for major state intervention.
Marginalist mathematics imply that economic problems may be solved 
merely by small shifts in a rather narrow set of variables. This approach uses 
the mathematics of entropy and general equilibrium theory to foster the 
impression, for instance, that any economy can pay almost all its debts, 
simply by diverting more income from debtors to creditors. This is depicted 
as being possible without limit. Insolvency appears as an anomaly, not as an 
inevitability as in exponential growth models.
Looking over the countries in which such theorizing has been applied, one 
cannot help seeing that the first concern is one of political philosophy, 
namely, to demonstrate that the economy does not require public regulation 
to intervene from outside the economic system. This monetarist theory has 
guided Russian economic reform (and its quick bankruptcy) under Yeltsin 
and his oligarchy, as well as Chile’s privatization (and early bankruptcy) 
under Gen. Pinochet, and the austerity programs (and subsequent 
bankruptcies and national resource selloffs) imposed by the IMF on third 
world debtor countries. Yet the reason for such failures is not reflected in the 
models. Empirically speaking, monetarist theory has become part of the 
economic problem, not part of the solution.
The Subjectivity of Statistical Categories
Early statistics dealt with public finances, debt and the economy’s tax-
paying capacity. The focus was on the ruler’s fiscal ability to tax the 
economy and to finance deficits (mainly in times of war) through public debt. 
From this primary concern rulers developed an interested in how to make 
their economies richer, so that they could generate more public revenue. This 
study was called Political Arithmetic. To the extent that laissez faire policies 
were advocated, it was as an economic plan to encourage economic growth 

and hence to enhance the ruler’s power to tax.
Classical political economy developed largely out of the anti-royalist 
political ideology of the French Physiocrats and Adam Smith opposing 
government regulations and taxation. The emerging individualistic discipline 
came to define the statistical categories that shaped peoples’ quantitative 
perception of economic phenomena.
Accounting formats require a theoretical conceptual apparatus. Categories 
must be defined before actual statistics can be collected. Any set of categories 
is itself a conceptual structure of the parts that make up the overall picture. 
Empirical statistics thus reflect theoretical accounting categories, for better or 
worse. To mathematize economic models using obsolete or dysfunctional 
concepts hardly can be said to be scientific, if we define science as the 
understanding of how the world actually works.
It is difficult to see where economies are generating wealth without 
dividing their activities into the classical categories of productive vs. 
unproductive, i.e., wealth-creating labor vs. economic overhead. 
Unfortunately, few economists remember the great debate over this issue that 
lasted for over a century.
A case in point is the GNP accounting format developed by Simon 
Kuznets. Its elements are neither inherent nor entirely objective. All activities 
are held to be productive, rather than some (such as crime prevention, 
medical treatment, environmental cleanup costs and warfare) being in the 
character of economic overhead. The production and sale of cigarettes is 
counted as output, and the medical treatment of smokers as yet more national 
product. Crime prevention is counted, but criminal earnings are not reflected 
in the national income statistics.
On the other hand, the national income and product accounts do not reflect 
the major way in which the largest sectors — real estate, mining, fuels, 
forestry, and even banking and finance — take their economic returns, 
namely, as capital gains. These sectors appear to be operating without earning 
any taxable profit, and their capital gains are not traced. The accumulation of 
real estate fortunes and stock-market gains have become the way in which 
wealthy people, and money managers and homeowners have built up their 
wealth. But this distinguishing financial phenomenon of the present decade 

— asset-price inflation — is lost from view by formats that treat capital gains 
as “external” to their model of how the economy works.
Today’s national-income concept of saving gives the appearance that at 
the end of 1998 the domestic U.S. saving rate was a negative 2% of national 
income. Yet savings are being built up at an unprecedented rate. The low 
statistical rate of savings simply reflects the high degree to which new 
savings find their counterpart in debt, including loans to real estate and stock 
market speculators seeking the afore-mentioned capital gains, rather than 
being invested directly in the form of new tangible capital.
Meanwhile, a rising proportion of liquid savings is coming from the 
world’s criminals and kleptocrats. Yet national income statistics neglect the 
economic role played by crime, fraud and other illegal activities, despite their 
important economic role in generating many of society’s major new fortunes. 
Only what is socially approved seems to be counted among society’s shaping 
dynamics. In the 1930s, when Roy Ovid Hall tried to include smuggling and 
other illicit activities in his balance of payments reports for the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, he was told sanctimoniously to desist from such 
behavior.
What is not seen probably will not be taxed. In the United States, real 
estate and financial interests have actively discouraged collection of 
meaningful statistics on land-price gains. Congressmen and government 
bureaucrats have sought to rationalize the real estate gains of their major 
constituents and campaign contributors. Federal Reserve flow-of-funds 
statistics attributed so much of the price rise to the inflation of construction 
costs that in 1994 the value of all corporately-owned land in the United States 
appeared to be a negative $4 billion! The actual land value of U.S. real estate, 
by comparison, was over $9 trillion at the time, as I estimate on the basis of 
the Census Bureau reports.
These seemingly objective official statistics only distract attention from 
the reasons why so large a proportion of the economy’s savings is being 
diverted away from new direct investment into real estate and stock market 
speculation. The party that suffers most is the government tax collector and 
of course, the majority of taxpayers onto whose shoulders the tax burden is 
being shifted). In this respect, the aim of statistics has been inverted from 

their original function of informing the state how much can be taxed, to 
concealing taxable gains from users of modern national income statistics.
Problems, Dilemmas and Quandaries
Students are taught that economics is about making choices between 
scarce resources, but when resources really become scarce, economists tend 
to call it a crisis. Every such problem is stated in such a way as to imply a 
ready solution. Only marginal problems are recognized, not real dilemmas or 
quandaries. The idea of “scarcity” is just a “little bit” of scarcity — nothing 
that a slightly higher price won’t cure (for output) or a bit lower wage (for 
employment problems).
Most economic models postulate that unemployment, for instance, can be 
solved by appropriate adjustments. “Trickle-down” theories of prosperity 
accordingly call for reductions in wage levels, while Keynesian theories call 
for or increased public spending to spur demand. Both approaches view 
savings as financing investment, which is assumed to take the form of 
tangible capital formation rather than a stock market or real estate bubble.
The important thing is that no structural problems are recognized, that is, 
no problems that cannot be solved by marginal quantitative adjustments in 
incomes, prices and wage levels, the money supply and the interest rate. It is 
in this respect that the mathematics of laissez faire monetarism are 
microeconomic, depicting the economy narrowly rather than broadly through 
the long-distance lens of historical development. The analysis may be valid 
as far as it goes, but it doesn’t go very far, as it formulates problems 
marginally rather than with an eye for structural reform. Looking for small 
adjustments, such economics misses the degree to which the economy is 
losing its flexibility and is structurally rigidifying.
For public relations purposes, policy advocates present their “solutions” in 
a way that appears to make everyone better off. At least somebody’s income 
is depicted as gaining, as if this automatically makes each inhabitant better 
off for living in a richer society (richer for whom?). Every solution seems to 
be a free lunch for the economy at large. What are not recognized are 

situations in which economies collapse because critical break-even conditions 
cannot be met. When this occurs, economies face dilemmas or, even worse, 
quandaries.
A dilemma is a situation in which whatever path or “horn” one chooses, it 
involves pain and the sacrifice of well-being. Somebody or some social value 
must lose out. Obstacles present themselves on every side, and if the 
economy avoids being impaled on one horn, it will fall on the other.
It should be noted that falling on one’s face is a state of equilibrium. Death 
is indeed the ultimate state of equilibrium. So is national austerity and its 
transfer of property from debtors to creditors, and from domestic 
governments to foreign institutional investors. But marginalist and monetarist 
equilibrium economics employ a mathematics that does not recognize the 
possibility of serious dilemmas developing, or of economies falling into 
quandaries whose financial and economic constraints prevent technological 
“real” potential from being realized. The preferred method of mathematical 
economics is general equilibrium analysis in an environment in which only 
small marginal disturbances are envisioned, not major structural problems or 
legal changes in the economic environment.
Economies fall into a quandary when the preconditions for a real solution 
are lacking. Debtors default on their payments, real estate prices fall, and 
asset prices for bonds and stocks also fall. Banks are unable to cover their 
deposit liabilities as the market value of their loan portfolios falls. The 
government is called on to bail them out by issuing bonds, and to pay the 
interest charges either by raising taxes or cutting back spending programs. 
The budget is balanced by selling public enterprises to foreign investors, 
whose remission of profits and dividends creates a balance-of-payments 
exchange drain that lowers the currency’s exchange rate.
The situation becomes worse as the government borrows from the IMF 
and is forced to enact an anti-Keynesian austerity program. IMF riots break 
out, the government falls and a dictatorship oriented to serve global financial 
institutions is installed, friendly to the capital flight which strips the economy 
of its resources all the faster. Money-capital flees abroad and skilled labor 
emigrates as the economy shrinks, with no technological cause indicated in 
the policy models being applied.

Marginal analysis avoids dealing with such quandaries, and the quantum 
leaps necessary to escape. It selects a rather narrow set of phenomena (labor 
and materials costs, the interest rate, income and the pattern of demand) to 
produce models that show how economies might settle at an equilibrium 
point if left free from outside political interference. What is missed is the 
degree to which the world economy is being pushed further and further out of 
balance.
Mathematical Economics as a Distraction from Economic Reality
Is it sufficient atonement that so many economists upon retirement merely 
give an apology acknowledging that, yes, perhaps their economics have all 
really been just a waste of time? Upon leaving office, each new president of 
the American Economic Association gives the expected speech showing that 
he knows full well it is all just a game, and chastises his colleagues for not 
being more realistic. But do they not have some obligation to set things right? 
Or is the problem that they cannot see what has to be done? 
Although academic economists hardly have shown themselves to be in 
favor of free markets in their own life, seeking the insulation of tenured 
positions and sinecures, they know well where their own money comes from. 
It comes from their ability to endorse creditor-oriented “free-market” policies 
and condemn government regulation. This premise has led their mathematical 
models to focus on how individuals can make money in our pecuniary 
society, but not how public entities can be better run.
The more libertarian the theory, the more authoritarian the economic 
pedagogy tends to be, precisely because its reasoning rests on specious 
foundations. In Pinochet’s Chile, Chicago economists showed their 
intellectual intolerance of a free market in economic ideas by closing the 
economics and social science departments of all universities save for the 
Catholic University in which they ruled unchallenged. Consensus was 
established not through reason, but by removing from the scene all who 
disagreed with their extremist policies.
Over the past generation, courses in mathematical economics have 

displaced the traditional courses in economic history and the history of 
economic thought that might have familiarized students with alternatives to 
today’s monetarist orthodoxy. Equilibrium theorizing has expunged a broad 
understanding of how economies work, and even the long dynamics of 
economic history, especially where the dynamics of debt are concerned.
The failure of mathematical economics to analyze our epoch’s financial 
strains suggests that its aim has not really been to explain the world as much 
as to censor perceptions that imply that the financial status quo is unstable 
and hence must be regulated. Such findings are not congenial to monetarists 
in their capacity as the political lobby for the financial sector. By ignoring the 
problems caused by the growing debt overhead, monetarist orthodoxy has 
removed economic planning from the democratic political process and placed 
it in the hands of financial technocrats. The effect has been to create a new 
(and highly centralized) elitist planning in the world’s finance ministries and 
central banks.
This poses the question of whether the most important phenomena and 
dynamics are being mathematized. Do today’s general equilibrium, 
monetarist and national income and product models correlate the appropriate 
phenomena, or do they omit key dynamics?
To contemporary economists, mathematics has become the badge of 
scientific method. But is the use of mathematics scientific ipso facto? To 
what extent may it be methodologically abused?
Many economists are trained in calculus and higher mathematics without 
feeling much need to test their theories quantitatively. They tend to use 
mathematics less as an empirical measuring tool than as an expository 
language, or simply as a decoration to give a seemingly scientific veneer to 
their policy prescriptions. Mathematics rarely is used to analyze statistically 
the financial tendencies working to polarize wealth and income, or how 
economies change their shape as they grow.
This shape is distorted by the inherent tendency for financial claims — 
bonds, bank loans and other financial securities — to grow more rapidly than 
the economy’s ability to carry them, much less to pay them off. The volume 
of such claims tends to grow by purely mathematical principles of self-
expansion independently from underlying economic trends in wealth and 

income, and hence from the ability of debtors to pay. Savers/creditors load 
tangible capital assets and real estate down with debts that in many cases are 
not repayable except by transferring ownership to creditors. This transfer 
changes the economy’s structural and, in due course, political shape.
But today’s monetarist models foster an illusion that economies can carry 
any given volume of debt without having to change their structure, e.g., their 
pattern of wealth ownership. Self-equilibrating shifts in incomes and prices 
are assumed to enable a debt overhead of any given size to be paid. This 
approach reduces the debt problem to one of the degree to which taxes must 
be raised to carry the national debt, and to which businesses and consumers 
must cut back their investment and consumption to service their own debts 
and to pay these taxes. The task of economic regulation is reduced to one 
merely of setting an appropriate interest rate to reflect profit rates and 
consumer time-preference patterns. An array of measures is selected from the 
overall credit supply (or what is the same thing, debt securities) to represent 
“money,” which then is correlated with changes in goods and service prices, 
but not with prices for capital assets — bonds, stocks and real estate.
Such economic models all but ignore rent-seeking exploitation and the 
proverbial free lunch, yet real-world economics is all about obtaining a free 
lunch. That is why one seeks to become a political insider, after all. Yet such 
considerations are deemed to transcend the narrow boundaries of economics. 
These boundaries seem to have been narrowed precisely so as to limit the 
recognized “problems” only that limited part of economic life that can be 
mathematized, and indeed, mathematized without involving any changes in 
the social environment.
The resulting logical constructs of modern mathematical economics were 
not created without some degree of protest. Already a generation ago 
F.J.Dyson complained that “Mathematical intuition is more often 
conservative than revolutionary, more often hampering than liberating.” 
Citing Ernst Mach’s observation that “The power of mathematics rests on its 
evasion of all unnecessary thought and on its wonderful saving of mental 
operations,” he worried that too much real-world complexity might be 
discarded.4
Certainly the mathematical “badge of science” has distracted attention 

from the tendency for economies to veer out of balance.5 The problem is that 
to achieve a single determinate, stable solution to any given problem (always 
posed as a “disturbance” to a pre-existing balance), general equilibrium 
theorists are driven to assume diminishing returns and diminishing marginal 
utility in order to “close the system.” Such an approach is not a passive tool 
in the sense of an X-ray machine revealing the essential skeleton of reality. It 
is more a distorting mirror, in the sense that it formulates problems in a way 
that makes them appear amenable to being solved with a single determinate 
solution.
This singular solution is achieved by postulating a production function 
based on falling productivity as more labor is applied to capital and land. As 
for consumption, each added unit is assumed to give less and less 
satisfaction, so that more revenue is saved as economies become wealthier. 
This means a falling marginal utility of income: The more one earns, the less 
one feels a need to earn more. This is fortunate, because most models also 
assume diminishing returns to capital, which is assumed to be invested at 
falling profit rates as unemployment declines. Income and wealth thus are 
portrayed as tapering off, not as soaring and polarizing until a financial 
collapse point, ecological limit or other kind of crisis is reached. It should be 
noted that the above variables all but ignore the economy’s growing debt 
overhead relative to its assets, and the associated flow of interest.
A particular kind of mathematical methodology thus has come to 
determine what is selected for study, recognizing only problems that have a 
single determinate mathematical solution reached by or what systems 
analysts call negative feedback. By contrast, a positive feedback model 
would depict an economic polarization that has an indeterminate number of 
possible resolutions as conflicting trends will intersect, forcing something to 
give. At such points the economic problem becomes essentially political. 
This is how the real world operates, but to analyze it would drive economists 
into an unstable universe in which the future is up for grabs. Such a body of 
study is deemed unscientific (or at least, uneconomic) precisely because it 
cannot be mathematized without becoming political.
The Hypothetical “Parallel Universe” Approach to Economics

Marx defined political economy’s task as being “to lay bare the economic 
laws of motion of modern society.”6 By contrast, equilibrium theory 
describes how market relations might settle at a stable resting point if only 
the world were something other than it is. An economic universe is 
envisioned that is not in political motion and that is not polarizing. This 
hypothetical world is characterized by automatic self-adjusting mechanisms, 
so that active government policies appear unnecessary. It is a world free of 
the financial dynamics of debt growing at compound rates of interest.
One must suspect a political reason for the aversion felt by economic 
model-builders to the real world’s financial dynamics. To acknowledge their 
tendency to create structural problems would imply just what it did in 
Sumerian and Babylonian times: The desired economic balance must be 
restored by fiat, that is, from outside the economic system. Neglect of the 
debt overhead therefore is a prerequisite for economic models to generate 
laissez faire conclusions. A “what if” universe is postulated — the kind of 
world that might exist if finance capital were not a problem. After all, what is 
not quantified is less likely to be perceived and regulated.
Economies are supposed to be able to pay their debts simply by saving 
more. The working assumption is that saving is invested productively, not in 
creating yet new debts. Sufficient saving and investment thus are assumed to 
enable any society’s growth in debt to proceed ad infinitum, as creditors are 
assumed to invest their earnings to further expand output and raise living 
standards. Any increase in saving is deemed to be good, regardless of 
whether it is invested productively or parasitically, physically or financially. 
Yet such saving in reality consists not only of direct investment in tangible 
capital formation. It also takes the form of stock market investment and real 
estate speculation in the ownership of assets already in existence, merely 
bidding up their price.
What is neglected is today’s most characteristic pattern of lending: the 
investment of savings in the form of financial claims on wealth — bonds, 
mortgages and bank loans. Channeling savings in this way enlarges the 
volume of financial claims attached to existing productive assets in an 
exponentially expanding process. This debt overhead extracts interest charges 

which are recycled into yet new loans rather than financing new means of 
production to help economies “grow their way out of debt.”
In recent decades such debt claims have grown more rapidly than tangible 
investment in factories and farms, buildings and homes, transport and power 
facilities, communications and other infrastructure. Economies have been 
obliged to pay their debts by cutting back new research, development and 
new physical reinvestment. This is the essence of IMF austerity plans, in 
which the currency is “stabilized” by further international borrowing on terms
that destabilize the economy at large.
Cutbacks in long-term investment also are the product of corporate raids 
financed by high-interest junk bonds. The debts created by businesses, 
consumers and national economies cutting back their long-term direct 
investment leaves these entities even less able to carry their mounting debt 
burden. They are forced to live even more in the short run. Interest rates rise 
as debt-strapped economies become riskier, for as Adam Smith observed, 
“interest rates usually are highest in countries going fastest to ruin.”7 And as 
interest rates rise, yet more money is shifted away from direct investment into 
lending at interest, until the system is torn apart from within. Capital flees 
abroad, the currency falls and unemployment rises.
No doubt a point must come at which the burden grows so large that it 
shakes the public out of its hope that matters somehow will return to normal. 
In the end the global economy must be obliged to do what Adam Smith said 
every debtor government historically was obliged to do: let its debts go. Now 
that global debts are becoming dollarized, however, it is less possible for a 
national economies simply to inflate their way out of debt so as to make what 
Smith called a “pretended payment.” The only options are default or outright 
repudiation. But it has become academic fashion to imagine alternative 
“virtual realities” in which no such debt problems exist.
This turns economics into something akin to science fiction. The literary 
critic Colin Wilson has observed that in evaluating such fiction, the proper 
question to be asked is, what if the world were really like this? What does 
such speculation teach us?
Let us ask that question of today’s monetarist fantasies. Fearing 
government regulation to be corrosive, monetarism warns that governments 

should not act to shape the economic environment. In particular they should 
not seek to regulate financial markets, for that would kill the goose that lays 
the golden eggs.
But is this Planet Earth, or a hypothetical world in which the charging of 
interest either was never invented, or was banned long ago? Such theorizing 
may be useful as an exercise in “alternative history” as it might have evolved 
in some parallel universe. But monetarist mathematics are not those of earthly 
reality. The economist’s idea of science itself appears otherworldly. Not 
being amenable to a singular determinate mathematical solution, the problem 
of analyzing the incompatibility between the growth in debt claims and the 
economy’s ability to pay is deemed unscientific. In this respect the way in 
which modern economists use mathematics diverges from what a scientific 
empirical economics would be.
The main criterion for success in modern economics is its ability to 
maintain internal consistency in the assumptions being made. As in science 
fiction, the trick is to convince readers to suspend their disbelief in these 
assumptions. The audience is asked to take seriously problems posed in terms 
of a universe in which money is spent on the production of current goods and 
services or saved, but not lent out to create a debt problem. Students are 
asked to believe that debts will not tend to grow beyond the means to pay, 
and that any disturbance in the economic balance will be met by automatic 
stabilizing responses rather than requiring action from outside the market 
economy. In sum, to believe that the growth in debt overhead is not a serious 
problem, it is necessary to suspend our natural disbelief in the fiction that 
shifting the money supply can steer interest rates to a precise level that will 
keep the economy’s debt and credit, new saving and direct investment in 
balance.
 
Economics versus the Natural Sciences: The Methodology of “As If”
What is even more remarkable is the idea that economic assumptions need 
not have any relationship to reality at all. This attitude is largely responsible 
for having turned economics into a mock-science, and explains its rather odd 
use of mathematics. Typical of the modern attitude is the textbook, 

Microeconomics by William Vickery, long-time chairman of Columbia 
University’s economics department, 1992–93 president of the American 
Economic Association and winner of the 1997 Nobel Economics Prize. Prof. 
Vickery informs his students that “pure theory” need be nothing more than a 
string of tautologies:
Economic theory proper, indeed, is nothing more than a system of logical 
relations between certain sets of assumptions and the conclusions derived 
from them. The propositions of economic theory are derived by logical 
reasoning from these assumptions in exactly the same way as the theorems of 
geometry are derived from the axioms upon which the system is built.
The validity of a theory proper does not depend on the correspondence or 
lack of it between the assumptions of the theory or its conclusions and 
observations in the real world. A theory as an internally consistent system is 
valid if the conclusions follow logically from its premises, and the fact that 
neither the premises nor the conclusions correspond to reality may show that 
the theory is not very useful, but does not invalidate it. In any pure theory, all 
propositions are essentially tautological, in the sense that the results are 
implicit in the assumptions made.8
This disdain for empirical validity is not found in the physical sciences. 
Ptolemaic astronomers were able to mathematize models of a solar system 
revolving around the earth rather than the sun. The phlogiston theory of 
combustion was logical and even internally consistent, as is astrology, former 
queen of the medieval sciences. But these theories no longer are taught, 
because they were seen to be built on erroneous assumptions. Why strive to 
be logically consistent if one’s working hypotheses and axioms are 
misleading in the first place?
Lacking empirical testing and measurement, economics narrows into a 
mock-science of abstract assumptions without much regard as to whether its 
axioms are historically grounded. The self-congratulatory language used by 
economists euphemizes the resulting contrast between economics and 
science. “Pure” theorists are depicted as drawing “heroic” generalities, that is, 
banal simplicities presented in a mathematical mode called “elegant” rather 
than simply air-headed. To the extent that the discipline uses mathematics, 
the spirit is closer to numerology than to the natural sciences. Indeed, 

astrology also is highly technical and mathematical, and like economics it 
deals with forecasting. But its respectability has not lasted. Is this to be the 
destiny of today’s economic orthodoxy? At first glance the sophistical 
tendency would appear to find an antecedent in John Stuart Mill’s 1844 essay 
“On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of Investigation 
Proper to it”:
In the definition which we have attempted to frame of the science of 
Political Economy, we have characterized it as essentially an abstract science, 
and its method as the method a priori.… Political Economy, therefore, 
reasons from assumed premises — from premises which might be totally 
without foundation in fact, and which are not pretended to be universally in 
accordance with it. The conclusions of Political Economy, consequently, like 
those of geometry, are only true, as the common phrase is, in the abstract; 
that is, they are only true under certain suppositions, in which none but 
general causes — causes common to the whole class of cases under 
consideration — are taken into account.9
Mill’s objective here was to isolate the principles appropriate to each 
dimension of social science, so as to avoid the confusion that resulted from 
intermixing them. Recognizing that people and societies were 
multidimensional, his logical method sought to segregate the various 
dimensions of social existence layer by layer, so as to deal separately with the 
economic pursuit of wealth, the political policy arena, and the respective 
subject matters of the other social sciences then emerging. This was not logic 
for its own sake, but for the sake of a systematic analysis proceeding step by 
step.
However, post-classical equilibrium economists have pursued logical 
consistency as an objective in itself. Disembodied from reference to how the 
real world operates, logic has been turned into a game. Rather than 
forecasting how the world will respond to the strains now building up, 
economists project existing trends in a political and social environment that is 
assumed to be unchanging. When this becomes a condition of the 
mathematical analysis itself, the idea of economics merely as “logical 
consistency” plays a much less logical role than it did in Mill’s day.
The problems inherent in this approach are typified by Nobel Prizewinner 

Paul Samuelson’s conclusion of his famous article on “The Gains from 
Trade”: “In pointing out the consequences of a set of abstract assumptions, 
one need not be committed unduly as to the relation between reality and these 
assumptions.”10 This attitude did not deter him from drawing policy 
conclusions affecting the material world in which real people live. He 
defended his Factor-Price Equalization Theorem (which states that under a 
regime of free trade, wages and profits will tend to equalize throughout the 
global economy) by claiming simply that:
Our problem is … a purely logical one. Is ‘If H, then inevitably C’ a 
correct statement? The issue is not whether C (factor-price equalization) will 
actually hold; nor even whether H (the hypothesis) is a valid empirical 
generalization. It is whether C can fail to be true when H is assumed to be 
true. Being a logical question, it admits of only one answer, either the 
theorem is true or false.11
Contrasting this theorem with the real-world tendency of international 
incomes and wages to polarize rather than equalize, Gerald Meier observes: 
“It need not … come with any surprise that factor returns have been so 
different … when in short, the restrictive conditions of the theorem have been 
so clearly violated in reality.”12 But is it not sophistical to speak of reality 
violating a theory? Theory violates reality, not the other way around.
If one must be logical, why not start with realistic rather than merely 
hypothetical assumptions? The answer, I am afraid, is that realistic 
assumptions do not lead to the policy conclusions pre-selected by economic 
ideologues. This would explain why Samuelson-type trade theories continue 
to treat the international economy as a thermodynamic system to be analyzed 
by entropy theory, whereas the real-life world economy is an expanding 
system in which labor migrates and capital flows from low-income “cold” 
economies to high-income “hot” ones.
Wrong-headedness rarely is accidental; there usually is a self-interested 
policy motive. In his essay on “How Scientific are the Social Sciences?” 
Gunnar Myrdal observes: “Facts do not organize themselves into systematic 
knowledge, except from a point of view. This point of view amounts to a 

theory.” He emphasizes that “contrary to widely held opinions, not only the 
practical conclusions form a scientific analysis, but this analysis itself 
depends necessarily on value premises.”13
What modern economics lacks is an epistemological dimension, the 
capacity for self-reflection so as to perceive the extent to which economic 
theorizing tends to be shaped by narrow self-interest. There is a bankers’-eye 
view of the world, as well as the perspective of financial manipulators, 
industrialists and so forth. It was the strength of Marxism to deal with 
economic theorizing critically on this level. Perceiving class biases, Marx 
viewed economic theory critically as apologetics for advocates of one policy 
or the other, a rhetorical system pleading for special interests. The 19th-
century American protectionists likewise pointed to international biases 
between lead nations and latecomers regarding free trade theorizing. Today, a 
self-centered monetarist world view serves the global financial interests that 
have emerged to dominate the “real” economy. To understand its blind spots, 
an awareness of the self-serving motivations underlying Chicago School 
monetarism is necessary.
We are entitled to ask whose interests are served when economists claim 
that their assumptions need have no connection with reality, yet then proceed 
to make policy recommendations. Why do so many economics departments 
teach the assumptions of, say, the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson theory of 
international equilibrium rather than starting from more realistic assumptions 
capable of explaining the real world’s financial and economic polarization?
The products of low-wage economies exchange for those of better-paid 
labor for a number of reasons. Productivity differences have long been cited, 
but another factor also is at work: chronic depreciation of the currencies of 
low-wage countries as a result of the capital transfers they make in a vain 
attempt to service their foreign debts. In the end these debts will prove 
unpayable as they mount up at interest beyond the economic means to pay. 
The austerity programs used by the IMF and other creditor institutions are 
defended by models that conceal this mathematical inevitability. By 
depriving debtor economies of capital, educational programs and other basic 
infrastructure, austerity makes it harder for indebted countries to catch up. 
Matters are aggravated further by privatization programs that serve in effect 
as voluntary and self-imposed forfeitures of public assets to foreign and 

domestic creditors.
Creating a statistical profile of financial relationships is impaired by the 
fact that when wealthy individuals operate out of offshore banking centers, 
they appear nominally as “foreigners” in their own countries. Yet economists 
have constructed models in which such offshore havens, foreign debt, land 
values, and the composition of savings and debt appear as statistical black 
holes. Such omissions help these models serve as fairy tales to rationalize 
today’s untenable status quo. Everyone is depicted as ending up in a stable 
and even equitable equilibrium.
A striking analogy of the impossibility of the world’s financial savings 
continuing to grow at compound interest ad infinitum is pointed out by 
Edward O. Wilson, citing: 
… the arithmetical riddle of the lily pond. A lily pad is placed in a pond. 
Each day thereafter the pad and then all its descendants double. On the 
thirtieth day the pond is covered completely by lily pads, which can grow no 
more. He then asks, “On which day was the pond half full and half empty? 
The twenty-ninth day.”14
By the time people feel obliged to argue over whether the economic glass 
if half empty or half full, we are on the brink of the Last Days. To financial 
optimists, it may be pointed out that growth in the economy’s savings is 
simultaneously growth its debt overhead. As debts grow, less and less saving 
is recycled into tangible direct investment. This may be good news for stock 
market and real estate speculators as savings are used to inflate the stock 
market and real estate bubble. But in the end the economy shrinks precisely 
because this “faux wealth” serves as a distraction, drawing savings away 
from direct investment in tangible capital formation.
What is lacking in the models preferred by vested interests is the use of 
mathematics to project the point at which trends intersect. At these crisis 
points economic forces do not have an inherently economic “solution,” for 
the response must be political, by forcing a policy conclusion to be made.
A relevant mathematical economics would include an analysis of how 

wealth is turned into political power by campaign contributions, ownership of 
the popular press and media, and the subsidy of education and culture. These 
public relations for the vested interests promote “solutions” to crises that 
increasingly favor these interests as the economy polarizes. The analysis of 
such phenomena is dismissed by general equilibrium theorizing that assumes 
a constant and unchanging political environment. Changes in laws are 
deemed to be exogenous to the subject matter of economics proper. The word 
“exogenous” is heard so often these days (along with “externalities”) that one 
wonders just what is left in economics proper. At issue for a more relevant 
empirical economics are the dynamics of social history, political institutions 
and the environment, not just the mechanics of supply and demand.
Governments tend to become the debtors of last resort. The culmination of 
this process is found in modern financial bailouts of private-sector 
(“socializing the losses” to savers). So we are brought back to Adam Smith’s 
maxim that no government has ever repaid its debts. This is why nobody’s 
savings have mounted up to become the equivalent of a solid sphere of gold 
extending from the sun out beyond the orbit of Saturn. The 12th-century 
accumulation of wealth of the Knights Templar was seized by Philip the Fair, 
who dissipated it in warfare. The wealth of the large Italian banking families 
subsequently was lost in loans to Britain’s kings, who dissipated the proceeds 
in waging their perpetual wars with France. Most early debts were wiped out 
by wars, and by their inflationary aftermath in more recent times. Other 
fortunes were lost through confiscation, and bad judgment such as often is 
found with risky foreign investment. Some fortunes were dissipated by one’s 
heirs or turned into land acquisition and other prestige asset ownership.
The relevant point for the social historian is that financial fortunes cannot 
continue to accumulate in the aggregate, precisely because the mathematics 
of compound interest are economically untenable. Throughout history it has 
become increasingly difficult to keep such fortunes viable. Money has been 
plowed back into increasingly risky new loans in ways that may impoverish 
and polarize the surrounding society to the extent that they find no 
counterpart in new tangible investment enhancing the economy’s means to 
pay.
The moral of all this is that there are different kinds of mathematical 
economics. What the Cornell philosopher E.A. Burtt referred to as the 

metaphysical foundation of modern physical science has become a politically 
tinged metaphysics in the hands of monetarists and neoclassical economists. 
Just how far their non-quantitative spirit diverges from the origins of 
economics is reflected in the closing words of David Hume’s Enquiry 
Concerning Human Understanding:
When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles, what havoc 
must we make? If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school 
metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning 
concerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any experimental 
reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Commit it then to the 
flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.15
Mathematizing the Economy’s Monetary and Financial Dimension
Not all trends proceed at the same rate. At some point certain major trends 
must intersect, and something must give. This is the definition of a crisis — 
literally a crossing or intersection of trends where the political structure must 
accommodate itself to promote one trend or the other.
The example with which most people are familiar was made famous by 
Malthus, who argued that population growth tended mathematically to grow 
in excess of the economy’s ability to supply food. The result, he concluded, 
must be starvation, wars or other “natural checks,” or else a voluntary limit to 
population growth. Since the late 1960s the Club of Rome has warned that 
modern resource-consuming trends are unsustainable in light of the world’s 
more limited growth in the supply of fuels and minerals, fresh water and air.
What these warnings achieved was to bring to peoples’ attention the fact 
that whereas most mathematical economics has focused on foreseeable, 
narrowly determined consequences, over time the indirect “external” 
economies of commercial behavior tend to be larger than these direct 
economies. But they also have tended to evade mathematical and statistical 
treatment.16
The limits-to-growth warnings proved to be premature a generation ago, 
but one cannot say the same thing for the growth of debts/savings at 

compound interest year after year. Any statistician plotting the growth of an 
economy’s debt quickly finds that existing trends are not sustainable. The 
growth of debt has become the major cause of economic downturns, austerity 
and financial polarization, creating financial crashes and, in severe cases, 
social crises.
Debt may be viewed as financial pollution, entailing major cleanup costs. 
Public policy is needed to cope with the incompatibility between the inability 
of consumers, businesses and governments to pay their stipulated debt service 
except by transferring an intolerable proportion of their assets to creditors. 
These transfers are done through bankruptcy proceedings, the liquidation of 
corporate or personal assets under distress conditions and (in the case of 
government debts) privatization selloffs.
The indicated solution is to limit the proliferation of debt by borrowing 
less, for instance, and to channel savings more into equities and tangible 
investment than into debt-claims on economic output. If present trends 
continue, it will be necessary to write off debts when they become too 
overgrown. This entails writing off the savings that have been invested in 
debt-securities — and this has now become the major political problem of 
our epoch. Yet monetarists — the very people who claim to specialize in 
financial science — see this crisis as an anomaly rather than a natural 
consequence of pursuing Chicago School policies. They urge economies to 
submit to financial austerity by sanctifying debts rather than saving 
themselves and their labor force at the expense of debt and savings trends.
An enormous volume of statistical research has been produced to analyze 
money and prices, and their links to interest rates and hence to the prices of 
bonds and other financial assets. When examining such research one should 
bear in mind that monetarism focuses on only part of the credit supply: bank 
deposits and “high-powered money” in the form of reserves invested in 
government debt. In reality the economy’s entire range of securities and other 
assets is available to be monetized or, more literally, creditized. The potential 
credit supply consists of the volume of marketable securities and debts 
outstanding (which their holders can collateralize as the basis for yet more 
credit) plus equity in “real” assets, that is, the portion of tangible asset values 
to which debts have not yet been attached.

Most money and credit is spent on transactions in financial securities, not 
on “real” goods and services. Each day the equivalent of almost an entire 
year’s U.S. national income passes through the New York Clearing House to 
buy stocks, bonds, mortgages and other bank loans. It thus is misleading to 
correlate the money supply only to transactions in current goods and services 
(“national product”). Such correlation analysis is not necessarily causal in 
any event. It is all too easy to mistake cause for effect. It therefore would be 
misleading to leave out of account the pricing of financial assets (bonds, 
stocks, and marketable debt securities such as mortgages, packaged consumer 
loans and so forth) and of the tangible assets (land and buildings, factories 
and equipment) on which this credit is spent. Nonetheless, these asset 
transactions seem to have disappeared from statistical sight as the focal point 
of monetarist analysis has shifted away from wealth and assets to consumer 
spending. For instance, despite the fact that the major asset for most families 
(at least in America and Britain) is the home in which they live, no adequate 
statistical time series for land and buildings is collected or published. In many 
cases one is obliged to estimate real estate values by looking at the growth of 
mortgage credit as a minimal proxy.
The very idea of what constitutes money remains in a state of confusion. 
To describe it simply as a set of counters neglects the fact that bank deposits 
and savings do not take the form of money as an abstract asset in itself, like 
gold or silver bullion. Rather, currency and bank money are debt/credit 
instruments. One person’s saving usually finds its counterpart in other 
peoples’ debts. If an individual or company deposits money in a bank or 
savings and loan association, a large portion of the deposit will be lent out as 
mortgage credit. Or, a saver may put money in a money market fund that 
channels its inflows into government bonds and corporate IOUs. The 
definition of “money” thus needs to be grounded in the overall superstructure 
of credit and debt.
An expanding superstructure of financial claims for payment grows and 
attaches itself to the economy’s income and assets. These claims find their 
counterpart in liabilities on the opposite side of the financial system’s balance 
sheet (e.g., the debts owed by the banks to their depositors, by insurance 
companies to their policy-holders, and so forth). They are securitized by the 
issue of bonds, mortgages and other IOUs. They represent the savings of 

people and the institutions through which people hold their savings, including 
pension fund contributions, Social Security, bank loan portfolios, insurance 
company reserves, and so forth. All these savings/debts must be paid out of 
future revenue.
Financial securities are not simply a mirror image of “real” economic 
activity, the “other” side of the balance sheet of assets and debts. They are a 
claim for payment that may be equal to, less than or greater than the 
economy’s ability pay. When it comes to deciding what must give, the 
economy or its financial superstructure, the latter turns out to be more 
powerful — and hence, more “real” — than the economy’s tangible flows of 
output and income. Entire economies are being crucified on the altar of debt 
and subjected to austerity and its foregone economic development. On this 
basis financial institutions have become the major economic planners of our 
epoch, usurping the former role of governments. Yet monetarists profess to 
oppose such centralized planning. What they evidently oppose is planning by 
elected officials with a broader set of social concerns than those of monetarist 
technocrats.
At the microeconomic financial level it seems wise to maximize one’s 
return on equity by indulging in debt pyramiding. But for the economy as a 
whole these savings/debts accumulates rapidly. Wealthier economies tend to 
become the most highly indebted precisely because they have the most 
savings. Interest and amortization payments to savers tend to increase beyond 
the economy’s overall ability to pay as debt service absorbs more and more 
personal disposable income and corporate cash flow. This constrains personal 
and business spending, creating the phenomenon of debt deflation. Yet no 
mathematical models depicting this process has been deemed acceptable by 
today’s monetarist orthodoxy.
If there is any planning to be done with regard to the banking and financial 
system, the central issue of mathematical economics as applied to the 
financial sector should focus on how economies should cope with the 
tendency for debts to mount up until a crisis erupts? Monetarist models deny 
that any practical debt limit exists. Economies are supposed to “solve” their 
debt problem simply by succumbing to austerity, which is presented as the 
solution to the problem rather than a sign of having entered the financially 
moribund stage.

Perception of the debt-overhead problem is concealed by the characteristic 
feature of today’s finance capitalism: an asset-price inflation of property 
markets, that is, rising land and stock market prices. This asset-price inflation 
goes hand in hand with debt deflation of the “real” goods-and-service 
producing economy. The failure to model this dichotomized economy is not 
the fault of mathematical economics as such, but reflects the constrained 
reasoning at the hands of the monetarist school that has monopolized 
economics departments in the world’s universities.
Monetarist models serve largely to distract popular attention from the 
extent to which more wealth is being generated more by the asset-price 
inflation — than by building new factories to employ more people. What has 
happened is that the classical distinction between productive and 
unproductive credit has been replaced by an ostensibly value-free theory 
claiming that money earned in one way is just as economically worth while 
as money earned in any other way. This is supposed to be the case regardless 
of its consequences for employment, national prosperity or other effects held 
to be extraneous to purely financial concerns.
“Hard” facts tend to be the preoccupation of technocratic economics, 
whose predictions focus on the short run, that is, on marginal changes rather 
than structural transformations. But economic truth involves a much broader 
evaluation of society and even culture, as economic theory itself may be 
viewed as an exercise in cultural history. To the extent that “free market” 
monetarist economics has now become the world’s de facto form of global 
planning, it threatens to bring about a poorer and more unfree world. If its 
models and their euphemisms do not make it clear just why this is the case, 
the reason is a politically motivated blind spot. Monetarist planning subjects 
the world to austerity to pay debts to a creditor class absorbing a growing 
proportion of the world’s wealth, leading to economic polarization.
It is a world succumbing to economic collapse, heating up financially, 
ecologically and geographically to a critical mass. It also is heating up 
militarily as local provinces seek to secede from governments that are being 
turned into collection agents for global lenders. Yugoslavia is the most 
notorious recent example.
Trying to sell today’s road to financial serfdom is much like trying to sell 

cigarettes. Popular fears of coughing, lung cancer, and other adverse effects 
are countered by advertising promises that cigarettes actually freshen the 
breath and are associated with vigorous outdoor life as epitomized by the 
Marlboro Man. Scientists are hired to provide a confusing flood of statistical 
analysis to dispute claims about smoking being causally associated with ill 
health, pretending that it is all just a coincidence. Neither the personal victims 
of smoking nor the public health agencies that must defray many of their 
medical costs are able to pierce the veil of such professionalized confusion.
In a similar way economists have been mobilized to serve creditor 
interests. Many of these hired guns act as public relations lobbies for global 
financial interests, often by joining think tanks that serve as advertising 
agencies to promote these interests. Their assigned task is to depict austerity 
as laying a sound foundation for future growth rather than promoting a self-
feeding collapse. As poverty intensifies, governments are urged to bail out 
the economy’s savers at taxpayer expense, cutting back wages even while 
shifting the tax burden from property onto labor. When the promised 
prosperity fails to materialize, the austerity lobby argues that the problem is 
simply that monetarist policies have not been followed intensively enough to 
“work their magic.” But like most magic, the purported “magic of the 
marketplace” is merely a trick performed by model-builders so deftly that 
most peoples’ eyes cannot quite follow what is happening.
As Erik S. Reinert has asked, if mathematical economics as practiced by 
the monetarists should face a product liability suit, what would be the 
appropriate judgment?17 If today’s Chicago School orthodoxy were to be 
tested by reality, it would flunk the test. Jobs have been downsized. Lives 
have been shortened and the quality of life has declined as Chicago graduates 
and their clones have monopolized the staffs of national Finance Ministries, 
Treasury departments, central banks and the leading international financial 
institutions, using their positions to censor alternative economic analysis.
The crisis created between the economy’s growth in debt and its ability to 
pay should be the starting point of mathematical economics.
 
PULL QUOTES

[PULL QUOTE 05-01]
In any pure theory, all propositions are essentially tautological, in the sense 
that the results are implicit in the assumptions made. — Nobel Prize winner 
William Vickery
1 John Shield Nicholson, Principles of Political Economy (London 1893): 122.
2 William Roscher, Grundlagen, 67 f. as quoted by J. Reiss, “Mathematics in Economics: Schmoller, 
Meyer and Jevons,” Journal of Economic Studies 27 (2000): 477–91.
3 Henry Adams, The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma (New York, 1919), introduction by 
Brooks Adams. For a discussion of the application of exponential growth to the movement of history, 
especially the economic applications of energy, see William H. Jordy, Henry Adams: Scientific 
Historian (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1953).
4 Freeman J. Dyson, “Mathematics in the Physical Sciences,” Scientific American 211/3 (Sept. 1964): 
132f.
5 I discuss this problem in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt: How Trade and Development 
Concentrate Economic Power in the Hands of Dominant Nations (ISLET 2009, 2nd ed., revised and 
expanded).
6 Capital, I: 14.
7 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, p. 213.
8 William Vickery, Microeconomics (New York 1964) :5 (italics added).
9 John Stuart Mill, “On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of Investigation Proper 
to it” in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions in Political Economy (London 1844): V.46.
10 Paul Samuelson, “The Gains from Trade,” Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 5: 
1939): 205: reprinted in Papers, 1966 II: 782 [781–971].

11 Paul Samuelson, “International Factor-Price Equilibrium Once Again,” Economic Journal 59 
(1949): 182 [181–197]; reprinted in Papers, 1966 II: 869–885.
12 Gerald Meier, The International Economics of Development; Theory and Policy (New York 1968): 
227.
13 Gunnar Myrdal, “How Scientific are the Social Sciences?” see An International Economy: Problems 
and Prospects (New York 1956): 336.
14 Edward O. Wilson, Consilience (New York 1998): 313.
15 David Hume, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748): 132 (section xii, part iii).
16 As early as 1849, Daniel Lee attempted to quantify the environmental depletion suffered by raw-
materials exporters in his agricultural supplement to the U.S. Patent Office report. This “external” 
effect of foreign trade became an essential component of E. Peshine Smith’s 1853 Manual of Political 
Economy (see Hudson 1975 [2010] for a discussion). Carey’s Law of Association postulated that 
economies grow more productive at the intensive margin as they become more dense. But free traders 
have ignored these broad consequences, and used rhetorical invective censorially to dismiss them as 
“externalities.”
17 Erik S. Reinert, point he made in a discussion.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 5
____________

*****
6. The Financial Character of Today’s 
Crisis and Why Economists Avoid 
Confronting It
 
Economists are the last people one should ask to explain today’s crisis. 
Although they say their discipline is about how to allocate scarce resources 
among competing ends, they refer only to small marginal movements within 
the existing set of institutional relationships, tax laws and loopholes, political 
alignments — and peoples’ gullibility. There is no free lunch, unearned 
income or exploitation in this textbook world, and hence no need for 
government regulation or economic reform. “Free market” advocates seem 
always to be shocked, shocked to hear that there is insider dealing, fraud and 
deception going on. Gambling, perhaps, but only to hedge against risk and 
stabilize markets, never to crash them.
This paradigm excludes reality as an anomaly. The recent Bubble 
Economy should have rendered its logic obsolete by showing it to depict a 
fictitious parallel universe that never really existed. If its post-classical tunnel 
vision survives, there must be strong vested interests supporting its happy-
face ideology and benefiting from today’s economic mess.
Rent-seekers and their bankers claim that if governments agree to step 
aside and stop regulating and taxing, economies will settle naturally at a 
stable and fair equilibrium. Automatic stabilizers will maintain full 
employment to run economies optimally, while price and income adjustments 
ensure that everyone’s income and wealth reflects their productive 
contribution to economic growth. This is why they call it a crisis when 
resources or money get scarce and debts cannot be paid — and blame it on 

disturbances from outside the economy. Presumably an accident that won’t 
happen again, not a systemic problem.
The refusal to recognize unproductive grabbing of unjustified income is 
subsidized by powerful interests that benefit by deterring economic reform, 
opposing public regulation and blocking progressive taxation of predatory 
income skimmed off without adding to production or the economic surplus 
but carved out of it. This revenue — which classical writers called economic 
rent — is extracted from business cash flow and appropriates the productivity 
gains that were supposed to raise living standards. At least that was the 
promise back in 1945 when World War II ended and productivity 
breakthroughs began to soar.
This rosy pro-rentier view of how a “free market” operates opens the gates 
for the frauds, insider dealing and unproductive predatory finance that are 
assumed not to exist. It is as if economies are not polarizing between 
creditors and debtors, culminating in foreclosure time and financial austerity. 
If the world really worked in the way that opponents of public regulation tell 
the story, there would be no need for fiscal and financial reform. But the 
reality is that economies polarize and shrink when they are stripped of the 
checks and balances put in place by the classical economists and Progressive 
Era reformers.
That is the problem the world faces today. It is the result of the financial 
sector loading down economies with loans without any idea of just how 
debtors are to pay out of their normal earnings. Banks and other creditors use 
their receipt of interest and fees to make yet more loans that further increase 
the debt overhead.
What has confused populations in recent years is that this debt creation 
appears to “create wealth” when credit is lent in a way that inflates prices for 
real estate, stocks and bonds. Asset-price inflation is what fueled the post-
1980 stock market takeover boom, the dot.com bubble, and the enormous 30-
year bond market rally from 1980 to 2011. Interest rates fell almost steadily 
as the Federal Reserve flooded the U.S. banking system with credit, raising 
the prices of existing bonds and increasing the multiplier by which banks 
could capitalize a given flow of real estate rent or business income into a 
loan. Property and financial securities are worth whatever banks will lend to 

new buyers or corporate raiders — and credit standards were lowered 
steadily, capped by the 2001–08 real estate bubble.
Until 2008, prices for housing or rewards for staging a corporate raid rose 
faster than carrying charges on the debt, so balance sheets reported rising net 
worth. But these were only “paper gains” — balance sheet net worth, not real 
wealth. Tangible capital investment slowed, and wages and disposable 
personal income were flat, or even falling if one takes into account FICA 
wage withholding and other taxes, rising debt service and housing costs. 
Many families were able to maintain their living standards only by 
borrowing. The idea was that once they got onto the “home ownership on 
credit” treadmill, they could simply take out home equity loans against the 
rising price of their property, treating it like the proverbial piggy bank. This is 
the kind of wealth creation that Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan 
celebrated. The secret of perpetual motion seemed to have been discovered, 
at least in the financial universe if not in the physical world. It was a godsend 
to bank loan offices, whose product is debt, after all.
Just as a Bubble Economy is financial and usually reflects the failure of 
public checks and balances to protect the economy from debt creation 
growing faster than the ability to pay, so most crises are resolved by public 
giveaways to the banks and other rentier interests, as if the alternative to the 
resulting asset grab and polarization of wealth would be economic collapse. 
Creditors buy up real estate, infrastructure and debt-strapped companies on 
the cheap.
The underlying debt dynamic is masked by the fact that crises typically are 
triggered by fraud or embezzlement. Blame for the crash of September 2008, 
for example, has focused on junk mortgage loans to NINJA borrowers (with 
No Income, No Job and no Assets) and fictitious property valuations given 
unwarranted credit ratings. But these are only the outcroppings of the basic 
imbalance between the debt overhead and the ability to pay.
Mainstream economics shies from dealing with this tendency for debt 
service to absorb more and more of the economic surplus. Instead of treating 
the financial sector as acting in extractive and outright parasitic ways as it 
becomes autonomous from production, bank-friendly economists depict it as 
part of the “real” economy. National income statistics recognize the 

symbiosis of finance with insurance and real estate (FIRE) by grouping them 
together, but treat their interest, fees and rents as earnings for providing real 
services.
Economic models stop short of acknowledging how “free markets” are 
shaped by high finance using part of its gains to capture governments and 
their regulatory agencies, starting with the central bank and the criminal 
justice system so as to neutralize their checks and balances against predatory 
finance. Wall Street backs politicians, public relations “think tanks” and 
business schools that provide a logic (or at least a cover story) for shifting 
taxes off interest and rent onto labor and industry. When this ends up 
shrinking the economy and causing debt defaults, financial lobbyists demand 
that the central bank and Treasury issue new public debt to bail out banks, 
brokerage houses and hedge funds for loans gone bad. 
In his 1987–2006 tenure as Federal Reserve Chairman, Mr. Greenspan 
promoted debt leveraging as the paradigmatic form of “wealth creation.” The 
“wealth” in this case is balance-sheet net worth, inflated by easier lending 
terms extended to a widening range of borrowers at rising risk. Bank balance 
sheets become increasingly fictitious, and when reality raises its ugly head 
and the debt bubble bursts, asset prices plunge — but the debts remain in 
place, bringing foreclosures that transfer property from debtors to creditors. 
Even government assets are privatized, creating yet a new category of lending 
for banks to finance on credit.
This financial turmoil makes little appearance in mainstream economic 
models. The monetarist Chicago School reflects a view popular since David 
Ricardo’s day, describing the economy as operating on barter beneath “the 
veil of money,” without debt problems. What passes for macroeconomics 
these days takes national aggregates without layering them into the top 1% to 
10% vis-à-vis the bottom 90% to 99%. The private sector is described 
homogeneously as “households,” without segregating the McMansions and 
lordly estates from the pueblos and middle class row houses. Wealth acquired 
by “capital gains” on credit — mostly on real estate, corporate raids and in 
the hedge fund casinos — are deemed as socially positive as wealth acquired 
by investing in tangible capital to employ labor to produce goods and 
necessary services. 

It is as if finance capitalism is part of industrial capitalism, not as having 
given way to casino capitalism quickly collapsing into a negative equity 
economy leading to debt peonage. Instead of bailing out the “real” production 
and consumption economy (the “bottom 99%”) by writing down debts to 
reflect the ability to pay, governments are acting as debt enforcers. Claiming 
to support “price stability,” they insist that this can be maintained only by 
keeping unemployment high. So even as credit-inflated asset prices soar for 
real estate, stocks and bonds, the prices on which monetarists and central 
bankers focus are consumer prices and wages. Debt deflation is permitted in 
the Bubble Economy’s wake, but not rising wages or social spending.
The economic theory used to justify this policy is a highly selective 
portrayal (“model”) of how society works. Depicting interest and rent as 
“earnings” on a par with profits on tangible capital investment gives the 
impression that the FIRE sector produces a surplus instead of being what 
France’s Physiocrats called sterile, or even worse: a deadweight eating 
parasitically into the economy. As bank loans turn land rent, monopoly 
privileges and infrastructure access fees into a flow of interest payments, they 
use some of this revenue to throw their lobbying power behind these rent 
extractors. The idea is to advocate lower taxes on rentier revenue so as to 
leave more available to pay interest. Land rent, monopoly privileges and 
patent rights are capitalized into bank loans, becoming the backing for 
today’s financial sector and the economy’s savings. 
This creates a symbiosis among the economy’s rent-yielding sectors. 
Some 80% of bank loans are real estate mortgages, and the balance of loans 
are to buy financial securities already issued or to take over companies, or 
consumer loans to be paid out of revenue earned in the normal course of 
employment, not by investing the bank credit productively. Even in the case 
of U.S. student loans (whose volume now exceeds that of credit card debt), 
this lending has not enabled many students to earn enough return on their 
education to pay their creditors. As debt deflation shrinks the economy, there 
are few employment opportunities for new graduates. Lacking jobs, they are 
obliged to live at home with their parents. Arrears on their student debts 
mount up, immune from the prospect of being wiped out in bankruptcy 
proceedings. The government has guaranteed these high-profit loans to the 
banks, yet the loans cannot be paid without polarizing the economy between 

creditors and debtors. 
Vested interests defend tax favoritism and public guarantees backing this 
rentier behavior and sponsor a self-serving economics denying that debts 
need to be written down to reflect the ability of debtors to pay. This approach 
rejects the classical contrast between cost-value (what is technologically and 
socially necessary to produce a good or service) and economic rent 
(“unearned” income, including capital gains). Rejecting the distinction 
between earned and unearned income and wealth, the value of financial 
securities and other assets is assumed to capitalize revenue streams reflecting 
real effort and enterprise.
Also rejected is the idea that reform can make economies more efficient 
by minimizing unearned income and unproductive credit. Post-classical (that 
is, pro-rentier) models reason as if the economy is imprinted with the existing 
political and institutional structures, somewhat like patterns on a balloon. It 
can be inflated by credit creation or deflated by debt service, but keeps its 
basic proportions. Keynesian fine tuning aims at injecting enough purchasing 
power to maintain full employment, and the Fed sets an interest rate intended 
to supply just the right amount of credit — without changing the economy’s 
institutional structure, tax system or political relationships. It is as if prices 
for goods and services, real estate, stocks and bonds are affected 
symmetrically and proportionally across the board. Under this assumption, 
any change is deemed to be “exogenous.” So economic reform is not a topic 
in this discussion. There is no recognition of a free lunch or special privilege 
polarizing the distribution of income and wealth, to say nothing of being 
regulated or even fully taxed. Just the opposite: Public regulation, taxation 
and public investment are accused of being distortions, and indeed the road to 
serfdom. From the vantage point of the free lunchers, the past eight centuries 
of reforms appear as a distortion. Only their own extraction of income is 
deemed to be distortion-free.
This attitude explains why new public debt is issued (as in the Federal 
Reserve’s post-2008 “cash for trash” swaps and taking Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac onto the government’s balance sheet) to bail out bankers and 
speculators from having to take a loss, but the “real” economy is not being 
rescued. A bad-debt crisis is inevitable, because no exponential growth of 
credit can be sustained for long. Politicians rationalize bailouts by claiming 

that they are selecting priorities — and that economy’s payments system will 
collapse if debts are written off. But keeping them on the books enables 
creditors at the top of the pyramid to steadily increase their share of wealth 
and income. Retail banking could have been rescued while folding up 
Citibank and Bank of America. But the financial sector seeks to convince 
politicians to accept the tunnel vision that Margaret Thatcher summarized in 
her intellectually and socially deadening slogan: “There is no alternative” 
(TINA). More blatantly, the bankers waive their final weapon: the threat to 
plunge the economy into chaos if they don’t get their way.
This tunnel vision — and the debt overhead it has facilitated — is the 
economic tragedy of our time. It is tragic not only because the financial 
system bases its operations on extractive rather than productive lending, but 
because this is so unnecessary. It doesn’t have to be this way! There is an 
alternative. That in fact is what classical political economy was all about.
The financial problem ultimately is rooted in fiscal policy. This makes it 
political. If classical political economy had succeeded in its reform program 
of taxing the land’s site value (created not by the landowner’s own efforts but 
by local transportation and other infrastructure investment and the level of 
general prosperity), this revenue would not have been available to be 
capitalized into bank loans and paid out as interest. This would have held 
down debt-leveraged housing prices, while saving governments from having 
to tax labor and productive business. 
This was the logic underlying the classical program to make economies 
more fair and equitable as well as more competitive by minimizing their cost 
structure. Taxing economic rent and regulating monopoly pricing was seen as 
the alternative to taxing productive labor and tangible capital. Progressive Era 
economists hoped to invest this revenue in infrastructure. If governments had 
kept basic infrastructure in the public domain, prices for its services would 
not reflect the privatizers’ interest charges and other financial fees for loans 
taken out to buy it, or the exorbitant salaries and bonuses that have 
accompanied the sale of these assets on credit. The public option would 
provide essential services (transportation, communications, etc.) at cost or on 
a subsidized basis, or as freely as roads and sidewalks. The aim was to 
minimize the cost of living and doing business. This is the logic by which a 
public option for banking and regulations against casino-capitalist gambling, 

collateralized debt swaps and extortionate gouging by credit card companies 
would have helped avert today’s polarization between rentiers and the 
productive economy.
But post-classical economic models neglect the distinction between 
necessary production costs and unnecessary “watered” costs. Income 
distribution is discussed without taking into account capital gains from real 
estate and stock market bubbles. There is almost no recognition that for real 
estate, finance and globalized investment today, the name of the game is 
capital gains, fueled by asset-price inflation. Wealthy individuals try not to 
earn (or at least to declare) taxable income, thanks to the fact that interest is 
tax deductible while capital gains and rentier revenue are replete with special 
loopholes and taxed at much lower rates than “earned income” in the form of 
wages and normal business profits.
This tax favoritism for debt financing as opposed to equity investment 
leads the debt overhead to reach a critical mass. The only way to avoid a 
crash is to lend debtors the credit to pay interest and even the amortization 
falling due. This is what U.S. banks did when they wrote “negative interest” 
mortgages that simply added the interest onto the debt balance, until it 
reached 125% or some other specified proportion of the original principal. 
The effect was an exponentially growing debt curve — the “magic of 
compound interest,” society’s paradigmatic free lunch. It can be sustained 
only by lending larger and larger amounts against collateral that is rising in 
price. An equivalent effect is achieved by channeling credit into the purchase 
of assets to raise their price at a high enough exponential rate to cover the 
accrual of interest, so that banks can rewrite their loans at the collateral’s 
higher, debt-inflated price. 
Lower interest rates enable a given stream of revenue to be capitalized into 
a larger loan principal. Under Mr. Greenspan’s stewardship, the Federal 
Reserve supplied enough credit by 2008 to drive down interest rates to as low 
as they seemed likely to go. (To be sure, long-term rates were driven down 
even further by 2011 as banks tried to revive the plunging housing market.) 
Lower amortization rates also reduced carrying charges. Many mortgage 
debts were made perpetual, covering only the interest payments instead of 
being self-amortizing. Finally, banks were able to make larger loans by 
requiring lower down payments. Whereas 30% equity was normal prior to the 

1990s, banks were making 100% loans by the early 2000s — indeed, even 
105% loans to enable borrowers to pay fees to the mortgage originators and 
title insurers’ who were Wall Street’s partners in crime.
The reality is that perpetual motion no more can be created in economies 
than in physical nature. As asset-price inflation raises the price of buying a 
retirement income (because higher stock and bond prices reduce the dividend 
and interest yield), pension funds cannot support retirees at the typically 8% 
rate assumed for annual returns (compounded annually to pay enormous 
sums out of “capital” gains. Reality imposes itself on “mark-to-model” 
calculations that are stock in trade of the GIGO (garbage in, garbage out) 
toolkit used by financial fraudsters.
By 2006 an estimated one-sixth of new U.S. homebuyers were 
speculators. Rents fell as these buyers sought tenants to carry as much of the 
mortgage as possible while waiting for prices to rise by enough to pay off the 
bank loan with interest and still leave the hoped-for capital gain. The fantasy 
was to pay off their debts out of these gains, not out of operating revenue. 
The plan was to buy property whose carrying charges that cover the debt 
service — as long as the rate of price gain remained higher than the rate of 
interest. But the economy was not expanding and rents did not keep pace as 
debt deflation diverted spending away from goods and services. When rents 
fell, buyers had to make up the shortfall from other revenue or by drawing 
down their own savings — or by borrowing yet more from the banks. Seeing 
the economy growing top-heavy with debt, wise investors cashed out. Prices 
stopped rising. Foreclosure time arrived.
Treating money and credit simply as a veil misses this drive for asset-price 
gains to obtain balance-sheet wealth by debt leveraging. The “value-free” 
neoliberal approach assumes that competition will keep prices in line with 
technologically necessary production costs, but does not take account of rent 
seeking on credit. It must fail as a business plan in the end, because adding 
financial costs to family and business budgets increases break-even prices 
beyond necessary cost-value. This enables other economies to undersell debt-
ridden ones.
Yet fortunes are still made most easily today by obtaining financial claims 
on existing wealth, not by increasing production. To the extent that free 

lunches are obtained this way, they are a quid without quo — revenue without 
a corresponding real cost of production. Yet the recent Bubble Economy has 
not deterred the textbook assumption that economies will “return” to 
equilibrium and fair income distribution when disturbed. Why then are there 
so many riots?
Throughout most of history the largest fortunes have been carved out of 
the public domain or achieved by insider dealings. A historically based 
reality-based economics thus should focus on the military conquests that 
created Europe’s landed aristocracy, land grants in its colonies, the real estate 
giveaways to America’s 19th-century railroad barons, and the recent financial 
giveaways to recipients of the $13 trillion in post-2008 U.S. financial bailouts 
that have endowed a power elite to rule the 21st century.
 
Ricardo’s Theory of Economic Rent Leading to a Crisis of British Industry
The leading theories of crisis were formulated as warnings of what would 
happen if economies failed to reform themselves by freeing markets from the 
special financial and property privileges inherited from Europe’s feudal 
epoch — landlordship, banking and the monopolies that medieval Europe 
bequeathed to industrial capitalism. Northern conquerors carved landlordship 
out of territories they defeated levying groundrent and monopoly rent as the 
primordial forms of tribute. In due course Italian bankers emerged out of 
Church orders to lend kingdoms the funds to pay tribute to Rome, and then to 
wage wars.
Prior to 1815, Britain’s landed interest and industrial capital both feared 
the overgrowth of debt owed to bondholders, especially to the Dutch who 
owned much government debt and stock in the Crown monopolies. But as 
normal trade resumed after the Napoleonic Wars ended, industry and banking 
formed an alliance of against the landed interest. In 1846 they succeeded in 
repealing Britain its protectionist Corn Laws, negotiating free trade to make 
Britain the “workshop of the world” — and also the world’s banker, making 
profits by financing foreign trade, mainly foreign raw materials for British 
manufactures.

The 19th century saw two major lines of theorizing about of how 
industrial capitalism would experience a crisis. The first was David Ricardo’s 
warning against landlords seeking protectionist trade policy to promote 
national self-sufficiency in food production — at rising prices and hence land 
rents. Assuming that diminishing returns would push up food prices at the 
margin of cultivation. Unless the rising cost of producing food at home was 
checked by importing lower-priced crops from abroad, the landlords’ rising 
receipt of groundrent would absorb the entire surplus. Industrialists would 
have to pay labor a higher wage to cover the cost of higher-priced food, 
ending capital profitability and thus stifling further progress. 
This logic was based on technological nonsense. It assumed diminishing 
returns in agriculture — just as the revolution in soil chemistry (the use of 
fertilizers, pesticides), new seed varieties and mechanized farm production 
powered a century of remarkable productivity gains. Ricardo’s pessimistic 
approach denied that fertilizers or capital improvements could change the 
“original and indestructible powers of the soil” in the form of natural fertility. 
This focus on diminishing returns distracted attention from earlier worries 
about financial crisis stemming from public debts imposing heavy carrying 
charges paid by a proliferation of excise taxes. At the time Ricardo wrote his 
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation in 1817, three-quarters of 
British government’s budget was spent on debt service, mainly as a result of 
its centuries of warfare with France. His labor theory of value (and its logical 
complement, his definition of economic rent as the margin of market price 
over actual costs of production ultimately reducible to the cost of labor) 
treated income and wealth in “real” terms, reducible to labor time and wages. 
It was as if economies operated on a barter basis, with money and credit (and 
hence, debt) being only a veil. There was no monetary and financial 
dimension, no debt service eating into income, no “capital transfer” problem 
of paying foreign debts.
As Britain’s Parliamentary spokesman for its banking industry (today we 
would say lobbyist), Ricardo based his price theory on Malthus’s ideas of 
population growth forcing resort to poorer soils, increasing the cost of 
producing food. Rising crop prices would provide a windfall gain — 
economic rent — for landlords on the better lands cultivated first. The 
increase in land rents would grind industrial capitalism to a halt, at least in 

Britain, as long as it relied on domestic agriculture to feed its work force. 
Rising prices for subsistence would price the economy’s manufacturers out of 
world markets and shift industrial power to less densely populated countries 
with better soils and hence (so Ricardo assumed) lower prices. 
Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations had denounced the policy of shifting the 
fiscal burden onto labor and industry by a proliferation of sales taxes and 
other excise taxes. Ricardo used his labor theory of cost-value (including the 
labor embodied in making capital goods) and market price (reflecting the 
excess of economic rent over and above the cost of production on well 
situated land) to oppose tariff protection for agriculture. British industry 
could retain its global dominance by abolishing the protectionist Corn Laws 
(introduced in 1798 during the Napoleonic Wars with France) so as to buy 
food in the cheapest markets it could find — mainly in North America. Free 
trade in grain would enable industrialists to feed their labor force as 
inexpensively as foreign manufacturers could. Given Britain’s industrial head 
start, it could remain the workshop of the world.
After the revolutions of 1848 drew the middle classes and labor back 
industrial and finance capital in the drive for democratic political reform, the 
consensus ideology of the Industrial Revolution was to free economies from 
the legacy of special privilege and hereditary favoritism. It was left to John 
Stuart Mill and subsequent “Ricardian socialists” to advocate taxing land 
rent. That became the great political fight in Britain from 1848 to World War 
I, highlighted by the Budget Crisis of 1909–11. It required electoral reform 
and an extension of the franchise to reduce the landed interest’s control over 
Parliament. Reformers throughout Europe and America sought to re-establish 
banking, basic infrastructure and land ownership (or at least the land’s rent) 
in the public domain. Evolution seemed to favor nations that invested the 
economic surplus in tangible public and private capital formation rather than 
unproductively to extract land rent and monopoly rent with borrowed credit 
at interest. 
The American School’s Technological Optimism as an Alternative to 
Ricardian Pessimism

Britain’s free trade negotiations after 1846 offered other countries tariff-
free access to its agricultural markets if they would give British industry 
access to their own domestic markets. This revived the tariff debate in the 
United States. Henry Clay had coined the term “American System” in the 
1840s for the Whig program of protective tariffs, internal improvements and 
a national bank. Henry Carey and his followers such as E. Peshine Smith 
soon pointed out that thanks to the progress of science and technology, 
increasing returns characterized agriculture as well as industry and 
transportation. By the 1850s a distinctly American School of political 
economy developed with regard to how increasing returns would transform 
economies, above all as a result of rising energy usage per worker.
To obtain such productivity gains, they argued, U.S. manufacturers needed 
to be protected from Britain’s industrial head start. This logic was embodied 
in the Republican Party’s founding program in 1853, and guided U.S. 
development after it won the 1860 presidential election behind Abraham 
Lincoln. Smith went into the State Department with his long-time Rochester, 
New York law partner, William Seward. In the 1870s, Seward arranged for 
Smith to go to Japan as advisor to the Mikado to guide that nation’s 
protectionist industrialization.
By the end of the 19th century the American School developed in a 
number of directions. In contrast to theorizing that assumed wages to be able 
to fall without reducing labor productivity, the Economy of High Wages 
theory held that better paid labor was more productive labor as a result of 
being better fed, better clothed and above all, better educated. All this cost 
money, but it enabled high-wage economic such as the United States to 
undersell low-wage economies.
The economic problem was expected to be more sociological than one of 
scarcity. Simon Patten, the first economics professor at the major early 
business school, the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, 
described a high productivity Economy of Abundance in which the 
temptation to over-consume would challenge the traditional morality of 
stalwart altruism inherited from subsistence societies.
Many of Patten’s students became sociologists or social workers. His 
student Rexford Tugwell became a member of Franklin Roosevelt’s Brains 

Trust and was appointed governor of Puerto Rico, later teaching at the 
University of Chicago as an institutionalist in the days before Chicago went 
hard-line monetarist. But despite the American School’s influence on U.S. 
economic policy for a century, protectionists and institutionalist ideas have 
been stripped from mainstream histories of economic thought. A censorial 
post-classical economics shifted the focus, traumatized by how Marx and 
other reformers mobilized classical economics to counter the rentier sector’s 
special privileges and continue the restructuring process initiated by France’s 
Physiocrats.
 
Marxian Socialism
Writing within the tradition of classical value theory but from the vantage 
point of labor, Marx viewed the essential crisis under capitalism as political. 
Capitalism would avoid stagnation by evolving into socialism. The transition 
would save it from underconsumption and economic polarization resulting 
from financial and industrial capital impoverishing labor.
Whereas Ricardo saw profits declining as a result of a rising share of 
income going to landlords, Marx saw profits falling as a proportion of the 
industrialist’s cash flow as what today is called depreciation and amortization 
increased — the return of capital, as well as the return to capital (profit). As 
production became more capital-intensive in its drive to raise productivity, 
capital/output ratios and capital investment per worker would increase. This 
meant that industrialists would have to recapture the original cost of their 
capital investment, in addition to making a profit. And like Adam Smith, 
Marx assumed a 50 : 50 share of debt and equity in his numerical examples. 
Assuming a steady interest rate, it followed that as production became more 
capital-intensive, financial charges would rise. But the political force of 
industrial capitalism would modernize finance and industrialize it, he 
optimistically believed.
Given the progress of science over the past few centuries, it is only natural 
that most technological views of the future are optimistic. Rising productivity 
has been a long-term trend, even in food production and mining. Despite the 
Ricardian assumption of diminishing returns that still characterizes textbook 

models, and despite Club of Rome limits-to-growth campaigning and peak-
oil warnings, crises have stemmed not from the production sector but from 
the financial sector — and behind it, from the concentration of wealth in the 
hands of rentiers, monopolists and privatizers that have carved special 
privileges and property rights out of the public domain.
Like the American protectionists, Marx was a technological optimist. 
Describing agriculture as becoming industrialized, lowering food prices by 
raising productivity, he saw technological innovation as constantly lowering 
costs, making much industrial capital obsolete before it physically wore out. 
To the extent that the pace of technological innovation gained momentum, 
obsolescent high-cost capital would have to be written off and replaced even 
though the physical lifetime of the machinery was not yet worn out. This 
rising productivity was unlikely to cause a chronic over-production crisis 
under capitalism, he wrote, because more labor would be employed in the 
capital goods sector as production became more capital-intensive.
Marx’s followers have focused on the relationship between industrial 
capital and labor, and on the internal contradictions of capitalism that Josef 
Schumpeter later elaborated as “creative destruction” within the capitalist 
class as innovators invested to undersell competitors by lowering production 
costs. But Marx also re-introduced the pre-Ricardian emphasis on finance and 
debt. In his draft notes for Volume III of Capital and Book III Theories of 
Surplus Value he discussed how the purely mathematical growth of finance 
capital at exponential rates caused financial imbalance — the “magic of 
compound interest.” The excessive autonomous buildup of finance capital 
formed the core of his theory of the business cycle. But these cyclical mini-
crises were not the existential theory that Ricardo forecast in what Marx 
characterized as the Armageddon of industrial capitalism. He optimistically 
expected finance to become industrialized, on its way ultimately to becoming 
socialized.
Yet despite the fact that Ricardo’s technological assumptions of 
diminishing returns was so wrongheaded and anachronistic even in its own 
day — not to mention his special-interest pleading for the banking industry 
— subsequent mainstream economics remains focused on his ideas rather 
than pursuing the more realistic development of classical political economy at 
the hands of Marx or those of the American School of technology theorists, 

institutionalists and Progressive Era social reformers. The explanation lies in 
the fact that Ricardo’s pleading for the financial sector appeals to the major 
backers of today’s academic economics. Realistic analysis showing the 
problems of financial overhead and extractive rent-seeking is precisely what 
led to its rejection, in accordance with the time-honored criterion for 
acceptability by vested rentier interests: “If the eye offends thee, pluck it 
out.” 
Post-classical Theorizing Defends the rentiers as Productive, in Proportion 
to Their Wealth
In criticizing the strictly Ricardian views of the American anti-socialist 
journalist Henry George, Marx wrote that industrial capital always had a 
visceral hatred of landlords. The historical task of industrial capitalism, after 
all, was to purify society of the carry-over from feudalism’s landed 
aristocracy — not only its land ownership and groundrent but also its control 
of the upper house of legislatures, by which it managed to block reform in 
many countries. In Britain the political struggle came to a head in 1909-10, 
when the House of Commons sought to pass a revenue bill based on a land 
tax. A constitutional crisis ensued, resulting in a ruling that the House of 
Lords never again could block a House of Commons revenue bill.
But by the time World War I broke out in 1914 the momentum for taxing 
landed property had passed. Finance capital was in the ascendant. And 
whereas in Ricardo’s day it had thrown its political support behind 
manufacturing industry — seeing international trade as the major private-
sector market for banking, as it had been since the 13th century — by the 
20th century urban real estate was becoming much more valuable important 
than agricultural land. Britain’s wealthiest individuals were still the post-
feudal families holding groundrent on Kensington and other high-value 
London neighborhoods, but home ownership and commercial real estate was 
well on its way to becoming democratized — on credit. Given the high price 
of real estate relative to income, it could be bought only by borrowing from 
the banks. Some 80% of bank lending in most English-speaking countries 
now takes the form of real estate mortgages. This has led the banking and 

financial sector to reverse its earlier attack on the landlord class — above all 
the post-Ricardian thrust of John Stuart Mill and other “Ricardian socialists” 
to fully tax groundrent or nationalize the land outright.
Today’s ultimate recipients of land rent are not the hereditary owners as 
was the landlord class in Ricardo’s day; they are the banks. No 19th-century 
economic writer expected this. From Britain to the United States, the great 
political fight was to socialize land rent either by taxing it or by nationalizing 
it. The thrust of classical value and price theory was to distinguish between 
earned income (wages and profits on industrial capital investment) and 
unearned income: economic rent, paradigmatically by landlords but also, by 
logical extension, monopoly rent, interest and other returns to privilege. The 
most important privilege today is the banking system’s privilege of creating 
credit.
After the Great War’s aftermath derailed the path of development toward 
which the Progressive Era seemed to have been leading. The vested financial 
and property interests mounted an ideological counter-attack, and a major 
arena was economic theory. The new theory’s political aim — its value 
system, price theory, monetary theory and the tax policy this theorizing 
implied — reflected the shift in alliances between finance capital, real estate 
and industry. Instead of continuing to oppose the landed interest, the 20th 
century’s democratization of property ownership — on credit — led to a 
symbiosis of finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE). To the extent that 
finance interfaces with industry, it has been to financialize industrial 
companies, not to industrialize the financial system as seemed to be occurring 
in the late 19th century from Germany and Central Europe to Japan. And to 
the extent that finance interfaces with government, it is first of all to finance 
the public construction of capital infrastructure, and then to force its sell-off 
— at prices far below the original cost — to buyers on credit, permitting them 
to factor in a proliferation of financial charges into the access fees they 
extract from the population. The result is the opposite direction of evolution 
from which 19th-century economic Darwinians expected. Instead of lowering 
a nation’s cost structure to make it more internationally competitive, 
financialization increases prices across the board.
As noted above, the definition of “free markets” has been turned upside 
down. Instead of freeing markets from rent-seeking, taxing groundrent and 

keeping major infrastructure monopolies in the public domain, economies 
were deregulated to “free” finance to load industry and government with 
debts, turning profits and disposable personal income into interest charges. 
Taxes have been shifted off real estate and finance onto labor and industry, 
while the post-1980 New Enclosure movement has increasingly privatized 
the public domain. And to cap matters, under the slogan of “free markets” as 
the antithesis to “the Road to Serfdom” (defined for all practical purposes as 
public regulation of the FIRE sector) planning has been centralized in the 
financial centers, from Wall Street to the City of London, the Paris Bourse 
and Frankfurt. 
It thus seems ironic that governments have become the major sponsors of 
private finance capital. Lenin was the most astute in applying Marx’s theory 
of finance capital to the eruption of the Great War, in Imperialism. At the 
time he wrote it in 1916, it was natural to focus on private finance capital. 
But what the war did was create an entirely new dynamic (or “synthesis,” as 
Marxists would say): inter-governmental debt, headed by the U.S. demands 
for Inter-Ally arms debts that led the Allies to demand German reparations to 
cover their payments of debt service to the United States. Wall Street 
organized a triangular flow of U.S. purchases of German state and local 
bonds, providing the Reichsbank with dollars to pay the Allies to pay the 
United States. And after World War II, the International Monetary Fund, 
World Bank and most recently the European Central Bank have acted as 
executive committees on behalf of international finance (mainly Wall Street, 
thanks to the Washington Consensus that dominates these creditor 
institutions). The result is an international imposition of financial and fiscal 
austerity on debtor countries, starting with Third World countries in the 
1960s and culminating in the asset stripping of Iceland and Greece today 
(2011).
The financial sector’s attempt to turn the economic surplus into debt 
claims threatens to leave economies in poverty by collateralizing wealth to 
pay interest rather than invest in tangible capital formation, rising living 
standards or environmental preservation. And the vested interests threaten to 
plunge economies into crisis if governments move to check their interest by 
reviving the Progressive Era’s policy to check the power unearned wealth, 
finance and monopolies. 

That is the essence of today’s global crisis. Yet the financial and other 
rentier interests are capturing the public debate, mass media and academic 
economics. Inverting classical economics, they have re-defined “free 
markets” in a way diametrically opposed to what was meant a century ago. 
Instead of meaning markets free of economic rent, interest and monopoly 
power, the term now means markets free for predatory finance and kindred 
rentiers to dismantle public regulation and free themselves from taxation. 
Such an economy “frees” the new financial oligarchy to reverse democracy, 
stifle growth and stop living standards from rising. 
The resulting dominance of the financial sector over industrial capital, real 
estate and commerce (and increasingly over family budgets) threatens to 
absorb the economic surplus today, bringing on precisely the form of 
economic Armageddon that Ricardo forecast landlords would create in the 
absence of free trade in grain, and which Mill, Henry George and other critics 
of landlord said would create economic crisis of the public sector failed to 
collect the land rent created by no effort of capital investment of landlords 
themselves.
The world economy is being thrown into a financial crisis based largely on 
mortgage debt so large that it not only absorbs all the land rent, but requires 
payment from wages and salaries as well as industrial profits. Ricardo’s 
barter-based, bank-free and debt-free economic theory did not recognize this 
kind of financial crisis. And all economic logic of the 19th and early 20th 
century assumed the rule of law. But today, junk mortgage lending and 
outright fraud are proliferating on an unprecedented scale, beyond the ability 
of the courts or criminal prosecutors to cope with. And in contrast to the 
effect of 19th-century Parliamentary and Congressional reform in promoting 
democracy politically, governments throughout the world are becoming 
subordinated not to the landed aristocracy this time around, but to financial 
rentiers. It is they to whom John Maynard Keynes referred in 1936 in his 
gentle term “euthanasia of the rentier,” by which he meant a rationalization of 
the financial system.
Instead of such rationalization occurring, the rentiers have fought back, 
joining in an alliance of finance capital with real estate to create the 
symbiotic FIRE sector. The national income and product accounts often are 
unable to distinguish financial from real estate earnings in today’s epoch of 

vertical integration between banks, real estate brokers and appraisers. By 
2008, Wall Street investment bankers were packaging junk mortgages into 
loans, and “casino capitalist” institutions placed bets on how long it would 
take for this “toxic waste” to explode, bringing down the economy in a 
convulsion of bankruptcy.
So in retrospect, the 19th century’s warnings of how the crisis of 
capitalism would unfold turned out to be too optimistic. They did not 
anticipate how the rentier interests would mount a counter-attack to block 
governments from industrializing (to say nothing of socializing) banking and 
insurance systems. The “independence of the central bank” is applauded as 
the “hallmark of democracy” rather than seeing it as a victory for the new 
financial oligarchy. The financial system has disabled the U.S. legal system 
by buying the right to name the heads of Congressional committees dealing 
with banking, and backing the political campaigns of judges committed to 
applying the law in the interests of their financial supporters.
 
Summary of Part I
Whereas Ricardo’s view of class war was between industrial capital and 
the landed aristocracy, Marx’s shifted the focus to industrial capital vis-à-vis 
labor — assuming that industrial capital was well on its way to winning its 
war against the landed aristocracy. And as for finance capital, Marx assumed 
that it would become subordinate to industrial capital.
But the seeming servant has become the master. Instead of banking 
becoming industrialized as seemed to be happening at least in central 
European banking prior to World War I, industry has been financialized. The 
shift gained momentum in the 1980s, as central banks first in the United 
States and then in Western Europe and Japan became free of the foreign 
exchange and gold bullion convertibility constraints that had existed prior to 
1971. Corporate raiders now raise credit to take over industry, paying out 
cash flow as interest and dividends instead of investing in fixed capital 
formation or longer-term research and development.
Only a reduction in debt and higher wages can spur real recovery. But this 

is blocked by austerity policies that impose debt deflation. The solution 
needed for today’s broad economic downturn is easier bankruptcy, especially 
for educational loans, and for mortgages to be brought in line with today’s 
lower market prices and affordability. But when the financial sector gains 
control of policy, its prime objective is to protect creditors from taking major 
losses on loans gone bad and gambles against bettors unable to pay (e.g., 
Lehman Bros. and A.I.G. after September 2008). Something has to give — 
and the financial sector has achieved sufficient power to sacrifice general 
prosperity in order to squeeze out debt service. So new capital investment and 
hiring shrink, and economies fall into depression — leading to yet more 
bankruptcies and foreclosures in the private sector, and privatization sell-offs 
by debt-strapped governments. 
The Role of Governments in Sponsoring Financial Exploitation
Saving used to mean putting money away out of earnings to be able to 
spend. But today, “saving” in the national income statistics takes the form 
mainly of paying down debts taken on in times past. Current earnings are not 
available for spending; they are earmarked to pay the banks for credit cards, 
to pay the mortgage, to pay student loans, auto loans, retail store credit. The 
era of free choice is over — the choice being offered is, “Your money or your 
life.”
The term “debt deflation” was popularized by Irving Fisher writing the 
Great Depression of the 1930s. Markets collapsed under the weight of Inter-
Ally debts and German reparations stemming from World War I, and 
speculative credit as the U.S. Federal Reserve flooded financial markets to 
enable American banks and investors to lend Germany the money to pay 
reparations to the Allies to pay their debts to the United States. Lenin had 
written that wars were inevitable because finance capitalists in leading 
creditor nations would be unable to reach market-sharing agreements as to 
how to carve up the word amongst themselves and their leading industrial, 
mining and other clients. But what turned out to be most intransigent were 
U.S. Government claims on the Allied Powers for payment for arms supplied 
prior to U.S. entry into the Great War. Keynes blamed this claim on the 

Allied governments turning on Germany to pay them the money being 
demanded by the U.S. Government. 
The amount demanded exceeded the reasonable amount that could be 
paid, making breakdown inevitable, first in 1929 and then finally in 1931 
when standstill agreements were reached among the governments. It was too 
late to save Western economies from the Great Depression that recovered 
only as a result of the new public spending peaking in World War II.
After 1945 the international economy was reorganized along creditor-
oriented lines sponsored by the United States as major global creditor, with 
nearly 80% of the world’s monetary gold stock. But starting with the Korean 
War, military spending pushed the U.S. balance of payments into deficit in 
the 1960s, forcing the dollar off gold in August 1971. August seems to have 
become the traditional time of international crisis, from the guns of August 
1914 to closing of the London Gold Pool in 1971 to the financial crisis of 
August 2011 that saw gold jump once again in response to a flight out of 
financial debt claims.)
The Eurozone is re-creating a similar inter-governmental debt tangle today 
against its own members. This time the aim is not to pay for military war as 
in the 1920s, but to wage a 21st-century mode of financial warfare by 
creditors against debtor economies. First Ireland and Greece and then Italy, 
Spain and Portugal were directed to bail out their insolvent banking systems 
by imposing austerity and letting the banks “earn their way out of debt” by 
creating credit to lend to private buyers of the land and public domain that 
debt-burdened governments were to sell off. So instead of the Ricardian 
socialism directed against landlords and monopolists or Marxian socialism 
aimed at raising living standards and rationalizing industrial organization, the 
world is threatened with a lapse back into neofeudal rentier power.
This financial aggression is similar to military asset grabs. Just as in overt 
warfare, creditors seek the land and other real estate, public infrastructure and 
other assets from debtors in Ireland and Greece, and now Portugal, Italy and 
Spain as well. In place of tribute as such, they demand debt service. And the 
way to achieve this is by creating crisis, using their control of the payments 
and credit system as leverage to stifle economies that do not obey their 
demands. This is why today’s global financial system is in crisis once again, 

largely because of inter-governmental debt overwhelming private-sector 
capital movements, and because of international financial institutions (headed 
by the multinational but U.S.-dominated International Monetary Fund and 
World Bank, the European Central Bank and the U.S. Federal Reserve 
system) seeking to impose austerity and heavy taxation for what has 
metamorphosed from military warfare to financial warfare — in this case, 
against debtor economies.
 
PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 06-01]
This tunnel vision — and the debt overhead it has facilitated — is the 
economic tragedy of our time. It is tragic not only because the financial 
system bases its operations on extractive rather than productive lending, but 
because this is so unnecessary. — Michael Hudson
_________________

**********

PART II: Inflated Debt and Debt Deflation
 
 
“I was never able to explain to the American people in a way in which they 
understood it why these rescues were for them and for their benefit, not for 
Wall Street.”
— Henry M. Paulson Jr., the former Treasury secretary, to the financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission in May 2010. Quoted in Gretchen Morgenson, 
“The Rescue That Missed Main Street,” The New York Times, August 27, 
2011.
_________________

*****
7. A Property Is Worth Whatever a Bank 
Will Lend
Never before have so many Americans gone so deeply into debt so 
willingly. Housing prices have swollen to the point that we have taken to 
calling a mortgage — by far the largest debt most of us will ever incur — an 
“investment.” Sure, the thinking goes, $100 000 borrowed today will cost 
more than $200 000 to pay back over the next thirty years, but land, which 
they are not making any more of, will appreciate even faster. In the odd logic 
of the real estate bubble, debt has come to equal wealth. 
And not only wealth but freedom — an even stranger paradox. After all, 
debt throughout most of history has been little more than a slight variation on 
slavery. Debtors were medieval peons or Indians bonded to Spanish 
plantations or the sharecropping children of slaves in the postbellum South. 
Few Americans today would volunteer for such an arrangement, and 
therefore would-be lords and barons have been forced to develop more 
sophisticated enticements. 
The solution they found is brilliant, and although it is complex, it can be 
reduced to a single word: rent. Not the rent that apartment dwellers pay the 
landlord but economic rent, which is the profit one earns simply by owning 
something. Economic rent can take the form of licensing fees for the radio 
spectrum, interest on a savings account, dividends from a stock, or the capital 
gain from selling a home or vacant lot. The distinguishing characteristic of 

economic rent is that earning it requires no effort whatsoever. Indeed, the 
regular rent tenants pay landlords becomes economic rent only after 
subtracting whatever amount the landlord actually spent to keep the place 
standing. 
Most members of the rentier class are very rich. One might like to join that 
class. And so our paradox (seemingly) is resolved. With the real estate boom, 
the great mass of Americans can take on colossal debt today and realize 
colossal capital gains — and the concomitant rentier life of leisure — 
tomorrow. If you have the wherewithal to fill out a mortgage application, 
then you need never work again. What could be more inviting — or, for that 
matter, more egalitarian? That is the pitch, anyway. The reality is that, 
although home ownership may be a wise choice for many people, this 
particular real estate bubble has been carefully engineered to lure home 
buyers into circumstances detrimental to their own best interests. The bait is 
easy money. The trap is a modern equivalent to peonage, a lifetime spent 
working to pay off debt on an asset of rapidly dwindling value. 
Most everyone involved in the real estate bubble thus far has made at least 
a few dollars. But that is about to change. The bubble will burst, and when it 
does, the people who thought they would be living the easy life of a landlord 
will soon find that what they really signed up for was the hard servitude of 
debt serfdom. 
The new road to serfdom begins with a loan. Since 2003, mortgages have 
made up more than half of the total bank loans in America — more than $300 
billion in 2005 alone. Without that growing demand, banks would have seen 
almost no net loan growth in recent years. 
Why is the demand for mortgage debt so high? There are several reasons, 
but all of them have to do with the fact that banks encourage people to think 
of mortgage debt in terms of how much they can afford to pay in a given 
month — how far they can stretch their pay checks — rather than in terms of 
the total amount of the loan. A given monthly payment can carry radically 
different amounts of debt, depending on the rate of interest and how long 
those payments last. The purchasing power of a $1,000 monthly payment, for 
instance, nearly triples as the debt lingers and the interest rate declines. 
 

Figure 1 follows: A Monthly $1,000 Payment Can Carry Different Levels of 
Debt
 
 
As it happens, banks are increasingly unhurried about repayment. Nearly 
half the people buying their first homes last year were allowed to do so with 
no money down, and many of them took out so-called interest-only loans, for 
which payment of the actual debt — amortization — was delayed by several 
years. A few even took on “negative amortization” loans, which dispense 
entirely with payments on the principal and require only partial payment of 
the interest itself: the extra interest owed is simply added to the total debt, 
which can grow indefinitely. The Federal Reserve, meanwhile, has been 
pushing interest rates down for more than two decades.
 
Figure 2 follows: Interest Rates Have Been Falling Since 1981
 

 
The IRS has helped create demand for debt as well by allowing tax breaks 
— the well-known home-mortgage deduction, for instance — that can 
transform a loan into an attractive tax shelter. Indeed, commercial real estate 
investors hide most of their economic rent in “depreciation” write-offs for 
their buildings, even as those buildings gain market value. The pretense is 
that buildings wear out or become obsolete just like any other industrial 
investment. The reality is that buildings can be depreciated again and again, 
even as the property’s market value increases.
Local and state governments have done their share too, by shifting the tax 
burden from property to labor and consumption, in the form of income and 
sales taxes. Since 1929, the proportion of tax burden has almost complete 
reversed itself. 
In recent years, though, the biggest incentive to home ownership has not 
been owning a home per se, or even avoiding taxes, but rather the eternal 
hope of getting ahead. If the price of a $200,000 house shoots up 15% in a 
given year, the owner will realize a $30,000 capital gain. Many such owners 
are spending tomorrow’s capital gain today by taking out home-equity loans. 
For families whose real wages are stagnant or falling, borrowing against 
higher property prices seems almost like taking money from a bank account 
that has earned dividends. In a study last year, Alan Greenspan and James 
Kennedy found that new home-equity loans added $200 billion to the U.S. 
economy in 2004 alone. 

It is also worth noting that capital gains — economic rent “earned” without 
any actual labor or industrial investment — are increasingly untaxed. 
All of these factors have combined to lure record numbers of buyers into 
the real estate market, and home prices are climbing accordingly. The median 
price of a home has more than doubled in the last decade, from $109,000 in 
1995 to a peak of more than $206,000 in 2005. That growth far outpaces the 
consumer price index, and yet housing affordability — the measure of those 
month-to-month housing costs — has remained about the same. 
 
Figure 3 follows: Housing Prices Have Far Outpaced Consumer Prices Even 
as Monthly Payment Remains Affordable
 
 
 
 
That sounds like good news. But those rising prices also mean that more 
people owe more money to banks than at any other time in history. And that’s 
not just in terms of dollar — $11.8 trillion in outstanding mortgages — but 
also as a proportion of the national economy. This debt is now on track to 

surpass the size of America’s entire gross domestic product by the end of the 
decade. 
Even that huge debt might not seem so bad, what with those huge capital 
gains beckoning from out there in the future. But the boom, alas, cannot last 
forever. And when the growth ceases, the market will collapse. 
Understanding why, though, requires a quick detour into economic theory. 
We often think of “the economy” as no more than a closed loop between 
producers and consumers. Employers hire workers, the workers create goods 
and services, the employers pay them, and the workers use that money to buy 
the goods and services they created. 
 
Figure 4 follows: Mortgage Debt is Rising as a Proportion of GDP
 
 
As we have seen, though, the government also plays a significant role in 
the economy. Tax hikes drain cash from the circular flow of payments 
between producers and consumers, slowing down overheated economies. 
Deficit spending pumps more income into that flow, helping pull stalled 
economies out of recession. This is the classical policy model associated with 
John Maynard Keynes. 
A third actor also influences the nation’s fortune. Economists call it the 
FIRE sector, short for finance, insurance, and real estate. These industries are 
so symbiotic that the Commerce Department reports their earnings as a 

composite. (Banks require mortgage holders to insure their properties even as 
the banks reach out to absorb insurance companies. Meanwhile, real estate 
companies are organizing themselves as stock companies in the form of real 
estate investment trusts, or REITs — which in turn are underwritten by 
investment bankers.) The main product of these industries is credit. The FIRE 
sector pumps credit into the economy even as it withdraws interest and other 
charges. 
The FIRE sector has two significant advantages over the 
production/consumption and government sectors. The first is that interest 
wealth grows exponentially. That means that as interest compounds over 
time, the debt doubles and then doubles again. The 18th century philosopher 
Richard Price identified this miracle of compound interest and observed, 
somewhat ruefully, that had he been able to go back to the day Jesus was 
born and save a single penny — at 5% interest,compounded annually — he 
would have earned himself a solid gold sphere 150 million times bigger than 
Earth. 
The FIRE sector’s other advantage is that interest payments can quickly be 
recycled into more debt. The more interest paid, the more banks lend. And 
those new loans in turn can further drive up demand for real estate — thereby 
allowing homeowners to take out even more loans in anticipation of future 
capital gains. Some call this perpetual-motion machine a“post-industrial 
economy,” but it might more accurately be called a rentier economy. The 
dream is that the FIRE sector will expand to embrace the fortune of every 
American — that we need not work or produce anything, or, for that matter, 
invest in new technology or infrastructure for the nation. We certainly need 
not pay taxes. We need only participate in the boom itself. The miracle of 
compound interest will allow every one of us to be a rentier, feasting on 
interest, dividends, and capital gains. 
In reality, alas, we can’t all be rentiers. Just as, in Voltaire’s phrase, the 
rich require an abundant supply of the poor, so too does the rentier class 
require an abundant supply of debtors. There is no other way. In fact, the vast 
majority of Americans have seen their share of the rental pie decrease over 
the last two decades, even as the real estate pie as a whole has expanded. 
Everyone got a little richer, but rich people got much, much richer. 

We will be hard-pressed to maintain even this semi-blissful state. Like any 
living organism, real economies don’t grow exponentially, or even in a 
straight line. They taper off into an S-curve, the victim of their own 
successes. When business is good, the demand for labor, raw materials, and 
credit increases, which leads to large jumps in wages, prices, and interest 
rates, which in turn act to depress the economy. That is where the miracle of 
compound interest founders. Although many people did save money at 
interest two thousand years ago, nobody has yet obtained even a single Earth-
volume of gold. The reason is that when a business cycle turns down, debtors 
cannot pay, and so their debts are wiped out in a wave of bankruptcy along 
with all the savings invested in these bad loans. 
Japan learned this lesson in the Nineties. As the price of land went up, 
banks lent more money than people could afford to pay interest on. 
Eventually, no one could afford to buy any more land, demand fell off, and 
prices dropped accordingly. But the debt remained in place. People owed 
billions of Yen on homes worth half that — homes they could not sell. Many 
commercial owners simply went into foreclosure, leaving the banks not only 
with “non-performing loans” that were in fact dead losses but also with 
houses no one wanted — or could afford — to buy. And that lack of incoming 
interest also meant that banks had no more reserves to lend, which furthered 
the downward spiral. Britain’s similarly debt-burdened economy inspired a 
dry witticism: “Sorry you lost your job. I hope you made a killing on your 
house.” 
We have already reached our own peak. As of last fall, even Alan 
Greenspan had detected “signs of froth” in the housing market. Home prices 
had “risen to unsustainable levels” in some places, he said, and would have 
exceeded the reach of many Americans long ago if not for “the dramatic 
increase in the prevalence of interest-only loans” and “other, more exotic 
forms of adjustable-rate mortgages” that “enable marginally qualified, highly 
leveraged borrowers to purchase homes at inflated prices.” If the trend 
continues, homeowners and banks alike “could be exposed to significant 
losses.” Interest rates, meanwhile, have begun to creep up. 
So: America holds record mortgage debt in a declining housing market. 
Even that at first might seem okay — we can just weather the storm in our 
nice new houses. And in fact things will be okay for homeowners who 

bought long ago and have seen the price of their homes double and then 
double again. But for more recent homebuyers, who bought at the top and 
who now face decades of payments on houses that soon will be worth less 
than they paid for them, serious trouble is brewing. And they are not an 
insignificant bunch. 
The problem for recent homebuyers is not just that prices are falling; it’s 
that prices are falling even as the buyers’ total mort- gage remains the same 
or even increases. Eventually the price of the house will fall below what 
homeowners owe, a state that economists call negative equity. Homeowners 
with negative equity are trapped. They can’t sell — the declining market price 
won’t cover what they owe the bank — but they still have to make those 
(often growing) monthly payments. Their only “choice” is to cut back 
spending in other areas or lose the house — and everything they paid for it — 
in foreclosure.
Free markets are based on choice. But more and more homeowners are 
discovering that what they got for their money is fewer and fewer choices. A 
real estate boom that began with the promise of “economic freedom” almost 
certainly will end with a growing number of workers locked in to a lifetime 
of debt service that absorbs every spare penny. Indeed, a study by The 
Conference Board found that the proportion of households with any 
discretionary income whatsoever had already declined between 1997and 
2002, from 53% to 52%. Rising interest rates, rising fuel costs,and declining 
wages will only tighten the squeeze on debtors. But homeowners are not the 
only ones who will pay. The overall economy likely will shrink as well. That 
$200 billion that flowed into the “real”economy in 2004 is already spent, 
with no future capital gains in the works to fuel more such easy money. 
Rising debt-service payments will further divert income from new con- 
sumer spending. Taken together, these factors will further shrink the “real” 
economy, drive down those already declining real wages, and push our debt- 
ridden economy into Japan-style stagnation or worse. Then only the debt 
itself will remain, a bitter monument to our love of easy freedom.
 
Chart follows: How Untaxing Land Rent Raises Real Estate Prices
 

___________________

*****
8. The Real Estate Bubble at the Core of 
Today’s Debt-leveraged Economy
From St. Simon’s followers in France to Marx and other reformers prior to 
World War I, nearly all financial observers expected banking to become the 
economy’s industrial planning agency, alongside government. But contrary to 
their expectation that banking would become industrialized, the opposite has 
occurred: Industry has been financialized. Companies are being turned from 
means of production into vehicles to extract interest, generate banking fees 
and register stock market gains for the banking and financial sector. 
Capital formation today is financed mainly out of retained business 
earnings. The stock market also was supposed to supply investment funding, 
but since the 1980s it has been turned into a vehicle for corporate raiding. By 
permitting interest to be tax-deductible and taxing capital gains at low rates 
(and often not at all), the tax code favors replacing equity with debt. The 
effect is to make asset-price inflation the quickest mode of “wealth creation” 
— buying real estate, monopolies and financial securities on credit, and 
hoping to emerge with a “capital” gain.
This is true above all for real estate, which remains the largest asset in 
every economy and hence the banking sector’s largest customer. Some 70% 
of bank loans in the United States, Britain and Australia are real estate 
mortgages. This paramount role of land and buildings as recipients of credit 
creation has created what national income accountants call the FIRE sector 

— an acronym for finance, insurance and real estate. 
This symbiotic sector is political as well as economic. Translating its 
economic power into political control, bankers support real estate owners in 
lobbying to roll back property taxes, slash income taxes on higher wealth 
brackets and dismantle public bank regulation. This policy is guided by the 
realization that whatever revenue the tax collector relinquishes will be “free” 
to be capitalized into mortgages and other loans, and paid as interest — to be 
recycled into new loans to bid up property prices further, justifying yet 
further new lending.
From antiquity down through medieval times, land provided the main 
source of taxes. But starting with the Revolt of the Barons in England in 
1258–65, its owners used their control of Parliament to shift the fiscal burden 
onto the rest of the economy. The thrust of classical economic reform was to 
make land once again the basic source of public revenue. Seeking to free 
labor and capital from the burden of rent and interest, Progressive Era 
reformers sought to fully tax the land’s rent or nationalize it outright. 
It is natural for land prices to increase over time as a result of 
infrastructure spending, the general level of prosperity, and property tax cuts. 
Governments invest in transportation, public schools and other infrastructure 
(water and sewer services, gas and electricity) and give rezoning permits 
providing valuable development privileges. All this raises the rental value of 
sites as populations grow and become more prosperous. But what turns out to 
be mainly responsible for the rising price of land today is mortgage credit. A 
property today is worth as much as banks will lend against it. As the volume 
of credit has grown exponentially, banks have lowered their credit standards 
to the point where most rental value (or its equivalent value to homeowners) 
is paid out as interest. 
New homebuyers are obliged to take on a lifetime of debt to obtain 
housing as property prices have soared. The irony is that this 
“democratization” of housing is called the bulwark of the middle class rather 
than debt peonage. As real estate bubbles burst and leave debts in their place, 
owners with negative equity (mortgages in excess of plunging market prices) 
are unable to sell, frozen into their homes, the result is not unlike medieval 
serfs tied to their land. Today’s post-industrial society is coming more and 

more to look like a regression to debt peonage.
Until recently, buying property was much like buying a bond. In fact, the 
original meaning of rente (a French word) was an interest-bearing 
government bond, later extended to include land receiving a regular periodic 
payment. Land was priced at “so many years purchase” of its rent. A 
property’s worth was calculated by discounting its flow of rental income (or 
equivalent value, for homeowners) at the going rate of interest: 
 
Price = rent/interest. 
 
A lower interest rate in the denominator gave a higher multiple. A $10,000 
annual income can be capitalized into a $2 million price at 5% interest (20 
years purchase) or $2.5 million at 4%, but only $1 million at a high interest 
rate of 10% (10 years purchase).1 
 
What additionally is factored in today is the expected price rise:
 
Price = (rent + ∆P)/interest. 
 
Buyers acquire property on credit, planning to pay off their debt by 
refinancing their mortgages (or “cashing out”) as asset prices are inflated. 
Hyman Minsky described this phenomenon as culminating in the Ponzi stage 
of the financial cycle: 
 
Debts are carried simply by adding the interest onto the principal, creating 
a rising upsweep of indebtedness — “the miracle of compound interest.”2
 
A Bubble Economy is based on debt leveraging in search of “capital” 
gains. Inasmuch as real estate is the economy’s largest sector and land its 
largest component, these gains are headed by rising site value. The annual 
rise in land prices has far outstripped growth in national income since the late 

1960s, becoming the driving force in today’s financialized mode of “wealth 
creation.”
 
Chart 1 follows: Annual Land-Value Gains Compared to Growth in National 
Income
 
 
Under Alan Greenspan’s chairmanship of the Federal Reserve Board 
(1988–2006), the government sought to enable debtors to carry their 
obligations by borrowing the interest against the rising market price of their 
property. Current income plays a declining role as property buyers aim at 
maximizing “total returns,” defined as income plus capital gains — especially 
the latter. The policy to keep the financial bubble expanding is asset-price 
inflation sufficient to keep increasing real estate prices by enough to enable 
debtors to refinance their mortgages and other loans. Applying the maxim 
that “Rent is for paying interest,” real estate investors are willing to pledge 
the net rental income to mortgage bankers in order to get a chance to make a 
capital gain. Asset-price gains become the key, not saving out of earnings or 
direct investment and enterprise. As the Federal Reserve’s 2004 Survey of 
Consumer Finances noted: “Changes in the values of assets such as stock, 

real estate, and businesses are a key determinant of changes in families’ net 
worth.”3
This creates a symbiosis between finance, insurance and real estate — the 
FIRE sector at the core of the Bubble Economy. Its basic dynamic is a 
feedback between bank credit and asset prices. The more credit and the easier 
the terms on which it is available — the lower the interest rate, the lower the 
amortization rate, and the lower the down payment required — the larger the 
loan can be made. And as debt leveraging increases, it is easier to go into 
debt to ride the wave of asset-price inflation than to earn profits by investing 
in industry. Why invest money in an industrial factory or other company that 
takes years to organize production and mount a marketing program to 
develop sales on which to make a profit that is taxed at 30%, when you can 
buy land and simply sit back and make capital gains that exceed profit rates 
and are taxed at only half as much?
 
Chart 2 follows: Annual Increase in Land Prices versus Corporate Profits
 
 
Yet the national income and product accounts (NIPA) do not count capital 
gains. These occasionally are surveyed by the Internal Revenue Service’s 
Statistics on Income, but the only regular estimate of such gains is the 

Federal Reserve’s flow-of-funds statistic for land prices. The Fed estimates 
that price for the nation’s raw land rose by $2.5 trillion for 2007 (I find $3.5 
to $4 trillion to be more realistic, for reasons discussed below). At over 20% 
of U.S. national income, this land-price gain was four times than the amount 
by which national income grew, and two-thirds more than total U.S. 
corporate profit (much of which itself derived from mortgage financing and 
brokerage). So today’s “postindustrial” economy turns out to be mainly about 
real estate. If it is a “service economy,” the services in question are mainly 
those of the FIRE sector.
 
From Asset-Price Inflation to Debt Deflation
 
Inflated asset prices have made fortunes for investors, and also for many 
homeowners who saw the market value of their homes rise by more than they 
were able to earn in a year. Financial promoters hawked a dream that people 
could maintain their life styles and get rich by capital gains rather than by 
what they could earn and save. Families who found that their wages and 
salaries were not enough to make ends meet were tempted to sustain their 
living standards by taking out home-equity loans. Banks appeared to have 
created a postindustrial mode of wealth creation by issuing enough credit to 
keep bidding up property prices — and to keep the boom going by lending 
yet more against collateral rising in value. Not to play this game was to be 
left behind as the affordability of housing rose further and further beyond the 
means of most families to pay without cutting back their expenditure 
elsewhere. 
The problem with such bubbles is that once underway, asset-price 
inflation becomes the only way to sustain the debt burden. Debt-financed 
speculation must accelerate or else end in a wave of bankruptcy. The problem 
is that carrying charges on this debt divert income away from being spent on 
consumption and investment. Using debt leverage to bid up property prices 
loads the economy down with interest and amortization commitments to pay 
creditors. Prospective buyers must devote more and more of their working 
life to pay off the debts needed to buy a home, automobile, education or 
health care. That is the essence of debt deflation.

The policy of lowering property taxes has subsidized speculation, by 
enabling more income to be paid as interest. The banks gain, capitalizing the 
proceeds of property tax cuts into yet larger loans. This raises the carrying 
costs of real estate (and business) financed on credit, while forcing taxes to 
be levied elsewhere to stabilize public revenue. If public spending is not cut 
back in response to foregone tax receipts, the shortfall must be made up by 
borrowing, by taxing non-property income at a higher rate, or by selling off 
the public domain. 
This is not how matters were supposed to work out. The Progressive Era a 
century ago advocated that taxes should fall mainly on rent and other 
property returns. The aim was to free economies from rent and interest, so 
that prices would only reflect necessary costs of production — wages and 
profits for labor and capital. But governments have pursued the opposite 
fiscal philosophy since World War I, and especially since 1980. They have 
lowered property taxes and refrained from imposing a resource-rent tax on 
minerals, fuels or the broadcasting spectrum. They also have deregulated 
monopoly prices rather than kept them in line with production costs, and cut 
capital-gains taxes to just half the rate levied on wages and profits. 
On the logic that capital gains built up net worth just as saving did 
America’s original 1913 tax code treated them as regular income. As 
Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon explained: 
The fairness of taxing more lightly income from wages, salaries or from 
investments is beyond question. In the first case, the income is uncertain and 
limited in duration; sickness or death destroys it and old age diminishes it; in 
the other, the source of income continues; the income may be disposed of 
during a man’s life and it descends to his heirs.
Surely we can afford to make a distinction between the people whose only 
capital is their mental and physical energy and the people whose income is 
derived from investments.4
This logic is applicable to today’s Bubble Economy. After a real estate 
bubble bursts, “total returns” no longer drive balance sheets. What Alan 
Greenspan lauded as “wealth creation” in the form of rising property prices 
has the opposite effect from tangible capital investment. Instead of lowering 
production costs, seeking gains from debt leveraging builds interest charges 

into the cost of living and doing business. This slows economic growth, by 
diverting income to pay creditors instead of to spend on production and 
consumption. 
 
The Symbiosis of Finance and Real Estate
 
Ever since the United States enacted its first modern income tax in 1913 
the financial sector has thrown its weight behind real estate and sought to 
shift the burden off property. This is quite a turnabout from David Ricardo’s 
day, when finance backed repeal of Britain’s high agricultural tariffs and land 
rents. At that time it seemed that industry and foreign trade would become 
the largest market for banks. But as matters have turned out, real estate has 
achieved this position.
The financialization of real estate is a distinctly 20th-century phenomenon, 
going hand in hand with the democratization of property ownership. Long 
after the end of feudalism, landlords remained the wealthiest and most liquid 
class. But the 19th and 20th centuries saw banks finance the spread of home 
ownership. In the early decades of the 19th century, residential mortgage 
lending was left mainly to local savings banks. Many of banks were set up to 
help immigrants or workingmen save up small change each week, as 
reflected in the names for some of the largest New York savings banks: 
Seamans, Emigrant, the Bowery and Dime Savings Banks. But banking since 
World WarI has focused on real estate mortgage lending as property 
throughout the world has become increasingly democratized, American-style.
By the 1930s, savings and loan associations (S&Ls) were formed to aim at 
middle-class depositors and homebuyers. After the return to peace after 1945 
the construction boom and suburbanization created a thriving mortgage 
market. Since the 1980s, most savings banks and S&Ls have been converted 
into commercial banks. 
As this has occurred, interest payments have expanded to absorb most of 
the rental value of commercial properties and owner-occupied housing. And 
as property became more widely owned and democratized, it was fairly easy 
for the largest investors — and mortgage bankers — to stir up popular 

opposition to real estate taxation. But homeowners are not much better off. 
What formerly was paid to the tax collector is now paid to bankers as interest.
This is the opposite of what the classical economists recommended. 
Nobody a century ago expected land rent to be paid out as mortgage interest 
to such a high degree — or that heavily mortgaged real estate would become 
the backing for the banking system. Banks were supposed to finance 
industrial capital formation, not create credit merely to bid up prices for land 
sites supplied by nature, rent-extracting monopoly and property rights and to 
buy companies already in place. 
Debt expansion for such purposes may seem self-justifying as long as 
asset prices are rising steadily. This price run-up is euphemized as “wealth 
creation” by focusing on the inflation of financial and property prices, even 
as disposable personal income and living and working conditions are eroded. 
The problem is that rising price/rent multiples and price/earnings ratios for 
debt-financed properties, stocks and bonds oblige wage earners to go deeper 
into debt, devoting more years of their working life to pay for housing and to 
buy income-yielding stocks and bonds for their retirement. Homeowners thus 
do not gain by this higher market “equilibrium” price for housing. Higher 
prices simply mean more debt overhead.
A simple example should make the problem clear. Suppose Mary Smith 
owns home free and clear of any debt that had cost her $100,000 to buy. 
Suppose Jane Doe later buys the same exact home, but the price has risen to 
$250,000. To buy it, Jane needs to take out a $100,000 mortgage. Who is in a 
better financial position? On paper, Jane has a $50,000 equity advantage 
($150,000, as compared to Mary’s $100,000). But she only owns 60% of the 
home’s value, and must pay her bank $600 a month — payments that Mary 
does not have to make. 
Prior to the real estate bubble Mary’s house has $100,000 equity with low 
taxes and no interest charges. By the time Jane buys the house, she must go 
into debt to outbid other potential buyers. The land area hasn’t increased 
(nature is not making any more), and buildings slowly depreciate, but the 
debt overhead rises, leaving less income available for consumption or saving. 
Mortgage credit inflates property prices (for a while), but is such “paper 
wealth” worth the carrying charge? Families a century ago dreamed of 

owning their home free and clear. They stayed out of debt to avoid worrying 
about losing the homestead. But these days the only way for many families to 
get a home is to borrow enough to pay prices set by buyers willing to pay the 
entire rental value to the bank for interest on the loan needed to buy it, in the 
hope of selling out later for a capital gain. In the above example, for instance, 
matters are aggravated if Jane tries to make ends meet by borrowing against 
the higher market price of her home. When real estate prices fall back, her 
debts and their carrying charges will remain in place, threatening to leave her 
with negative equity. This is the condition into which a quarter of U.S. real 
estate was estimated to have fallen by autumn 2009.
Investors are tempted to believe they are better off as long as asset prices 
rise faster than debt, improving their balance sheet. But by absorbing rents, 
business profits and disposable personal income, the debt overhead entails 
future clean-up costs. The credit that bid up prices to “create wealth” during 
the Bubble Economy’s run-up leaves “debt pollution” in its wake after asset 
prices collapse. Living standards, business investment and new construction 
must be cut back to pay the bill for pumping up asset prices that have 
receded. Higher real estate and other asset prices provide no more economic 
benefit than do higher consumer prices. One party’s income or gain is another 
party’s expense.
Real estate bubbles are a symptom of debt creation, shaped and sponsored 
by governments cutting property taxes and thus leaving more revenue to be 
pledged to bankers as debt service. Modern debt peonage obliges families to 
take on a lifetime of debt to gain access to housing, an education and health 
care. The class war takes on a decidedly financial dimension, as Alan 
Greenspan explained to Congress: Rising mortgage debt has made employees 
afraid to go on strike or even to complain about working conditions. 
Employees become more docile in a world where they are only one paycheck 
or so away from homelessness or, what threatens to become almost the same 
thing, missing a mortgage payment. This is the point at which they find 
themselves hooked on debt dependency.
What has been lost along the way is the economy’s traditional set of 
proportions. From 1945 to 2000, for example, the total value of U.S. real 
estate remained in a fairly stable proportion to national income (about 250%). 
The dot.com bubble of the 1990s inflated stock market prices, but real estate 

resumed its dominant role as the Federal Reserve flooded financial markets 
with credit after the market downturn of 2000. Fueled by rising debt ratios, 
real estate prices soared to the unprecedented levels of 325% of national 
income.
Debt pyramiding was encouraged by looser terms for bank lending — low, 
zero or even negative down payments, while unprecedented fraud by 
mortgage brokers and local banks exaggerated the income and hence debt-
carrying power of homebuyers, making soaring mortgage loans appear to be 
affordable. However, adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) guaranteed that 
loans affordable at low “teaser” rates of interest would become unaffordable 
when their carrying charges re-set at higher rates, forcing homebuyers into 
the “Ponzi” stage of having to borrow the interest. Defaults that initially were 
thought to be a known risk turned out to be an inevitability.
 
The Magnitude of Real Estate Revenue, and Its Increasing Payout as Interest
 
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) depict the entire 
economy as if every activity were organized as a business — even owner-
occupied housing. The word “rent” appears in only one line (NIPA Table 2.1, 
line 12). It is not a rent that actually is paid, but an imputed “as if” estimate of 
what homeowners would pay if they rented out their dwellings to themselves. 
This typically amounts to only 1% or 2% of national income. 
Commercial and residential property income is reported as “real estate 
earnings,” corporate and non-corporate. Most property investment is 
organized as partnerships, so most rental revenue accrues to non-corporate 
real estate. So closely intertwined are the real estate and financial sectors that 
for many years the NIPA were unable to separate their earnings.
Owners pay some of these earnings in taxes, but pass on most to their 
bankers. The relevant cash-flow concept is: 
 
ebitda: earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. 
 

This can be compiled by adding real estate earnings (non-corporate and 
corporate, NIPA Tables 6.12 and 6.17), interest (NIPA Table 6.15) taxes paid 
at the state and local level (NIPA Table 3.3) plus federal taxes, capped by the 
most remarkable category in which ebitda is buried: depreciation (NIPA 
Tables 6.13 and 6.22 respectively for non-corporate and corporate real estate 
depreciation).
 
Chart 3 follows: Real Estate ebitda as a Percentage of National Income, 
1930–2007
 
 
Real estate ebitda (including the rental value of owner-occupied homes) 
topped 60% of national income when the U.S. economy entered the Great 
Depression in the 1930s. This ratio fell by half by the time World War II 
ended, to just 28%, reflecting the shrinkage in personal income available after 
defraying other living costs. 
Homeowners’ “rental equivalent” and commercial cash flow rose from 
1945 until 1960 as the postwar economy grew wealthier and more income 
was available to spend on homes and office space, whose location 
traditionally has been the major factor defining social status. But for the next 
twenty years the rest of the economy grew more rapidly than real estate. That 
sector’s cash flow fell back under 25% of national income through the mid-

1980s — until the watershed 1981 tax subsidy reversed matters. Real estate 
ebitda accelerated sharply after 1985, recovering to nearly a third of national 
income by 2000.
As noted above, classical writers expected land prices to rise as population 
increased and economies grew more prosperous and urbanized. The intention 
was to tax real estate’s rising rental value, but two tax breaks have prevented 
this from happening. First is the tax deductibility of interest charges, which 
have absorbed most real estate cash flow since 1945. Nobody anticipated that 
so much interest would be paid out as to leave scarcely any income to be 
reported to the tax authorities. A second tax pretense permits landlords to 
over-depreciate buildings as if they are losing book value even while their 
market price is rising. The result is that despite the real estate boom, property 
pays an ever-shrinking share of local and federal taxes.
 
Chart 4 follows: Composition of Real Estate ebitda, 1930–2007
 
 
Shifting State and Local Taxes off Property onto Consumers
 
The well-known phrase of real estate agents to explain pricing — location, 

location and location — refers mainly to the proximity of transportation and 
good schools, which the United States historically has financed by taxing 
property. Localities could recapture the cost of this infrastructure spending by 
taxing the market value it adds to real estate sites. Instead, tax favoritism for 
real estate obliges federal, state and local budgets to look elsewhere for 
financing — mainly to tax sales and consumer income, and to borrow from 
the wealthy who have been un-taxed. The result is that property owners enjoy 
rising prices substantially in excess of what they pay in taxes.
Prior to the 1930s property taxes accounted for about two-thirds of state 
and local government receipts. But the Great Depression obliged localities to 
look to sales taxes as property values shrank — and to income taxes in recent 
decades. Despite the postwar rise in property prices, states and localities have 
shifted taxes off property owners onto wage earners and consumers almost 
steadily, so that property taxes now make up only about 20% of state and 
local revenues (Chart 8). This is less than a third of their proportion ninety 
years ago.
Real estate downturns prompt property owners to campaign for their taxes 
to be reduced to save them from defaulting on their mortgages. Today’s 
“negative equity” squeeze on mortgage debtors no doubt will increase 
political pressure for further tax shifts off property, avidly supported by bank 
lobbyists. The rhetoric is anti-government, but it mainly benefits bankers and 
large commercial owners.
 
Chart 5 follows: Annual Rise in Land Prices, Compared to Property Taxes
 

 
The national tax shift off real estate has been even more regressive than 
the local tax shift. Finance and real estate have obtained “small print” tax 
breaks so enormous that only a modest proportion of their gains — which 
represents most of the economy’s wealth — is counted as taxable income. 
Lobbyists have persuaded lawmakers to define taxable income in ways that 
leave property owners with no earnings to declare after deducting interest and 
a basically fictitious bookkeeping charge for depreciation. Landlords are 
allowed to pretend that their property is losing money as buildings are “used 
up.” This tax ruling promotes a Bubble Economy by making it most 
economic for investors to put as little of their own money down as possible, 
using debt to a maximum degree. It also encourages investors to sell their 
property every few years, after depreciating their buildings so that new 
buyers can start depreciating them all over again.
This fiscal favoritism for property is a major factor polarizing wealth 
ownership in the United States. The effect is to wage a war on the middle 
class, despite the political values and seeming self-interest of most Americans 
in a more progressive tax system.
 
Chart 6 follows: Property Taxes, as a Percent of Overall State and Local 
Revenues, 1930–2007.

 
 
Over-Depreciation of Buildings
 
It took until the mid-19th century for economists to recognize depreciation 
as an element of value. Surprising as it may seem, it was Marx who first 
established it as a necessary charge in pricing commodities. In his critique of 
the French Physiocrats, he pointed out that when Francois Quesnay produced 
his national income account for France, the Tableau Économique, in 1759, he 
overlooked the need to replenish seed, inventory and capital stock.5 In 
addition to covering their basic expenses, buying tools and raw materials and 
paying rent and taxes, cultivators need to set aside seed grain plant the next 
season’s crop. This seed is not available to be sold. 
Just as bondholders get paid back their principal as well as interest, 
investors are permitted to recoup their original capital outlay without it being 
taxed as income. The recoupment period is spread over the expected lifetime 
of machinery, patent rights or other assets. Failure to acknowledge the need 
for this replacement out of sales revenue would give an overly optimistic 
picture of how well the economy is operating. Not to renew seed and capital 
investment would result in asset stripping — paying out revenue without 
maintaining a viable capital stock.
Economists recognize that depreciation results as much from technological 

obsolescence as from physical wearing out. Technology is continually 
improving, raising productivity and cutting costs. Rivals’ innovation forces 
factories to modernize or be priced out of the market, sometimes obliging 
machinery to be sold as scrap metal before it actually wears out. But most 
depreciation statistically occurs where one might least expect it — in real 
estate. 
This seems strange, because landlords rarely let their buildings wear out. 
They typically spend 5% to 10% of their rental income on maintenance and 
repairs, and periodically replace their plumbing and heating systems, electric 
wiring and windows. Buildings constructed prior to World War II — already 
a few lifetimes in the Internal Revenue Service’s depreciation schedule sell at 
a premium because they tend to occupy prime locations and are better built 
than their modern counterparts. Contractors have cut construction standards 
each decade, replacing 4-by-4 beams and copper plumbing with cheaper 
materials such as 2-by-4s and plastic, and making walls of aluminum siding 
tacked onto soft insulation.
 
Chart 7 follows: Land-Price Gains Compared to Depreciation Write-offs
 
 

The fact that most buildings are kept in good repair has led many countries 
not to permit landlords to depreciate them. It would be logical for landlords 
to depreciate their buildings only if they “bled” them by letting them run 
down. This would violate many commercial leases and is even against the 
law in many cities for residential buildings. But that has not prevented 
lobbyists in the United States from turning the depreciation allowance into a 
stratagem to shelter rental income from taxation. Instead of depreciating in 
the way that industrial capital does, real estate accrues capital gains as land 
prices tend to rise far in excess of the rate at which buildings “wear out.” 
Most properties are sold and resold, wish new landlords able to start 
depreciating buildings anew with each sale — at the higher sales price.
Land is not depreciable. Being supplied by nature, it has no cost of 
production. It is not used up in the process of yielding a revenue, nor does it 
become technologically obsolete. Yet most property assessors pro-rate each 
sales price so that the value of buildings appears to rise proportionally to the 
overall gain. After buildings have been depreciated once, they can be resold 
and depreciation write-offs can start all over again, without limit, at so high a 
rate as to offset a large portion of the new landlord’s erstwhile taxable 
income.
This poses a logical problem: How can buildings gain in assessed 
valuation if they are supposed to be depreciating? Indeed, how can the 
economy’s most sustained capital gain — that of real estate — reasonably be 
depicted as operating at a loss for years on end?
The explanation is to be found in the ability of lobbyists to find lawmakers 
willing to distort the tax code’s small print in a way that makes owning real 
estate much like owning an oil well in the heady days of the oil-depletion 
allowance. No profit appears in this “Hollywood accounting.” From the 1954 
tax act through its sequels in 1972, 1979 and the Economic Recovery Tax 
Act of 1981, the depreciation treatment became increasingly generous to real 
estate investors. The 1981 tax code assumed a short 15-year lifetime for 
buildings — and let property owners write off the assessed value of their 
buildings at twice this rate by using a convoluted “double declining balance” 
method. Owners could deduct twice the permitted 1⁄15 of the purchase price 
of a building in the first year (that is, 14% as a “non-cash” expense), as if it 
would last just 7½ years. The accounting schedule stretched out the 

remaining depreciation period by one year in each successive year — to 16 
years in year two, 17 years in year three, and so forth. This meant that in the 
second year the owner could write off twice 1⁄16 (or another 12½%) on the 
remaining balance, and recover 55% of the building’s valuation in just five 
years.
The 1986 tax reform stretched out the depreciation rate on residential 
buildings to 27½ years (and nonresidential buildings to 31½ years), but 
grandfathered in new buildings if they had obtained a certificate of 
occupancy for rental. The resulting depreciation write-offs for the real estate 
sector as a whole were large enough to leave no net taxable income to declare 
during the 1989–92 downturn. This pretense enabled investors to keep on 
earning rental income free of taxation, as if nothing “really” was being 
earned. Economic fiction became a fiscal reality, even to the point of being 
confirmed by seemingly empirical national accounting data.6 
When one finds a statistical distortion at work, a special interest is almost 
sure to be involved. Misrepresentation and a false empiricism becomes a 
highly professionalized part of the economics of deception. The result is junk 
statistics. Unlike investment in machinery, property tends to rise in price, 
thanks to the land’s rising site value. The deception that buildings are 
depreciating results in a fictitiously high ratio of ostensible building valuation 
to land. Precisely because the land site ostensibly cannot be depreciated, the 
tax privilege of depreciating buildings provides a motive for maximizing 
their valuation. 
Despite the reported net $5.1 billion pretax loss, $5.9 billion after-tax loss 
and $1.2 billion negative cash flow in 1990, real estate corporations paid $3.9 
billion in dividends and were the largest source of interest for banks, 
maintaining the almost steady rise during the postwar period. Yet the NIPA 
show it often not to be earning any income and paying almost no income tax.
The effect is to encourage commercial property to change owners every 
few years, keeping it in perpetual motion to minimize its tax liability. Owners 
typically sell property when a building has been largely depreciated, and the 
new landlord can start depreciating it anew. In this way a building that 
already has been depreciated by its former owner achieves a new life. Like 
cats, a building seemingly has nine lives and can be written off again and 

again, turning real estate and its depreciation allowance into the economy’s 
largest tax shelter. This explains why a sector that seems chronically to be 
losing money enjoys soaring investment and dividend payouts. While real 
estate investors pretend that their property is losing value as their buildings 
wear out, the site’s locational value rises to more than compensate. 
Replacement-cost accounting likewise assumes a higher value for buildings, 
and hence a higher write-off each time a new buyer plays the game. 
From 1981 through 1995 real estate investment trusts (REITs) and other 
corporate real estate the depreciation write-off was so large as to produce 
fictitious accounting losses for tax purposes, despite their rising cash flow 
and dividend payouts. By buying real estate, investors acquired so large a tax 
deduction that they often have been able to use it as a charge against other 
sources of income.
Most commercial investment is organized as partnerships to obtain the 
financial benefits of incorporation while taking “book losses” as credits 
against the personal income of property investors. Like corporate real estate, 
these partnerships enjoyed freedom from income taxation during the second 
half of the 1980s, although the explosive take-off in rents rendered more 
income taxable over the two decades stretching from the mid-1980s through 
2005 (Chart 8). Property prices soared as buyers earned income in excess of 
carrying charges and come out with a capital gain — and a tax write-off to 
boot.
 
Chart 8 follows: Non-Corporate Real Estate Cash Flow
 

 
Homeowners are not able to make this depreciation pretense, only 
absentee owners. But even without being able to take a depreciation write-off 
against their wages and salaries, they have ridden the wave of asset-price 
inflation to build up their net worth. Applauded as ushering in an era of 
postindustrial prosperity, tax-subsidized debt pyramiding became a new 
mode of wealth creation — a seemingly permanent capital-gains economy.
 
Chart 9 follows: Corporate Real Estate Cash Flow
 

 
How the Fed’s Appraisal Philosophy Attributes Land Values to Buildings
 
Assessors in most U.S. cities estimate land at 40% to 60% of real estate 
value, tending toward the higher ratio. Federal Reserve statistics also show 
that land represents the largest element of real estate’s market price, despite 
the fact that their methodology substantially undervalues land relative to 
buildings. Fed statisticians treat land as a residual left over after valuing 
buildings at their reproduction cost, including capital gains that reflecting 
rising construction costs. 
The problem with this land-residual methodology is that it leaves an 
unrealistically low residual for land — so low that earlier Federal Reserve 
estimates produced a negative $4 billion number for corporately owned land 
in 1994. The Fed has since reorganized its categories to moderate this 
irrationally low calculation, but continues to defend its methodology.7
Treating land sites as a residual (after over-estimating the value of 
buildings at replacement cost) makes land prices appear more volatile than 
overall real estate. The seeming fallback after 1990 in the land’s residual 
value as a proportion of national income (Chart 13) is largely a statistical 
illusion as the pace of construction-price inflation increased the Federal 
Reserve’s calculation for the replacement cost of buildings, leaving less 
residual for land, where the real market value lies. The steep rise in land 
valuation from 1995 to 2007 reflects the reduction of interest rates engineered 
by the Federal Reserve flooding the economy with liquidity to promote 
“wealth creation.”
 
Chart 10 follows: Land Residual Cost of Structures. (Source: FRB, Flow of 
Funds)
 

 
The inflation of land prices has been the driving force in real estate’s 
dominant role in the U.S. economy. The Fed helped inflate real estate prices 
by lowering interest rates (enabling bankers to capitalize rental income at a 
higher multiple) and flooding the banking system with enough credit to 
enable prospective buyers to bid up prices. Fed Chairman Greenspan lauded 
the “wealth effect” for raising consumption levels on the way up, especially 
as homeowners took out home equity loans to sustain their living standards, 
while refraining from regulating lending to keep it honest.
It should be clear from the foregoing analysis that real estate is doing 
much better than appears at first statistical glance. Buildings are not really 
deteriorating, thanks to their ongoing repair and maintenance. Although the 
NIPA depict real estate as operating at a loss, investors actually are getting 
rich through asset-price inflation creating capital gains.
So this poses an important policy question: Is it socially useful to increase 
real estate prices by providing tax breaks for running up mortgage debt and 
for absentee building owners? This might be argued if the reason why 
property owners are going deeper and deeper into debt is that rising 
construction costs increase the cost of buildings and other capital 
improvements. But if higher prices (and hence, larger mortgage loans 
necessary to buy real estate) simply reflect higher prices for land sites that 
have no cost of production, then to actively support property prices merely 

makes new buyers pay more — and specifically, pay more debt service to 
mortgage bankers. Higher land prices simply increase the cost of providing 
homes, office buildings and industrial plant. Taxing the land’s rising rental 
value would not reduce its supply (nor would taxing the rising reproduction 
cost of buildings already in place lead to their removal from the market) but 
taxing the construction of new buildings would do so.
 
Chart 11 follows: Land-Residual Valuation, as Percentage of National 
Income
 
 
The more real estate growth consists of investing in capital improvements, 
the more it can be argued that rising property prices elicit more investment in 
the form of construction activity. But this argument cannot be made if what is 
being bid up is simply the land’s access price. Higher site prices do not 
induce more land to be supplied, because it is provided freely by nature. The 
only way to increase site values is to provide more transportation access. It 
has long been argued that the public sector should recover the cost of this 
infrastructure by taxing the increase in rental and site values along the route.
 
Chart 12 follows: Land-Price Gains Compared to Mortgage Interest.

 
 
Tax Favoritism for Capital Gains
 
When owners sell their real estate, they are supposed to report the 
recovery of past depreciation write-offs as a capital gain — the sales price 
minus the depreciated book value. But capital gains are taxed at a much lower
rate than “earned” income — if at all! The tax code permits investors to avoid 
paying a tax at the point of sale if they build up of wealth by reinvesting their 
sales proceeds to buy new property of equal or greater cost.
The hypocrisy behind this tax logic is revealed by the Federal Reserve’s 
own statistical treatment that estimates building values as rising. Using a 
construction price index that assigns an annual cost increase to buildings, the 
Fed subtracts their hypothetical replacement cost from its overall property 
valuation based on Census Department figures. The residual is assigned to 
the land. The faster building costs rise, the slower land sites seem to 
appreciate — sometimes not much at all. 
Missing the logic that guides Bubble Economy investors and homeowners, 
the NIPA do not take account of soaring land prices or other asset-price 
gains. Like the tax filings on which they are based, these national accounts 
look much more pessimistic than how investors view matters. They report 
merely that real estate often goes many years on end without earning an 

income. 
Investors are just as happy to see these gains left out of the public 
accounts, because there is less pressure to tax them, in contrast to the late 
19th century when the classical reformers focused attention on them. The less 
political pressure is brought to bear to tax or even take note of capital gains, 
the larger loans borrowers will take on, making mortgage lenders the ultimate 
beneficiaries of the fiscal giveaway.
Owners argue that they deserve to have their investment “keep up with 
inflation” — the rising cost of a new building to replace the one they are 
selling (after having sheltered its income by depreciating it). The Fed’s logic 
serves to justify this claim — and hence, the land-price gains that John Stuart 
Mill described as a passive, unearned increment that should be taxed away. 
But if the driving forces behind rising real estate prices are credit, public 
transport spending and other infrastructure — and the overall level of 
prosperity — why are landlords allowed to write off their cost as if their 
investment is being eaten away?
No other part of the economy is inflation-indexed. Wage earners do not 
receive higher paychecks to reflect inflation. Landlords can avoid paying an 
income tax on their cash flow while industrial companies and their employees 
are obliged to save out of the income left after paying taxes. Real estate 
investors thus are given a tax break based on a concept of economic fairness 
that they alone are permitted to enjoy in claiming merely to be “breaking 
even” with inflation as construction costs rise — while at the same time 
pretending that depreciation is consuming their capital. This helps explain 
why most people no longer try to save by putting earnings in the bank. 
Most families — and businesses — now seek to build up their net worth 
mainly via capital gains, buying homes and other assets whose price is 
expected to rise. Subsequent personal saving takes the form of paying down 
debts taken on to buy property.
 
Chart 13 follows: Comparison of Capital Gains Tax Rate with Normal 
Income Tax Rates 1942–1995
 

 
 
Paying out Real Estate Rental Income as Interest
 
Reflecting real estate’s status is the U.S. economy’s largest asset, by far 
the most interest in the is paid on mortgage debt (Charts 14, 15 and 16). 
Rising property prices oblige new buyers turn over most of its rental cash 
flow or value to mortgage lenders. As long as the Bubble Economy creates 
land-price (“capital”) gains by enough to cover the interest payments, real 
estate owners are willing to pay out current income as debt service. But this 
arrangement cannot last, because adding the interest onto the debt balance 
year after year entails more and more charges. 
As interest rates rose after 1945 to their high of about 15% in 1980, the 
volume of interest payments increased from just 1% of national income to 
12% in the mid-1980s. As mortgage interest rates receded, the ratio of 
interest payments to national income fell below 8% in 2001, but then 
resumed its upward trend as new debt markets were developed, headed by 

subprime lending and the derivatives trade. Falling interest rates since 2000 
offset the rising debt burden as the Federal Reserve flooded the U.S. 
economy with credit, but carrying charges now threaten to skyrocket if 
interest rates rise back to “normal” levels. 
The composition of interest on the economy-wide level has remained 
basically stable. By far most interest is paid on mortgage debt, whose growth 
is subsidized by making interest payments tax deductible. The higher the 
degree of subsidy, the more debt can be afforded. And conversely, ending tax 
deductibility would reduce the amount of debt that a homebuyer can afford to 
take on. This would lower the equilibrium price that could be afforded. What 
seems at first glance to be an economic benefit to homebuyers — making 
their interest payments tax deductible — thus turns out to be largely illusory. 
The subsidy ends up being passed on to the banks. 
Giving homeowners and property investors a tax subsidy, while 
maintaining the rule of thumb that mortgage payments should equal 25% or 
some such ratio of personal income, merely replaces the cost of tax payment 
with an interest payment to bankers. 
Adam Smith suggested as a rule of thumb that interest rates tend to be 
about half the profit rate. For a commercial or industrial enterprise financed 
entirely on credit, interest would absorb half the gross profit. But since the 
1980s the ratio has risen as debt leveraging has spread throughout the 
economy. “Shareholder activists” (the euphemism for corporate raiders) are 
financializing industry along much the same lines as real estate with its high 
debt/equity leveraging, turning profits and cash flow into interest via buyouts 
leveraged with high-interest “junk” bonds.
 
Charts 14, 15, & 15 follow –
Chart 14: Interest in the U.S. Economy
Chart 15: Interest Payments as a Percentage of U.S. National Income
Chart 16: U.S. Interest – Percentage Composition
 


 
For commercial investors the choice of whether to buy a rent-yielding 
property on credit to use one’s own money is a business decision shaped by 
prospects for after-tax returns. Debt financing is not a necessary operating 
cost but a business choice by investors to buy property with loans instead of 
using their own money. The government alters the investment equation by 
making such payments tax-deductible as if they were a necessary cost of 
doing business. The effect is that interest payments expand to absorb the 
revenue hitherto paid out as taxes, and the tendency is to absorb whatever is 
un-taxed. Making interest tax-deductible encourages debt pyramiding. This in 
turn leads to political pressure for tax cuts when investors suffer the 
inevitable debt squeeze as the economy shrinks in response to debt deflation.
 
From Asset-Price Inflation to Debt Peonage
 
Today, banks and other mortgage holders have become the major parties 
in U.S. real estate. Overall U.S. homeowners’ equity has fallen from 70% to 
under 50% of property values as the United States shifts from an ownership 
to a debtor economy.
In contrast to industrial capitalism, financialization squeezes out an 
economic surplus not by employing labor to produce commodities for sale at 

a markup but by getting labor and industry into debt. It extracts a financial 
surplus in the form of interest, not profits on production and sales. And 
finance capitalism uses this surplus to extend yet new interest-bearing loans, 
not to invest in tangible capital formation. When income is insufficient to pay 
bondholders, financial managers extract revenue by carving up and selling off 
assets. Such zero-sum (or even negative-sum) transfer payments do not 
promote growth but polarize the distribution of wealth in ways that dry up the 
domestic market for consumer goods and investment goods. 
Financialization also acquires wealth from governments by appropriating 
the public domain or monopoly rights in settlement of debt. In the United 
States the railroad barons became land barons with a stroke of the 
privatization pen — along with the emerging mining and timber oligarchy. 
By this time real estate, mining and forestry were becoming part of the FIRE 
sector, dominated by finance. In America this meant Wall Street; in England, 
the City of London.
 
Chart 17 follows: Homeowner’s Equity as Percentage of Household Real 
Estate (Source: FRB)
 
 
 
It often is overlooked that inequality of wealth far exceeds that of income. 
This is because the wealthiest 10% of families prefer to take their returns not 
as income but in the form of the much less highly taxed capital gains. And 
while the population’s bottom 90% hope to catch up by going into debt to 
buy homes and other property, the insatiable growth in debt needed to keep a 
real estate and finance bubble expanding imposes financial charges that 
polarize wealth ownership. These debt charges grow so heavy that debtors 
are able to pay only by borrowing the interest. They do this increasingly by 
pledging real estate or other assets whose prices are being inflated by a 
combination of central bank policy and Treasury tax concessions. The 
problem is that in addition to going further into debt, the policy of un-taxing 
property and financial wealth forces labor and tangible industrial capital to 

pick up the fiscal slack. 
Governments have become the property bubble’s ultimate enablers. 
Ostensibly created simply to give liquidity to mortgages (which traditionally 
were held by the banks that originated them), the semi-public Federal Home 
Administration (FHA), Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) and 
Freddie Mac became the largest buyers, packagers and ultimate guarantors of 
U.S. mortgages, buying them up as fast as banks and mortgage brokers could 
issue them — some two-thirds of all U.S. home mortgages. These 
government-sponsored agencies then sold bonds backed by these mortgage 
holdings to institutional buyers who trusted that the government would stand 
behind them regardless of how poor the underlying quality of mortgages 
were. This was analogous to the Federal S & L Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) 
bailing out risk-taking institutional depositors in S & Ls two decades earlier, 
in the 1980s. FNMA and Freddie Mac bonds amounted to $5.3 trillion, as 
much as the entire publicly held U.S. Government debt.
 
Chart 18 follows: FNMA and Freddie Mac Have Become the Largest 
Mortgage Holders
 
 
 
Accounting fraud by FNMA managers helped create a false sense of 
confidence by buyers unfamiliar with how crooked the U.S. financial sector 
was becoming as deregulation let banks run wild. When the collateral value 
backing their mortgage-backed securities plunged, the FHA, FNMA and 
Freddie Mac duly reported losses and called for public bailouts — of 
themselves and their institutional clients, not for defaulting homeowners. But 
by July 2008 it was reported that under “fair value” accounting rules the 
mortgages failed to cover obligations by over $5 billion, share prices for the 
two semi-public agencies had fallen by 90% from 2007 to 2008. A Wall 
Street Journal editorial commented that: “The double irony amid the current 
credit crunch is that our politicians have been promoting Fannie and Freddie 
as mortgage saviors even as their risk of insolvency has grown. Chuck 

Schumer, Chris Dodd and many others have encouraged the duo to take on 
even greater mortgage risk as the housing slump has unfolded. They’re the 
arsonists posing as firemen while putting more dry tinder around the blaze.”8 
Rather than letting bad debts go under, Congress set about trying to re-inflate 
the home mortgage market so as to enable homeowners suffering negative 
equity to raise the money to pay their debts — debts owed almost entirely to 
large institutional investors and ultimately to the population’s wealthiest 
10%.
 
Real Estate in a Debt-Leveraged Economy
 
The fact that land-price gains have long overshadowed real estate cash 
flow (ebitda) has made property investors willing to pledge their rental 
income to bankers as interest. Rather than seeking current income (or for 
homeowners, rental value) the aim is to ride the wave of asset-price inflation. 
So the fact that overall real estate net cash flow (ebitda) is about a third of 
national income, this was by no means the whole story. In terms of total 
returns — cash flow plus asset-price gains — real estate generated an amount 
that rose as high as half of reported U.S. national income in 2005. That year’s 
$2.5 trillion in higher land prices amounted to about 20% of reported national 
income, while real estate cash flow (ebitda) added even more ($3 trillion). 
And this still leaves another trillion dollars or so for the Fed’s calculation of 
capital gains for buildings’ “replacement cost” which actually should be 
treated as site value.
 
Conclusion: The Larger the Tax Giveaway, the More the Mortgage Debt 
Grows
 
Tax favoritism for real estate, corporate raiders and ultimately for their 
creditors has freed income to be pledged to carry more debt. Mortgage 
lenders consider that a “virtuous circle” is created when the right to deduct 
interest paid on debt leveraging “frees” income to be pledged for larger bank 
loans. But this credit has been used to fuel asset-price inflation, raising the 

entry price of home ownership and the cost of buying corporate stocks and 
bonds to yield a retirement income. But it does not increase production and 
output. Families get off the rent treadmill only to get onto the debt treadmill. 
Rental income hitherto paid as taxes is now paid as interest on credit 
extended to new buyers, while taxes on consumer income and sales also rise.
 
The idea is that shifting taxes off property and finance promotes a “free 
market.” What it actually does is favor the debt-leveraged buying and selling 
of real estate, stocks and bonds, distorting markets in ways that de-
industrialize the economy.
 
Chart 19 follows: Adding Land-Price Gains to National Income Provides a 
Measure of Total Return
 
 
 
This is the tragedy of our financial system today. Credit creation, saving 
and investment are not being mobilized to increase new direct investment or 
raise living standards, but to bid up prices for real estate and other assets 
already in place, and for financial securities (stocks and bonds) already 
issued. The effect is to load down the economy with debt without putting in 
place the means to pay it off, except by further and even more rapid asset-
price inflation — and sale or forfeiture of property from debtors to creditors.
This kind of economic distortion is largely the result of relinquishing 
planning and the structuring of markets to large banks and other financial 
institutions. In the name of “free markets” the economics profession has 
celebrated the shift of planning and tax policy to the financial sector, whose 
lobbyists have rewritten the tax code and sponsored deregulation of the 
checks and balances put in place in the Progressive Era a century ago. 
At that time it seemed that banking and finance would be industrialized, 
while landed wealth and monopolies would become more socialized and their 
“free lunch” (economic rent) fully taxed. Rather than real estate prices rising 

as we are seeing today, this “free lunch” (what John Stuart Mill called the 
“unearned increment”) would provide the basic source of public finance, 
including the financing of public infrastructure. 
The classical policy of basing tax policy on the land’s rising rental value 
was intended to have two positive effects. First, it would free labor and 
industry from the tax burden as this was shifted back onto property. Second, 
paying this rental value to the government would make it unavailable to 
pledge to mortgage lenders as interest and capitalized into larger bank loans 
to bid up real estate prices. This would prevent rent-extraction from 
becoming the objective of new credit, absorbed as interest by the banks. 
But the vested interests have fought back. Financial lobbyists have 
extracted fiscal favors for real estate and pressed for deregulation of 
monopolies as the major source of interest and collateral for bank loans and 
bonds. The largest gains of all are made by privatizing enterprises from the 
public domain, most notably in the post-Soviet kleptocracies but also from 
debt-strapped Western governments. 
This is a travesty of the “free markets” that lobbyists for the banks and the 
wealthy in general claim to advocate. If the revenue currently used for 
interest and depreciation were paid property taxes, this would free an 
equivalent sum from having to be raised in the form of income and sales 
taxes. This was the classical idea of free markets.
Financial and real estate lobbyists encourage the popular misconception 
that higher property taxes squeeze homeowners and wage earners. The reality 
is that taxing the land’s rental value would reduce interest charges by an 
amount equal to the tax. Real estate prices would become more affordable as 
the interest now paid to banks to support a high debt overhead would go to 
lowering the income- and sales-tax burden. This would reduce the cost of 
production and living proportionally, by about 16% of national income. 
Prices and rents for housing and office space are set by the market place. 
Interest and taxes are paid out of this rental value. This means that 
homeowners and renters would pay the same amount as they now do, but the 
public sector would recapture the expense of building transportation and 
other basic infrastructure out of the higher rental value this spending creates. 
The tax system would be based on user fees for property, falling on owners in 

a way that collects the rising value of their property resulting from the rent of 
location, enhanced by public transportation and other infrastructure, and from 
the general level of prosperity, for which landlords are not responsible but 
merely are the passive beneficiaries under current practice.
In sum, fiscal policy would aim at recapturing the land’s site value created 
by public infrastructure spending, schooling and the general level of 
prosperity. The economy’s debt pyramid would be much lower as savings 
take the form of equity investment once again, rather than a minority position 
in a debt pyramiding operation. Slower growth of debt, housing and office 
prices, and lower taxes on income and sales would make the economy more 
competitive internationally. 
But as matters stand, a Bubble Economy weakens the national fiscal 
position as well as burdening industry and the nation’s competitive position. 
International equilibrium can be maintained only if all other economies are 
financialized in a symmetrical fashion — a proliferation of the debt burden 
that in fact has become a distinguishing characteristic of today’s 
globalization.
 
PULL QUOTES
PULL QUOTE 08-01
Giving homeowners and property investors a tax subsidy, while maintaining 
the rule of thumb that mortgage payments should equal 25% of personal 
income, merely replaces the cost of tax payment with an interest payment to 
bankers. — Michael Hudson
1 William Petty, Treatise of Taxes and Contributions (London 1662), p. 26: “Having found the Rent or 
value of the usus fructus per annum, the question is, how many years purchase … is the Fee simple 
naturally worth?” Marx (History of Economic Theories, tr. Terence McCarthy [New York: 1952], p. 5) 
notes that Petty deduces the rate of interest from rent “as the general form of surplus value.
2 Hyman P. Minsky, The Financial Instability Hypothesis, Working Paper No. 74, May 1992 (The 
Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College). Prepared for Handbook of Radical Political 

Economy, ed. Philip Arestis and Malcolm Sawyer (Edward Elgar: Aldershot, 1993).
3 “Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer 
Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 2006, pp. A1–A38.
4 Andrew Mellon, Taxation: The People’s Business (New York 1924): 63.
5 The Wall Street analyst Terence McCarthy observed that Marx’s analysis of the Economic Theory of 
Depreciation was so complete that, “if Capital has been called the bible of the working class, the 
History [he is referring to Theories of Surplus Value] might well be called the bible of the Society of 
Cost Accountants.… Over the whole society, failure to provide adequate depreciation reserves is, Marx 
implies, to negate economic progress and to begin consumption of that portion of the value of the 
product which Marx believes belongs neither to the laborers in industry, nor to their employers, but to 
the economy itself, as something which must be ‘restored’ to it if the economic process is to continue.” 
Marx, (New York 1952: xv). This was the first English language translation of Marx’s Theories of 
Surplus Value.
6 This phenomenon has far-reaching implications for the so-called declining rate of profit. Marx 
attributed this to the rising organic composition of capital — and hence, an increasing rate of capital 
consumption (depreciation) relative to profit. However, his point of reference was industrial capital, not 
real estate. The latter’s dominant economic role requires that it be segregated from the industrial 
economy’s statistics. Otherwise, the rate of return on capital investment would be considerably 
understated.
7 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System publishes “Balance Sheets for the US 
Economy” and has published papers defending the land-residual method. It is criticized in Ronald 
Banks, ed., Costing the Earth (London: Shepheard & Walwyn, 1989).
8 James Politi and Ben White, “Freddie and Fannie in turmoil,” Financial Times, July 11, 2008, and 
“The Price of Fannie Mae,” Wall Street Journal editorial, July 10, 2008.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 8
___________

*****
9. Junk-Bonding Industry
 
Fiction: Banks and stock markets finance capital formation to help 
companies grow and expand.
Reality: The stock market has become a vehicle for leveraged buyouts and 
corporate takeovers to load companies down with debt. This diverts profits 
away from being used for new investment while raising break-even costs, 
making financialized companies (and economies) less competitive.
The mythology of our time depicts the stock market as financing industry 
by providing equity capital — buying shares in companies, in contrast to 
interest-bearing bonds and bank loans. But companies have long been 
financing most capital investment out of retained earnings. Banks play little 
role in financing new plant and equipment, research and development. To top 
matters, the investment bankers who underwrite new stock issues and the 
hedge funds offering to buy out existing stockholders at a price gain seek to 
profiteer at the expense of industry more than help it. Underwriters, leading 
money managers and a new brand of corporate raider euphemized as “activist 
shareholders” take the lion’s share of gains that occur after setting a low 
Initial Public Offering (IPO) price and then holding on for the jump that 
normally follows almost immediately. Companies normally receive only part 
of the market’s valuation of their stock after a month, week or even the day 
of its issue.
The fact that this practice has been going on for over a century and has 

become worse rather than better shows that it is not an innocent pricing error 
by investment bankers who are supposed to know a reasonable price for a 
company. It is systematic deception by Wall Street, the City of London and 
other finance-capital centers. Governments play along with this exploitative 
financial fiction for their own reasons — headed by their support for the 
financial sector rather than industry. 
It is hardly an innocent coincidence, for example, that the fraction of 
corporate value received by new stock issuers in Britain’s major public 
utilities was lowest in Mrs. Thatcher’s privatizations of the 1980s. Her 
Conservative Party advisors underpriced shares of British Telephone — and 
later those of the railroads and other companies formerly in the public 
domain — to give the customers of these firms a chance to benefit as 
capitalists-in-miniature, making quick first-day or first-week gains. But they 
lost out as prices were jacked up and service standards declined. Privatized 
bus companies sold off their centrally located terminals for their real estate 
value and cut back money-losing service. For the railroads, ticket prices 
soared, more trains crashed and passengers were jammed as London’s real 
estate bubble of the 1980s and ‘90s forced people to live far away from their 
jobs in order to afford housing, which absorbed a rising share of their 
paychecks. 
The policy was characterized as “Sorry you’ve lost your job. We hope you 
made enough money cashing out on your home or in the stock market to 
make up for it.” The idea was for the victims of this process — the bottom 
99% — to make enough one-time gains from carving up and inflating the 
economy to mute their opposition to the widening polarization between 
creditors and debtors, that is, between the financialized sector and the rest of 
the economy.
The stock market became an arena in the new financial warfare as it was 
turned into a vehicle for takeovers, mergers and acquisitions based on 
replacing equity with debt leveraging. Federal Reserve statistics show that 
more U.S. stocks have been retired since 1980 than issued. Despite the flurry 
of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) during the high-tech dot.com bubble, the 
net flow of funds has been out of the stock market, not into it.  The stocks 
that have been retired have been replaced with debt — “junk bonds,” other 
bonds, mortgages and bank loans.

Credit to corporations is created to buy assets already in place or to ship 
goods and services already sold and waiting for payment, not to invest in new 
plant and equipment or employ labor to produce more. Meanwhile, corporate 
raiders and management buyout teams now purchase entire companies on 
credit. The post-1980 mushrooming of such credit was catalyzed by high-
interest “junk” bonds, but as the Federal Reserve flooded the economy with 
credit, banks were able to ease loan standards and lower interest rates each 
year. Takeover credit became much more accessible. Raiders were able to 
obtain increasingly low-cost financing to buy out companies with returns on 
equity of 9% or more. The wealth of the population’s richest 1% soared so 
rapidly as progressive taxes were slashed.
The logical culmination of this process is for the entire economy to be 
bought out by financial managers, or at least come under their control. The 
problem for society is that the aims of financiers are quite different from 
those that textbooks describe as being the aims of industrial entrepreneurs: 
namely, to invest in factories, plant and equipment and hire labor to apply 
new technology to produce more output at lower cost, creating the promised 
economy of abundance.
 
[Fig.1 follows: Federal Reserve Flow of Funds – Net stock-market 
disinvestment, 1980–2010.]
 

 
Taking over companies with borrowed credit seeking to make quick gains 
on their stock prices — or to take the companies private, break them up, seize 
their pension funds, cut services, work labor more intensively or outsource 
employment and downsize, and then to re-float the “streamlined” carcass — 
has become so pervasive that well-run companies fear being targeted. Their 
defense is to take “poison pills” by borrowing to buy up their own stock, 
making it more costly to raiders — while leaving themselves with less debt 
leeway for prospective raiders to capitalize into takeover loans. The idea is to 
use up their debt servicing capacity in advance, indebting themselves so 
heavily that no raider could hope to saddle them with enough more debt to 
pay for a takeover. 
For most companies these days, buybacks create capital gains for 
stockholders — gains that are taxed at a much lower rate than dividend 
payouts. They also increase the value of the stock options that corporate 
managers give themselves — options whose value often exceeds their salary. 
But these debt-leveraged buyouts, buybacks and stock manipulation leave 
less revenue to invest in expanding business. So financial “gain-seeking 

becomes decoupled from tangible capital formation as managers spend 
earnings to push up the price of their stock by buybacks rather than by 
investing to generate more earnings. 
 
Corporate Takeovers Replace Equity with Debt 
 
Fiction: Bank loans and bond issues finance productive capital 
investment, creating profits that borrowers use to pay off their loans.
Reality: Banks extend most credit against property already in place. Most 
corporate bond issues since the 1980s have been to finance takeovers. This 
inflates asset prices, but does not finance tangible capital formation. Interest 
must be paid out of income streams already in place — or by cutting back 
capital spending and squeezing more out of employees or their pension funds.
 
The underlying fiction is that debt leveraging can “create wealth.” What 
makes the indebting of industry so ironic is that it is being done via the stock 
market, which was founded to provide equity capital as an alternative to debt. 
This original role has now been reversed. 
At first glance one might imagine that the 1992–2001 stock market boom 
might have led companies to take advantage of rising price/earnings ratios 
and replace bonds with stock. But the tax code favors debt financing rather 
than equity. Corporate dividends are paid out of after-tax profit, while interest 
is a pre-tax charge. At the 50% corporate income-tax rates still typical in the 
1980s, companies could pay out twice as much in pretax interest as they 
could pay in after-tax dividends. The asymmetrical tax treatment has been a 
major incentive in turning the stock market into a vehicle for buying 
companies by loading them down with debt — at the tax collector’s expense. 
The pretense for making interest on bank loans and bonds tax-deductible 
is that it is considered to be a necessary cost of doing business. But takeovers 
are not part of the production and consumption economy. This market 
distortion prompts investors to shift away from equity financing to debt 
financing. As interest rates were receding from the 20% rate they reached in 
1980, pension funds and other institutional investors sought higher rates of 

return — by lending to corporate raiders seeking to take over companies. 
Drexel Burnham took the lead in popularizing high-interest bonds. They were 
called “junk” because they increased the debt/equity ratio of companies far 
beyond traditional banking norms. So even as the stock market boomed with 
takeover offers, companies did not use this to reduce their debt overhead. 
Debt ratios soared. 
Companies became more financially fragile. Stock dividends can be cut 
back when earnings decline, but interest must be paid regardless of how 
much the company earns. If a company cannot pay, it is declared insolvent 
and turned over to its creditors, wiping out stockholders. This became the fate 
of many companies skating on the increasingly thin financial ice — becoming 
more fragile because of tax favoritism for debt financing.
The reasons for this favoritism toward creditors is not technological, and 
did not spur capital investment. Banks, pension funds and other institutional 
investors lend to raiders and corporate empire-builders simply to buy up 
stock. The strategy of “financial engineering” is to make capital gains by 
downsizing and breaking up companies, or to bid up their stock prices rather 
than investing in more capital or hiring more employees.
Stock buybacks dispose of the surplus cash that acts like a red flag 
attracting raiders. Companies that operate in the old-fashioned way of 
building up capital investment and cash reserves find that their liquid assets 
and un-mortgaged property attract predators. So the spread of corporate debt 
becomes contagious, because it obliges companies to defend themselves by 
depleting their working capital and going so deeply into debt that few assets 
or earnings remain to be pledged to creditors. 
 
The Adverse Effect of Debt-Financed Raids on Long-Term Corporate 
Investment
 
Fiction: Debt leveraging increases returns on equity as funds can be 
borrowed at a lower interest rate than companies expect to earn, enabling 
companies to pay off their debts.
Reality: Issuing high-interest “junk” bonds to buy out stockholders and 

“take companies private” raises the proportion of cash flow absorbed by 
interest, leaving less for new direct investment. So capital formation and 
employment slow, reducing economic growth.
 
The problem is that this kind of defense emulates the very policies that 
raiders threaten. Supporting a stock’s price by buying it up or paying out 
more in dividends often involves dismantling a company’s long-term 
investment plans and running up enormous debts. The company may make 
ends meet by cutting costs and employment drastically. This is what CBS did 
in 1987 when the “white knight” Larry Tisch fired employees and sold off 
$2.65 billion of CBS subsidiaries.
Tisch emerged from the new generation of corporate raiders who refined 
the practice of issuing bonds to buy out stockholders and their companies. In 
the spirit of the real estate principle that “rent is for paying interest,” they 
organized takeover funds, arranged bank loans and issued bonds similar to 
mortgages. These were not productive debts to finance new capital 
investment. Rather than generating more profits, these new loans simply 
replaced equity. Their interest charges had to be paid out of existing earnings 
— and by stripping assets.
All this was applauded by politicians on the right and left alike. In the 
spring of 1985, Senator Jesse Helms and other rightwing politicians backed 
Ted Turner’s attempt to take over CBS. Their main objective was to change 
the station’s liberal programming. Turner had founded the innovative Cable 
News Network (CNN), but lacked the resources to take over CBS. The only 
way he could do so was to offer $5 billion in high-interest bonds — the 
equivalent of $150 a share at a time when CBS stock was selling at a fraction 
of this price.
Wall Street was unimpressed. It thought he could deliver more right wing 
programming but not the dollars he promised. His basic business approach 
already had caused his Atlanta Braves baseball team to flop. Baseball players 
take years of professional training to reach the major leagues. Farm systems 
are run at a loss to provide this preparation, much like corporate R&D 
(research and development). Seeking to avoid such costly investment, Turner 
cut back on scouting (“research”) and minor league development, and simply 

hired free-agent players from other teams. This meant selecting players past 
their prime and often injury-prone. The result was a money-losing last-place 
team. In 1990 he finally appointed a general manager who turned the team’s 
fortunes around by developing one of baseball’s best scouting and minor 
league systems. But this was after his CBS experience.
One of CBS’s major stockholders was Larry Tisch, holding 5% of CBS 
stock. Soon after being elected to its board of directors, he announced his 
intention to save the company. Riding in like the proverbial white knight, he 
mobilized his family’s holdings in Loews to buy 24.9% of its stock by 
September. This kept CBS in ostensibly friendly hands inasmuch as Tisch 
already was a board member.
Having made his money by diversifying his Loews theater chain into 
hotels and insurance, He was known for cutting payrolls and other costs. The 
first thing he did at CBS was to reduce its staff and begin negotiating to sell 
off assets, starting with its magazines for $650 million, and CBS Records to 
Sony for $2 billion. There were rumors that he might even sell the company’s 
New York “Black Rock” headquarters and lease it back, raising cash but 
increasing the annual (tax deductible) rental outlay.
By the end of 1987 these policies had doubled Tisch’s original $951 
million investment in CBS. The company’s total worth rose to about $7 
billion, and it was in a cash-rich position — a bonanza for its stockholders, 
the largest of whom was Tisch himself. But in the process of “saving” CBS 
he just what its officers and employees had feared Turner would do: sell off 
its properties and lay off workers. The white knight became almost 
indistinguishable from the raider. 
 
Stock Buybacks to Increase Share Prices
Increasingly, corporate buybacks reflect management’s desire to raise the 
stock price as an aim in itself, not merely to deter takeovers. In addition to 
serving the interests of shareholders in the short run, buybacks enable 
managers to exercise their stock options at a higher price. The drawback is 
that they divert revenue away from being invested to expand the company’s 
long-term business.

During the 1990s, IBM routinely spent $10 billion of its earnings each 
year to buy its own stock. The company also borrowed. In effect, it was 
borrowing to bid up its stock price, not to expand research and development. 
In 1980, for instance, it contracted out its software technology for personal 
computers to Microsoft, and subsequently let other producers develop 
leadership positions for chips and associated hardware. Other companies did 
the same thing. By 2005 even staid General Electric announced in that it 
would sell its Swiss Reinsurance Company for $6.8 billion and use the 
proceeds to buy its own stock and raise its dividend payout.1
In 2004 the Standard & Poor 500 companies spent $197 billion on buying 
their own shares to support their price. The pace accelerated to over $100 
billion a quarter by March, 2006, by which time these buybacks were running 
at a rate large enough to “cover this year’s Medicare budget.” S&P calculated 
that 268 of the companies in the S&P 500 bought back shares in the first 
quarter, with nearly 110 of them cutting their diluted shares outstanding by at 
least 4% from a year earlier. … Exxon Mobil Corp., Microsoft Corp. and 
Time Warner Inc. were the biggest buyers of their own shares during the first 
quarter, spending $14.37 billion combined, according to S&P. 
As the Wall Street Journal report concluded:
 
A company that aggressively buys its own shares on the market can give 
investors a skewed picture of its earnings growth. When a company reduces 
its shares outstanding, it will report higher earnings per share, even if its total 
earnings don’t grow by a penny, simply because those profits are spread 
across fewer shares. Exxon Mobil’s net income rose 6.9 % in the first quarter, 
but that turned into a 12.3% earnings-per-share increase after share buybacks, 
according to S&P.2
 
Paying Greenmail to Deter Financial Raids
 
Raiders may negotiate “greenmail” payments to end their takeover threat. 
The target company agrees to buy the raider’s stock at a price that gives him 
a nice profit on top what became a customary 0.375% (3⁄8ths of 1%) 

commitment fee to the go-go investors who backed the greenmailer, the 
banking house that committed itself to underwrite the takeover, and the legal 
costs incurred in the cross-suits between the prospective raider’s company 
and its target. 
The attempted takeover of Phillips Petroleum by T. Boone Pickens and 
Carl Icahn illustrates the standard ploy. Icahn produced a financial plan to 
sell off $3.7 billion of Phillips’ assets to pay for the takeover, leaving Phillips 
with about $11 billion in debt compared to only $800 million in common 
stock. This would have produced nearly a 14:1 debt/equity ratio, compared to 
the average 1:1 ratio for the oil industry as a whole. Debt-servicing charges 
would have added to Phillips’ production costs, making it less competitive 
within the oil industry — and too cash-poor to sustain the exploration and 
development needed for long-term growth. 
This is why Phillips and other companies fought hard against such raids. 
They did not want to dismantle their production and investment position 
simply to let bondholders strip their assets and income stream. So Phillips 
negotiated a settlement that left it independent, while Pickens made $90 
million and Icahn over $50 million on the increased value of their 
stockholdings. Drexel Burnham Lambert got $1 million for letting Icahn use 
its name.
Biographies have been written about leading raiders such as Carl Icahn, T. 
Boone Pickens, Carl Lindner, Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky, Henry 
Kravis and their colleagues, along with stories about their takeover targets: 
Nabisco’s $22 billion leveraged buyout, Beatrice Foods, Revlon, Goodrich, 
Wierton Steel and the various airline buyouts and bankruptcies.3 Books could 
just as well have been written about companies that resisted takeovers by 
taking “poison pills” whose effects were nearly as bad as what the raiders 
would have done.
But personal and even corporate biographies run the risk of missing the 
forest for the trees. The junk-bond phenomenon is more than just an 
adventure story about some Wall Street raiders leveraging debt on a vaster 
scale than their real-estate counterparts. At stake is the fate of Americans who 
do not get rich from this financialization of industry. For instance, when the 
Leucadia takeover group bought out the National Intergroup conglomerate, 

no purchaser could be found for its Weirton Steel division. As a last resort 
Leucadia sold the plant to its employees. Rather than see it closed down, they 
cut their own wages and promised to pay for the steel plant with high-interest 
bonds. This turned the labor force into something akin to indentured servants 
working off the debts with which Leucadia saddled the plant. 
This kind of debt-financed raiding increased the cost for Weirton to 
produce each ton of steel, and for Phillips to produce each barrel of oil. The 
additional unit cost may be computed by dividing debt service by physical 
output before and after the takeover attempt. On an economy-wide level, 
higher interest charges have become a major factor pricing U.S. goods out of 
world markets. So claims that leveraged buyouts and other debt pyramiding 
is part of the “free market” economy on its way to a Darwinian survival of 
the fittest refers only to asset markets and balance-sheet wealth (and indeed, 
wealth at the top of the economic pyramid, achieved by indebting the bottom 
99 %), not to “markets” leading to more competitive pricing. 
 
Stock Market Strategies to Obtain Capital Gains Rather than Profits and 
Dividend Yields
 
Fiction: Stocks are worth more because earnings are growing.
Reality: Stock prices reflect the flow of funds steered into (or out of) the 
market by tax laws, pension and retirement funding, and Federal Reserve 
credit bubbling to lower interest rates and hence raise the “capitalization rate” 
of a given after-tax revenue stream.
 
Financial bubbles inflate stock market prices for reasons that have little to 
do with “real” wealth creation. By pushing down interest rates after 1981, for 
example, the Federal Reserve increased the “capitalization rate” of existing 
income streams. Borrowing terms became easier. But while debt-leveraged 
capital gains the market price of companies (and real estate) raised balance 
sheet net worth, this is done at the expense of earnings. Higher interest 
charges were built into a company’s break-even costs. So what rose was not 
net income or tangible wealth, but the ratio of stock prices to earnings — and 

of course, the value of stock options given to upper management. 
 
[Fig.2 follows - Falling Rate of GDP Growth Per Increase in Private Debt]
 
 
Until the 1980s, making capital gains on stocks tended not to involve 
actually taking over a company. Brokerage houses and investors looked for 
companies with undervalued assets, especially real estate bought long ago 
when prices were lower. Many auto supply stores, dairy distribution 
companies and other small companies had storage operations or retail outlets 
in neighborhoods where property prices were soaring. These companies also 
tended to have stable but not rapidly growing sales, which the stock market 
capitalized at low price/earnings ratios. Outside buyers could take over such 
companies, close them down and turn a $10 million sales-distribution 
business into a $20 million real estate deal by selling the property to 
developers. Or, a brokerage firm could buy the stock, provide its analysis to 

clients and watch them bid up the price — and then sell its holdings to make a 
trading profit.
Rising share prices in the stock market do not provide much benefit for the 
companies that initially issued them, unless firms issue new equity as well. 
By the 1960s the most noteworthy stock-market action consisted of corporate 
mergers. Aggressive conglomerates would offer to buy companies at a price 
higher than their stock was trading for. A 25% premium usually was 
sufficient inducement for shareholders to accept the offer. So if a company’s 
stock was trading at $20 a share, an ambitious buyer might offer $25 a share. 
Brokerage firms and their clients pored over balance sheets looking for 
prospective takeover targets. 
Growth companies with high price/earnings ratios sought to merge with 
slower growing firms by exchanging their high-priced stock for the relatively 
low-priced stock of these firms. This is what AOL did when it merged with 
Time Warner. Although Ted Turner’s company had much larger assets and 
earnings, the stock market valued these at a lower price/earnings ratio, 
enabling AOL to swallow it much like a crocodile biting off a prey much 
larger than itself. The hope was that the newly merged company’s stock price 
would enjoy a high price/earnings ratio. But the plan backfired as the bloom 
evaporated from AOL. The stock plunged to near the old Time Warner 
price/earnings ratio, making it one of the worst merger deals in history.
Apart from undervalued real estate, dominant market positions and 
intellectual property rights, the main bait for mergers was cash on hand — 
bank accounts, well funded pension plans, and low debt ratios. A new breed 
of financial manager accumulated cash simply by paying bills more slowly, 
and cutting costs by squeezing out more work — holding output steady in the 
face of attrition for the work force, and outsourcing employment to non-
union labor. All this was considered to be the essence of sophisticated 
management practice.
Unprecedented amounts of credit became available to finance corporate 
buyouts. Instead of merely doubling one’s money by buying a company for 
$10 million in one’s own cash and selling it for $20 million, a ten-fold return 
— 1,000% — could be made by borrowing $9 million of the purchase price, 
turning a debt-leveraged $1 million equity investment into a $10 million 

capital gain. The ideal was not to put in any of one’s own money at all, but to 
finance the takeover entirely on credit. The return on this zero equity (that is, 
100% debt pyramiding) was mathematically infinite. Going into debt became 
the way to get a free lunch. But it was not free for the companies being taken 
over, or for their employees or for the economy at large.
A new class of corporate raiders emerged in the 1980s. Their idea was to 
buy a company and cut costs — but not by raising productivity through 
capital investment and new technology. It was more like new landlords 
bleeding a hitherto well-maintained building and cutting the staff (or shifting 
to non-unionized labor), while increasing earnings by raising prices (much 
like raising rents). Corporate raiders looked for bankers to put up the money, 
just as real estate developers had long done. The bankers for their part saw 
these ambitious individuals as providing a major new growth market for 
loans. What made this harmony of interests work was the free ride that the 
government provided by letting corporations deduct interest payments from 
their reported income. The tax subsidy promoted the practice of loading 
industry down with debt, with the consequence that firms pay about twice as 
much of their income as interest as they could pay in after-tax dividends. 
What made “junk” bonds — and mergers and acquisition in general — 
risky for the economy at large was that their proceeds were not used to 
increase productivity or overall earning power. The funding simply was used 
to bid up stock prices. At best, the strategy was to buy a company, 
“streamline” its management, run it more “efficiently” in the short run to 
squeeze out more earnings. Raiders might take a company private — that is, 
off the stock market — and turn it into a privately owned company, 
streamlining it and often selling off the parts at a capital gain. The aim was to 
cash out by selling the company back on the stock market.
At first, target companies tried to protect themselves by bringing RICO 
claims against raiders — a law initially designed to prosecute the Mafia. But 
the higher courts ruled that what raiders and their junk-bond backers were 
doing was legal. The trials of Michael Milken and his client Ivan Boesky did 
not focus on corporate raiding and indebting as such, but on the insider 
dealing that was the key to the takeover deals negotiated by Drexel Burnham 
Lambert. Before making a takeover announcement, the perpetrators would 
buy stock options for the companies they targeted. Options could be bought 

at a low price, and on credit. Suppose a raider planned to offer $30 a share for 
a company whose stock was selling at only $20. For perhaps only $1 he could 
buy an option to buy the shares at $20 — and then watch his offer drive them 
up toward $30.
The legal problem was that under Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal reforms 
that followed the stock market crash of 1929, prospective buyers are legally 
required to give markets “full knowledge.” This transparency principle is the 
premise on which free-market economics is supposed to work. Milken’s 
“Drexel gang” violated it.
 
The Economy-Wide Effect of Financializing Industry
 
Some prominent financial leaders arrayed themselves against raiders 
loading industry down with junk bonds and depleting capital reserves via 
stock buybacks. Henry Kaufman resigned from the Salomon Brothers board 
of directors (and later from the firm itself) to protest its underwriting of debt-
for-equity swaps. Felix Rohatyn of Lazard Frères also warned of the risk of 
burdening balance sheets with high interest obligations. The corporate lawyer 
Martin Lipton wrote a public letter to Senator Proxmire defending companies 
against raiders:
 
These takeovers move assets into hands that profit by cutting off … 
research and development and capital improvements and instead divert those 
revenues to paying the debt incurred to acquire the assets. One can analogize 
the situation to a farmer who does not rotate his crops, does not periodically 
let his land lie fallow, does not fertilize his land and does not protect his land 
by planting cover and creating wind breaks. In the early years he will 
maximize his return from the land. It is a very profitable short-term use. But 
inevitably it leads to a dust bowl and economic disaster. … Day after day the 
takeover entrepreneurs are maximizing their returns at the expense of future 
generations that will not benefit from the research and development and 
capital investments that takeover entrepreneurs are forcing businesses to 
forego.4

 
Takeovers raid the social functions of capital, not just the company (whose 
shareholders may make a nice capital gain by selling their stock to raiders). 
These social costs do not show up on corporate balance sheets. Economists 
call them “external diseconomies” — consequences borne by society at large, 
as when debt-financed speculation leaves companies too cash-strapped to 
undertake new productivity-raising investment. Projects with long lead times 
are the first to be cut back, because they making companies ripe for takeover 
by a raider coming in to increase short-term earnings by reducing R&D and 
bleeding the company much in the way that landlords improve their cash 
flow by failing to keep up their rental properties. 
Communities suffer when jobs are lost as raiders improve short-term 
earnings by cutting back on employment. Workers who formerly paid taxes 
now collect unemployment insurance. Meanwhile, the shift to pay interest 
rather than paying out earnings as dividends aggravates the federal budget 
deficit, creating pressure to increase taxes on the economy’s non-financial 
sectors. The past thirty years’ experience with junk bonds and corporate 
raiding, seeking the best short-term management to raise stock prices — on 
credit — has burdened industry and the economy at large with financial 
overhead charges. Yet the economics profession followed bank lobbyists in 
advising that economies perform best over the long run by living in the short 
run, moving from one short-term spurt to the next. “Liquidity” Is the 
preferred euphemism for interest- bearing credit.
Typical of the applause for debt leveraging was President Ronald 
Reagan’s 1985 Economic Report of the President. Noting that “contests for 
corporate control are part of a larger merger and acquisition process that 
plays an important role in the economy’s adjustment to changing market 
circumstances,” it endorsed debt-financed buyouts on the ground that 
whatever generates the highest return is the most efficient use of resources, 
concluding that “there is no economic basis for regulations that would further 
restrict the … process.” 
This ideology of financial deregulation has promoted the junk bonding of 
industry, and ultimately a crash as the economy has been de-industrialized. 
Living in the short run, financial operators jumping from one company to 

another, loading each one down with debt in order to increase returns on 
equity. And this has been applauded. By 2006 the Financial Times wrote that: 
“With pressure on institutional investors to deliver short-term gains, 
corporate hell-raisers — once vilified as ‘vultures’ and ‘speculators‘ — have 
become champions of better governance.”5
“Creating wealth” by debt pyramiding is encouraged by the tax system’s 
failure to distinguish between productive investment and speculation. Capital 
gains obtained by raiding a company or manipulating its stock are taxed at 
only half the rate as income earned by building a factory to increase output 
and jobs. And adding insult to injury, debt leveraging is subsidized by 
making interest payments tax deductible — aggravating the fiscal squeeze.
Nothing about this debt subsidy is a natural or inherent in markets. As 
Keynes pointed out in the 1930s, capital markets function best when 
governments adjust the rules to serve longer-term growth objectives. An 
obvious first step toward improving industry would be a tax structure that 
favors equity capital rather than debt, and holding stocks on a longer-term 
basis.
 
The Inevitability of Debt Default
 
Already before the bankruptcy of high-risk S&Ls in the 1980s, observers 
warned about the bankruptcy danger for companies whose earnings could not 
cover their high interest charges, and those that had indebted themselves with 
poison pills to defend against financial takeovers. Securities and Exchange 
Commission Chairman John Shad warned that “even a mild recession” might 
force some companies into default on their junk bonds. “The more leveraged 
takeovers and buyouts today,” he concluded, “the more bankruptcies 
tomorrow,”6 leaving lawyers and accountants to carve up the hapless target 
companies to pay their creditors. 
But the SEC has little authority to overrule the issue of junk bonds. It was 
not designed to protect the economy by setting rules for financing or taxing to 
promote long-term investment and financial viability. Its role is only to 
protect stockholders by pressing for full financial disclosure and other 

technical market functions such as limiting insider dealing and collecting 
accurate statistics for stock and bond investors. 
Deposit insurance agencies — the FDIC and the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) — likewise were unable to block junk-bond 
investments by banks and S&Ls. Defaults soon led to insolvency for savings 
institutions that held such bonds. Columbia S&L in Beverly Hills had nearly 
half (some $2 billion) of its depositors’ funds in junk bonds. Its insolvency 
helped empty out FSLIC, which had permitted S&Ls to deviate far from their 
original purpose of financing homebuilding. The low price of Columbia’s 
stock already by 1986 reflected the view of most investors that the S&L had 
jeopardized its long-term solvency by seeking high yields. Financial 
deregulation let these institutions invest in junk bonds for no better reason 
than to pay depositors a few percentage points more for a temporary period of 
time — at the cost of ending up losing their principal. The process occurred 
quite rapidly.
The financial problem is symbiotic with today’s fiscal policy of taxing 
business earnings higher than capital gains on stock and bond speculation. 
This pro-financial tax philosophy is the diametric opposite of what classical 
economists advocated. It steers savings and new credit creation into loans, 
building up debt. By encouraging debt-leveraged buyouts, the tax-
deductibility of interest has turned securities markets into vehicles for 
pension funds and other institutional traders to find the quickest returns by 
acting as short-term speculators rather than long-term investors.
 
Diverting Stock-Market Gains from Companies to Investment Bankers
 
Silicon Valley’s dot.com and Internet leaders became multi-millionaires 
and sometimes even billionaires when their companies were floated on the 
stock market in the 1990s. They have become poster boys for the claim that 
Wall Street rewards innovation. Yet they received only a portion of the 
money raised by the Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) of stocks in their 
companies on the day they went public and over the next few trading days. 
Their venture capitalists took the lion’s share as sleeping partners, along with 
the investment bankers who marketed these stocks.

First-day price jumps of 100% to 400% were normal for IPOs in the 
information sector, sometimes more than seven-fold. The higher the jump, 
the more successful the flotation was deemed to be — successful in attracting 
investment bank clients to the next underwriting. The earliest buyers got the 
quickest and largest gains. The companies got only the initial offering price 
— less underwriting commissions typically 7% — higher than the 6% 
commission charged by real estate brokers. In addition to this rake-off, the 
bankers who underwrote these offerings got much of the price run-up for 
their own trading account. 
These gains made the interest of Wall Street inherently opposed to that of 
companies going public, which received far less than their stock proved to be 
worth after only a few hours of trading. Many small buyers who jumped onto 
the bandwagon lost their shirts after the bubble burst in 2001. The process is 
best described in the prosecutions mounted in 2002–04 by New York State 
Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, who fined Wall Street’s leading firms over 
$1.5 billion for engineering price jumps in an illegal way. Still, their gains far 
outweighed the penalties negotiated with law enforcement agencies. 
The felony case against Frank P. Quattrone is illustrative. Employed as a 
stock analyst by Credit Suisse First Boston to tout high-tech shares, he was 
convicted on May 3, 2004, for destroying evidence in the government’s 
investigation of his firm’s wrongdoing. Prosecutors showed that what passed 
for research was a con job, for which his firm paid a fine of $100 million — 
without admitting criminal wrongdoing (thus avoiding a raft of civil lawsuits 
by its victims).
The Linux flotation provides an object lesson for the kind of insider 
dealing that became rife. When Credit Suisse brought the company (then 
called VA Linux) public in December 1999, it pretended that Linux’s 
prospective earning power justified an initial offering price of $30. But by the 
end of first day the stock had changed hands numerous times as it soared to 
$320. It then fell back to close at $239.25, more than seven and a half times 
what it had sold for in the morning. This price exceeded what Linux would be 
selling for by the end of 1999 — still remarkably high, considering that its 
shares would plunge to just 54 cents by 2002 and then would settle in the $2 
range, about 1% of the first day’s peak price. 

Who benefited the most? At the head of the pack were the underwriters, 
followed by the favored pension funds and other institutions who got first 
crack at the shares and flipped them to new buyers by mid-day. Then came 
the venture capitalists that helped fund Linux. In the final position were the 
“content providers” who actually created the company’s technology. They 
didn’t receive anything like the $239 their stock ended up selling for in the 
first day. They didn’t even get all that much of the $30 a share at which the 
stock was issued, after Credit Suisse First Boston took its commission and the 
venture capitalists got their share.
The venture capitalist’s role is to find innovative individuals and start up a 
company for about $10 million, retaining control over how it is spent. They 
draw up a partnership agreement replete with small print spelling out how 
many shares of common and preferred stock they will get, and what 
proportion of the money they will receive when the company goes public — 
with management fees for themselves (usually about 2.5%). As one reporter 
has described: 
 
...preferred equity gains leverage when a company is sold for close to its 
original valuation, or a small multiple. The funding deal can be structured so 
that a venture capital fund with 20% preferred equity stake takes up to 40% 
of the sale proceeds, plus a dividend, and “double dips” by claiming 40% of 
the remaining capital gain. A technology entrepreneur who has a 30% equity 
stake may end up with less than 5% of the proceeds.7 
 
The bulk of the money raised accrues to the venture capital partners and 
their investment bankers. Retail investors are shut out of the most lucrative 
action. To protect their interest and stop “crony finance-capitalism,” 
Congress passed the Oxley-Sarbanes Act in 2002. The idea was to put all 
customers on the same footing. It was a good idea as far as it went, but its 
reforms and those that followed Mr. Spitzer’s prosecutions were mainly 
administrative. A more structural solution was needed to refocus stock 
ownership on the longer term rather than quick in-and-out trading.
One reform under discussion is to require initial buyers (including 
institutional investors) to hold stock for a reasonable period of time, at least a 

month. This is still short-term as capital markets go. Another suggestion is a 
stock-transfer “Tobin” tax. This would absorb a high margin of speculative 
gains traded on highly debt-leveraged terms. The average high-tech stock 
trades so rapidly that it now is normal for an amount equal to a company’s 
entire stock issue to turn over every day. This increasingly frenetic stock 
trading is Wall Street’s most profitable activity. And most of this trading is 
on credit, enabling banks to charge interest on financing this speculation. 
Now supplemented increasingly by complex computerized derivatives, it is 
gambling on probability curves, decoupled from tangible capital investment.
 
Google Attempts to Avoid Short-Term Financial Constraints
 
Realizing that it would take a long time for more far-reaching reforms to 
be enacted, the Internet search company Google sidestepped at least the most 
obvious traps. It began preparations in 1999 when it sold 10% partnerships to 
Sequoia Capital and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers for $12.5 million 
each. The holdings of these two venture capital firms ended up being valued 
at about $40 billion, for a 1,600-fold return on their investment. As for the 
investment bankers, Google limited their commission to just 3%, less than 
half the usual 7% rake-off. And to avoid the usual rapacious underpricing of 
its shares, it hired Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse First Boston to hold a 
“Dutch auction.” Prospective buyers were invited to submit their bids, and a 
price would be set to clear the market. The idea was to exclude speculators by 
giving all buyers an equal opportunity to buy shares at the moment of issue.
Google’s founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin spelled out their critique of 
this process in a letter they included with the “Owners Manual” for their 
stock offering in 2004. Contrary to Wall Street tradition, they explained that 
they would not make quarterly earnings estimates, because their focus was on 
the long run rather than the short term:
 
In our opinion, outside pressures too often tempt companies to sacrifice 
long-term opportunities to meet quarterly market expectations. Sometimes 
this pressure has caused companies to manipulate financial results in order to 

“make their quarter.” In Warren Buffett’s words, “We won’t ‘smooth’ 
quarterly or annual results: If earnings figures are lumpy when they reach 
headquarters, they will be lumpy when they reach you.”
 
To make sure that stock market investors would not have an opportunity to 
oppose this strategy, publicly traded shares would have only a tenth of the 
voting power of those kept by the company’s founders. As they explained:
 
If opportunities arise that might cause us to sacrifice short-term results but 
are in the best long-term interest of our shareholders, we will take those 
opportunities. …
Although we may discuss long-term trends in our business, we do not plan 
to give earnings guidance in the traditional sense. We are not able to predict 
our business within a narrow range for each quarter. We recognize that our 
duty is to advance our shareholders’ interests, and we believe that artificially 
creating short-term target numbers serves our shareholders poorly. We would 
prefer not to be asked to make such predictions, and if asked we will 
respectfully decline. A management team distracted by a series of short-term 
targets is as pointless as a dieter stepping on a scale every half hour. …
We will not shy away from high-risk, high-reward projects because of 
short-term earnings pressure.8
 
Logical as this approach seemed to be, Wall Street did not approve. “Let’s 
hope this doesn’t become a precedent,” one banker remarked. A hedge fund 
manager told the New York Times that he thought:
 
...shareholders should punish Google for its failure to give new investors 
the same rights as its founders. Once a company goes public, its founders 
must understand and accept that they are responsible to public shareholders 
and are no longer fully in control.9 
 
This was the mentality that Google sought to avoid. Its stock was issued at 

a price of $100 by Dutch auction on August 19, 2004, and then doubled by 
October and tripled by the following June — just what the company also had 
tried to avoid. But at least the price run-up seemed motivated by a better 
understanding of the company’s long-term earning power, not by the kind of 
insider deals to favored customers that had inspired Google to avoid the 
typical Wall Street ways.
 
Underwriting Rip-Offs to Deprive the Public and Private Sectors of Realistic 
Asset Value
Google learned what to avoid by watching how underwriters handled most 
stock issues. The most egregious examples occurred outside of the United 
States, above all for privatizations of public enterprises. Shares in these 
companies were underpriced as a political ploy to promote privatization, 
starting with British Telephone in 1982. The guiding idea of Mrs. Thatcher’s 
Conservative Party was to make these stock issues a “steal” for employees 
and customers of these firms, as well as for investors in general to make 
quick windfall gains.
For starters, British stock underwriters received a quite unnecessary 
windfall. The government made no attempt to negotiate lower issue fees than 
the 7% monopoly rate that underwriters were used to charging small and 
untested companies for new issues without clear earnings prospects. The 
public enterprises being sold off already had an established earnings stream, 
so little research was needed. Two percent or at most 3% would have been 
enough to obtain the underwriting services needed to sell the stock, given the 
enormous size of the issue. But providing a free lunch at public expense 
became the essence of the new finance capitalism.
The post-1980 rise of finance capital can be attributed in large part to its 
ability to privatization of public and private-sector capital on credit. Britain’s 
government could have received five or six times as much as it did by 
offering only about 20% of British Telephone initially in order to establish a 
logical — and much higher — market price, and then selling the balance of 
the company. Instead, it underpriced the entire company’s value to stock 
market investors and underwriters. The magnitude of this and similar 

giveaways is so large as to be transformative, because the largest capital 
investment in most economies prior to the financial conquest of the 1980s 
was infrastructure in the public domain. By focusing on “capital formation” 
as being a private-sector phenomenon, economics textbooks — and financial 
“free market” lobbyists — distract attention from the privatization giveaways 
that have been a major factor in enabling the economy’s wealthiest 1% to 
sharply increase their share of wealth and income. 
The process was capped by the privatized infrastructure monopolies to 
raise access prices (“rent extraction”) and transform industrial economies into 
rentier tollbooth economies. This transformation was achieved in part by the 
financial sector using its rich takings to mount an attack on government price 
regulation (making the spurious claim that “free markets” were ones that 
permit monopoly gouging), untaxing property rents and capital gains (on the 
claim that “free markets” needed a flat tax falling on labor, not on finance or 
real estate), and using the power of advertising and subsidy to drown out the 
concept of free markets that had been developing in the last few centuries of 
Western civilization. This was the essence of Thatcherism. And in America, 
Ronald Reagan’s team applauded it as the wave of the future. The barbarians 
were at the gates.
One might expect that this experience would dissuade underwriters from 
claiming that they give investors and corporate clients a fair idea of the value 
and prospective dividend stream for the shares being issued. But privatization 
stocks were not priced to take into account the fact that earnings would rise 
as private management was freed from the behavioral constraints that public 
companies had to follow. Yet it was precisely to break “free” of such 
regulation that public companies were being privatized by the Thatcherites! 
So it was mainly investment bankers and underwriters, stockbrokers and 
money managers that made money from their rake-off fees, administrative 
overhead charges and short-term trading gains. These financial operators 
depict themselves as key intermediaries mobilizing peoples’ hard-earned 
savings to fund innovations that propel the economy forward. Yet what Wall 
Street and the City of London has been selling is debt leveraging, downsizing 
and outsourcing, privatization and de-unionization — culminating in austerity 
planning and what is best characterized as a race to the bottom. The economy 
shrinks, and many small savers are left holding an empty bag with a 

mountain of debt attached to it. It was not how economic futurists a century 
ago expected the era of progress and abundance to develop.
The main talent that underwriters and money managers really need to 
succeed is greed, and this is something that cannot be taught in school. Its 
spirit is extractive and parasitic, not productive. Its route to success is not to 
make profit in the classical way, by capital investment to produce goods and 
services. Bankers and financial managers prefer the easier route of making 
money by transferring property into their own hands, and “extracting rent” by 
siphoning off real estate and stock market gains fueled by debt-leveraged 
asset-price inflation, and monopoly rents from key technologies such as 
Microsoft or “intellectual property” such as Walt Disney. 
 
Some Almost-Successful Takeover Attempts of 2005
 
Fiction: Corporate takeovers streamline inefficient management by 
cutting the fat.
Reality: Financial predators cut bone and muscle as they reduce 
investment programs with long lead-times. They increase returns by paying 
bills more slowly and running companies deeper into debt — to raise stock 
prices, not production.
 
Companies traditionally increased their dividends by investing in tangible 
capital to earn more profits, or cutting costs and/or raising prices for their 
products. But by 2005 an aggressive new source of financing developed. The 
idea was to mortgage corporate real estate and pay out the loan proceeds as 
dividends. This promised to make money in a purely financial way, by 
stripping assets to increase stock prices. Rather than investing in new capital 
to expand the business, raiders aim is to acquire assets already in place and 
sell them for a price gain, or even borrow against them to bid up stock prices. 
Earnings would be fully paid out instead of being invested in tangible capital 
formation. Financial managers would take the money and run, leaving 
indebted corporate shells in place of solvent companies.
Raiders (now euphemized as “activist shareholders”) need buy only 5% or 

6% of a company’s stock or round up hedge funds and other speculators in 
order to mount a proxy fight and pressure companies to raise dividend 
payouts and share buybacks. Their tactic is to pledge corporate assets for debt 
service, using the stock market as a vehicle to replace equity with debt. 
Whatever assets were not already collateralized, especially cash or pension 
funds, became a red flag similar to the curse that plagues countries with rich 
oil deposits — a target tempting predators to buy a company’s stock on 
credit. Financial Times columnist John Gapper described how dangerous 
sizable corporate cash holdings could be:
 
Companies have made themselves vulnerable to activist hedge funds by 
playing safe in the past three years. After the scare of the collapses of Enron 
and WorldCom, they paid down debt and amassed cash in case they suffered 
a similar crisis. Now, according to Standard & Poor’s (S&P), U.S. companies 
hold $1,300 billion of cash and liquid assets — more than 10% of all balance 
sheet assets.10
 
Next to liquid cash assets, corporate raiders concentrated on real estate. 
Among the hottest targets are food chain stores with property in prime 
locations that accounted for a high proportion of their net worth. Hedge funds 
take short-term loans to buy land-rich companies, and repay this bridge 
financing by mortgaging the property. Retail stores in particular own prime 
real estate locations, especially the large British grocery chains — and in the 
United States, the major restaurant chains.
 
Liquidating Corporate Assets
 
Fiction: The stock market raises long-term equity capital as an alternative 
to debt.
Reality: The stock market is becoming a vehicle for corporate raiders to 
untrack long-term investment planning by indebting companies to the hilt, 
cashing out, and running.

 
Hedge fund managers pressed predatory finance to new limits in 
November 2005. Carl Icahn, one of the most notorious raiders from the 
1980s, bought over 3% of Time Warner stock, and other hedge funds 
controlling a similar amount joined him to stage the largest proxy fight in 
U.S. corporate history. Lazard also set a precedent by acting as his advisor — 
the first time a staid Wall Street investment bank joined in attacking a blue-
chip company, its traditional client base. Its 343-page report by Bruce 
Wasserstein urging Time Warner to bid up its stock price by raising its 
annual buybacks from $5 billion to $20 billion. He also suggested that the 
company break itself into four parts and sell them off to pay quick dividends 
to stockholders.
Around the same time, William Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital hedge 
fund bought options on 4.9% of McDonald’s. McDonald’s was land-rich, 
owning more than a third of the land underneath its 13,500 restaurants in the 
United States and 30,000 worldwide. This un-mortgaged property was 
bankable, providing a borrowing opportunity that made the company a 
takeover target in the closing months of 2005. Mr. Ackman rounded up 
Vornado Realty Trust to buy another 1.2%, and a few other funds joined in to 
mount a proxy contest for control of the company. Among them was Whitney 
Tilson’s hedge fund T2 Partners. Tilson, earlier had urged Wal-Mart to buy 
back its stock and “take advantage of the low interest-rate environment and 
take on debt, allowing it to both expand and buy back shares.”11 The raiders 
thus shared a similar mentality and game plan.
This was the second fast-food company that Mr. Ackman had attacked. 
Earlier he had cornered 9.3% of Wendy’s stock, enough to force it to spin off 
its Horton’s coffee-shop division and pay out the proceeds as dividends. His 
plan for McDonalds was even bolder: The company would sell two-thirds of 
its restaurants for $3.3 billion, and raise $9 to $15 billion more by mortgaging 
its real estate to the hilt, using the proceeds to buy back its shares. It would 
spin off its wholly owned restaurants into a distinct property company 
(McOpCo), which would lease them back to McDonald’s, while selling 20% 
of its shares to raise a further $1.3 billion. 
Mr. Ackman forecast that these policies would enable McDonald’s to 

triple its dividend from 67 cents to $2 per share, raising its stock price by 
about 10% (around $2 to $4 per share), despite the fact that it would reduce 
the company’s net worth by paying out the value of its assets.12 For Mr. 
Ackman’s plan to work, buyers of McDonald’s shares would focus on its 
short-term dividend yield, not on the company’s long-run prospects as it 
became more financially fragile.
McDonald’s officers explained that the plan would discourage prospective 
new franchise purchasers, who naturally would fear that the proposed real-
estate affiliate would charge high rents. That is what landlords tend to do, 
after all. So making money as a landlord would reduce the viability of the 
fast-food operation. And on purely financial grounds the debt leverage 
proposal would strip the company’s assets and leave it deeply indebted. Chief 
financial officer Matthew Paull characterized Mr. Ackman’s plan as 
“financial engineering.”13 But as the Wall Street Journal observed: “In the 
hedge-fund world, ‘financial engineering’ isn’t a pejorative.” 
It was not as if McDonald’s needed rescuing. Since 2002 it had raised its 
dividends by 185%, tripling its share price at a time when most stock market 
averages were drifting downward. In any event, none of the hedge-fund 
proposals involved restaurant management as such. Their aim was pure asset 
stripping — borrowing against property not yet pledged as collateral, and 
paying out the loan proceeds to shareholders to produce a price jump — 
brief, but sufficient to enable the hedge funds to dump their shares for a quick 
killing.
The tragic consequence, for the economy at large as well as the companies 
being raided, is that after the financial dust had settled, the company would 
be left deep in debt. As the above-cited Wall Street Journal report summed up 
the threat: “Even the very best management teams aren’t safe in today’s free-
for-all corporate environment.” In the new financial perspective, “Holding so 
much [cash] is inefficient: companies reduce their return on equity by having 
too little debt. That makes the smaller ones targets for private equity funds.”
As matters turned out by February 2006, Mr. Icahn and Mr. Ackman 
failed in their takeover attempts. Mr. Ackman did succeed in debt-leveraging 
his hedge fund’s holdings of McDonald shares, and cleaned up when the 
stock jumped by 11% by January 2006. But at least McDonald’s remained in 

one piece. So did Time Warner, where Mr. Icahn was unable to convince 
most shareholders that he could significantly improve its stock performance. 
Its shares remained stuck around $18, far from the $26 level he claimed his 
policies would produce. Lazard, which had negotiated a fee of $5 million for 
every $1 increase in Time Warner’s share price, also lost.14 Still, the attack 
forced the company to quadruple its share buybacks from $5 billion to $20 
billion annually, and slash operating expenses by $1 billion. This prompted 
Fitch Ratings to downgrade the company’s bonds a notch, from BBB+ to 
BBB.
Taken together, these two episodes show how little today’s post-modern 
hit-and-run finance has to do with actual capital formation. It turns upside-
down the original idea of creating joint-stock corporations. They were 
expected to transform financial organization by creating large companies that 
would finance their expansion by raising permanent funding in the form of 
equity capital rather than debt. The advantage of equity was supposed to be 
that companies could pay their backers out of profits. If they make losses or 
their profits fall, they can cut back dividends accordingly. So equity reduces 
the risk of bankruptcy, making shareholders partners with the active 
manager-owners. But if companies do not pay the scheduled interest charges 
owed to creditors, they come under creditor control and stockholders may be 
wiped out. 
The short time frame of financial managers thus loses the advantage of 
long-term, flexible equity funding. Stock markets are subjecting companies to 
short-term management seeking gains by trading stocks and downsizing — 
that is, in ways that are largely decoupled from providing new financing for 
corporate investment. Today’s financial management philosophy — 
reinforced by the tax code and deregulation of corporate oversight — calls for 
cutting back R&D, downsizing the labor force, raiding pension-fund reserves 
and degrading defined-benefit plans into defined-contribution schemes. 
These policies are imposing a debt overhead on industrial capitalism as 
finance capital takes over industry, real estate and monopolies.
 
Junk Statistics
 

Fiction: Corporate land has almost no market value.
Reality: Land accounts for most growth in corporate property value.
 
In view of real estate’s importance in determining corporate net worth — 
and hence, borrowing power, as the McDonald’s episode illustrates — one 
might expect Federal Reserve statistics on America’s balance sheet to provide 
a fair valuation of corporate land. But its economists treat the market value of 
real estate as consisting mainly of buildings, not land sites. Starting with a 
market appraisal based on Census Department estimates for overall property 
prices, Fed statisticians then estimate the original cost of buildings and 
multiply this number by the Commerce Department’s index of construction 
costs to calculate their replacement cost. Whatever statistical residual remains 
between this estimate and current market value is attributed to land. The 
pretense is that buildings gain value simply as a result of price inflation 
increasing their replacement costs. Yet their owners are depreciating them — 
claiming that they are “recouping their capital,” even as their market price is 
being inflated by while inflation or easier credit, public infrastructure 
spending and general prosperity. These are not recognized as having any 
effect — presumably because it is harder to justify such “free lunch” gains for 
landowners. When they do sell their depreciated properties, they do not even 
have to pay low capital gains taxes if they reinvest their money in buying yet 
more property. So the tax system subsidizes a free-lunch rentier economy.
The seemingly empirical statistical nonsense that this methodology 
produces is illustrated by the fact that in some years this “land residual 
method” has left no land value at all! The Fed’s replacement-cost index for 
buildings rose so far in excess of actual market prices that by 1994 it reported 
the market value for U.S. corporately owned land as being a negative $4 
billion. The implication was that America’s corporations, as a whole, would 
have been willing to pay anyone $4 billion just to take all the negatively 
valued land they owned off their hands. The land’s apparently negligible 
statistical valuation was “crowded out” by the replacement-cost index.
When systematic on-going error is continued for generation after 
generation, there invariably is a special interest involved. In the case of land 
valuation, this interest goes back to the classical debates of the 18th and 19th 

centuries, above all the attempt by the Physiocrats, Adam Smith, John Stuart 
Mill, Henry George and the Progressive Era to tax land rent as society’s 
major form of unearned income and wealth. The idea was that taxing land 
rent would save it from being pledged to the banks as interest, and thereby 
would keep down housing prices (which are set at however much banks will 
lend). A land tax also would free governments from having to burden labor 
and industrial capital, thereby keeping their supply price low (as taxes, like 
interest, raise the price of production via the cost of living and doing 
business).
But since World War I the rentiers have fought back to shift taxes off 
themselves onto labor, consumers and even industry. Empowered by the 
symbiosis between finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE), rent extractors 
have fought to keep their free lunch out of the hands of government precisely 
because it is free, and easy to obtain. As J. S. Mill explained, land rent and 
rising prices for land are a gain that landlords make “in their sleep.” And 
since his day the democratization of property ownership on credit has enabled 
landlords to sell out — with banks providing the mortgage loans to buyers 
who bid against each other to see who will pay the largest proportion of the 
land rent to the banks in exchange for the loan to acquire the property. Not 
only homeowners do this, but corporations seeking to turn around and sell the 
land at a higher price.
If the Fed’s estimates were realistic and corporate property value resides 
in its buildings, little gain could be made in tearing down properties to 
gentrify or rebuild. But prices for commercial and industrial sites have been 
soaring in prime locations such as New York’s midtown, downtown Tribeca 
neighborhood and even the Lower East Side and darkest Brooklyn, as well as 
in Chicago’s Loop and on the South Side’s gentrified neighborhoods in 
which Barack Obama played so active a role on behalf of the Pritzker and 
Crown families. So the Fed’s economists had enough good sense to be 
properly embarrassed by their unrealistic land valuations, and stopped 
breaking out corporate land value separately in their balance-sheet estimates 
since their 1994 report. This behavior of the Fed shows the degree to which 
seemingly empirical economic and financial data are still being subjected to 
ideological distortions lingering over from the 19th century’s tax reform 
debate seeking to tax land rather than labor and manmade capital investment. 

It is testimony to the ability of rentier interests — indeed, the FIRE sector 
acting in concert — to conceal the degree to which wealth is not earned by 
labor or enterprise as modern popular morality holds should be the case. 
The absurdity of the Fed’s low land-price statistic is shown by the avidity 
with which speculators search for companies with undervalued or “under-
mortgaged” land — sites that official statistics hold to be nearly worthless. 
The more reasonable procedure is that which inspired Mr. Ackman and other 
corporate raiders — to start with land prices and assign the residual value to 
buildings. If the Federal Reserve’s balance-sheet statistics were realistic, 
stock market raiders would not be able to make quick gains in the way that 
Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund tried to extract from them McDonald’s — “capital 
gains” that actually reflect the property’s growing site value that could be 
liquefied by mortgaging it. 
 
“Like a Plague of Locusts” – Stock Ownership without Responsibility
 
Fiction: The stock market sets share prices responsibly to reflect long-
term growth prospects.
Reality: Companies are valued in terms of their short-run liquidation 
value.
 
Making money financially is not the same thing as earning income by 
industrial investment. Providing easy tax-deductible credit for corporate 
raiders and hedge funds has turned high finance into a hit-and-run game by 
making a company’s breakup value more important than how much it can 
produce and earn over the longer term. It seems not to matter that companies 
are left highly indebted with little cushion against economic downturns. The 
bubble mentality views a liquidity cushion or unpledged net worth as a free 
asset not “making money.”
For many years corporate raiders have looked for companies that carry 
assets at less than their current market value. Such companies can be bought 
at a discount and their real estate, licensing rights or other assets sold off for a 
capital gain. The government has subsidized such takeovers by lowering 

taxes on capital gains below those on earning profits, wages and salaries. 
This encourages financial speculation and the indebting of corporate industry 
rather than new capital investment. 
Much of the problem could be cured by stopping the practice of permitting 
interest to be counted as a tax-deductible cost of doing business. This 
distortion encourages raiding and “value extraction” by loading companies 
down with debt. What determines a firm’s worth under today’s conditions is 
how much it — or an outside bidder — can borrow against its liquidation 
value. In today’s Orwellian financial vocabulary, “wealth creation” is based 
on asset stripping, not tangible capital formation. This prompted Franz 
Müntefering, former chairman of Germany’s Social Democratic Party, to tell 
his fellow politicians at a conference in April 2005: “Some financial investors 
don't waste any thoughts on the people whose jobs they destroy.” Hedge 
funds and buyout firms harmed the national interest by draining companies of 
their wealth and shrinking the economy’s employment prospects. “They 
remain anonymous, have no face, fall like a plague of locusts over our 
companies, devour everything, then fly on to the next one.”
Most money now is made not by making goods and services but by buying 
and selling assets, from real estate, stocks and bonds to entire companies, and 
using financial engineering to leverage this trading on credit. The financial 
sector describes wealth as increasing as long as asset prices rise. But the 
“wealth” in question consists of financial securities and claims, not the “real” 
production-and-consumption economy. It is created seemingly out of nothing 
— out of the financial system’s ability to create debt and attach it to 
properties. This engineers higher asset prices by using debt to pyramid one’s 
own minimal equity — freely created credit that has no cost of production.
Some companies are shunning the stock market altogether. When Koch 
Industries, for instance, reached an agreement to take Georgia Pacific private, 
the logic in avoiding the stock market was similar to that of Mr. Müntefering. 
As Georgia-Pacific’s chairman and chief executive A.D. ‘Pete’ Correll 
explained, “private ownership will allow the company to make investments 
that might well have been eschewed by public shareholders.” Whereas 
shareholder “activists” wanted the company to pay out its revenue instead of 
re-investing it, “Georgia-Pacific may now be able to put more money into its 
commodity building-supply businesses.”15

For hundreds of years, family firms have gone public to obtain capital 
needed to expand. But since 1980 this historical trend has been reversed. As 
ownership has diffused, it became divorced from day-to-day corporate 
management. Companies are retiring their stock and going private. They are 
using their earnings not to invest in expanding their scale of operations, but to 
buy up their own stock, either to support its market price (thus making it 
more expensive to potential raiders) or to retire it and leave the company the 
personal property of its new owner. Companies are stripping themselves 
down to retain only those divisions with the highest and shortest-term 
payouts. 
The prosecution of Frank Quattrone showed that Wall Street earnings 
estimates were as little concerned with reality as were the junk mortgage 
packages in the lead-up to 2008 or the happy-face estimates of Greek 
sovereign debt before 2011. These examples should suffice to controvert the 
assumption that market efficiency is assured by “full knowledge.”
 
Fiction: Bank loans finance productive capital investment, creating 
enough profit to enable borrowers to pay off their loans.
Reality: Banks extend most credit to buyers of property already in place, 
enabling corporate raiders and real estate speculators to pay interest as their 
loans inflate asset prices. 
 
This price rise enables debtors to pay interest charges by taking out larger 
loans. But as bonds have been issued more to finance corporate takeovers 
than new capital investment since the 1980s, the effect has been to shrink the 
industrial economy’s ability to carry the growing debt overhead.
Today’s debt-driven financial system is both inflationary and deflationary. 
It is inflationary in a novel way: Credit produces capital gains by supplying 
easy, increasingly low-interest financing for borrowers to spend on bidding 
up property and stock market prices. Companies forego tangible investment 
in order to increase their share prices by paying higher dividends or buying 
back their stock. The media welcomed this asset-price inflation as 
constituting a new form of wealth creation — as long as asset prices rather 

than wages or consumer prices are being inflated. But credit is debt, and debt 
needs to be paid — absorbing income that otherwise would be spent on goods 
and services. The result is debt deflation. 
The underlying problem, as Aristotle noted long ago, is that money as 
such is sterile. Brokers may advertise “Let your money work for you,” but 
money doesn’t really work. People work. Money seeks to obtain the surplus 
they produce. And when the creditor’s gain is the debtor’s loss, making 
money financially is a zero-sum game for the economy as a whole. “Making 
money from money” means using credit to leverage asset purchases in search 
of capital gains. The process has little linkage with increasing production or 
living standards. Labor may be worked more intensively to squeeze out 
enough revenue to carry the rising debt burden. But this is exploitation in a 
non-productive form. Employees are indebted more deeply, and a sense of 
desperation replaces the hoped-for leisure economy.
Part of finance capital’s problem is its high liquidity, seemingly a virtue as 
compared to fixed industrial capital. Hitherto staid institutions are turning 
their portfolios over at a dizzying rate as they jump like fleas on and off of 
quick zigzags in stock market values. The hope is simply to outperform the 
Dow Jones Industrial Average (and other fund managers) on a monthly basis. 
The long-term position of companies whose stocks are being traded so 
frenetically is a secondary consideration, because stocks are sold before the 
long run ever arrives. 
 
Financializing Industry Abroad
 
Financial parasitism is becoming worldwide as the trend toward neoliberal 
(that is, pro-financial) ideology makes it more difficult for nations to regulate 
their financial markets and protect their industry from debt. The Financial 
Times recently reported: 
 
Private equity groups operating in Europe are loading the companies they 
buy with record levels of debt, new data show. In particular, the so-called 
‘leveraged ratio‘ — or the ratio of debt to core earnings — has risen sharply, 

suggesting that some companies could struggle to repay debt if their 
performance deteriorated suddenly. … One measure of this trend is the ratio 
between a company’s debt and its core earnings — earnings before interest, 
tax, depreciation and amortization — seen in the debt markets. In March, 
companies raising finance that had a rating below investment grade had debt 
that was 5.73 times ebitda, according to S&P’s Leveraged Commentary Data. 
This is the highest figure since the leveraged loan market started to be tracked 
in Europe in the late 1990s.”16 
 
The phenomenon is global, not confined to the United States. The strategy 
of financialization is not only to appropriate the public domain via 
privatization, but to take companies traded on the stock exchange “private,” 
that is, for individuals to form hedge funds to raise the funding to buy them 
out on credit. The British retailer Debenhams, for instance, was bought in this 
way. The new owners sold off its stores for cash, which they paid out to their 
backers, and then agreed to lease them back. “The enfeebled company was 
then sold back to the stock market. … This is not pro- but anti-wealth-
creation. … private equity has been able to carry short-termism to new 
extremes. This is said to raise productivity and performance.” However, Will 
Hutton argued: “The chief reason British business remains at the bottom of 
the international league tables for innovation, research and development, and 
productivity growth is because of too much takeover and too much private 
equity. Innovation lowers short-term profits.”17 This financial devouring of 
wealth is achieved by the ability of banking interests to lobby for a perverse 
set of tax incentives “that favour takeover [and] need to be removed.” But 
both the Conservatives and Labour Parties have accepted the logic that debt-
leveraged asset-price inflation is “wealth creation.”
Similar global pressure is at work in Japan. “Growing corporate terror of 
takeover is spurring companies to use excess cash to pay higher dividends. 
This cuts cash reserves, making companies less attractive as targets. It also 
pleases existing shareholders,” increasingly foreigners.18 But these payouts 
are made by sacrificing long-run investment.
 
Summary

 
Fiction: Productivity gains lower production prices over time.
Reality: Interest charges on debt pyramiding raise the cost of doing 
business by so much as to offset productivity gains, diverting revenue away 
from new investment and consumption.
 
The nation’s highest-paid individuals work on Wall Street, where they 
devote an enormous amount of effort and even innovation to make money 
financially. Unfortunately, they are part of a system that has become 
dysfunctional for the economy at large. Financial gain seeking has been 
decoupled from long-term capital investment, and now undercuts it by being 
predatory.
Textbook formulae describing stock market behavior neglect the 
associated fiscal distortions that lead financial managers to load industry 
down with debt, and treat as “exogenous” the behavior of lobbyists backing 
politicians committed to shifting the tax burden onto labor and industry. 
There is little hint of how self-defeating the recent structural changes in the 
economy’s financial and tax policies have been in polarizing property and 
wealth distribution and the incidence of debt.
Profits and capital gains are described as resulting from farsighted 
investors taking risks. But rather than being far seeing, the financial time 
frame is short-term. Speculators have survived by shifting the risk onto 
society (“taxpayers”), most notoriously in the post-2008 bailouts. As 
Cadbury-Schweppes chairman John Sunderland recently decried the situation 
in a speech to Britain’s Investor Relations Society: “The pressure on the sell 
side has, in my view, made analysts very focused on the near-term … 
research tends to be more sensational, and on roadshows there is increasing 
pressure to put us in front of hedge funds rather than traditional long 
funds.”19
By 2006, hedge funds were accounting for nearly half the trading flows on 
the London and New York stock exchanges, although they only owned a 
small percentage of equity in these two markets. Their aggressive trading has 
played a major role in subordinating the industrial economy to financial 

management. “Mark Goyder, who runs the UK-based think tank 
‘Tomorrow’s Company,’ believes that … where ‘shareholder value’ may 
once have referred to the long-term creation of wealth, today’s short-term 
financial investor demands action that can influence the share price even on a 
daily basis. Add in the misguided belief, known as ‘agency theory,’ that 
management’s remuneration has to be closely tied to share prices, and you 
have a recipe for very short-term thinking.”20
Misguided beliefs are not accidental. The natural tendency is to see 
matters realistically. Wrong-headed economics requires a blizzard of rhetoric 
to distract attention from the extractive character of today’s financial markets. 
Euphemisms replace functional description, and the financial sector’s first 
task is to deny in principle the idea of an economic free lunch. All debt is 
deemed “productive,” that is, financing investment in the means to pay it off 
with the stipulated interest charge. Every sector of the economy is assumed to 
help every other sector grow, so that all income is earned productively as 
finance helps industry. The “proof” is simply to correlate the growth of rates 
of finance and the industrial sector. But one could just as well correlate these 
two time series with global warming, rising costs for health insurance or any 
other variable. The idea of causality has been left behind by today’s post-
modern mathematical fads.
This ideological set of blinders (“guidelines”) has inspired academics 
committed to rationalizing the status quo to turn the word “risk” into a 
euphemism for almost any kind of free lunch. For investment bankers and 
corporate raiders, the main risk is that regulators may close the loopholes that 
make speculative “risk-taking” un-risky, while shifting the actual risk onto 
industrial companies and their employees — whose available revenue is 
shrunk by rising charges for debt service — and ultimately onto taxpayers via 
central bank and Treasury bailouts.
Financial lobbyists treat our financial situation and increasingly regressive 
tax structure as being natural and hence inevitable — and therefore not 
subject to change by earthly reformers. Their public-relations campaign 
promotes the idea that unregulated (and un-taxed) financial markets are all 
for the best, as if driven by an Invisible Hand. And they are not referring to 
the invisible hand of insider dealing (e.g., that Eliot Spitzer’s prosecutions 
revealed). 

The preceding pages have described how the first myth in this economic 
fiction story is that the stock market raises money to provide companies with 
equity capital to build factories and employ more people. The reality is that 
investment bankers and speculators obtain most of the price established by 
the end of the first day’s trading of new public offerings. For companies 
already established, the stock market has become a vehicle for raiders to buy 
out stockholders and burden companies with debt, forcing companies to 
spend their earnings on buying their own stock to support its price. 
The traditional industrial objective of corporate officers was to build up 
their company’s net worth — the value of its plant and equipment, 
inventories, real estate and other investments over and above its debts. But 
since the 1980s, stock-market wealth creation has gone together with debt 
pyramiding. As long as financial managers find it easier to make money by 
stripping assets than by undertaking new direct investment, the debt burden 
will make economies more fragile. Only asset-price inflation kept the market 
value of assets high enough to cover the rising volume of corporate debt 
mounting up more rapidly than the value of stocks, the book value of assets 
or sales over the past decade. 
The question is, how long can this continue? Which expansion path 
ultimately will end up higher: that of debt, or that of the assets bought on 
credit? 
The answer from every historical epoch is that financial dynamics end up 
more powerful. And by deterring new capital formation, they often work in 
the opposite direction from technology. The resulting debt crisis disproves 
the assumption that people — or entire economies — recognize their self-
interest. Yet this is the axiom on which free-market economics is based.
As noted earlier, the simplest cure would be to remove the tax-
deductibility of interest charges. It is one thing for investors to buy real 
estate, stocks, bonds or other assets and make a gain; it is another thing to 
borrow freshly-created credit to do this, subsidized by taxpayers. (The 
subsidy ends up being used to pay the banks that create the credit.) As an 
Australian critic James Cumes recently observed: “In 1997, non-financial 
[U.S.] corporations paid $218.1 billion in dividends from $337.7 billion in 
after-tax profits. In 2002, they paid dividends of $285.8 billion out of sharply 

lower profits of $197.0 billion. In other words, they financed a substantial 
and growing part of their dividends by drawing on their cash reserves or 
borrowing. In past, more normal times, the distribution was about half and 
half — half after-tax profits went to dividends, half were undistributed. … 
Dividend payments have been rising to an all-time high as a share of national 
income, while profits, by the same measure, have fallen to an all-time low. 
Excessive and what would once have been regarded as highly imprudent 
dividend payments are now used to prop up overvalued stock prices.”21 
 
Fiction: Income that is un-taxed will be invested productively to help the 
economy grow.
Reality: Income that is un-taxed will be pledged to pay more interest to 
banks and bondholders — and this bank credit will bid up the price of the real 
estate and corporate revenue that is being untaxed.
 
All this has profound implications for tax policy. Since the U.S. income 
tax was first enacted on the eve of World War I — with capital gains being 
taxed at the same rate as other income — business has waged a constant 
struggle to get un-taxed, by shifting the burden onto labor and consumers. 
The argument is that lower taxes will leave more income to be reinvested, to 
earn more profits by hiring more labor to produce more goods and services to 
raise living standards.
The world now has learned that this is nonsense. The reality is that the real 
estate motto, “Rent is for paying interest,” has become the corporate motto as 
well: “Corporate earnings are for paying creditors,” in exchange for loans to 
buy companies or at least to bid up their share prices. The tradeoff is not over 
whether companies either will pay taxes or invest. It is between companies 
paying taxes to the government or interest to their banks and bondholders. 
Most business tax reductions have ended up being paid as debt service, 
thereby expanding the debt burden that business must carry, instead of 
reducing corporate costs and making industry more competitive. The effect is 
to divert more credit and savings to the financial sector, increasing the debt 
that financially leveraged companies must pay, and the resulting tax shift that 
the economy’s labor and consumers must pick up.

What makes the downsizing of employment by today’s financial managers 
so ironic is the avid support by pension funds as well as by mutual-fund small 
investors for takeovers, share buybacks and the general indebting of industry. 
Fund managers ostensibly representing the interest of retirees and labor have 
bought into the junk-economics myth that it pays to maximize the short-term 
performance of their stock portfolio, without regard for how this may impair 
long-term industrial investment and employment. Fund managers are told 
that to forego the drive for capital gains is a failure to use the financial 
portfolio to its “best” use. There has been almost no European-style attempt 
to use employee or consumer stock ownership to steer corporate policy in the 
interests of the labor force on whose behalf these stocks and bonds are held. 
“In the beginning” and throughout all antiquity, industrial capital was self-
financed. There was no productive lending to invest in workshops or other 
means of production, but only to finance trade in goods already produced. In 
the Bronze Age (before 1200 BC) most manmade capital was owned by the 
large economic institutions of the epoch: the temples and palaces of the 
ancient Near East. In classical Greece and Rome the civil governments or 
temples owned the mines, mints and basic infrastructure, and this continued 
to be the case up through the Renaissance. There was no public debt or debts 
owed by the temples or to the large estates on which the division of labor 
took place. Land as well as workshops and high-cost investments were 
owned outright. These assets might be leased out to private managers, but 
remained in the public domain — and debt-free.
The most productive banking was to finance foreign trade, as well as 
transferring funds geographically. Consumer usury was universally 
denounced, but lending to kings — mainly for war-making — legitimized 
domestic money lending. Still, finance refrained from participating in or 
funding the major innovations of the Industrial Revolution. James Watt could 
not get bank credit, nor could Henry Ford. The major innovators borrowed 
against their real estate, and from their families and friends for start-up 
capital. 
Public investment in canals and other basic infrastructure was self-
financed. At a local level, this was done largely by taxing property owners. 
Only after these capital investments became going concerns would banks be 

willing to lend against their property, sales and income stream already in 
place, not to create new means of production.
Almost without economic theorists or even historians noticing, the basic 
form of competition today is no longer primarily among industrial 
entrepreneurs to lower prices and undersell their competitors, as Joseph 
Schumpeter described “creative destruction” via technological advance. The 
competition today is among financial raiders to acquire industrial companies 
and turn their assets into debts, to be paid out to the raiders and the banks and 
bondholders who back them. 
The drive for lower costs today is not one of technological advances in 
productivity as was expected a century ago. It is a drive to lower costs by 
lower wages, lower taxes — and lower financing costs under a distorted tax 
system by replacing “high cost” (but low break-even) equity capital with 
ostensibly “low-cost” tax-deductible debt financing that raises break-even 
costs.
Every new economic system emerges from its predecessors. Finance 
capitalism emerged from the Industrial Revolution’s industrial capitalism. 
But finance capital almost always has been antithetical to industrial capital 
formation, as well as to the much larger capital investment by the public 
sector in creating basic infrastructure such as roads and other transportation, 
ports and air fields, water and sewer systems, public utilities. These are being 
privatized and financialized today, and formerly public services provided at 
cost or freely are being replaced by tollbooths.
This is what has been happening to industrial firms taken over by financial 
managers since the 1980s. Instead of productive tangible capital investment 
in the means of production, finance capital produces debt to attach to existing 
assets in the public and private sector alike. It used part of the proceeds to 
buy control of government, above all by purchasing control of the electoral 
process and the mass media. The result was not only direct financial 
parasitism on the industrial economy, but cultural and intellectual parasitism 
to depict all this as being progressive and even part of natural evolution 
toward globalization — financial-style.
Tax favoritism for debt service treats even takeover debts as an inherent 
and normal cost of doing business. Yet the resulting financial dynamic is de-

industrializing the United States, Britain and other economies that are “going 
financial.” Returns are paid to bond and stock holders rather than being 
recycled into tangible capital formation. These payments are “crowding out” 
the commitments that these companies earlier took to defer labor’s wages by 
paying pensions later on. 
Labor leaders negotiated lower wages in exchange for future retirement 
payments. In exchange for reduced wage demands, employers agreed to set 
aside a portion of their higher cash flow and invest it in a pension fund, 
thereby giving workers a stake in their employers. So labor acted with 
foresight, preferring to take its return later in life. But financial lobbyists now 
assert that corporations are being made uncompetitive and even forced into 
bankruptcy by labor demands for unpayable high-cost pensions and health 
care. 
The employers thus are breaking their word — or more to the point, new 
financial managers have taken over and claim that these promises made by 
past executives must be downsized. Raiders and other managers are paying 
out pension fund assets to backers, along with a rising share of profits and 
cash flow. The effect is to leave companies sufficiently broke that their 
managers claim that a force majeur emergency prevents them from paying. 
Labor unions are given the choice either to scale down their claims or have 
the company declare bankruptcy.
The effect of debt leveraging collateralizing all available assets is to leave 
companies in a high-cost position. Even healthy corporations have felt 
obliged to take on debt as a “poison pill” to deter financial raiders from 
taking them over and borrowing against their assets to pay themselves, 
leaving debt-ridden carcasses in their wake. Bankruptcy is a means of wiping 
out financial obligations to employees in order to pay large institutional 
creditors — while shifting their pension-fund and healthcare obligations onto 
the government pension-insurance agency.
The hypocrisy of the financial takeover movement is exemplified by New 
York (that is, Wall Street) Sen. Chuck Schumer. His Orwellian-titled 
Shareholder Bill of Rights Act of 2009 aimed ostensibly “to prioritize the 
long-term health of firms and their shareholders” as if these aims were 
identical. But as a group of corporate lawyers observed, the specific 

provisions of the proposed act would give shareholders the ability to carve up 
companies with debt, not heal them:
Excessive stockholder power is precisely what caused the short-term 
fixation that led to the current financial crisis. As stockholder power 
increased over the last twenty years, our stock markets also became 
increasingly institutionalized. The real investors are mostly professional 
money managers who are focused on the short term.
It is these shareholders who pushed companies to generate returns at levels 
that were not sustainable. They also made sure high returns were tied to 
management compensation. The pressure to produce unrealistic profit fueled 
increased risk-taking. And as the government relaxed checks on excessive 
risk-taking (or, at a minimum, didn’t respond with increased prudential 
regulation), stockholder demands for ever higher returns grew still further. It 
was a vicious cycle...
 
Institutions should discontinue the practice of compensating fund 
managers based on quarterly performance. And corporations should follow 
the lead of General Electric by discontinuing the practice of issuing quarterly 
earnings guidance.22
 
The problem is that bank credit has played an increasingly intrusive rather 
than productive role in recent centuries. To cap matters, it has become 
outright parasitic in organizing today’s leveraged buyouts (LBOs), creating 
computerized credit default swaps, arranging tax-avoidance money 
laundering, and lobbying for tax subsidy for debt financing — to be paid by 
imposing austerity on the economy at large. At the end of this road lies 
bankruptcy for companies, wipe-out of their pension plans (beyond the ability 
of the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corp. to pick up the pieces, given its 
reticence to levy risk premiums proportional to risk), and finally bank 
insolvency as debt deflation shrinks the economy and forces borrowers to 
default. At that point the banks demand public bailouts at taxpayer expense, 
shifting bad private-sector debts onto the public balance sheet. So entire 
economies are crippled even more. The bankers’ last act is to take what 
bailout money they can and run. This is what they did in QE II in summer 

2011, reportedly sending the entire $800 billion in new Federal Reserve 
credit abroad in foreign-currency interest rate arbitrage.
The “internal contradiction” in financialization is that while it “extracts 
value” from companies for the raiders, the debt that it creates raises the 
break-even cost of production. So debt-leveraging an industrial company has 
a similar effect to taxing it more, or raising wage levels: unless it has 
monopoly power, it is priced out of the market.
There is only one way left to continue: to globalize the financialization 
process, spreading the tactic to other countries so that everyone’s cost of 
production rises as industrial firms across the world are loaded down with 
debt to enrich a financial overclass. This is what is occurring today. But it is a 
dangerous tactic. Other countries may resist. And by promoting equity rather 
than debt financing, these economies will out-compete the more debt-ridden, 
financialized economies. Without a mutual financial suicide pact at this point, 
the tendency toward global free trade will be blocked.
 
PULL QUOTES
 
[PULL QUOTE 09-01]
But credit is debt, and debt needs to be paid — absorbing income that 
otherwise would be spent on goods and services. The result is debt deflation. 
— Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 09-02]
Today’s debt-driven financial system is both inflationary and deflationary. It 
is inflationary in a novel way: Credit produces capital gains by supplying 
easy, increasingly low-interest financing for borrowers to spend on bidding 
up property and stock market prices. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 09-03]
The internal contradiction in financialization is that while it extracts “value” 

from companies for the raiders, the debt that this creates raises the break-even 
cost of production. So debt-leveraging an industrial company has a similar 
effect to taxing it more, or raising wage levels: unless it has monopoly power, 
it is priced out of the market. — Michael Hudson
1 “Cash-Rich Firms Urged to Spend,” Wall Street Journal, November 21, 2005. The article quotes 
hedge-fund manager Jeff Matthews as noting that “investors’ demands for stock buybacks and the like 
are prompting some companies to do the wrong thing. . . . hedge-fund managers like himself are paid 
based on their portfolios’ annual performance. So they tend to be short-sighted when they see a 
company with lots of cash and a languishing share price. ‘I don’t think it has as much to do with what’s 
in the long-term interest of the company as in the long-term interest of the hedge funds,’ he says.”
2 “Big Companies Put Record Sums Into Buybacks. Repurchases Aim to Bolster Shares but They Also 
Signal Hesitancy to Invest in Growth,” The Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2006. Cisco Systems 
“approved the repurchase of an additional $5 billion of its own stock, on top of a $35 billion repurchase 
plan it announced five years ago. The week before, Tribune Co. announced a $2 billion buyback, to be 
financed by debt, in a decision that sparked controversy on the company’s board, with representatives 
of the Chandler family, one of the company’s biggest shareholders, objecting to the massive outlay.”
3 For the $22 billion Nabisco takeover as the high point of excess from the 1980s see Bryan Burrough 
and John Hellyar, Barbarians at the Gate (1990). Drexel-Burnham’s escapades and the prosecution that 
bankrupted Drexel and sent Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky to jail insider dealing are highlighted in 
Connie Bruck’s The Predator’s Ball (1988).
4 American Lawyer, May 1986.
5 “Raiders rolling back the years,” Financial Times, August 16, 2006.
6 Wall Street Journal, December 12, 1987.
7 John Gapper, “Google’s auction exposes intermediaries’ phoney war,” Financial Times, May 5, 2004.
8 “Excerpts from ‘Owner’s Manual’ Included With Offering,” The New York Times, April 30, 2004.
9 “Google Says To Investors: Don’t Think of Flipping,” and “An Egalitarian Auction? Bankers Are 
Not Amused,” The New York Times, April 30, 2004. See also Frank Norris, “Google May Have Pre-
empted Regulators on Public Offerings,” The New York Times, May 4, 2004.

10 John Gapper, “Hedge fund agitators deserve to be heard,” Financial Times, November 17, 2005.
11 “Cash-Rich Firms Urged to Spend,” Wall Street Journal, November 21, 2005.
12 “Investor urges McDonald’s to sell off restaurants,” Financial Times, November 14, 2005.
13 Alan Murray, “Attack on McDonald’s Heralds a New Order,” Wall Street Journal, November 23, 
2005.
14 “Icahn Plan For a Split Gets a Push,” The New York Times, February 8, 2006.
15 “Koch Industries Agrees to Buy Georgia-Pacific,” The Wall Street Journal, November 14, 2005.
16 Gillian Tett, Louisa Mitchell and Peter Smith, “Private equity acquisitions loaded with debt,” 
Financial Times: May 25, 2006. Ebitda is an acronym for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation 
and amortization.
17 Will Hutton, “Private equity is casting a plutocratic shadow over British business,” The Guardian, 
February 23, 2007.
18 “Japanese payout hunters face gamble on cultural change,” Financial Times, March 30, 2006.
19 Stefan Stern, “The short-term shareholders changing the face of capitalism,” Financial Times, 
March 28, 2006.
20 Ibid.
21 Note on Gang8 e-mail list, June 2006.
22 Martin Lipton, Jay W. Lorsch and Theodore N. Mirvis, “Schumer’s Shareholder Bill Misses the 
Mark,” Wall Street Journal, May 12, 2009.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 9
_____________

*****
10. Privatizing Social Security to Rescue 
Wall Street
 
From the time he took office in 2001, a major economic initiative of 
George W. Bush was to privatize Social Security, formerly the “third rail” of 
American politics. This was a difficult sell after the dot.com bubble crashed, 
demonstrating that the stock market could plunge as well as soar — and also 
showing that Wall Street’s money managers were not society’s most honest 
citizens. But egged on by Alan Greenspan at the Federal Reserve and Wall 
Street campaign contributors, the new president’s drive pushed toward a peak 
in 2005. 
Given that the maneuver was both stupid and unnecessary, one must ask 
why the pretense over the past decade that Social Security is a clear and 
present danger. Indeed,why has President Obama picked up his predecessor’s 
drive to steer FICA wage withholding into the stock and bond market with 
even more urgency? Why is it a problem at all, given that the program’s 
alleged deficiencies, if there are any, will not manifest themselves until at 
least 2018. This is not quite the same as worrying about the sun’s eventual 
collapse into a black hole, but for most politicians a problem that lies thirteen 
years in the future is nearly the same thing. Clearly all is not what it seems. 
Bush himself offered two reasons for his radical boldness. The first — that 
Social Security is “in crisis” — is easily dismissed. Government actuaries, 
backed by economists from across the political spectrum, insist there is no 
funding problem. The Social Security Administration will take in more 

money than it pays out for the next thirteen years (as of 2005, when this 
article was first published). It has built up a reserve of $1.8 trillion in interest-
bearing Treasury bonds for the years after that; and any later shortfall can be 
covered easily by even a partial rollback of the Bush tax cuts for the rich. 
Bush’s second argument sounded more promising. If the American people 
would follow his plan, he said, they too could grow rich.1
The way the system works now, the government withholds 13.2% of your 
paycheck, up to $120,000 in annual income. In return, it promises to provide 
a monthly payment — a pension — from the time subscribers turn sixty-two 
until the time they die. The Bush and Obama administrations’ alternative 
remains somewhat nebulous, but what is clear in all the variations presented 
thus far, employees and employers will be able to put some of the wage 
withholding into the stock market, in the form of “personal savings 
accounts.” 
 
The Only Way for the Stock Market to Grow Is to Steer More Pension 
Savings into It 
 
Vice President Dick Cheney described the benefits of these personal 
savings accounts in January. His example was a young woman who put away 
$1,000 every year for forty years. The Social Security Administration 
currently puts her money into Treasury bills, which at present return about 
2%, so in forty years that investment would have returned about $61,000. Not 
too bad. “But if she invested the money in the stock market,” Cheney said, 
“earning even its lowest historical rate of return, she would earn more than 
double that amount — $160,000. If the individual earned the average 
historical stock market rate of return, she would have more than $225,000 — 
or nearly four times the amount to be expected from Social Security.”2 
That’s a lot of math. Cheney’s main point was that an upbeat assessment 
of the stock market — about 7.5% annually over forty years, by his reckoning 
— would easily exceed the 2% offered by Treasury bills. There is no arguing 
that $225,000 is more than $61,000. 
On the other hand, it is not as if you get a lump sum from the Social 

Security Administration when you retire. The woman Cheney cited could 
have ended up taking in much more than $61,000 if she lived long enough, 
but the average annual payment to retirees today is about $11,000. Or she 
could die on her sixty-second birthday. Like any other investment — or any 
other form of insurance, for that matter — Social Security is somewhat of a 
gamble. But then so is the stock market. By Cheney’s estimation, however, 
today’s stock market is a much better bet. “Over time,” he concluded, “the 
securities markets are the best, safest way to build substantial personal 
savings.” 
That is the argument, anyway. The stock market is the main chance in 
America, and Bush and Obama want to let all of us in on the action. The one 
sure mark of a con, though, is the promise of free money. In fact, the only 
way the stock market is going to grow is if we the people put a lot more of 
our money into it. What Bush and Obama seek to manufacture is a new stock 
market boom — or, more accurately, a bubble — bankrolled by the last safe 
pile of cash in America today. Their plan is a Ponzi scheme, in which Social 
Security itself is playing the role of the last sucker to join the game before it 
goes the way of the real estate bubble. 
Retirement savings are by far the most important source of money on Wall 
Street. The Federal Reserve Board reports that private and public retirement 
accounts, not including Social Security, had assets of $10 trillion at the end of 
2003. Nearly half of that, $4.7 trillion, was held in stocks. By way of 
comparison, the total value of all domestic stocks listed on NASDAQ, the 
American Stock Exchange, and the New York Stock Exchange at the end of 
2003 was about $14.2 trillion. 
In the past, few retirement dollars found their way to Wall Street. IRAs 
and 401(k)s had yet to be invented, and few companies offered private 
pension plans of any kind. In 1950, GeneralMotors — then, as now, among 
the largest employers on earth — began to change that with a new form of 
compensation. The company would withhold money from paychecks, much 
like the Social Security Administration was doing, and add money of its own 
to build up a reserve to pay retirees many decades into the future. Generally 
called a “defined benefit” plan, the scheme guaranteed retirees a specific 
(defined) monthly payment until they died. 

Other giants of American industry soon followed, and the funds grew 
quickly. In most of them, at least half the money was put into the stock 
market. Workers thus would gain, at least in theory, a stake in the prosperity 
of their company, building loyalty to management while also providing 
companies with a captive source of credit — their own workforce. All of that 
new cash contributed to the bull market of the 1950s. 
 
Companies Have Not Put Away Enough Money to Pay Retirees What They 
Are Owed 
 
Calling this process “pension-fund socialism,” management philosopher 
Peter Drucker hailed it as the most positive social development of the 
twentieth century, because it would at last merge the interests of labor and 
capital. Louis O.Kelso and Mortimer J.Adler wrote a book called The 
Capitalist Manifesto announcing that a new epoch of harmony between 
workers and owners was at hand, because soon all workers would be owners 
of Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs), which Drucker warned could 
be wiped out as almost half were loaned to their employer companies that 
went bankrupt. The most notorious recent example is the Chicago Tribune’s 
ESOP, which Sam Zell used to pay the creditors who backed his leveraged 
buyout of the company, wiping out employee savings in 2011. 
From the outset, many companies used retirement reserves to buy their 
own stocks, bidding up their share price and allowing them to take over other 
firms on favorable terms, especially as mergers and acquisitions gained 
momentum in the 1960s. The problem was that when companies went 
bankrupt — especially small firms — the collapse also wiped out the pension 
funds invested in those companies. Employees of such companies found 
themselves not only out of work but stripped of the money they thought was 
being saved up for their retirement. 
Congress moved to limit such behavior by obliging corporate pension 
funds to be run by arm’s length trustees, although employees were still 
permitted (and often encouraged) to keep their pensions in the stock of their 
employers. To further protect workers, Congress created the Pension Benefit 
Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) in 1974. All corporate pension plans were 

required to buy federal insurance, through the PBGC, to protect workers in 
the event of a failed investment scheme or corporate bankruptcy. The plans 
were still prone to risk, but at least the pensions would be backed by the 
government and workers could feel secure about their retirement.3 
Most companies now offer their employees a broad array of mutual funds 
instead of just their own stock. In itself this is good commonsense investing 
practice, and it also protects fund managers from charges of scheming. The 
other result of this practice is that workers’ fortunes are now tied not just to 
their own companies but to the market as a whole. 
Which is where and how we come to both the problem and the scam. 
While fears regarding the solvency of Social Security are unwarranted, many 
corporate pension plans — the ones that have been so important in 
bankrolling the stock market rise of the past few decades — are themselves 
threatening to go bust, taking their parent companies down with them. The 
financial rot already has begun to seep into the airline and steel industries, 
and the auto sector may be next. 
General Motors reported in 2005 that its pension obligations added $675 
to the cost of every vehicle it produced. The company had to be rescued after 
trying to shift its debts to employees at its auto parts plants by spinning them 
off into a separate company, Delphi, that duly went bust. In 2009 the PBGC 
took over Delphi’s pension plan at a cost of $6.2 billion rather than taking the 
shortfall from its parent, GM. This bailout pushed the PBGC some $33.5 
billion into deficit in 2009, raising the specter of it itself needing a taxpayer 
bailout to meet its longterm pension guarantees. 
The shortfalls were not just a matter of bad luck. For quite a few years 
now, companies simply haven’t been putting away enough money to pay 
retirees what they are owed. The PBGC estimates that the underfunding of 
traditional defined-benefit plans, for instance, deepened by $100 billion in 
2004, to a total of $450 billion. The problem was created by fund managers 
and CFOs who believed — or at least pretended to believe — that pension 
reserves could grow at fantastic rates of return forever. Milliman USA, a 
benefits consulting firm, reports on the assumed rates of return on pension 
investments at the hundred largest firms in America. How high did these 
companies bet? In 2000 and 2001, the median projected rate of return was 

9.5%. In 2002 it was 9.25%. And in 2003 it was 8.55%. It has remained at an 
unrealistic 8% fantasy level for the past few years, as of 2011. 
 
The Choice between Living up to Their Pension Promises or Reporting 
Higher Earnings 
 
These are wildly optimistic projections, even by Dick Cheney’s standards. 
Already in 2004 the Financial Times noted that they conflict not only with 
present reality but with warnings from such mainstream investment experts 
as Peter Bernstein, Jeremy Siegel and Jeremy Grantham that “we have 
entered a low return environment” and that as a result many investors are 
expecting longterm returns closer to 7% or 5%. By 2011 there was question 
as to whether much return could be made at all! Even the rates being forecast 
seem overly exuberant, given that the top hundred corporate pension funds 
earned an average annual investment return of just 1.3% between the end of 
1999 and the end of 2003.4 And hedge funds have been going out of business 
at an alarming rate. 
At the beginning of 2001, IBM proposed that it would earn $6.3 billion on 
pension-fund assets of $61 billion — about 10%. This was an astonishing 
demonstration of confidence given that IBM had earned only $1.2 billion on 
those assets the previous year. IBM actually went on to lose $4 billion in 
2001. Barely daunted, the company’s managers predicted a 9.5% return in 
2002. They lost another $7 billion. In 2003 they predicted a return of $6 
billion, and — as the market began to recover — they at last beat their 
prediction, by $4.4 billion. The result of this “recovery” is that IBM’s 
pension-fund assets have plummeted by more than $1 billion after George W. 
Bush took office. Nonetheless, corporate fund managers across America 
remained optimistic even as the real estate bubble crashed the stock market in 
2008–09. 
Such errors in judgment are seldom accidental. In pretending that their 
funds could generate high returns, managers sought a real — albeit short-
term — advantage. Fiction paid. The faster companies projected their funds 
to grow, the less they had to set aside to pay their retirees. The resulting 
lower set-asides allowed them to report higher earnings, thereby driving up 

the price of the company’s own stock to “create shareholder value.” Faced 
with a choice between living up to their pension promises or reporting higher 
net earnings, companies simply decided not to live up to their employee 
agreements. Plans with more realistic projected rates were deemed 
“overfunded” and emptied out. 
Such practice is not one that can be sustained for forty years. It is a Ponzi 
scheme, in which present profits are paid for by the promise of future stock 
market gains. At some point retirees are going to want the money they are 
owed. The last few years have seen the results of these broken promises in 
the form of lawsuits, bankruptcy, and ultimately retirees being forced to live 
on far less than they were promised. In the end it is the PBGC that pays when 
the plans go bust. Here, however, the problem deepens considerably, because 
picking up the total bill for the corporate sector’s underfunding would 
bankrupt the PBGC. 
Last November it reported that although it had “operated for several years 
with virtually no claims,” the end of the stock market boom has given way to 
“a period of record-breaking claims.” As recently as 2001, the PBGC had a 
surplus of $8 billion, but a series of bankruptcy cases pushed it $23 billion 
into deficit by 2004, a year in which it took in only $1.5 billion in premiums. 
The PBGC needed more than fifteen years just to make up that deficit, with 
new claims arriving all the while. It proposed that companies follow more 
realistic accounting rules and pay premiums that reflect the true risks of their 
underfunding. It also asked for stricter limits on the ability of companies to 
escape their pension debts by declaring bankruptcy.5 
 
Something Has to Give: Either the Hopes of Retirees or Those of the Stock 
Market 
 
Without such changes the PBGC will be forced into bankruptcy and the 
government will have to bail it out. That could cost as much as $95 billion, 
according to the Congressional Research Service. At that point only today’s 
profits would remain private. The losses will be fully socialized.6 
Barring some sudden influx of capital, something has to give — either the 

hopes of retirees or the hopes of the stock market. Unfortunately, this is a 
zero-sum game in which many Americans are on both sides at once. Higher 
pension set-asides will diminish corporate earnings. Lower earnings will lead 
to dividend cuts and job losses. Low dividends and high employment will 
decrease the demand for stocks — leading to further declines in the ability of 
pension funds to pay retirees, with more defaults all around. Workers, 
retirees, investors and taxpayers thus find themselves yoked to the fortunes of 
the financial managers who created this fictitious economy. 
This is not the happy pension-fund socialism that Peter Drucker had in 
mind, in which worker-owners would share risks and rewards alike as they 
created the goods and services demanded by a thriving marketplace. What 
actually has happened is that companies have made a great effort not merely 
to share the risk, but to offload it onto the backs of their employees, the 
government, and taxpayers in general. 
This phenomenon of risk rolling downward can be seen most clearly in the 
move by many companies from defined-benefit programs — in which 
employees are guaranteed a specific retirement payment, based on their 
salary history — to “defined-contribution plans,” in which workers know 
nothing else except how much is being deducted from their paychecks. The 
payout rate is decided by how well the stock market performs. This shifts the 
risk onto employees, while freeing up more revenue for their employers and 
generating rich commissions for money managers. The risk flows down the 
economic scale while the cash flows up. No wonder the economy is 
polarizing between the top 1% and the bottom 99%! 
Given the widespread problems confronting pensions outside the embrace 
of the federal government, the past decade would seem an odd time for the 
administration to campaign to privatize Social Security. Why would anyone 
want to invest America’s last line of pension defense in so perilous a market? 
Are Bush, Obama and their Wall Street-nominated advisers and lobbyists 
unaware of the odds? 
Probably not. So they must have a particular aim in mind — a new money 
grab. Presumably they believe that some kind of market recovery is needed to 
rescue not only the PBGC  but also the pension funds, stock market, and for 
that matter the political fortunes of the ruling party — that what is needed, in 

fact, was a Bush boom (which collapsed in 2008) and prospectively an 
Obama boom. This would allow the United States to “grow our way out of 
trouble,” as we have done so many times before. 
But where will the funds come from to bid up stock prices? The national 
savings rate is nearly zero, because most personal discretionary income — 
like that of most companies — is absorbed in paying debt service. Previously 
the Fed could have flooded the capital markets with credit to lower interest 
rates and thereby spur a bond and stock market bubble. But interest rates are 
at their lowest since the 1950s. They can go no lower.7 
There is only one other place to turn. The new flow of funds into the stock 
market will have to come from labor itself, just as it did back in the 1950s. 
Social Security is the greatest plum, so large as to virtually guarantee a boom. 
 
History’s Most Famous Bubbles Have All Been Sponsored by Governments 
 
Talk of bubbles has become popular in recent years, but most discussions 
miss the key point. Although optimism is inherent in the human spirit, it 
rarely effloresces into the kind of frenzy necessary to float a bubble without 
help from the government. In fact, many of history’s most famous bubbles 
have been sponsored by governments in order to get out of debt. Britain, in 
1711, persuaded bondholders to swap their bonds for stocks in the South Sea 
Company, which was expected to get rich off the growth industry of its day, 
the African slave trade. By the time the South Sea bubble collapsed, the 
government had indeed paid off its war debt — and speculators were left 
holding worthless “growth sector” stocks. In 1716, John Law organized 
France’s Mississippi bubble along the same lines, retiring France’s public 
debt by selling shares to create slave-stocked plantations in the Louisiana 
territories. It worked, for a while. 
The U.S. government is now attempting to run the same kind of scam. 
First Bush and then Obama — or at least their Wall Street campaign backers 
— would like to persuade Social Security claimants to exchange the security 
of U.S. Treasury bonds for a chance to buy growth stocks on which a much 
higher return is hoped for. No modern blue-sky venture comparable to the 

South Sea or Mississippi companies is needed. The stock market itself has 
become a bubble, borne aloft from the burden of generating actual goods and 
services by a constant flow of new retirement dollars. 
There is no denying that channeling trillions of Social Security dollars into 
the stock market would produce short term gains. But once this money is 
spent, the markets are likely to retreat. That is what happens after a financial 
bubble. Then we will be right back where we are today, only much the poorer 
and with no guaranteed pension system for elderly Americans — who will, of 
course, need guaranteed pensions more than ever as they watch their stock 
holdings continue to shed value. Indeed, many other countries are just now 
recovering from their own dismal experiences with what Augusto Pinochet 
and Margaret Thatcher called “labor capitalism” and Bush calls, with no 
apparent irony, an “ownership society.”8 President Obama simply calls it 
rescuing the economy from a fictitious revenue shortfall created by his 
retention of the Bush tax cuts for his major campaign contributors. 
In the 1930s, Keynes urged governments to run budget deficits in order to 
increase the economy’s spending power on goods and services. His point of 
reference was the “real economy” — the economy of production and 
consumption, investment in capital and in the labor to operate that capital. 
Whereas he spoke of governments priming the pump with public spending 
programs to get domestic investment and employment going, Mr. Obama 
designated his Deficit Reduction Commission and later his Congressional 
SuperCommittee of 12 to prime the stock market pump with Social Security 
contributions.9 It is the next natural step from our real economy to the 
economy of dreams. But that is President Obama’s stock in trade. He is a 
better shill for Wall Street than his predecessor, being able to neutralize 
Democratic Congressional opposition and that of his constituency in the 
lower 99% that he delivers to his campaign contributors. That is what a 
politician does these days. 
 
1 Bush’s opponents noted a possible third reason, which is that he hoped to roll back the New Deal in 
favor of smaller government. No doubt Bush disliked the New Deal, but it is hard to envision taxing 
employees to send funds into the stock market as a small government alternative. A federally mandated 
transfer of funds — whether it is from taxpayer pockets to Treasury bills, as with Social Security, or 

from taxpayer pockets to the stock market, as under Bush’s proposed changes — is still a federally 
mandated transfer of funds.
2 Any relationship between the solvency of Social Security and the prospect of these personal accounts 
is purely rhetorical. Just before Bush’s 2005 State of the Union address a reporter asked a “senior 
administration official” at a background briefing whether it was accurate to say that personal savings 
accounts themselves would have “no effect whatsoever on the solvency issue.” The surprisingly candid 
response was, yes — “that’s a fair inference.” Toward the end of his tenure in 2008, Bush admitted that 
Social Security holdings were only an accounting book entry on the Treasury, not actually real.
3 Although as former employees of Enron and WorldCom recently learned, the price of demonstrating 
loyalty still can be quite steep. 
4 A three-year Treasury bill purchased at the end of 1999 would have returned 6%. By 2011 they 
yielded only 2%.
5 Reasonable as these requests seem, they were opposed by the same corporate managers who created 
the mess in the first place. In 2004 the American Benefits Council, the lobbying organization of 
pension-fund managers, persuaded regulators to further loosen the requirement that companies estimate 
realistic rates of return.
6 That estimate is probably low. The precedent is the bailout of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation, which ended up costing taxpayers over $200 billion.
7 After World War II interest rates rose to a peak, in 1980, of more than 21%. The result was nearly 
four decades of capital losses on bonds — whose interest rates are fixed at the time you buy them — 
and a steady rise in stocks. Since 1980,however, interest rates have fallen back, creating the greatest 
bond market boom in history.
8 In Chile, conglomerates invested employee paycheck withholding in their own stocks or in loans to 
affiliates whose value then was wiped out in financially engineered bankruptcies. The problem got so 
bad by 1980 that the government turned over management to American and other international firms. 
Most discussions of Chile’s “success story” choose to start at the trough, right after these fraudulent 
bankruptcies, which gives a steep trough-to-peak tilt for the rate of return that is claimed to be normal. 
The equivalent for America would be to start a new trend right after a 1929type stock market crash. 
When one starts from a peak, such as today, it is much harder to give the statistical impression that a 
fantastic takeoff is in store.
9 The genius of recent administrations, Democratic and Republican, has been to transfer inflation to the 
stock market — that is, to the prices of stocks and bonds instead of to the prices of labor and 
production. Real wages today are lower than they were in 1964.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 10
_____________

*****
11. Saving, Asset-Price Inflation and Debt 
Deflation
 
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) measure the circular 
flow between production, consumption and new investment. Employers earn 
profits which they invest in capital goods, and they pay their employees who 
spend their income to buy the goods they produce. 
 
Figure 1 follows: Economy #1 – Production/Consumption (the “Real 
Economy” without FIRE and Government)
 
 
Production and consumption represent only part of the economy. 
Governments levy taxes and user fees, which they spend and sometimes run 
budget surpluses (the government’s way of saving) that drain income from 

the economy’s flow of spending. But more often, governments inject 
spending power by running deficits (financed by running into debt). The 
NIPA measure these fiscal removals or injections of revenue by taxing and 
spending.
 
Figure 2 follows: Economy #1 With Government
 
 
A half century ago economists anticipated that rising incomes and living 
standards would lead to higher savings. The most influential view of the 
economic future was that of John Maynard Keynes. Addressing the problems 
of the Great Depression in 1936, his General Theory of Employment, 
Interest, and Money warned that people would save relatively more as their 
incomes rose. Spending on consumer goods would tail off, slowing the 
growth of markets, new investment and employment. 
This view of the saving function — the propensity to save out of wages 
and profits — saw saving break the chain of payments simply by not being 
spent. The modern dynamics of saving — and the debts in which savings are 
invested — are more complex. Most savings are lent out. Nearly all new 
investment in capital goods and buildings comes from retained business 
earnings, not from savings that pass through financial intermediaries. Under 
these conditions, higher personal saving rates are reflected in higher 
indebtedness. 
Since World War II, in fact, each new business upswing has started with a 
higher set of debt ratios. A rising proportion of savings find their counterpart 
more in other peoples’ debts rather than being used to finance new direct 
investment. The net savings rate has fallen, even though debt ratios and gross 

savings have increased.
To understand these dynamics it is necessary to view economies as 
composed of two distinct systems. The largest system is that of land, 
monopoly rights and financial claims that yield rentier returns in the form of 
interest, other financial fees, rents and monopoly gains (which can be viewed 
either as economic rents or super-profits). These returns far overshadow the 
profits earned on investing in capital goods and employing labor to produce 
goods and provide actual services. This reflects the fact that the value of 
rentier property and financial securities far exceeds that of physical capital in 
the form of factories and machinery, buildings, or research and development. 
Keynes was not careful to analyze how the savings functions associated 
with financial securities and rentier claims — and the property rights backing 
them as collateral — differed from personal savings functions. Some help, 
however, is provided by the NIPA, which break out the distinct flow of 
property and financial income that accrues to the FIRE sector, an acronym for 
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate. 
To fill out the picture from the investor’s vantage point, especially that of 
FIRE, it is necessary to recognize the increasingly important role played by 
capital gains rather than current earnings. The economy’s wealthiest layers 
take their “total returns” primarily in the form of capital gains, not profit, 
interest or rental income.
No regular measures of capital gains are published, but they can be 
estimated on the basis of the Federal Reserve Board’s balance-sheet data 
published in Table Z of its annual Flow-of-Funds statistics on financial assets 
(stocks, bonds and bank deposits and loans) and tangible assets (land, 
buildings and capital goods). These statistics show that capital gains and the 
returns to property and finance — rent, interest and capital gains — far 
overshadow profits.
This distinction between the property and financial sectors and the rest of 
the economy is not immediately apparent, however. NIPA statistics follow 
modern “value-free” economics in conflating all forms of current income 
(excluding capital gains) into the single category of “earnings.” Interest, rent, 
insurance and financial fees are treated as payments for current services, not 
claims by property, credit or monopoly power that find no counterpart in 

direct outlays. 
These forms of revenue are not inherently necessary expenses of 
production, but are best viewed as being institutional in character. Returns to 
finance and property may be viewed as transfer payments rather than as 
actual costs entailed by producing goods and services. This contrast makes 
the savings and debt functions of these rentier sectors differ from those 
associated with the wages and profits paid to labor and tangible capital 
investment.
 
Figure 3 follows: Interaction of Economy #1, Economy #2 and Government
 
 
 
Monetary Considerations
 
Industry and agriculture, transport and power, and similar production and 
consumption expenditures account for less than 0.1% of the economy’s flow 
of payments. The vast majority of transactions passing through the New York 
Clearing House and Fedwire are for stocks, bonds, packaged bank loans, 

options, derivatives and foreign-currency transactions. The entire stock-
market value of many high-flying companies now changes hands in a single 
day, and the average holding time for currency trades has shrunk to just a few 
minutes. 
The value of these financial transactions each day exceeds that of the 
entire annual U.S. national income. It therefore seems absurd to relate the 
money supply only to consumer and wholesale prices, excluding asset prices.
 
Today’s Anomalies That Need to Be Explained
 
Today’s world requires more variables to be analyzed. The (net) savings 
rate has moved in the opposite direction from what Keynes had anticipated. 
The NIPA report a zero-savings rate for the economy at large. If the recycled 
dollar holdings of foreign central banks are excluded, the domestic U.S. 
savings rate is a negative 2%. A time series of the U.S. propensity to save 
since 1945 shows a steady decline in (net) S/Y.
 
Figure 4 follows: Actual Saving vs. Keynes’ Expected Saving
 

 
Despite a falling savings rate, however, the economy never has been 
flusher with savings and credit. The growth of savings, wealth and net worth 
is less and less the result of new direct investment in tangible capital 
formation, but rather the product of rising asset prices for real estate, stocks 
and bonds. In balance-sheet terms, gross savings are soaring while net 
savings are zero or negative.
This growth in net worth occurs despite the fact that most new saving is 
offset on the liabilities side of the balance sheet by growth in debt. The rise of 
net worth is the result of savings being lent to borrowers who bid up asset 
prices by using new loans and credit to buy property and securities, that is, 
wealth and financial claims on wealth.
These features of today’s economy appear to be an anomaly as compared 
to the formulae that Keynes traced out in 1936. Today’s economy is best seen 

as a financial bubble, just the opposite of the deflationary Great Depression 
described by Keynes. Credit — and hence, debt — is being created to inflate 
the bubble rather than to finance direct capital formation. In this respect the 
banking and financial systems have become dysfunctional.
Monetary expansion and prices in the commodity and asset markets move 
asymmetrically. Today’s asset-price inflation goes hand in hand with 
commodity-price stagnation and a deflation of labor’s spending power. Upon 
closer examination this inverse relationship is not an anomaly. But the 
phenomenon shows that the savings problem has become more serious than 
Keynes feared, for reasons that he had little reason to discuss seventy years 
ago. 
For one thing, the volume of savings compounds by being recycled into 
the creation of new interest-bearing debt as savers or financial institutions use 
their accrual of income, dividends and capital gains to buy more securities, 
make more loans or buy property rather than to spend this revenue on current 
output. The growing debt overhead — and the savings that form the balance-
sheet counterpart to this debt — bears interest charges that divert income to 
debt service rather than being available for spending on consumption and 
direct investment.
 
The FIRE Sector in Relation to the Rest of the Economy
 
The institutions that distinguish one national economy from another are 
the property and financial institutions that steer saving and investment, and 
the public tax policies that shape markets. These policies determine the 
character of the FIRE sector. The largest and defining features of any 
economy are those of the property and financial sector, whose rent, interest, 
monopoly revenue and “capital” gains (most of which are real-estate gains) 
rise relative to overall national income. 
Instead of examining these contrasting financial and fiscal policies, most 
economics texts concentrate on abstract technological production and 
consumption dimension of economic life. It is as if the property and financial 
dimension — tangible wealth and financial claims on property and income — 

lie somewhere on the far side of the moon, invisible to earth or at least 
wrapped in a cloak of invisibility.
When Keynes viewed individuals as saving a portion of the income they 
earned, he defined (S) as a function of income (Y) multiplied by the marginal 
propensity to save (mps, or simply s), so that S = sY. Keynes thus derived the 
savings function s = S/Y for economies as a whole.
This formula does not acknowledge that financial institutions tend to save 
all their income. Furthermore, over time a rising proportion of this inflow of 
interest, dividends and rent is plowed back into new loans rather than 
invested in tangible capital formation. 
Keynes recognized that wealthy individuals save a higher portion of their 
income as they earn more. He feared that as economies grew richer over time, 
the propensity to save would rise. But he did not describe corporate financial 
institutions as having a distinct propensity of their own to save all their 
interest and dividend receipts. 
Today we can see that the problem with saving is not simply that it is 
“non-spending.” A rising proportion of savings are lent out or invested in 
loans and securities, dividend-yielding stocks and rent-yielding properties, to 
become interest-bearing debts owed by the economy at large. These savings 
expand of their own accord as their interest receipts are recycled into new 
loans and other income-yielding assets, growing in an exponentially rising 
curve. This exponentially rising curve is that of compound interest, so that St 
= St-1(1+i), where i represents the rate of interest. Meanwhile, the growth of 
debt grows pari passu, as Keynes would have put it.
It thus is helpful to distinguish between the propensity to save (1) by labor 
and industrial firms out of income earned by producing goods and services, 
and (2) by the FIRE sector out of debt service and rental charges. Drawing 
this distinction requires that the economy itself be viewed as a combination 
of two separate parts, by separating the FIRE sector from the rest of the 
economy. I refer to these two sectors as (1) the production and consumption 
economy comprising fixed capital and labor, and (2) the economically larger 
property and financial sector receiving rentier income (defined to include 
financial “service” fees).
Although net saving does not increase in such cases, the volume of 

loanable funds expands. These funds are built up as interest, dividends and 
rents accrue to owners of securities and property. To the extent that these 
revenues accrue to large financial institutions — insurance companies, 
pension and mutual funds — the propensity to save such returns is nearly 
100%. To be sure, bankers pay interest to their depositors while insurance 
and pension funds pay their policy holders. However, most of these interest 
and dividend accruals are left in accounts to accumulate. The result is an 
exponentially rising curve of savings at compound interest.
The idea of a propensity to consume is appropriate only for consumer 
income, not that of the financial, insurance and real estate (FIRE) sectors. 
Consumers, especially retirees, do indeed consume some part of their rentier 
income, but this is not true of institutional investors. Keynes recognized that 
the wealthiest income brackets have a high propensity to save, while less 
affluent brackets have a lower propensity. Today, the wealthiest 10% of the 
population holds most of the savings in every economy. The bottom 90% 
tend to be net debtors rather than net savers in today’s highly financialized 
economies of North America and Europe.
Additional saving is created when banks create credit. Most finds its 
counterpart in the new debts that borrowers owe, so that the net saving rate is 
not affected. Keynes concerned himself almost entirely with net saving, not 
gross savings and their counterpart debt.
When Keynes defined saving as equal to investment, he did not emphasize 
the distinction between direct investment in tangible capital goods and loans 
that became the debts of the economy’s non-financial sectors. Failure to draw 
this distinction led to an ambiguity between gross or net saving. National 
income accounts define saving net of the growth in debt, so that no increase 
in net saving occurs when savings are lent out. 
This condition has become more and more the case for the U.S. economy 
in recent decades. Today’s propensity to save is less than zero as the 
economy is running into debt faster than it is building up new savings. 
Keynes did not address this possibility, and indeed it was not a pressing 
concern back in 1936 when he wrote his General Theory.
Modern national income accounts also combine the wages and profits that 
labor and industry earn with the interest and rent that finance and property 

receive. The basic idea is that providing land, the radio spectrum, subsoil 
minerals and even monopoly goods supplies a “service” alongside the goods 
and services produced by labor and capital goods. But it is equally possible to 
view finance and property not as “factors of production” producing services 
that earn interest, financial fees and rent, but as receiving transfer payments 
or what Henry George called “value from obligation.” This distinction 
enables the classical distinction between “earned” and “unearned” income to 
be preserved in a way that I believe Keynes would have appreciated in view 
of his call for “euthanasia of the rentier.”
Nearly all new fixed capital formation is financed out of retained business 
earnings, not out of bank borrowing. Banks finance sales, foreign trade, 
consumer debt and the purchase of property already in place, but hardly ever 
have they taken the risk of financing new direct investment. Their time 
horizon is short-term, not long-term.
This chapter proposes a model to integrate the analysis of asset-price 
inflation with debt deflation and Say’s Law. Viewing savings and debt in 
their institutional context, it relates the behavior of banks and institutional 
investors to the dynamics of asset-price inflation and debt deflation. A central 
theme is that most lending and credit creation are directed into the capital 
markets via borrowers who buy property or financial securities. As the 
economy’s assets are loaded down with debt and its interest charges, this 
credit growth extracts interest payments that divert revenue away from 
current demand for goods and services. That is why asset-price inflation 
usually involves debt deflation. The deflationary effect may be mitigated by 
lowering interest rates, as occurred in the United States during 1994–2004. 
The debt/savings overhead can rise without extracting a higher flow of 
interest payments as interest rates approach their nadir (about 1% today).
Keynes viewed saving as causing insufficient market demand to provide 
full employment. The long-term threat seemed to be that as economies grew 
richer, people would save more, disrupting the circular flow of spending 
between producers and their employees as consumers. What was not 
emphasized was that as savings were recycled into loans, economies would 
polarize between creditors and debtors.
Today the net savings rate has fallen to zero, and the major factor 

impairing effective demand is the diversion of revenue to service the 
economy’s debt overhead. Paying interest and principal reduces the 
disposable income that debtors have available to spend on goods and 
services, while the financial institutions that receive this revenue do not 
spend it on goods and services. They lend out their receipts to enable the 
buyers to purchase assets that already exist.1
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) define the 
amortization of debt principal as saving. Most of these repayments are lent 
out to new borrowers, including corporate business whose balance sheets 
have reached what Hyman Minsky called the Ponzi stage of fragility — the 
point at which the debt overhead is carried by debtors borrowing the interest 
charges that are growing exponentially. In this respect “debts cause saving.”
Today’s problem of inadequate consumer demand and capital investment 
lies on the liabilities (debt) side of the balance sheet, not on the asset (saving) 
side. Keynes anticipated that as economies grew and incomes rose, a rising 
proportion of S/Y would reduce consumption, leading to overproduction if 
employers did not cut back their own direct investment. This line of thought 
reflected the psychological theorizing of British marginal utility analysis 
rather than a financial view of the dynamics that determined the buildup of 
savings.
Keynes’s discussion of savings led him to re-examine Say’s Law, which 
described circular flow of spending between producers and consumers. Under 
normal conditions producers would hire workers, who would spend their 
wages on buying what they produced. This was the basic meaning of the 
phrase “supply creates its own demand.” But savings threatened to interrupt 
this circular flow by diverting the purchasing power of consumers away from 
the demand for goods and services, and that of employers away from the 
purchase of capital goods.
Keynes found saving to be the main culprit for the economic slow-down 
of the Great Depression on the ground that it led to reduced market demand, 
deterring new direct investment and hence slowing the growth of 
employment. But in today’s U.S.-centered bubble economy the problem has 
become more complicated. To the extent that savings are lent out (rather than 
invested out of retained earnings to purchase capital goods, erect buildings 

and create other tangible means of production), they divert future income 
away from consumption and investment to pay debt service. In this respect 
the growth of savings in financial form (that is, in ways other than new direct 
capital formation) adds to the debt overhead and hence contributes to debt 
deflation. This is what occurs with nearly all the savings intermediated and 
lent out or reinvested by the banks, insurance companies and other financial 
institutions.
Keynes did not devote much attention to the accrual of interest on past 
savings. His General Theory was ambiguous with regard to the specific forms 
that savings might take. They were identified simply as investment, so that on 
the macroeconomic plane, S = I. The implication by many Keynesians today 
is that savings actually cause investment. The reality is that savings not 
invested directly in new means of production were invested indirectly in 
stocks, bonds and real estate. Investment in securities and property already in 
existence had no positive employment effects. But there was not much 
growth in either borrow-ing or this kind of indirect investment back when the 
General Theory was published. The tendency was for savings to sit idle, as 
did much of the labor force.
 
The Self-Expanding Growth of Savings through Their Accrual of Interest
 
The financial system exists in a symbiosis with the “real” economy. Each 
system has its own set of growth dynamics. Financial systems tend to grow 
exponentially at compound interest. The cumulative value of savings grows 
through a dynamic that Keynes had little reason to analyze in the 1930s — 
what Richard Price described as the “geometric” growth of a penny invested 
at 5% at the time of Jesus’s birth, growing to a solid sphere of gold extending 
from the Sun out beyond the orbit of Jupiter by his day (1776). He contrasted 
this “geometric” growth of savings invested at compound interest to the 
merely “arithmetic” growth of a similar sum invested at simple interest. This 
was the metaphor that Malthus adopted to describe the growth of human 
populations in contrast to the means of subsistence.2
Many people saved money back in the time of Jesus. But nobody has 
obtained savings amounting to anywhere near a solid sphere of gold. The 

reason is that savings that are invested in debt tend to stifle economies, 
causing downturns that wipe out the debts and savings together in a 
convulsion of bankruptcy. This was what happened to the Roman Empire, 
and on a smaller scale it has characterized business cycles for the past two 
centuries. Yet this dynamic rarely has been related to the bankruptcy 
phenomenon although it is a key factor countering the growth of savings.
Economies do grow faster than “arithmetically,” but not “geometrically.” 
Their typical growth pattern is that of an S-curve, tapering off over the course 
of the business cycle. The exponential growth of savings and debts thus tends 
chronically to exceed that of the “real” economy. Unless interest rates 
decline, the debt burden will divert income away from spending on goods and 
services, turning the economy downward. 
 
Figures 5 and 6 follow:
Figure 5: How the Rise in Debt Overhead Slows Down the Business Cycle
Figure 6: Financial Crisis Pattern versus Business Cycle

 
 
The General Theory recognized saving as arising out of current income, 
not as growing through the compounding of interest, doubling and redoubling 
at compound interest by their own inertia. They accrue interest independently 
of the course of incomes when invested in bonds or left in savings accounts, 
as well as accruing dividends if invested in stocks, or rental income if 
invested in property. This is especially true of “forced savings” in the form of 
paycheck withholding for Social Security, pension and retirement accounts, 
along with insurance policies segregated in a way that makes them 
unavailable for current spending. 
Not being limited by the course of income or the ability to pay, the 
exponential growth of savings tends to exceed growth of the real economy. 
This is what occurs when economies are loaded down with debts, which 
could equally well be thought of as the savings overhead that is lent out. 
Rising savings on the asset side of the balance sheet connote a rising debt 
overhead on the liabilities side. In this case saving does not necessarily reflect 
an increase of productive powers and the means of production, nor does it 
tend to employ labor. Rather, the debt service that results from lending out 
savings tends to shrink markets and employment. 
It should be noted that while the financial sector represents itself as 
providing credit to consumers and producers, it also absorbs income by 
charging interest, in amounts that are as large as the entire loan principal 
every doubling period — seven years at 10% interest, 13 years at 5%. 

Ultimately the financial sector extracts revenue from the economy. That is 
why it is in business, after all: to “make money from money.”
Money cannot be made from money, of course. It is itself sterile, as 
Aristotle noted long ago. But it can charge interest from the rest of the 
economy that does perform the work. Levying interest, rent and other 
property and financial charges is not to be confused with making money 
through labor or capital investment. The perception of classical economics 
that the property and financial system is different has been lost in today’s 
economic thought.
 
The Growth of Net Worth through Capital Gains
 
The cumulative volume of savings also grows through a dynamic that 
Keynes had little reason to analyze in the 1930s: capital gains. Property and 
financial securities tend to appreciate in price over time. The main cause of 
this price appreciation is that the physical volume of assets grows slowly, 
while the financial volume of loanable funds grows exponentially.
Let us return for a moment to Richard Price’s example of a penny saved at 
the time of Jesus being worth a sphere of gold extending from the sun out to 
Jupiter. Few investors buy gold, as it does not yield an income. The largest 
investment — and the most heavily debt-financed asset these days — is land. 
More credit does not expand the volume of land, which is fixed, but it does 
raise its market price. A rising volume of savings is channeled to buy a fixed 
supply of land. The financial system thus creates capital gains as the finite 
volume of property and supply of buildings and financial securities expands 
more slowly than the potentially infinite volume of loanable funds. 
Keynes did not anticipate that savings would be channeled in a way that 
bid up asset prices for securities and property without funding tangible capital 
formation. In the 1930s net worth was built up mainly by saving, not by 
asset-price inflation such as is occurring today. In traditional Keynesian 
terms, revenue or credit spent on buying property in place represented 
hoarding, not investment. 
Homeowners and investors imagine themselves growing richer as prices 

rise for their assets. Their net worth rises without their having to save. 
However, this rise tends to require more income set aside to pay debt service 
on the loans taken out to buy their property. Credit lent out in this way does 
not increase consumption and direct investment. It creates debts whose 
carrying charges shrink markets. Savings and debts rise together, so that there 
is no increase in net saving. 
New saving does occur as financial institutions recycle the receipts of debt 
service into new loans, whose carrying charges absorb yet more future 
income. The result is that gross savings (and hence, indebtedness) rise 
relative to national income. Stated another way, saving for many 
homeowners takes the form of paying off their mortgages. This is not the 
same thing as hoarding (in Keynes’s sense), but it plays much the same 
function, as it is not available for spending on current output.
As savings rise and are lent out, debt service absorbs more income. But 
the net economic surplus available to service these savings — by paying 
interest and dividends on the debts and securities in which they are invested 
— tends not to keep pace with their stipulated debt service. This debt 
problem therefore plays the deflationary economic role that Keynes attributed 
to savings.
 
How Asset-Price Inflation Aggravates Economic Polarization
 
Keynes favored inflation as eroding the burden of debt. He saw inflation 
as the line of least political resistance to wiping out the economy’s debt 
burden. His idea was that inflation would leave more income available for 
consumption and for new direct investment. But asset-price inflation works in 
a different way. Instead of eroding the purchasing power of wealth relative to 
commodities and labor, it increases property prices without increasing 
consumer prices or wages. At least this has been the pattern since 1980. 
Wealth disparities have increased even more than have disparities among 
income brackets. The net worth for the wealthiest 10% or 20% of the 
population has soared, while the rest of the economy has fallen more deeply 
into debt and many of its gains have turned out to be short-term.

Keynes recognized that rich and poor income and wealth brackets had 
differing marginal propensities to save. But today’s financial polarization has 
gone beyond anything he anticipated, or what anyone else anticipated back in 
the 1930s, or for that matter even in the 1950s.
Long before the General Theory, economists recognized that wealthy 
people did not expand their consumption in keeping with their income 
growth. The image of widows and orphans living off their interest was 
relevant only for a small part of the economy. Rentiers always have tended to 
save their income and reinvest it in the financial and property markets. This 
occurs also with savings deposits, which banks lend out or invest directly in 
financial securities. Most of the interest and dividends credited to savers thus 
is left to grow by being lent out or plowed back into indirect securities and 
property investment, increasing asset prices. 
The ability to get an easy ride from the resulting asset-price inflation — 
coupled with an easy access to credit and favorable tax treatment — prompts 
investors to take their returns in the form of capital gains rather than current 
income. In real estate, the economy’s largest sector, property owners use their 
rental income to pay interest on the credit borrowed to buy properties, leaving 
no taxable earnings at all. The same phenomenon characterizes the corporate 
sector, where equity has been retired for bonds and bank loans since 1980. 
Ambitious CEOs, managers of privatized public enterprises and corporate 
raiders have bought entire companies with debt-financed leveraged buyouts. 
Interest charges have absorbed corporate earnings, leaving little remaining for 
new capital investment. The name of the game has become capital gains, 
which have been spurred more by downsizing and outsourcing than by new 
corporate hiring.
Prices for property, stock, and bonds have soared relative to wages, 
forcing home buyers to spend a rising multiple of their annual incomes to buy 
housing. Also rising has been the cost of acquiring companies relative to 
corporate profits as price/earnings ratios increase.
Capital gains make the inequality of wealth and property more extreme 
than income inequality. The wealthiest layer of the population derives its 
power from capital gains, while using its income to pay interest — as long as 
interest rates are less than the rate of asset-price inflation. The ratio of wealth 

and property has risen relative to the value of goods and services, wages and 
profits, while the debt overhead has grown proportionally.
 
Does Asset-Price Inflation “Crowd Out” New Direct Investment?
 
The FIRE sector has been expanding at the expense of the “real” 
economy. It drains revenue in the form of interest, rental income and 
monopoly profits, which are paid out increasingly as interest and financial 
fees. This triggers a fresh cycle of saving and re-lending by the FIRE sector 
itself, not so much by the rest of the economy. The more interest accrues in 
the hands of creditors, the faster their supply of loanable funds increases, 
thanks to the “magic of compound interest.” This revenue is lent out and 
accrues new interest (“interest on interest”), which is recycled into yet new 
loans. 
This growth of savings and loanable funds in the hands of financial 
institutions is lent out mainly to buy property in place and financial securities, 
not to fund tangible capital formation. This financial dynamic spurs asset-
price inflation, which in turn reduces the incentive to invest directly in capital 
goods, because it is easier to make capital gains than to earn profits.
These developments have prompted investors to seek “total returns” — 
capital gains plus profits or earnings — rather than earnings alone. Under 
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan as “Bubble Maestro” in 
the 1990s, stock prices for dot.com and internet companies soared without a 
foundation in earnings or dividend-paying ability. Balance-sheet 
maneuvering was decoupled from tangible investment in the “real” economy. 
Companies such as Enron prided themselves in not having any tangible assets 
at all, just a balance sheet of speculative contracts. People began to ask 
whether wealth could go on increasing in this way ad infinitum.
Keynes’s analysis implied that the income “multiplier” (Y/S, or 1/mps) 
would increase as prosperity increased and people consumed a smaller 
portion of their income. What was being multiplied, however, was not 
national income — wages, profits and other earned income — but the volume 
of credit and hence the pace of capital gains in the asset markets.

 
Tax Policy and Financial Bubbles
 
Unlike the industrial sector, real estate does not report a profit — and 
hence, pays no income taxes. Property owners do pay state and local real 
estate taxes, to be sure, but they have been joined by the financial and 
insurance lobbies to shift local government budgets away from the land and 
onto the shoulders of labor, through income taxes, sales taxes and various 
user fees for municipal services hitherto provided as part of the basic 
economic needs and infrastructure.
Although land does not depreciate — that is, wear out and become 
obsolete — by far the bulk of depreciation tax credits are taken by the real 
estate sector. This is because the economic theory underlying tax obligations 
has become essentially fictitious. Each time a property is sold, the building is 
assumed to increase in value, rather than the land’s site value generating the 
gain.
Nothing like this could happen in industry. Machinery wears out and 
becomes obsolete — think of computers and word processors bought a 
decade ago, or even three years ago. Technological progress reduces the 
value of physical capital in place. But the prosperity that progress brings 
increases the market price of land. 
Keynes pointed to the desirability of preventing the diversion of income 
into the purchase of securities and property already in place. He hoped to 
restructure the stock market and financial system so as to direct savings and 
credit into tangible capital formation rather than speculation. He deplored the 
waste of human intelligence devoted merely to transferring property 
ownership rather than creating new means of production.
Today’s financial markets have evolved in just the opposite direction from 
that advocated by Keynes. New savings and credit are channeled into loans to 
satisfy the rush to buy real estate, stocks and bonds for speculative purposes 
rather than into the funding of new direct investment and employment. 
Matters are aggravated by the fact that financial gains are taxed at a lower 
rate, thanks to the growing power of the financial sector’s political lobbies. 

This prompts companies to use their revenue and go into debt to buy other 
companies (mergers and acquisitions) or real estate rather than to expand 
their means of production.
Going into debt to buy assets with borrowed funds experienced a quantum 
leap in the 1980s with the practice of financing leveraged buyouts with high-
interest “junk” bonds. The process got underway when interest rates were 
still hovering near their all-time high of 20% in late 1980 and early 1981. 
Corporate raiding was led by the investment banking house of Drexel 
Burnham and its law firm, Skadden Arps. Their predatory activities required 
a loosening of America’s racketeering (RICO) laws to make it legal to 
borrow funds to take over companies and repay creditors by emptying out 
their corporate treasuries and “overfunded” pension plans. New York’s laws 
of fraudulent conveyance also had to be modified.
Tax laws promoted this debt leveraging. Interest was allowed to be 
counted as a tax-deductible expense, encouraging leveraged buyouts rather 
than equity financing or funding out of retained earnings. Depreciation of 
buildings and other assets was permitted to occur repeatedly, whenever a 
property was sold. This favored the real estate sector by making absentee-
owned buildings and other commercial properties virtually exempt from the 
income tax. To top matters off, capital gains tax rates were reduced below 
taxes on the profits earned by direct investment. This diverted savings to fuel 
asset-price inflation. By the 1990s the process had become a self-feeding 
dynamic. The more prices rose for stocks and real estate, the more mortgage 
borrowing rose for homes and other property, while corporate borrowing 
soared for mergers and acquisition. 
Meanwhile, the more gains being made off the bubble, the more powerful 
its beneficiaries grew. They turned their economic power into political power 
to lower taxes and deregulate speculative finance — along with fraud, corrupt 
accounting practices and the use of offshore tax-avoidance enclaves — even 
further. This caused federal, state and local budget deficits while shifting the 
tax burden onto labor and industrial income. Markets shrank as a result of the 
fiscal drain as well as the financial debt overhead.
Abuses of arrogance and outright fraud occurred in what became a golden 
age for Enron, WorldCom and other “high flyers” akin to the S&L scandals 

of the mid-1980s. But free-market monetarism draws no distinction between 
tangible direct investment and purely financial gain-seeking. Opposing 
government regulation to favor any given way of recycling savings as 
compared to any other way, the value-free ethic of our times holds that 
making money is inherently productive regardless of how it is made. “Free-
market fundamentalism” came to shape neoliberal tax policy in a way that 
favored finance, not industry or labor.
 
Can Economies Inflate Their Way out of Debt?
 
Only a limited repertory of opportunities for profitable new direct 
investment exists at any given point in time. The exponential growth in 
savings tends to outstrip these opportunities, and hence is lent out. This 
lending — and its mirror image, borrowing — may become self-justifying at 
least for a time to the extent that it bids up asset prices. Homebuyers and 
investors feel that it pays them to go into debt to buy property, and this is 
viewed as “prosperity,” although it is primarily financial rather than industrial 
in character.
About 70% of bank loans in the United States and Britain take the form of 
real estate mortgages. Most new savings and credit creation thus enables 
borrowers to bid up the price of homes and office buildings. The effect is to 
increase the price that consumers must pay to obtain housing, as new 
construction loans account for only a small proportion of mortgage lending. 
Over-extended families become “house-poor” as rising financial charges for 
housing diverts income away from being spent on new goods and services, 
“crowding out” consumer spending and business investment.
Governments may try to mitigate the inflation of housing prices by raising 
interest rates. But this will increase the carrying charges for borrowers with 
floating-rate mortgages, as well as debtors throughout the economy. (Also, as 
Britain discovered in spring 2004, the increase in interest rates also raises the 
currency exchange rate, making its exporters less competitive in world 
markets.) For fixed-rate mortgages, higher interest rates may squeeze the 
banks, leading to losses in their portfolio values and prompting calls for the 
government to bail out losers (at least depositors, if not to rescue S&Ls and 

commercial banks).
Perception of this problem leads central bankers not to raise interest rates 
and take the blame for destroying financial prosperity by pricking the bubble. 
Instead, they try to keep it from bursting. This can be done only by inflating it 
all the more. So the process escalates.
Balance sheets improve as the pace of capital gains outstrips the rate of 
interest. Debt service can be paid out of rising asset values, either by selling 
off assets or by borrowing against the higher asset prices as collateral. The 
problem occurs when current income no longer can carry the interest charges. 
The financial sector absorbs more income as debt service than it supplies in 
the form of new credit. Asset prices turn down — but the debts remain on the 
books. This has been Japan’s condition since its bubble peaked in 1990. It 
may result in “negative equity” for the most highly leveraged mortgage 
borrowers in the real estate sector, followed by debt-ridden companies. 
When interest charges exceed rental income, commercial borrowers 
hesitate to use their own money or other income to keep current on their 
debts. The limited liability laws let them walk away from their losses if 
markets are deflated, leaving banks, insurance companies, pension funds and 
other financial institutions to absorb the loss. Sell-offs of these properties to 
raise cash would accelerate the plunge in asset prices, leaving balance sheets 
“hollowed out.”
Savings do not appear as the villain in such periods. The zero net savings 
rate has concealed the fact that gross savings have been relent to create a 
corresponding growth in debt. America’s national debt quadrupled during the 
12-year Reagan-Bush administration (1981–93). This increase in debt was 
facilitated by reducing interest rates by enough so that the unprecedented 
increase in credit rose without extracting more interest from many properties. 
The natural limit to this process was reached in 2004 when the Federal 
Reserve reduced its discount rate to only 1%. Once rates hit this nadir, further 
growth in debt threatened to be reflected directly in draining amortization and 
interest payments away from spending on goods and services, slowing the 
economy accordingly. Further debt growth would require a rising proportion 
of disposable personal income to be spent on debt service.
 

How Long Can Bubbles Keep Expanding?
 
The potential credit supply is limited only by the market price of all 
existing property and securities. The process is open-ended, as each new 
credit creation inflates the market value of assets that can be pledged as 
collateral for new loans.
Until bubbles burst, they benefit investors who borrow money to buy 
assets that are rising in price. Running into debt becomes the preferred way to 
make money, rather than the traditional first step toward losing the 
homestead. The motto of modern real estate investors is that “rent is for 
paying interest,” and this also applies to corporate raiders who use the 
earnings of companies bought on credit to repay their bankers and 
bondholders. What real estate investors and corporate financial officers are 
after is capital gains. 
There is no inherent link with making new direct investment. Indeed, the 
after-tax return from asset-price inflation exceeds that which can be made by 
investing to create profits. Retirees, widows and orphans do best by living off 
capital gains, selling part of their growing portfolios rather than seeking a 
flow of interest, dividends and rental income. The idea begins to spread that 
people can live off capital gains in an economy whose incomes are not 
growing.
Asset-price inflation would be a rational long-term policy if economies 
could inflate their way out of debt via capital gains. The solution to debt 
would be to create yet more debt to finance yet more asset-price inflation. 
This dynamic is more likely to create debt deflation than commodity-price 
inflation, however. It is true that a consumer “wealth effect” occurs when 
homeowners refinance their mortgages by taking new “home equity” loans to 
spend on living, or at least to pay down their credit-card debt so as to lower 
the monthly diversion of income for debt service. If this were to lead to a 
general inflation, interest rates would rise, prompting investors to shift out of 
stocks into bonds. Foreign investors and speculators bail out, accelerating the 
price decline. This threatens retirement funds, insurance companies and 
banks with capital losses that erode their ability to meet their commitments. 

The more likely constraint comes from asset-price inflation itself as price/ 
earnings ratios rise. Interest rates and other returns slow, making it difficult 
for pension plans and insurance companies to earn the projected returns 
needed to pay retirees. In any event, asset sales exceed purchases as the 
proportion of retirees to employees grows, causing stock and bond prices to 
decline. Pension funds must sell more stocks and bonds — or employers must 
set aside more of their revenue for this purpose, in which case their ability to 
pay dividends is reduced.
Asset-price inflation reaches its limit when interest charges absorb the 
entire flow of earnings. Debt-financed bubbles remove more purchasing 
power from the “bottom 90%” of the population than they supply. Debt spurs 
rising housing prices but reduces consumer demand as a result of the need to 
service mortgages. Likewise, financing for leveraged buyouts, mergers and 
acquisitions may increase stock prices, but the interest charges absorb 
corporate earnings and “crowd out” new direct investment and employment. 
The drive for capital gains thus complicates the traditional macroeconomic 
Keynesian categories. Although these gains are not included in the national 
income statistics, they have become the key to analyzing how asset-price 
inflation leads to debt deflation of the “real” economy. One thus may ask 
what sphere of the economy is more “real” and powerful: that of tangible 
production and consumption, or the financial sector which is wrapped around 
it.
 
Can the Debt and Savings Overhead Be Supported Indefinitely?
 
Richard Price’s illustration of the seemingly magical powers of compound 
interest is a reminder that many people saved pennies (and much more) at the 
time of Jesus, and long before that, but nobody yet has obtained an expanding 
globe of gold. The reason is that savings have been wiped out repeatedly in 
waves of bankruptcy.
The reason is clear enough. When savings, lending and “indirect” financial 
investment grow by compound interest in the absence of new tangible 
investment, something must give. The superstructure of debt must be brought 

back into a relationship with the ability to pay.
Financial crashes occur much more quickly than the long buildup. This is 
what produces a ratchet pattern for business cycles — a gradual upsweep and 
sudden collapse of financial and property prices, leaving economies debt-
ridden. Many debts are wiped out, to be sure, along with the savings that have 
been invested in bad loans — unless the government bails out savers at 
taxpayer expense. 
Financial crises are not resolved simply by price adjustments. Almost all 
crises involve government intervention, solving matters politically. As the 
financial and property sectors gain political power relative to the increasingly 
indebted production and consumption sectors, their lobbies succeed in 
lowering tax rates on rentier income relative to taxes on wages and profits. 
Tax rates on capital gains have been slashed below those on “earned” wages 
and profits, whereas the two rates were equal when America’s income-tax 
laws first were introduced.
Financial lobbies also have gotten law-makers to adopt the “moral hazard” 
policy of guaranteeing savings. Debtors still may go bankrupt, but savings are 
to be kept intact by making taxpayers liable to the economy’s savers. Ever 
since the collapse of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation 
(FSLIC) in the late 1980s a political fight has loomed over just whose savings 
are to be rescued. Unfortunately, the principle at work is that of “Big fish eat 
little fish.” Small savers are sacrificed to the wealthiest savers and 
institutional investors. 
The mathematics of compound interest dictates that such public 
guarantees to preserve savings cannot succeed in the long run. Financial 
savings and debts tend to grow at exponential rates while economies grow 
only by S curves, causing strains that cannot be supported as credit is used to 
buy assets rather than to invest in capital goods or buildings.
Financial strains become further politicized as large institutions and the 
“upper 10%” of the population account for nearly all the net saving, which is 
lent out to the “bottom 90%” and to industry. The balance-sheet position of 
the wealthiest layer increases as long as capital gains exceed the buildup of 
debt. The bottom 90% also benefit for a while during the early and middle 
stages of the financial bubble. Workers are invited to think of themselves as 

finance-capitalists-in-miniature rather than as employees being downsized 
and outsourced. But much of what they may gain in the rising market value 
of their homes (for the two-thirds of the U.S. and British populations that are 
homeowners) is offset by the debt deflation that bleeds the production-and-
consumption economy. 
Throughout history societies that have polarized between creditors and 
debtors have not survived well. Rome ended in a convulsion of debt 
foreclosure, monopolization of the land and tax shifts that reduced most of 
the population to clientage. Third-world countries today are being stripped of 
their public domain and public enterprises by the international debt buildup, 
while industry and real estate in the creditor nations themselves are becoming 
debt-ridden.
Today’s bubble economy is seeing interest charges expand to absorb 
profits and rental income, leading to slower domestic direct investment and 
employment. Much as classical economists believed that rent would expand 
to absorb the entire economic surplus, it now appears that interest-bearing 
debt will play this role.
 
PULL QUOTES
 
[PULL QUOTE 11-01]
In balance-sheet terms, gross savings are soaring while net savings are zero 
or negative. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-02]
Most lending and credit creation today is directed into the capital markets via 
borrowers who buy property or financial securities. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-03]
Today’s problem of inadequate consumer demand and capital investment lies 
on the liabilities (debt) side of the balance sheet, not on the asset (saving) 

side. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-04]
Balance sheets improve as the pace of capital gains outstrips the rate of 
interest. Debt service can be paid out of rising asset values, either by selling 
off assets or by borrowing against the higher asset prices as collateral. — 
Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-05]
Savings do not appear as the villain in periods of rising asset prices. The zero 
net savings rate has concealed the fact that gross savings have been re-lent to 
create a corresponding growth in debt. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-06]
Asset-price inflation reaches its limit when interest charges absorb the entire 
flow of earnings. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 11-07]
The mathematics of compound interest dictates that public guarantees to 
preserve savings cannot succeed in the long run. — Michael Hudson
1 Keynes noted that Malthus pointed out that landlords helped contribute to aggregate demand by 
spending their rental income on hiring servants. But banks lend to service producers and other labor, 
increasing the volume of debt.
2 I review how economists have treated this phenomenon in “The Mathematical Economics of 
Compound Interest: A Four-Thousand Year Overview,” Journal of Economic Studies 27 (2000): 344–
363.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 11
______________

*****
12. Saving Our Way into Poverty: The 
Political Implications
The U.S. and European economies are still in the Denial Stage of the debt 
problem. Bank lobbyists are trying to inspire hope that economies can “grow 
their way out of debt” rather than having to write off bad debts. They want 
the government to squeeze out a budget surplus by cutting back Social 
Security, Medicare and social spending, and for families to pay more to the 
banks and other creditors by reducing consumer spending on goods and 
services. 
Despite the fact that such debt deflation shrinks markets, the economy 
somehow is supposed to grow and create a large enough financial surplus to 
“save its way out of debt,” much like a homeowner who saves enough 
income to pay down the mortgage. Governments are to shrink their spending 
and run a budget surplus to hold down the ratio of public debt to GDP. 
Families are to continue doing what they are doing — reducing their credit 
card lines and borrow less, paying down their mortgages and other debts. 
And companies are to use their profits and cash flow to pay down 
borrowings.
This hope does not really make sense when you think about it. Since 2008 
the economy’s net saving rate has indeed risen, from 0 to over 2% of GDP. 
This saving has indeed taken the form of paying down debt, rather than 
building up liquid deposits for most people or businesses. But as Keynes 
pointed out in the 1930s, saving money takes it out of the circular flow 

between producers and consumers. When consumers save, they buy fewer 
goods and services. Markets shrink. Profits decline as sales fall. Real estate 
vacancy rates rise, and rents fall. This is precisely what is happening today — 
and why the so-called “double dip” recession turns out to be simply a 
continuation of the post-2008 debt deflation.
There is also a distributional problem. Most of the liquid savings (i.e., net-
surplus that is not used to pay down debts) are by the economy’s wealthiest 
10% (and, of those, especially the richest 1%). These savings, again, are 
invested to yield interest. They are lent out to those in the bottom 90% who, 
in the end, are unable to carry their debt and need to borrow in order to pay 
interest. So “saving our way out of debt” really means that most of the 
economy is to “borrow its way out of debt.” Gross saving in the U.S. and 
European economies remain high. But the great bulk is lent out (to become 
other parties’ debts), without being invested productively, i.e., in tangible 
capital formation to create jobs and spur economic growth.
The problem therefore lies with the banking and credit system itself, and 
with the economic polarization between wealthy savers and indebted 
consumers, indebted real estate, indebted business, and indebted 
governments — all paying interest and financial fees to the banks and to the 
richest 1% of American families who now receive about two-thirds of the 
returns to wealth in the form of interest and dividends, rents and capital gains. 
This is a malstructuring of the financial system. Keeping the resulting debts 
in place is imposing financial brakes on economic recovery.
Every sector obviously needs credit to bridge the gap between income and 
outgo. That is inherent in the specialization of production and the lag-times 
between the inception of an economic activity and its fruition. Farmers need 
credit to plant their crops and defray their expenditures until the harvest is in, 
sold and paid for. Manufacturers need credit to acquire machinery, stock up 
on raw materials and undertake work in progress. Merchants borrow to carry 
their inventories, ship their goods and wait for payment to clear. 
Governments have run up debts in wartime or other national emergencies, as 
have consumers in the face of adversity or simply in the expectation that they 
will be able to repay their home mortgages, student loans, automobile loans 
or other debts out of the higher incomes they hope to earn in years to come.

The financial system was becoming less stable, not yet having gained firm 
political control over government via campaign contributions, public 
relations think tanks and Chicago School academic legitimization backed 
globally by U.S. military force and diplomatic power. This meant that the 
government not only had to pay higher interest rates, it had to keep coming 
back to the financial markets more often. The average maturity on federal 
debt securities shortened from 7 years at the end of World War II to just 2 
years and 10 months in 1980. Real estate, stock and bond prices plunged, 
wiping out the value of the loans in which savings had been invested. By 
yearend 1980 many sectors of the economy were technically insolvent, 
headed by the banking system itself. 
In the international sphere, heavily indebted countries such as Brazil had 
kept afloat simply by getting their creditors to add the interest due onto the 
principal each year, at rising rates of interest. The game ended when Mexico 
declared itself insolvent in 1982, followed by widespread defaults that led to 
write-downs of the principal as third world government bonds sold for as low 
as 20 to 40 cents on the dollar. The best that creditors could do was to accept 
conversion of such debts into Brady bonds organized by the U.S. Treasury 
Secretary. But creditors to pull back on making new loans. By 1990, interest 
rates on new dollar borrowings by Brazil, Argentina and other countries 
soared as high as 45%.
The rate of interest is supposed to act as a mediator between borrowers 
and creditors by inducing savers to lend out their money at a level covering 
normal risk. But the risks grow larger as economies are less able to carry their 
debt overhead in the face of a growing volume of savings/debts. Interest rates 
rise, shortening the doubling time of savings/debts. From their 3% to 4% 
level at the end of World WarII, rates soared to 20% in 1980. Growing 
uncertainties, above all the prospect that the government would resort to 
inflationary measures to monetize its debt, made investors willing to put up 
funds only for short periods of time. There were more savings to lend, but 
lending was becoming riskier as the rate of debt service to income rose, and 
as economies began to inflate their way out of debt. 
 
Paying Interest out of Debt-Financed Capital Gains

This seemed to be a harbinger of things to come in the United States and 
Europe. The U.S. debt overhead seemed stretched to its limit in 1980. If 
anyone had been told that a wave of debt run-ups and bankruptcies would 
occur for S&L’s, real estate, corporations and foreign governments, the last 
thing they would have expected would have been that interest rates would 
soon decline to produce the greatest bond market boom in history. Nobody 
anticipated that instead of bankruptcies wiping out debts, third-world style, 
the 1980s would see an unprecedented growth of debt — without the feared 
price and wage inflation. When Ronald Reagan took office in 1981, nobody 
expected that over the next twelve years Republican administrations would 
quadruple the public debt by cutting taxes while maintaining military and 
social spending unabated. 
In the past, most government debts stemmed from war borrowing, but now 
they are taken on to cover budget deficits resulting from un-taxing wealthy 
individuals and the FIRE sector. The same thing happened in Britain, where 
government budgets were pushed into surplus only by selling off the public 
domain, mediated by the financial sector.
The stock market soared, mainly in response to falling interest rates, and 
also because of takeover bids made attractive by the tax and deregulatory 
changes that left a wide swath of bankruptcies in their wake in the late 1990s. 
Corporate raiders issued junk bonds to raise money to “take companies 
private” by buying their stock (which had paid taxable dividends) and 
replacing it with tax-deductible high-yield bonds. This enabled companies to 
pay out twice as much money as interest as they could pay in dividends, 
because they were able to pay bondholders out of pre-tax revenue, cutting the 
tax collector out of the picture. But this interest was contractual. Unlike 
dividends that could be cut back when profits declined, missing an interest 
payment meant insolvency and potential bankruptcy. This was the effect of 
tax rules favoring debt rather than equity financing.
Instead of raising funds to finance new capital investment as textbook s 
describe, the stock market was downsized as stocks were retired in favor of 
bonds. Taxes on capital gains were slashed to a fraction of tax rates on earned 
income (wages and profits). This encouraged a shift of investible savings into 
lending and speculation rather than to finance direct industrial investment. 

Employees also were cut out, and industrial corporations fell prey to financial 
raiders who paid off their bonds by selling their companies part by part, 
emptied out corporate pension funds (by declaring them to be “overfunded”), 
downsized and out-sourced the labor force. The promised capital investment, 
factory construction and new hiring gave way to a postindustrial Rust Belt. 
This was euphemized as a “service” economy, without specifying that the 
main “services” were financial, based on appropriating and capitalizing into 
bank loans real estate and natural resource rents (including the telephone and 
radio spectrum) and monopoly rents or super-profits for the public agencies 
and utilities being carved out of the public domain.
To defend themselves against the threat that their stockholders would sell 
a controlling share to debt-financed raiders, target companies took on so 
much debt of their own that no raiders from Drexel Burnham or other attack 
houses could find room to issue their own bonds against the company’s 
assets. The term for this strategy, taking the “poison pill,” reflected the 
danger that observers associated with the fact that the major way for 
companies to protect their independence in the new mergers-and-acquisitions 
frenzy was to borrow money to use in buying other companies. . The stock 
market became a search for quick gains as speculators tried to guess what 
companies would be the next to be bought. 
The postindustrial economy had arrived, not on a wave of rising labor 
productivity as its promoters had forecast (although this was part of it), but in 
a struggle for existence between finance and manufacturing over who would 
obtain the economic surplus. A new breed of corporate managers and 
arbitrageurs borrowed not to finance profit-making enterprise, but to obtain 
capital gains on stock market maneuverings, real estate, rare paintings and 
other trophies. They leveraged their own capital by borrowing credit, which 
now can be created without prior saving. And it was created with the aim of 
transforming the economic surplus into a flow of interest payments — by 
capitalizing the surplus for bank loans. This became the way in which 
economic assets were priced: by what a bank would lend against them.
Headed by real estate and the oil industry, entire sectors operated without 
reporting a profit. Interest charges on this “financialization” strategy absorbed 
the revenue that otherwise would have been taken as profit and paid to the tax 

collector. Investors preferred to take their returns in the form of capital gains. 
Earnings were pledged as tax-deductible interest in exchange for yet more 
debt financing to leverage the post-industrialization process all the more. 
No regulators stepped in to deter the economy’s rise in debt/equity ratios. 
Many of the tactics employed were challenged, major participants went to jail 
and Drexel Burnham went bankrupt, but the lawyers and lobbyists who 
designed the new practices went free and prospered. Once the corporate 
raiding of pension funds and other capital reserves was deemed not to fall 
under the RICO (racketeering) act, companies could be bought, their bank 
accounts and pension fund reserves looted, and their real estate and 
operational divisions sold off fair and square.
The new deregulatory ethic claimed that such raiding enriched the 
economy by increasing stock-market valuations, which were defined as being 
the new postindustrial form of “wealth creation” rather than as asset 
stripping. A miasma of well-funded euphemism descended over most 
economic discussion, injecting doctrinaire anesthetic into the industrial 
sector’s defense mechanisms Popular movies such as Wall Street provided a 
more realistic picture than the libertarian Chicago School apologetics.
 
Sacrificing the “Real” Economy to Pay the Expanding Debt Overhead
Financial rentiers obtained the revenues previously destined for the tax 
collector. Profits and dividend payments on equity were replaced by interest 
payments on mortgages, bonds and other debts. Federal income-tax receipts 
fell proportionally, aggravating the budget deficit and swelling the public 
debt. Private sector debt also grew as the revenue freed from taxation was 
pledged to bankers and bondholders in exchange for credit to buy the 
properties whose price appreciated as taxes were cut. The government’s loss 
and corresponding indebtedness found its counterpart in the FIRE sector’s 
gain, which was capitalized into more private-sector debt.
Rather than downsizing the government as Reaganomics had promised, 
the financial bubble empowered the government over the economy in a new 
way, in a role as large as hitherto had been played only by war. The 

government’s new role was to underwrite the financial bubble, by reversing 
the trend toward progressive taxation and taking the side of finance against 
the “real” production-and-consumption economy. Starting in 1981 when 
President Ronald Reagan took office, the government lowered taxes on the 
major banking sector’s customers — real estate and monopolies, and 
corporations generally as well as the upper income and wealth brackets. The 
effect was to leave more revenue tax-free to pay creditors — more rental 
revenue to be capitalized into mortgage loans to bid up real estate prices, and 
more corporate profits to be used to pay bondholders and thus attract raiders 
using junk bonds.
This shifted the tax burden onto employees, most drastically by the 
Greenspan Commission’s proposal in 1983 to treat Social Security as a user 
fee, to be financed by saving in advance — forced savings withheld from 
employee paychecks and also their employers’ income, to be invested in 
Treasury bonds, enabling taxes to be cut on property, on the wealthiest tax 
brackets and on inherited fortunes. The result was to add a fiscal burden on 
top of the debt burden that was shrinking the “real” economy, even as the 
financial efflorescence gave the impression that the economy was growing. It 
was not Main Street’s economy, but that of Wall Street.
The government also intervened into the economy on the side of the 
financial sector by guaranteeing savings in the amount of the economy’s 
exponentially rising debt in which these savings were invested. At the end of 
the deregulatory and tax-subsidized indebtedness would come the 2008 bank 
bailouts to ward off the bankruptcies that brought debt bubbles down to earth 
in times past. 
Many of the junk bonds issued by corporate raiders in the 1980s were sold 
to the deregulated savings and loan (S&L) industry, whose insider loans a 
financed a real estate bubble whose subsequent collapse wiped out S&L 
stock- and bondholders, leaving some $300 billion in Federal S&L Insurance 
Corporation (FSLIC) cleanup costs. The parallel international credit bubble 
also burst. But the IMF bailed out global banks that had lent to Latin America 
and other third world countries. Governments were prompted to borrow from 
the IMF to pay interest and principal to these international banks. (Citibank 
was the most over-committed. Its head, John Reed, assured his depositors 
that “countries don’t go bankrupt.” By “stretching the envelope,” Citibank 

attracted other U.S. banks, followed by British, German and French banks in 
its train.) 
For the time being the inter-governmental debt bubble had reached its 
limit. The World Bank responded by organizing a vast voluntary pre-
foreclosure sale by debtor governments. As sovereign governments there was 
no easy way to force them to pay their debts. They had to be persuaded that it 
was in their interest to dismantle their public infrastructure and enterprises, 
and sell them off to private buyers — who bought on credit provided by the 
international banks. 
These privatization selloffs enabled Latin American and other third world 
governments to avoid default after Mexico’s 1982 insolvency collapsed the 
global debt market. The objective was to save international banks and 
institutional bondholders from further losses — just as the European Central 
Bank would do with Ireland and Greece in 2010–11.
The epoch of Moral Hazard arrived — hazardous most of all for the 
taxpayers who footed the bill for reimbursing the large institutional investors 
who took high interest premiums, secure in the knowledge that government 
agencies would bear the real risk.
 
Inflating the Debt Bubble in an Attempt to Carry the Debt Overhead
The economy was being re-planned. Politicians still were doing the 
lawmaking, but acted increasingly as vehicles for legislation composed by the 
FIRE sector to serve its own special interests. In gratitude for their role as the 
major campaign contributors to both parties, FIRE-sector lobbyists were 
given a free hand in writing new tax legislation, while control over the 
regulatory agencies was ceded to the financial industry’s own proxies. 
In practice this meant deregulation, as became clear when the S&L 
industry’s Danny Wall was appointed head of the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board. Instead of limiting debt-leveraging practices as the financial bubble 
gained momentum, government agencies poured fuel on the fire by 
dismantling the rules that had limited risk while channeling finance to serve 
public objectives. The major beneficiaries were the large institutional savers, 

whose deposits in S&Ls and commercial banks were guaranteed up to much 
higher levels, even as these deposits were recycled recklessly into real estate 
and high-interest “junk” bonds. A real estate debt bubble of unprecedented 
size was inflated — only to be outdone by the Greenspan Bubble of 2001–08.
The government relinquished tax income to creditors across the board, but 
the revenue that was freed was used more for financial parasitism than for 
productive investment. The largest impetus to the debt boom took the form of 
slashing taxes on commercial real estate. Depreciation schedules — the 
“small print” determining how quickly property owners could take their tax-
free capital consumption write-offs on buildings and capital improvements — 
were shortened drastically in 1981, freeing most real estate from income 
taxation. Local real estate rates also were lowered, especially for commercial 
property. The cash flow that was freed from the tax collector was pledged to 
mortgage lenders for credit to buy more commercial and residential 
properties, whose prices soared as more money became available at falling 
rates of interest as the Federal Reserve flooded the banking system with 
credit — and the banks lent it out to become other parties’ debts. For the 
economy at large this meant higher access costs to obtain housing and office 
space. But most people viewed the process as creating wealth, not as making 
its acquisition more expensive for the economy at large.
Someone must bear the fiscal burden of bailing out the soaring volume of 
bad savings. The onus falls on the average taxpayer, largely through 
increased “forced saving” (a term hitherto used when describing fascist or 
Stalinist economies) in the form of Social Security and Medicaid withholding 
taxes, and a proliferation of consumption taxes, plus cutbacks in government 
social spending. As for the manufacturing sector, it is given few of the special 
tax benefits enjoyed by the FIRE sector and by the highest personal tax 
brackets.
Under these conditions employee pension funds found their strategy 
dictated by the new shape imposed on the economy by the financial planners 
who have replaced those of Keynesian social democracy. The problem is that 
from the pension-fund managers’ viewpoint the value of savings seems best 
preserved by joining the financially parasitic process, instead of backing 
more job-creating investment. In this way the employees, through their 
legitimate desire for an adequate pension, inadvertently help speed the 

deindustrialization process.
In the face of mounting savings/debts, the limited repertory of credit-
worthy loan projects obliged banks and other financial institutions to seek out 
new classes of borrowers. One new category consisted of global debtors in 
Asia, Russia and other regions. Another category was sub-prime borrowers in 
America — the poor at the bottom of the economic pyramid. Shares boomed 
for companies involved in high-interest payday lending, pawnshops, second-
mortgage lending and credit card companies and banks. As debtors defaulted, 
Washington lobbyists for predatory lenders succeeded in rewriting the 
bankruptcy laws to remove traditional protections for financial victims. This 
became the legal dimension of the “magic of compound interest” that was 
financializing American society.
Even for more responsible financial institutions, loan standards were 
relaxed. Fewer loans were self-amortizing. Banks were just as glad to see the 
debt remain perpetual, with only the interest being paid. But a growing 
proportion of loans could not even be paid out of the borrower’s profit or 
cash flow. Hopes for repayment depended on the ability of debtors to sell 
their property — at a high enough capital gain to pay off the loan.
Banks were making larger and larger real estate loans to new buyers, 
enabling old mortgages to be paid off and replaced with larger ones. The 
economy entered what Hyman Minsky called the Ponzi stage of the financial 
cycle, in which debtors kept solvent by borrowing the money needed to pay 
their creditors. The indebted economy survived by borrowing the interest — 
thanks to the Federal Reserve fueling asset-price inflation. This was the 
Bubble Economy, which gained momentum in the 1990s and then took off 
after the dot.com stock market bubble collapsed in 2000.
What enabled the loans to be covered — and the volume of savings to 
keep growing, and indeed to be relent on their way seemingly toward infinity 
— was the inflation of asset prices. U.S. Treasury fiscal policy and Federal 
Reserve monetary policy aimed at building such windfalls structurally into 
what promised to be a New Economy. What actually was occurring was an 
over-stretched financial economy replacing the industrial economy. The 
portmanteau term “postindustrial society” failed to specify its basically 
financial aspect, and hence missed the essence of the structural change being 

implemented by government fiat.
As the rising flow of funds fueled an asset-price inflation, business and 
even personal debts were taken on to buy assets that already were in place, 
mainly real estate and business corporations. Having embarked upon this 
path, debtors borrowed all the more merely to stay afloat, not to create new 
means of production. Hitherto taxable profits and dividend payouts were 
replaced by interest paid to creditors as a tax-deductible expense. These 
interest charges were built into the economy’s cost structure as part and 
parcel of its new capital-gains focus. In effect, the economy was trying to 
“borrow its way out of debt” as new lending was extended mainly to fuel the 
asset-price inflation. This became America’s version of Japan’s zaitech 
financial engineering that had marked that country’s bubble economy.
But even the exponential growth of debt must have a limit. The New 
Financial Economy was replacing the manufacturing economy. Industrial 
neighborhoods in America’s largest cities were gentrified into high-priced 
luxury residential lofts and sold to FIRE-sector managers and kindred young, 
upwardly mobile professionals. The term “gentrification” reflected the degree 
to which a new financial gentry was being vested as the modern epoch’s 
successor to feudal Europe’s landed gentry. 
This modern financial gentry lives more on capital gains than rents, and 
makes its money by running into debt rather than by staying out of it. This is 
why the New Financial Economy has been accompanied by more frequent 
waves of bankruptcy. It tries to solve the debt problem (which seemed so 
intractable in 1980) by supplying enough loanable funds to float an 
exponentially rising volume of borrowing by governments, real estate 
investors, corporate raiders and speculators. The secret of perpetual financial 
motion seemed to have been discovered. 
Since the 1980s the compound interest phenomenon has expressed itself 
mainly through the asset (“savings”) side of the balance sheet, although of 
course both the savings and debt sides have grown in tandem. This is why 
national income statistics indicate a zero saving rate, despite the vast increase 
in the financial flow of funds. Current accounting practices look at net rather 
than gross flows. The volume of gross savings (total financial assets) was 
doubling with increasing rapidity, fueled by a tidal wave of new bank credit 

created and poured into the capital markets mainly as loans. 
As described above, stocks were retired and replaced by the high-interest 
bonds issued by raiders, whose buyout offers raised stock market prices. The 
ensuing financial speculation seemed to be justified by asset-price inflation, 
precisely because savings were lent to borrowers to bid up prices for assets. 
Borrowers turned around and pledged these assets as collateral to their 
backers for yet larger loans, on which they hoped to make further capital 
gains.
A precondition for this self-feeding process to continue was rising 
debt/income ratios across the board, because what was buoying asset prices 
was precisely the expansion of lending. The economy was walking up a 
financial tightrope, carrying increasingly heavy savings and liabilities on each
side of its financial balance sheet. What Federal Reserve Chairman Alan 
Greenspan applauded as “wealth creation” was simply debt creation, justified 
by asset-price inflation.
The ensuing top-heavy instability caused stock and bond prices, real estate 
prices and exchange rates to zigzag wildly. What was new was the safety net 
(which critics called Moral Hazard) that the government provided for savers. 
After it collapsed in 2008 the debt overhead was kept in place by a $13 
trillion bailout by the U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve. Creditors were 
saved — but not debtors. This was the ultimate political consequence of the 
magic of compound interest. It was sufficiently powerful to replace social 
democracy with an emerging financial oligarchy — and to replace long-term 
economic planning with a short-run financialized policy that deteriorated into 
a program for creditors to take the money and run, converting their financial 
claims into whatever “real” assets they could, or at least shifting their 
fortunes to less debt-ridden economies.
There was little discussion about how long the process could continue. 
The logic of financial optimists seemed persuasive only if one granted their 
assumption that lending was made for productive investment whose earning 
power would enable borrowers to pay their debts out of rising earnings. But a 
rising proportion of lending was to inflate the financial bubble. A new kind of 
planned economy was emerging, but not the kind that 19th-century industrial 
futurists had envisioned. To help spur total returns, the U.S. Government cut 

capital gains taxes, leaving yet more gains in the hands of borrowers to pay 
creditors in exchange for larger loans. 
Governments throughout the world were not doing actual planning as 
much as acting as intermediaries implementing plans provided by FIRE-
sector investors and their lobbyists. The world of government planning 
denounced by Frederick Hayek in The Road to Serfdom was replaced by a 
financialized Road to Debt Peonage.
 
PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 12-01]
The government’s loss and corresponding indebtedness found its counterpart 
in the FIRE sector’s gain, which was capitalized into more private-sector 
debt. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 12-02]
From the pension-fund managers’ viewpoint the value of savings seems best 
preserved by joining the financially parasitic process, instead of backing 
more job-creating investment. In this way the employees, through their 
legitimate desire for an adequate pension, inadvertently help speed the 
deindustrialization process. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 12-03]
Hitherto taxable profits and dividend payouts are now avoided. Instead, 
interest is paid to creditors as a tax-deductible expense. These interest charges 
are built into the economy’s cost structure as part and parcel of its new 
capital-gains focus. — Michael Hudson
___________________

**********

PART III: The Global Crisis
 
 
Capping a day of extreme political turbulence in Athens, George 
Papandreou told his socialist colleagues that there was no need for a 
referendum after the conservative opposition promised to support the terms 
of a €130 billion bail-out from the European Union, European Central Bank 
and International Monetary Fund.
 
“Failure to back the package would mean the beginning of our departure 
from the euro,” Mr Papandreou said. “But if we have consensus, then we 
don’t need a referendum.”
 
“I’m pleased to see that there are sufficiently responsible politicians in 
Greece who have understood that message and who have been able to see the 
national priorities,” Mr Sarkozy said, praising the opposition’s decision to 
support the October 27 rescue deal for Greece as courageous and responsible. 
… The abandonment of the referendum plan offered much-needed relief to 
financial markets …
 
— Tony Barber, Kerin Hope, Peter Spiegel and David Oakley, “Greek PM 
scraps referendum plan,” Financial Times, November 3, 2011.
 
__________________

*****
13. Trade and Payments Theory in a 
Financialized Economy
If trade theory is to be based on how economies work and relate to each 
other, it should focus on the financial overhead, capital movements and tax 
policies that are the key to today’s prices, payments and exchange rates. 
Mortgage debt taken on to buy homes (with prices bid up on credit) and 
obtain an education, and wage set-asides for pension funds, Social Security 
and Medicare, all raise the cost of living and doing business. So do debt-
leveraged corporate buyouts — making economies less competitive.
Most trade and exchange rate models have neglected these financial, rental 
and fiscal charges ever since David Ricardo analyzed costs as if economies 
operated on barter. He claimed that debt service and military spending could 
not create economic problems, because they were automatically self-
financing. Capital transfers supposedly set in motion re-stabilizing 
“corrections” enabling debts or payments outflows to be paid without 
disrupting price and income structures. This approach excluded recognition 
of how debt service adds to the cost of living and doing business, and 
depresses exchange rates. 
Forecasts promising that austerity will revive growth and that debt 
leveraging helps economies get richer faster rarely are innocent. When such 
theorizing is pursued generation after generation, the explanation is that 
special interests must be benefiting from its tunnel vision. When it comes to 
minimizing the role of debt and credit, the financial sector’s motivation is to 

distract attention from the problems caused by debts growing beyond the 
ability to be paid, disrupting economies and add to the cost of living and 
doing business.
This turns economics into a public relations lobbying effort for financial 
deregulation. What is remarkable is that debtor interests have accepted this 
“don’t worry about debt” logic about “automatic stabilizers.”
One cannot discuss the roles of finance and government without the 
concept of economic rent, because rent seeking is the largest category of bank 
lending — and also of tax favoritism. Today’s academic mainstream rejects 
the classical idea of unearned income, defined as that which has no 
counterpart in socially necessary costs of production. But economic 
historians will recognize the concept of a free lunch as the centuries-long 
description of rentiers — bankers and landlords in the private sector. 
Post-classical economics claims that there is no such thing as a free lunch 
— as if everyone earns and hence deserves whatever income and wealth they 
obtain, regardless of how they get it. This conflates transfer payments 
(including outright fraud and looting) with productive effort. All rentier 
income appears to be payment for providing economically helpful services, 
equal in value to the income paid to the financial, insurance and real estate 
(FIRE) sector. This is the concept that underlies the national income and 
product accounts (NIPA). 
The classical doctrine now swept under the academic rug began in the 
13th century with the Schoolmen discussing Just Price, mainly to distinguish 
between fair and extortionate banking charges. In time, the idea of unearned 
income came to be applied to land rent. Yet the analysis of economic rent — 
whether in finance, insurance or real estate, or even monopoly pricing — 
finds no room in today’s curriculum. The concept is muddied by turning the 
tables to depict government officials as “rent-seeking” bureaucrats increasing 
public spending and regulation in ways that enhance their own power, in 
unproductive ways that add to the “deadweight” cost of doing business. 
Nothing about predatory FIRE-sector rentiers in this view! 
 
Excluding Debt Service from Trade Theory — and from Domestic Price and 
Income Theory

 
The financial sector historically has sought to make itself invisible. After 
all, what is not seen will not be criticized — or taxed. To paraphrase Charles 
Baudelaire’s quip that the devil wins at the point where the public comes to 
believe that he doesn’t exist, the financial sector’s lobbying effort wins at the 
point where people believe that running into debt contributes to economic 
growth rather than burdens it, and that they will end up richer by acting as 
bank customers. Debt leveraging is depicted as the easiest and even the surest 
way to accumulate wealth — going into debt to buy assets whose prices are 
being inflated on credit, or to spend in the hope of paying out of rising and 
more easily earned future income.
But since 1980 — and especially since the bailouts of 2008 — most 
fortunes have been made by bankers and brokers, largely at the expense of 
their clients and taxpayers. The banking system’s product is debt, in a 
dynamic that ends with many debtors falling into negative equity and 
forfeiting their property to foreclosing creditors. That is the legacy of the real 
estate bubble and debt-financed corporate buyouts. Internationally, debt-
ridden economies are subject to pressure from inter-governmental institutions 
such as the IMF and European Central Bank to impose fiscal austerity on 
their labor force, cut back public spending and even sell off public 
enterprises.
This explains why the non-financial “barter” approach to trade and 
exchange rate theory pioneered by Ricardo, writing as Britain’s leading bank 
spokesman, was a whitewash in denying that foreign payments or credit can 
cause economic problems. Bankers are depicted as oiling the wheels of 
commerce, providing the “neutral” means of pricing goods and services 
(ignoring asset prices), not intruding into the circular flow between producers 
and consumers by extracting debt service and lobbying for rentier privileges. 
The public relations problem that Ricardo faced was that debt service in 
1815 absorbed three-quarters of the British government’s budget. Especially 
problematic was foreign debt taken on to finance military spending and 
subsidies to Britain’s allies in its many centuries of wars against France. The 
Seven Years War (1756–63) and Napoleonic Wars (1787–1815) sharply 
increased the national debt and, as Adam Smith illustrated in Book V of The 

Wealth of Nations, new excise taxes to pay for each new borrowing. 
Confronted with popular criticism of the proliferation of taxes to pay 
bondholders, the political task of bankers was to deny the problems caused by 
this debt. 
 
Most Money and Credit, Wages and National Income are Spent on the FIRE 
Sector
 
The textbook formula MV = PT means money (M) times the velocity of 
turnover (V) = the market price (P) of the economy’s transactions (T). 
However, the “transactions” in question are limited to current production and 
consumption, and “price” refers only to consumer prices or those of other 
commodities — or wages. Yet by far most credit is spent on assets, not goods 
and services. Every day a sum larger than an entire year’s GDP passes 
through the New York Clearing House and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange 
for asset purchases and sales. More than 99% of spending in the United 
States and other financialized economies is thus for real estate, mortgages and 
packaged bank loans, and for stocks and bonds. By limiting the scope of 
analysis to commodity prices and wages, mainstream monetarist theory 
leaves these credit transactions and their debt service out of account.
International payments are dominated by capital flows for direct 
investment, bonds and stocks, bank loans and speculation. Also foreign 
lending and debt service, military spending and financial speculation affect 
exchange rates. But despite John Stuart Mill’s analysis of how “capital 
transfers” affect exchange rates, popular discussion still calculates 
purchasing-power parity rates for MacDonald’s hamburgers and other 
consumer goods as if this were a measure of international equilibrium.
To the extent that trade remains based on the cost of labor and doing 
business, rising payments to the FIRE sector also dominate. This is a far cry 
from the early 19th century when prices reflected mainly the price of food 
and other basic consumer goods. Each country’s debt overhead, housing 
prices, tax rates, public subsidies and fiscal systems determine product prices. 
Some 70% to 75% of typical U.S. wage-earner budgets are paid to the FIRE 
sector and to government. So economic analysis is trivialized if it only takes 

into account direct production costs reducible to labor, not taxes or 
“economic rent” as an element of price with no counterpart in technologically 
necessary production costs — land rent, monopoly rent (including bank 
credit-creating privileges), interest charges and kindred transfer payments to 
rentiers. 
This has far-reaching implications for how best to achieve trade 
competitiveness. Neoliberals tell Latvia, Greece and other countries to 
impose economic austerity by monetary and income deflation to cut wage 
levels (“internal devaluation”). But this leaves financial and tax structures in 
place. Policy discussion is limited to fiscal austerity and currency 
depreciation — but not a shift of the incidence of taxation to real estate, 
finance or monopolies, or less regressive taxation on employment and 
consumption, or debt write-downs. What is lacking in this approach is a view 
of the economy as a system. Wage levels and interest rates are singled out as 
the only variables to “solve” the debt and balance-of-payments problems. So 
we are dealing with a purposeful narrow-mindedness. 
Latvia has flat taxes on employment that add up to 59% of the wage. 
Cutting this tax by 40 percentage points — down to about 20% of the wage 
— would double labor’s take-home pay (from about 40% to 80% of the 
wage). The government would make up the loss by raising the land tax to 
absorb the groundrent, and also the economic rent now being collected by the 
buyers of the formerly public infrastructure. But this rental income is the 
preferred object of bank lending — turning rent into interest payments, 
mainly to branches of Scandinavian banks. Yet there has been little 
discussion of shifting taxes onto land and monopolies, leaving less economic 
rent to capitalize into interest payments, thereby holding down housing 
prices.
Latvia’s public-sector wages were cut by 30% during 2009–10 as the GDP 
plunged by over 20%. But cutting wages also cut employment taxes, so take-
home wages fell only by 12% — as unemployment spread, turning Latvia 
into a neoliberal disaster story. Its regressive tax policy has made the nation’s 
industrial labor so uncompetitive that young adults have emigrated to find 
work, causing Latvia’s population to plunge by 10% (from 2.2 million to 1.9 
million since the last census).

This demographic effect of trade deficits was well recognized by 
economic writers already in the 18th century. But free trade theory 
expurgated the linkages between trade and population growth, for the same 
reason that it conflated finance capital extracting debt service with industrial 
capital employing labor to produce goods and services: Greater realism leads 
to policy conclusions not favored. So economic theory was over-simplified. 
The rent and tax structure is taken for granted or simply treated as 
“exogenous,” being political or “institutional” and as such, excluded from the 
sphere of “scientific” economics proper. The resulting legacy of Ricardian 
trade theory focuses on subsistence consumption, not debt-financed housing 
costs, education, financialized pensions and Social Security, and other FIRE-
sector charges.
A scientific body of analysis would demonstrate how financialization adds 
to the cost of living and doing business. The financial overhead consists not 
only of debt, but also compulsory saving in the form of wage withholding to 
pay for future pensions and medical care. In the United States these wage set-
asides gained momentum after 1980. And the post-2001 Bubble Economy 
that inflated prices on credit for housing, commercial real estate and 
corporate ownership celebrated “debt leveraging” as raising returns on equity.
But the effect was to absorb more of the economic surplus in the form of debt 
service.
All nations face common global prices for fuels and raw materials, and 
licensing fees for patents such as information technology and 
pharmaceuticals. Trade competition reflects financial dynamics, economic 
rent and tax policy in four main national variables: 
 
(1) labor’s cost of living, wages and non-wage benefits (mainly pensions and 
health care), 
(2) land rent and debt overhead, 
(3) the incidence and level of taxation, and 
(4) the terms on which governments provide infrastructure services such as 
transportation and communications, Social Security and health care, along 
with economic subsidies. 

 
The impact of financialization and an anti-labor tax shift on the 
deteriorating U.S. industrial trade balance, for example, is clear from the 
following rough approximation of typical American employee budgets:
 
Balance-sheet factors 
(debts taken on to buy assets rather than current output)
• Housing (ownership or rental costs):  32% to 40%
• Debt service (non-mortgage):  15%
• Private health-care and pension fund contributions:  ?
 
Government tax policy structure
• FICA withholding for Social Security and Medicare:  15%
• Taxes (income, sales and excise or VAT):  15%
 
U.S. de-industrialization — and rising motivation to invest in less debt- 
and rent-ridden economies — reflects the fact that rentier payments and taxes 
absorb as much as 75% of family budgets. In Germany, housing absorbs only 
about 20% of family income, half the U.S. rate. So the proportion of German 
wages available for spending on goods and services (rather than being paid to 
the financial sector as mortgage interest) is 20 percentage points higher than 
is the case with U.S. family budgets. This is explained partly by institutional 
factors and partly by financial practice. Germany has a tradition of rental co-
ops, to which many families belong. Membership rents are based on current 
operating costs. Also, Germany’s construction industry is not monopolized or 
criminalized as it is in New York and other major U.S. cities.
But the major differences between Germany and U.S. real estate are 
financial and legal. European homebuyers typically must save 20% to 30% of 
the purchase price to obtain a mortgage, in contrast to America’s practice of 
100% mortgages (or even a net cash payment to new home buyers) as the 
2002–06 real estate bubble gained momentum. European mortgage markets 

also have been relatively free of no-documentation “liars’ loans” to NINJA 
borrowers (“no income, no job, no assets”) backed by crooked real estate 
brokers and appraisers. Wholesale financial fraud has effectively been 
decriminalized in the United States. 
Renters in the 1970s and ’80s were panicked into buying at extortionate 
prices as residential real estate in the large cities was sold off. Co-ops 
typically were sold with existing mortgages attached to them, with buyers 
borrowing almost an equivalent volume of new debt. Housing costs quickly 
doubled, prompting speculators to increase their share of the residential 
housing market to an estimated one-sixth by 2006.
Looser lending terms — lower down payments, slower amortization rates  
(culminating in no-interest mortgages by 2006), and less regulation to keep 
income declarations honest — fueled a larger debt pyramid. Real estate and 
other assets are worth whatever banks will lend against them. And whatever 
the tax collector relinquishes is “free” to pay the banks. A lower tax on land 
rents leaves more to be capitalized into mortgage loans, and hence inflates the 
price of housing — while government revenue is balanced by burdening labor 
and industry with income and sales taxes. The financial sector aims to shift 
taxes off its major customers (real estate and monopolies) so as to leave more 
revenue “free” to be paid as debt service. To subsidize this debt leveraging, 
interest is made tax-deductible. 
This has major implications for how best to adjust to international 
payments imbalances. Pro-financial lobbyists urge an anti-labor policy of 
“internal devaluation,” lowering wages to make economies more competitive 
to “earn their way out of debt.” But the cost of labor could be reduced just as 
effectively by a tax policy that shifts the fiscal burden off employment onto 
property rents and other economic rent.
Failure to deal with bank loans, real estate, stocks and bonds — and the 
income diverted away from consumption and tangible investment to pay debt 
— limits monetary and price analysis to relating the money supply and 
government budget to price and wage levels. Left out of account is the use of 
credit to fuel asset purchases and speculative gambles, as well as for 
government deficits from bailouts taking bad bank debts onto the public 
balance sheet. In 2011, for example, banks used the U.S. Federal Reserve’s 

$700 billion Quantitative Easing (QE II) mainly for foreign currency 
arbitrage, not making it available for domestic consumer spending. Also left 
out of account are the prices at which public or private infrastructure services 
are supplied.
Failure to take account of debt service and government spending on 
anything except current employment affecting consumer prices makes trade 
theory unrealistic. But financial interests endorse this narrow-mindedness to 
promote anti-labor austerity and high interest rates, and to exclude an 
understanding of how financialization burdens economies with banking and 
financial charges. 
To secure its privileges and tax favoritism, the financial sector opposes 
government power to tax or regulate. In the name of “free markets” it is now 
centralizing economic planning power in Wall Street, the City of London and 
other financial centers. Under ostensibly democratic politics, an 
“independent” central bank has been carved out — independent from elected 
officials, not from the commercial banks whose interests it represents. Many 
voters follow Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan in believing that a 
financial bubble enriches the economy rather than simply turning the surplus 
into a flow of interest and banking fees. 
 
The 2011 Crisis over Greek Government Debt
 
The Eurozone’s rule against central banks lending to governments has 
been attributed largely to Germany’s hyperinflation trauma in the early 
1920s. The myth is the old MV = PT tunnel vision claiming that the problem 
was caused by the Reichsbank using the printing press to finance Germany’s 
budget deficit. Today’s constitution accordingly prevents the central bank 
from creating credit to lend to government. 
This is what psychologists call an implanted memory, a false image 
suggested in this case by anti-government ideologues. Every hyperinflation in 
history has been caused by international payments deficits. For the industrial 
nations, these deficits almost always involve foreign military spending. War 
spending also is responsible for most growth in public debt (as peacetime 

government budgets tended until quite recently to be approximately in 
balance). Paying these debts abroad involves the capital transfers that Ricardo 
argued could not cause serious structural problems, on the myth that they are 
self-financing! 
But in the 1920s the Allies imposed an unpayably high reparations burden 
on Germany — largely to obtain the foreign exchange to pay the Inter-Ally 
arms debts that the U.S. Government insisted on collecting, rather than 
forgiving these debts as allies traditionally had done upon achieving victory.1 
The Reichsbank created German marks to throw onto the currency markets to 
obtain the foreign exchange to pay reparations. France also monetized francs 
to obtain the dollars to pay the American Government. A monetary theory 
that looks only for links between the money supply and current production 
and consumption will fail to understand this situation. The tragic results are 
clear from reviewing the narrow-minded arguments of Jacques Rueff and 
Bertil Ohlin with Keynes and Harold Moulton in the 1920s over the roots of 
international instability in the way that World WarI was settled financially.
The moral is that in addition to the (1) international and (2) financial 
rentier dimensions, (3) the government sector plays a key role the economic 
system. This dimension is missing from models that limit their scope to 
private sector transactions, and indeed, to “current” production and 
consumption spending without reference to the purchase of assets on credit. 
The European Central Bank’s operating philosophy fails to distinguish 
between creating money to spend on employment, production and 
consumption in the “real” economy (affecting consumer prices, commodity 
prices and wages) as compared to creating credit (or simply Treasury debt) to 
give to banks to buy or lend against assets in the hope that this will bolster 
prices for real estate, stocks and bonds. The latter policy inflates asset prices 
but deflates current spending.
The $13 trillion increase in U.S. Treasury debt in the post-2008 financial 
meltdown was not spent in product markets or employment in the “real” 
economy. It was balance-sheet help. Likewise for the ECB, pressure arose by 
October 2011 to violate the German constitution and the Lisbon agreements 
to buy Greek debt — the bonds that French, German and Belgian banks held, 
along with other debts of the PIIGS (Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece and 
Spain). European financial stability came to rest on the ability to rescue banks 

holding these debts. This new money and debt creation has little interface 
with the “real” production-and-consumption economy, except to burden 
taxpayers.
This Eurozone financial crisis of summer and autumn 2011 shows the 
importance of distinguishing between two modes of central bank money and 
debt creation. The first is to spur deficits “Keynesian-style” by spending on 
employment, goods and services. The second is to increase balance-sheet 
debt without spending on current output — for instance to give banks 
government bonds to add to their reserves so as to make loans or, as was 
promised in the United States, to write down mortgage loans so as to raise 
property owners out of negative equity in order to stop the deflation of real 
estate prices.
The Eurozone has fallen into an intellectual trap in which banks have 
come to believe their own anti-government propaganda. Associating budget 
deficits only with wage and price inflation excludes consideration of 
government spending to bail out banks or provide credit to re-inflate asset 
prices (as well as creating infrastructure to hold down the cost of living and 
doing business). Opposing public social spending, European banks threw out 
the baby with the bathwater by blocking central banks from doing what the 
Bank of England, the U.S. Federal Reserve and other central banks were 
created to do: finance public deficits. This obliges governments to borrow 
from banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions. The 
resulting debt overhead leads to debt deflation that slows the economy and its 
tax yield, producing a fiscal crisis that in due course becomes a financial 
crisis.
To resolve matters, banks are backtracking and urging the European 
Central Bank to make loans to government — to bail out banks and 
bondholders, not to spend on employment in the “real” economy. Voters 
understandably resent further bank bailouts under conditions where many 
debtors are themselves facing foreclosure and have lost much of their net 
worth. Why should governments bail out the financial sector at the top of the 
pyramid but not reflate production and consumption in the “real” economy. 
The problem today, after all, is under-employment and debt deflation, not 
inflation.

Economic models have not caught up with this reality. National income 
statistics do not distinguish the rentier layer from the “real” economy below 
it, much less how the wealthiest 1% (and especially the richest 0.1%) are 
making money at the expense of the bottom 90% or even 99%. Credit is 
depicted only as financing economic expansion, not leading to shrinkage and 
austerity. Yet in America the easiest way to make money is not by “creating 
jobs” but by loading the economy down with debt, inflating asset prices on 
credit, privatizing natural monopolies and extracting economic rent in the 
form of higher access charges. None of this increases real output. But it does 
increase the cost of living and doing business. 
 
Public Over-Indebtedness Leads to Privatization Sell-Offs
 
New investment and hiring taper off as rising debt charges divert income 
from being spent on current output. Economic growth slows in an S-curve, 
yet debts continue to accrue interest, which is lent out to obtain yet more 
interest, diverting yet more income from production and consumption. 
Slower income growth net of this debt service leads to lower tax payments 
(especially as interest is deemed tax-deductible), and hence to deepening 
budget deficits. 
The financial sector’s political strategy is to use these deficits as an 
opportunity to insist that governments balance their budgets by selling off 
public enterprises and other assets. The result is a modern version of Britain’s 
Enclosure Movements of the 16th to 18th centuries, except that today’s 
version is international and driven by the financial sector. Starting with the 
IMF and World Bank, and most recently the European Central Bank (ECB), 
inter-governmental financial institutions have gained authority over national 
governments. The ECB has taken the lead in telling Greece to sell off some 
€50 billion euros worth of prime tourist land, some of its islands, offshore oil-
drilling rights or even the Parthenon, as well as the water and sewer systems 
of Athens and other cities, the Piraeus port and other parts of the Commons.2 
When the new buyers charge monopoly prices for the infrastructure being 
sold off, this increases the cost of living and doing business, turning the 
economy into a set of tollbooth opportunities. The resulting economic rent is 

financialized as buyers borrow from banks whose loan officers calculate the 
prospects for rent extraction available to pay interest. What the public sector 
relinquishes in user fees and taxes is made available to pay (tax-deductible) 
interest to the FIRE sector — without the public-interest dimension of public 
investment. So instead of being “neutral” in its price and income effects, 
credit transforms the economy’s structure itself.
A century ago U.S. economists described public infrastructure investment 
as a “fourth factor of production” — roads and canals, urban water and sewer 
systems, education, the post office, communications and other publicly-
owned utilities that represent the largest category of tangible capital 
investment (next to buildings) in many economies. Providing their services at 
cost or on a subsidized basis (transportation) or freely (as in the case of 
roads), their returns are to be calculated not like private-sector investment in 
user fees relative to capital investment costs, but in the degree to which this 
infrastructure lowers the economy’s costs and prices.3
Privatization adds to these costs by involving expenses that public 
enterprise rarely charges. These add-ons are headed by interest and dividend 
payments to private owners, other underwriting and financial fees, and much 
higher salaries and bonuses to the privatized managers, including stock 
options. And as part of the structural transformation of society urged by 
creditors, governments are to deregulate (or simply not put regulatory 
authorities in place) the sectors being privatized on credit. Finally, labor is 
outsourced, especially to non-union workers. On the broadest level, the 
world’s major financial centers replace national governments as economic 
planners allocating resources, particularly in nations that fall into foreign 
debt.
Financial lobbyists advise governments to sell off public infrastructure, to 
buyers on credit. Equilibrium conditions are resolved when the new owners 
pledge the current cash flow of rent-extraction opportunities to the banks as 
interest. They then try to raise access charges to roads, water, power, 
transportation and other public services. 
Governments are forced into a budget squeeze by depriving them of a 
central bank of the sort that Britain and the United States have. The proper 
historical role of central banks or Treasuries is to finance government 

spending by creating money. This is in practice how the economy is supplied 
with money and credit, which, being fungible, is used as the means of 
circulation for overall activity — the purchase and sale of goods and services, 
and the transfer of property, stocks and bonds or other assets. 
If central banks are deprived of this opportunity to create credit, 
governments must rely on commercial banks to finance their budget deficits 
— at interest. This provides a free lunch to banks as a result of their privilege 
of credit creation. To avoid crises and bank runs, bank deposits are insured by 
government agencies. This runs the risk of transferring the banking system’s 
losses onto the public balance sheet when crises arrive. Unless the bank 
insurance premiums accurately reflect this risk, such insurance represents a 
public subsidy to the banks.
Most important from the vantage point of national competitiveness is the 
fact that the privatization of credit creation raises the cost of living and doing 
business, by building in financial overhead charges. Privatization of public 
infrastructure has the same effect, by providing rent-seeking opportunities for 
natural monopolies financed on credit rather than providing their basic 
services at subsidized rates or freely, financed out of progressive taxation.
 
Can “Internal Devaluation” Make Labor More Competitive?
 
Economies are complex systems whose interconnections are broader than 
current trade theory takes into account. To analyze costs and trade 
competition requires integrating the “real” production and consumption 
economy with balance-sheet transactions in assets and the debt overhead, as 
well as with government fiscal policy. 
The key to fiscal policy is much more than the level of taxation. The 
incidence of taxation affects domestic cost structures and determines whether 
the burden will fall on labor and its employers (increasing production costs) 
or on property and rent-yielding assets. Taxing land rent holds down the price 
of housing; taxing employment and sales raise the cost of living and doing 
business. Likewise in monetary policy, the terms on which credit is created 
affect the degree of debt pyramiding, while public capital investment in 

infrastructure tends to provide its basic services at a lower cost than 
privatization.
Failure to take account of these property, financial and the government 
balances leaves today’s mainstream trade theory — and above all, the 
adjustment policies being prescribed for countries in deficit — to focus 
crudely on labor’s overall wage rates rather than on the structure of family 
and business budgets. Neoliberal demands for wage cuts overlook the fact 
that the cost of labor may be reduced more efficiently by shifting the mode of 
taxation to focus on collecting economic rent and minimizing the debt 
overhead. This policy can reduce costs and increase competitiveness much 
less wastefully than austerity programs aimed at cutting wages and social 
spending. The effect of neoliberal austerity programs is to shrink markets and 
induce emigration of labor, worsening international deficits rather than 
overcoming them.
 
A Policy Antidote: The Progressive Era’s Attempt to Ward off 
Financialization
 
The classical anti-rentier policy featured:
 
(1) a central bank to monetize government spending deficits rather than 
borrowing at interest from commercial banks and other creditors (e.g., as 
dictated by the ECB and the Lisbon treaty);
(2) taxing away land rent, and enacting anti-monopoly laws and regulatory 
agencies to keep prices in line with necessary and justifiable costs of 
production;
(3) keeping basic infrastructure in the public domain, providing it at cost 
or at subsidized rates or freely (as in the case of roads), with construction 
costs financed out of progressive income taxation and taxes on economic 
rent;
(4) paying for pensions and Social Security and health insurance on a pay-
as-you-go basis rather than by financialization (pre-saving by purchasing 

bonds and stocks);
(5) not permitting interest payments to be tax deductible; encouraging 
equity financing rather than subsidizing debt;
(6) providing a national income accounting format that (a) distinguishes 
economic rent paid to the FIRE sector and monopolies, and (b) recognizes the 
contribution of public infrastructure investment to lowering the cost of living 
and doing business.
 
Financialization has reversed these Progressive Era policies designed to 
minimize the debt overhead and the rent-extracting opportunities that are 
today’s prime objective of bank marketing departments. However, countries 
that recently have been neoliberalized may still rectify matters by taxing rent 
and windfall gains to recover what has been appropriated. They also can 
remove the tax deductibility of interest and “watered” charges such as high 
salaries, and tax the fictitious transfer pricing and savings via offshore 
banking centers at the rate that normal earnings would be taxed. These are the 
classical economic policies proposed to free markets from the legacy of 
European feudalism and conquest of the land. They remain the great tasks 
confronting nations as the global economy enters the End Days of the post-
World War II credit/debt expansion.
 
Tables 1–4 follow: 
Neoliberal vs. Classical – Scope of Economic Theory
Neoliberal vs. Classical – Political Ideology
Neoliberal vs. Classical – Fiscal Policy
Neoliberal vs. Classical – Trade Policy




 
PULL QUOTES
 
[PULL QUOTE 13-01]
Neoliberals tell Latvia, Greece and other countries to impose economic 
austerity by monetary and income deflation to cut wage levels (“internal 
devaluation”). But this leaves financial and tax structures in place. Policy 
discussion is limited to fiscal austerity and currency depreciation — but not a 

shift of the incidence of taxation to real estate, finance or monopolies, or less 
regressive taxation on employment and consumption, or debt write-downs. — 
Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 13-02]
Neoliberal demands for wage cuts overlook the fact that the cost of labor may 
be reduced more efficiently by shifting the mode of taxation to focus on 
collecting economic rent and minimizing the debt overhead. Austerity 
programs shrink markets and induce emigration of labor, worsening 
international deficits rather than overcoming them. — Michael Hudson
1 I describe the reparations and arms-debt tangle in Super Imperialism (2nd ed. 1992), and the 
distinction between the domestic budget problem and the international transfer problem in my historical 
review of theories of Trade, Development and Foreign Debt (2nd ed., 2010).
2 See for instance Andy Kessler, “The ‘Brady Bond’ Solution for Greek Debt,” Wall Street Journal, 
June 29, 2011: “Private buyers are increasingly skeptical of government guarantees and will demand 
real collateral. Credit default swap derivatives, which merely spread the risk, will no longer do. Some 
other sweetener will be needed. The solution? Bonds backed by real Greek assets. ... utilities, railroads, 
tollways, airports, cellphone services, tourism, Ouzo factories and maybe even the islands of Santorini 
and Mykonos. If (some say when) the Greeks default, the Germans or new bondholders end up with the 
assets, much like in a home foreclosure.” This is why the Financial Times’ Lex column reported 
(“Greece: reckoning postponed,” June 29, 2011): “the vote in parliament was held to the sound of 
rioting and the smell of tear gas.”
3 I describe the logic in “Simon Patten on Public Infrastructure and Economic Rent Capture,” 
American Journal of Economics and Sociology 70 (October 2011): 873–903. Patten was the first 
Professor of Economics at America’s pre-eminent business school, the Wharton School at the 
University of Pennsylvania.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 13
______________

***** 
14. U.S. Quantitative Easing is Fracturing 
the Global Economy 
 
Moreover, it may well be asked whether we can take it for granted that a 
return to freedom of exchanges is really a question of time. Even if the reply 
were in the affirmative, it is safe to assume that after a period of freedom the 
regime of control will be restored as a result of the next economic crisis.
— Paul Einzig, Exchange Control (1934)1
 
Great structural changes in world trade and finance occur quickly — by 
quantum leaps, not by slow marginal accretions. The 1945–2010 era of 
relatively open trade, capital movements and foreign exchange markets is 
being destroyed by a predatory financial opportunism that is breaking the 
world economy into two spheres: a dollar sphere in which central banks in 
Europe, Japan and many OPEC and Third World countries hold their reserves 
the form of U.S. Treasury debt of declining foreign-exchange value; and a 
BRIC-centered sphere, led by China, India, Brazil and Russia, reaching out to 
include Turkey and Iran, most of Asia, and major raw materials exporters that 
are running trade surpluses.
What is reversing trends that seemed irreversible for the past 65 years is 
the manner in which the United States has dealt with its bad-debt crisis. The 
Federal Reserve and Treasury are seeking to inflate the economy out of debt 
with an explosion of bank liquidity and credit — which means yet more debt. 

This is occurring largely at other countries’ expense, in a way that is flooding 
the global economy with electronic “keyboard” bank credit while the U.S. 
balance-of-payments deficit widens and U.S.  official debt soars beyond any 
foreseeable means to pay. The dollar’s exchange rate is plunging, and U.S. 
money managers themselves are leading a capital flight out of the domestic 
economy to buy up foreign currencies and bonds, gold and other raw 
materials, stocks and entire companies with cheap dollar credit.
This outflow from the dollar is not the kind of capital that takes the form 
of tangible investment in plant and equipment, buildings, research and 
development. It is not a creation of assets as much as the creation of debt, and 
its multiplication by mirroring, credit insurance, default swaps and an array 
of computerized forward trades. The global financial system has decoupled 
from trade and investment, taking on a life of its own.
In fact, financial conquest is seeking today what military conquest did in 
times past: control of land and basic infrastructure, industry and mining, 
banking systems and even government finances to extract the economic 
surplus as interest and tollbooth-type economic rent charges. U.S. officials 
euphemize this policy as “quantitative easing.” The Federal Reserve is 
flooding the banking system with so much liquidity that Treasury bills now 
yield less than 1%, and banks can draw freely on Fed credit. Japanese banks 
have seen yen borrowing rates fall to 0.25%.
This policy is based on a the wrong-headed idea that if the Fed provides 
liquidity, banks will take the opportunity to lend out credit at a markup, 
“earning their way out of debt” — inflating the economy in the process. And 
when the Fed talks about “the economy,” it means asset markets — above all 
for real estate, as some 80% of bank loans in the United States are mortgage 
loans. 
One-third of U.S. real estate is now reported to be in negative equity, as 
market prices have fallen behind mortgage debts. This is bad news not only 
for homeowners but also for their bankers, as the collateral for their mortgage 
loans does not cover the principal. Homeowners are walking away from their 
homes, and the real estate market is so thoroughly plagued with a decade of 
deception and outright criminal fraud that property titles themselves are 
losing security. And despite FBI findings of financial fraud in over three-

quarters of the packaged mortgages they have examined, the Obama Justice 
Department has not sent a single bankster to jail. 
Instead, the financial crooks have been placed in charge — and they are 
using their power over government to promote their own predatory gains, 
having disabled U.S. public regulatory agencies and the criminal justice 
system to create a new kind of centrally planned economy in the hands of 
banks. As Joseph Stiglitz recently observed:
 
In the years prior to the breaking of the bubble, the financial industry was 
engaged in predatory lending practices, deceptive practices. They were 
optimizing not in producing mortgages that were good for the American 
families but in maximizing fees and exploiting and predatory lending. Going 
and targeting the least educated, the Americans that were most easy to prey 
on.
We’ve had this well documented. And there was the tip of the iceberg that 
even in those years the FBI was identifying fraud. When they see fraud, it’s 
really fraud. But beneath that surface, there were practices that really should 
have been outlawed if they weren’t illegal.
… the banks used their political power to make sure they could get away 
with this [and] … that they could continue engaging in these kinds of 
predatory behaviors.… there’s no principle. It’s money. It’s campaign 
contributions, lobbying, revolving door, all of those kinds of things.
… it’s like theft … A good example of that might be [former Countrywide 
CEO] Angelo Mozillo, who recently paid tens of millions of dollars in fines, 
a small fraction of what he actually earned, because he earned hundreds of 
millions.
The system is designed to actually encourage that kind of thing, even with 
the fines.… we fine them, and what is the big lesson? Behave badly, and the 
government might take 5% or 10% of what you got in your ill-gotten gains, 
but you’re still sitting home pretty with your several hundred million dollars 
that you have left over after paying fines that look very large by ordinary 
standards but look small compared to the amount that you’ve been able to 
cash in.

The fine is just a cost of doing business. It’s like a parking fine. 
Sometimes you make a decision to park knowing that you might get a fine 
because going around the corner to the parking lot takes you too much time.
I think we ought to go do what we did in the S&L [crisis] and actually put 
many of these guys in prison. Absolutely. These are not just white-collar 
crimes or little accidents. There were victims. That’s the point. There were 
victims all over the world.… the financial sector really brought down the 
global economy and if you include all of that collateral damage, it’s really 
already in the trillions of dollars.2
 
This victimization of the international financial system is a consequence of 
the U.S. Government’s attempt to bail out the banks by re-inflating U.S. real 
estate, stock and bond markets at least to their former Bubble Economy 
levels. This is what U.S. economic policy and even its foreign policy is now 
all about, including de-criminalizing financial fraud. As Treasury Secretary 
Tim Geithner tried to defend this policy: “Americans were rightfully angry 
that the same firms that helped create the economic crisis got taxpayer 
support to keep their doors open. But the program was essential to averting a 
second Great Depression, stabilizing a collapsing financial system, protecting 
the savings of Americans [or more to the point, he means, their indebtedness] 
and restoring the flow of credit that is the oxygen of the economy.”3
Other economists might find a more fitting analogy to be carbon dioxide 
and debt pollution. “Restoring the flow of credit” is a euphemism for keeping 
today’s historically high debt levels in place, and indeed adding yet more 
debt (“credit”) to enable home buyers, stock market investors and others to 
bid asset prices back up to rescue the banking system from the negative 
equity into which it has fallen. That is what Mr. Geithner means by 
“stabilizing a collapsing financial system” — bailing out banks and making 
all the counterparties of AIG’s fatal financial gambles whole at 100 cents on 
the dollar.
The Fed theorizes that if it provides nearly free liquidity, banks will lend it 
out at a markup to “reflate” the economy. The “recovery” that is envisioned is 
one of new debt creation. This would rescue the biggest and most risk-taking 
banks from their negative equity, by pulling homeowners out of theirs. 

Housing prices could begin to soar again. 
But the hoped-for new borrowing is not occurring. Instead of lending more 
— at least, lending at home — banks have been tightening their loan 
standards rather than lending more to U.S. homeowners, consumers and 
businesses since 2007. This has obliged debtors to start paying off the debts 
they earlier ran up. The U.S. saving rate has risen from zero three years ago 
to 3% today — mainly in the form of amortization to pay down credit-card 
debt, mortgage debt and other bank loans.
Instead of lending domestically, banks are sending the Fed’s tsunami of 
credit abroad, flooding world currency markets with cheap U.S. “keyboard 
credit.” The Fed’s plan is like that of the Bank of Japan after its bubble burst 
in 1990: The hope is that lending to speculators will enable banks to earn 
their way out of debt. So U.S. banks are engaging in interest-rate arbitrage 
(the carry trade), currency speculation, commodity speculation (driving up 
food and mineral prices sharply this year), and buying into companies in Asia 
and raw materials exporters.
By forcing up targeted currencies, this dollar outflow into foreign 
exchange speculation and asset buy-outs is financial aggression. And to add 
insult to injury, Mr. Geithner is accusing China of “competitive non-
appreciation.” This is a term of invective for economies seeking to maintain 
currency stability. It makes about as much sense as to say “aggressive self-
defense.” China’s interest, of course, is to avoid taking a loss on its dollar 
holdings and export contracts denominated in dollars (as valued in its own 
domestic renminbi).
Countries on the receiving end of this U.S. financial conquest (“restoring 
stability” is how U.S. officials characterize it) understandably are seeking to 
protect themselves. Ultimately, the only serious way to do this is to erect a 
wall of capital controls to block foreign speculators from deranging currency 
and financial markets. 
Changing the international financial system is by no means easy. How 
much of an alternative do countries have, Martin Wolf recently asked. “To 
put it crudely,” he wrote:
 

...the US wants to inflate the rest of the world, while the latter is trying to 
deflate the U.S. The U.S. must win, since it has infinite ammunition: there is 
no limit to the dollars the Federal Reserve can create. What needs to be 
discussed is the terms of the world’s surrender: the needed changes in 
nominal exchange rates and domestic policies around the world.4
 
Mr. Wolf cites New York Federal Reserve chairman William C. Dudley to 
the effect that Quantitative Easing is primarily an attempt to deal with the 
mortgage crisis that capped a decade of bad loans and financial gambles. 
Economic recovery, the banker explained on October 1, 2010, “has been 
delayed because households have been paying down their debt — a process 
known as de-leveraging.” In his view, the U.S. economy cannot recover 
without a renewed debt leveraging to re-inflate the housing market. 
By the “U.S. economy” and “recovery,” to be sure, Mr. Dudley means his 
own constituency the banking system, and specifically the largest banks that 
gambled the most on the real estate bubble of 2003–08. He acknowledges 
that the bubble “was fueled by products and practices in the financial sector 
that led to a rapid and unsustainable buildup of leverage and an underpricing 
of risk during this period,” and that household debt has risen “faster than 
income growth … since the 1950s.” But this debt explosion was justified by 
the “surge in home prices [that] pushed up the ratio of household net worth to 
disposable personal income to nearly 640%.” Instead of saving, most 
Americans borrowed as much as they could to buy property they expected to 
rise in price. For really the first time in history an entire population sought to 
get rich by running into debt (to buy real estate, stocks and bonds), not by 
staying out of it.
But now that asset prices have plunged, people are left in debt. The 
problem is, what to do about it. Disagreeing with critics who “argue that the 
decline in the household debt-to-income ratio must go much further before 
the de-leveraging process can be complete,” or who even urge “that 
household debt-to-income ratios must fall back to the level of the 1980s,” Mr. 
Dudley retorts that the economy must inflate its way out of the debt corner 
into which it has painted itself. “First, low and declining inflation makes it 
harder to accomplish needed balance sheet adjustments.” In other words, 

credit (debt) is needed to bid real estate prices back up. A lower rather than 
higher inflation rate would mean “slower nominal income growth. Slower 
nominal income growth, in turn, means that less of the needed adjustment in 
household debt-to-income ratios will come from rising incomes. This puts 
more of the adjustment burden on paying down debt.” And it is debt deflation 
that is plaguing the economy, so the problem is how to re-inflate (asset) 
prices.
 
(1) How much would the Fed have to purchase to have a given impact on 
the level of long-term interest rates and economic activity, and, 
(2) what constraints exist in terms of limits to balance-sheet expansion, 
and what are the costs involved that could impede efforts to meet the dual 
mandate now or in the future?5
 
On October 15, 2010, Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke explained that he 
wanted the Fed to encourage inflation — his of program of Quantitative 
Easing — and acknowledged that this would drive down the dollar against 
foreign currencies. Flooding the U.S. banking system with liquidity will 
lower interest rates, increasing the capitalization rate of real estate rents and 
corporate income. This will re-inflate asset prices — by creating yet more 
debt in the process of rescue banks from negative equity by pulling 
homeowners out of their negative equity. But internationally, this policy 
means that foreign central banks receive less than 1% on the international 
reserves they hold in Treasury securities — while U.S. investors are making 
much higher returns by borrowing “cheap dollars” to buy Australian, Asian 
and European government bonds, corporate securities, and speculating in 
foreign exchange and commodity markets.
Mr. Bernanke proposes to solve this problem by injecting another $1 
trillion of liquidity over the coming year, on top of the $2 trillion in new 
Federal Reserve credit already created during 2009–10. The pretense is that 
bailing Wall Street banks out of their losses is a precondition for reviving 
employment and consumer spending — as if the giveaway to the financial 
sector will get the economy moving again. 

The working assumption is that if the Fed provides liquidity, banks will 
lend it out at a markup. At least this is the dream of bank loan officers. The 
Fed will help them keep the debt overhead in place, not write it down. But as 
noted above, the U.S. market is “loaned up.” Borrowing by homeowners, 
businesses and individuals is shrinking. Unemployment is rising, stores are 
closing and the economy is succumbing to debt deflation. But most serious of 
all, the QEII program has a number of consequences that Federal Reserve 
policy makers have not acknowledged. For one thing, the banks have used 
the Federal Reserve and Treasury bailouts and liquidity to increase their 
profits and to continue paying high salaries and bonuses. What their lending 
is inflating are asset prices, not commodity prices (or output and 
employment). And asset-price inflation is increasing the power of property 
over living labor and production, elevating the FIRE sector further over the 
“real” economy. 
These problems are topped by the international repercussions that Mr. 
Dudley referred to as the “limits to balance-of-payments expansion.” Cheap 
electronic U.S. “keyboard credit” is going abroad as banks try to earn their 
way out of debt by financing arbitrage gambles, glutting currency markets 
while depreciating the U.S. dollar. So the upshot of the Fed trying save the 
banks from negative equity is to flood the global economy with a glut of U.S. 
dollar credit, destabilizing the global financial system.
 
Can Foreign Economies Rescue the U.S. Banking System?
The international economy’s role is envisioned as a deus ex machina to 
rescue the economy. Foreign countries are to serve as markets for a 
resurgence of U.S. industrial exports (and at least arms sales are taking off to 
India and Saudi Arabia), and most of all as financial markets for U.S. banks 
and speculators to make money at the expense of foreign central banks trying 
to stabilize their currencies.
The Fed believes that debt levels can rise and become more solvent if U.S. 
employment increases by producing more exports. The way to achieve this is 
presumably to depreciate the dollar — the kind of “beggar-my-neighbor” 
policy that marked the 1930s. Devaluation will be achieved by flooding 

currency markets with dollars, providing the kind of zigzagging opportunities 
that are heaven-sent for computerized currency trading, short selling and 
kindred financial options.
Such speculation is a zero-sum game. Someone must lose. If Quantitative 
Easing is to help U.S. banks earn their way out of negative equity, by 
definition their gains must be at the expense of foreigners. This is what 
makes QEII a form of financial aggression.
This is destructive of the global currency stability that is a precondition for 
stable long-term trade relationships. Its underlying assumptions also happen 
to be based on Junk Economics. For starters, it assumes that international 
prices are based on relative price levels for goods and services. But only 
about a third of U.S. wages are spent on commodities. Most is spent on 
payments to the finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE) sector and on taxes. 
Housing and debt service typically absorb 40% and 15% of wage income 
respectively. FICA Wage withholding for Social Security and Medicare taxes 
absorb 11%, and income and sales taxes another 15% to 20%. So before take-
home pay is available for consumer spending on goods and services, these 
FIRE-sector charges make the cost of living so high as to render American 
industrial labor uncompetitive in world markets. No wonder the U.S. 
economy faces a chronic trade deficit!
The FIRE sector overhead has become structural, not merely a marginal 
problem. To restore its competitive industrial position, the United States 
would have to devalue by much more than the 40% that it did back in 1933. 
Trying to “inflate its way out of debt” may help bank balance sheets recover, 
but as long as the economy remains locked in debt deflation it will be unable 
to produce the traditional form of economic surplus needed for genuine 
recovery. A debt write-down would be preferable to the policy of keeping the 
debts on the books and distorting the U.S. economy with inflation — and 
engaging in financial aggression against foreign economies. The political 
problem, of course, is that the financial sector has taken control of U.S. 
economic planning — in its own self-interest, not that of the economy at 
large. A debt write-down would threaten the financial sector’s creditor power 
over the economy. 
So it is up to foreign economies to enable U.S. banks to earn their way out 

of negative equity. For starters, there is the carry trade based on interest-rate 
arbitrage — to borrow at 1%, lend at a higher interest rate, and pocket the 
margin (after hedging the currency shift). Most of this financial outflow is 
going to China and other Asian countries, and to raw materials exporters. 
Australia, for example, has been raising its interest rates in order to slow its 
own real estate bubble. Rather than slowing speculation in its large cities by 
fiscal policy — a land tax — its central bank is operating on the principle that 
a property is worth whatever a bank will lend against it. Raising interest rates 
to the present 4.5% reduces the capitalization rate for property rents — and 
hence shrinks the supply of mortgage credit that has been bidding up 
Australian property prices.
This interest-rate policy has two unfortunate side effects for Australia — 
but a free lunch for foreign speculators. First of all, high interest rates raise 
the cost of borrowing across the board for doing business and for consumer 
finances. Second — even more important for the present discussion — high 
rates attract foreign “hot money” as speculators borrow at low interest in the 
United States (or Japan, for that matter) and buy high-yielding Australian 
government bonds.
The effect is to increase the Australian dollar’s exchange rate, which 
recently has achieved parity with the U.S. dollar. This upward valuation 
makes its industrial sector less competitive, and also squeezes profits in its 
mining sector. So on top of Australia’s rising raw-materials exports, its policy 
to counter its real estate bubble is attracting foreign financial inflows, 
providing a free ride for international arbitrageurs. Over and above their 
interest-rate arbitrage gains is the foreign currency play — rising exchange 
rates in Australia and many Asian countries as the U.S. dollar glut swamps 
the ability of central banks to keep their exchange rates stable. 
This foreign-currency play is where most of the speculative action is today 
as speculators watching these purchases have turned the currencies and bonds 
of other raw-materials exporters into speculative vehicles. This currency 
speculation is the most aggressive, predatory and destructive aspect of U.S. 
financial behavior. Its focus is now shifting to the major nation that has 
resisted U.S. attempts to force its currency up: China. The potentially largest 
prize for U.S. and foreign speculators would be an upward revaluation of its 
renminbi.

The House Ways and Means Committee recently insisted that China raise 
its exchange rate by the 20% that the Treasury and Federal Reserve have 
suggested. Suppose that China would obey this demand. This would mean a 
bonanza for U.S. speculators. A revaluation of this magnitude would enable 
them to put down 1% equity — say, $1 million to borrow $99 million — and 
buy Chinese renminbi forward. The revaluation being demanded would 
produce a 2000% profit of $20 million by turning the $100 million bet (and 
just $1 million “serious money”) into $120 million. Banks can trade on much 
larger, nearly infinitely leveraged margins.
 
Can U.S. Banks Create Enough Electronic “Keyboard Credit” to Buy up the 
Whole World?
The Fed’s QEII policy poses a logical question: Why can’t U.S. credit buy 
out the entire world economy — all the real estate, companies and mineral 
rights yielding over 1%, with banks and their major customers pocketing the 
difference?
Under current arrangements the dollars being pumped into the global 
economy are recycled back into U.S. Treasury IOUs. When foreign sellers 
turn over their dollar receipts to their banks for domestic currency, these 
banks turn the payment over to the central bank — which then faces a 
Hobson’s Choice: either to sell the dollars on the foreign exchange market 
(pushing up their own currency against the dollar), or avoid doing this by 
buying more U.S. Treasury securities and thus keeping the dollar payment 
within the U.S. economy. Why can’t this go on ad infinitum? 
What makes these speculative capital inflows so unwelcome abroad is that 
they do not contribute to tangible capital formation or employment. Their 
effect is simply to push up foreign currencies against the dollar, threatening 
to price exporters out of global markets, disrupting domestic employment as 
well as trade patterns. 
These financial gambles are setting today’s exchange rates, not basic 
production costs. In terms of relative rates of return, foreign central banks 
earn 1% on their U.S. Treasury bonds, while U.S. investors buy up the 

world’s assets. In effect, U.S. diplomats are demanding that other nations 
relinquish their trade surpluses, private savings and general economic surplus 
to U.S. investors, creditors, bankers, speculators, arbitrageurs and vulture 
funds in exchange for this 1% return on U.S. dollar reserves of depreciating 
value — and indeed, in amounts already far beyond the foreseeable ability of 
the U.S. economy to generate a balance-of-payments surplus to pay this debt 
to foreign governments. 
The global economy is being turned into a tributary system, achieving 
what military conquest sought in times past. This turns out to be implicit in 
QEII. Arbitrageurs and speculators are swamping Asian and Third World 
currency markets with low-priced U.S. dollar credit to make predatory 
trading profits at the expense of foreign central banks trying to stabilize their 
exchange rates by selling their currency for dollar-denominated securities — 
under conditions where the United States and Canada are blocking reciprocal 
direct investment (e.g., Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan in Canada and Unocal 
in the United States.).
 
The Road to Capital Controls 
Hardly by surprise, other countries are taking defensive measures against 
this speculation, and against “free credit” takeovers using inexpensive U.S. 
electronic “keyboard bank credit.” For the past few decades they have 
stabilized their exchange rates by recycling dollar inflows and other foreign 
currency buildups into U.S. Treasury securities. The Bank of Japan, for 
instance, recently lowered its interest rate to just 0.1% in an attempt to induce 
its banks to lend back abroad the foreign exchange that is now coming in as 
its banks are being repaid on their own carry-trade loans. It also offset the 
repayment of past carry-trade loans extended by its own banks in yen by 
selling $60 billion of yen and buying U.S. Treasury securities, of which it 
now owns over $1 trillion.
Foreign economies are now taking more active steps to shape “the market” 
in which international speculation occurs. The most modest move is to 
impose a withholding tax on interest payments to foreign investors. Just 
before the IMF meetings on October 9–10, 2010, Brazil doubled the tax on 

foreign investment in its government bond to 4%. Thailand acted along 
similar lines a week later. It stopped exempting foreign investors from having 
to pay the 15% interest-withholding tax on their purchases of its government 
bonds. Finance Minister Korn Chatikavinij warned that more serious 
measures are likely if “excessive” speculative inflows keep pushing up the 
baht. “We need to consider the rationality of capital inflows, whether they are 
for speculative purposes and how much they generate volatility in the baht,” 
he explained. But the currency continues to rise.
Such tax withholding discourages interest-rate arbitrage via the bond 
market, but leaves the foreign-currency play intact — and that is where the 
serious action is today. In the 1997 Asian Crisis, Malaysia blocked foreign 
purchases of its currency to prevent short-sellers from covering their bets by 
buying the ringgit at a lower price later, after having emptied out its central 
bank reserves. The blocks worked, and other countries are now reviewing 
how to impose such controls.
Longer-term institutional changes to more radically restructure the global 
financial system may include dual exchange rates such as were prevalent 
from the 1930 through the early 1960s, one (low and stable) for trade and at 
least one other (usually higher and more fluctuating) for capital movements. 
But the most decisive counter-strategy to U.S. QEII policy is to create a full-
fledged BRIC-centered currency bloc that would minimize use of the dollar. 
China has negotiated currency-swap agreements with Russia, India, 
Turkey and Nigeria. These swap agreements may require exchange-rate 
guarantees to make central-bank holders “whole” if a counterpart currency 
depreciates. But at least initially, these agreements are being used for bilateral 
trade. This saves exporters from having to hedge their payments through 
forward purchases on global exchange markets.
A BRIC-centered system would reverse the policy of open and 
unprotected capital markets put in place after World War II. This trend has 
been in the making since the BRIC countries met 2009 in Yekaterinburg, 
Russia, to discuss such an international payments system based on their own 
currencies rather than the dollar, sterling or euro. In September , China 
supported a Russian proposal to start direct trading using the yuan and the 
ruble rather than pricing their trade or taking payment in U.S. dollars or other 

foreign currencies. China then negotiated a similar deal with Brazil. And on 
the eve of the IMF meetings in Washington on Friday, Premier Wen stopped 
off in Istanbul to reach agreement with Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan to 
use their own currencies in a planned tripling Turkish-Chinese trade to $50 
billion over the next five years, effectively excluding the dollar.
China cannot make its currency a world reserve currency, because it is not 
running a deficit and therefore cannot supply large sums of renminbi to other 
countries via trade. So it is negotiating currency-swap agreements with other 
countries, while using its enormous dollar reserves to buy up natural 
resources in Australia, Africa and South America. 
This has reversed the dynamics that led speculators to gang up and cause 
the 1997 Asia crisis. At that time the great speculative play was against the 
“Asian Tigers.” Speculators swamped their markets with sell orders, 
emptying out the central bank reserves of countries that tried (in vain) to keep 
their exchange rates stable in the face of enormous U.S. bank credit extended 
to George Soros and other hedge fund managers and the vulture funds that 
followed in their wake. The IMF and U.S. banks then stepped in and offered 
to “rescue” these economies if they agreed to sell off their best companies 
and resources to U.S. and European buyers.
This was a major reason why so many countries have tried to free 
themselves from the IMF and its neoliberal austerity programs, euphemized 
as “stabilization” plans rather than the economic poison of chronic 
dependency and instability programs. Left with only Turkey as a customer by 
2008, the IMF was a seemingly anachronistic institution whose only hope for 
survival lay in future crises. So that of 2009–10 proved to be a godsend. At 
least the IMF found neoliberal Latvia and Greece willing to subject 
themselves to its precepts. Today its destructive financial austerity doctrine is 
applied mainly by Europe’s “failed economies.”
This has changed the equation between industrial-nation creditors and 
Third World debtors. Many dollar-strapped countries have been subject to 
repeated raids on their central banks — followed by IMF austerity programs 
that have shrunk their domestic markets and made them yet more dependent 
on imports and foreign investments, reduced to selling off their public 
infrastructure to raise the money to pay their debts. This has raised their cost 

of living and doing business, shrinking the economy all the more and creating 
new budget squeezes driving them even further into debt. But China’s long-
term trade and investment deals — to be paid in raw materials, denominated 
in renminbi rather than dollars — is alleviating their debt pressures to the 
point where currency traders are jumping on the bandwagon, pushing up their 
exchange rates. The major international economic question today is how such 
national economies can achieve greater stability by insulating themselves 
from these predatory financial movements.
 
Summary
The 1945–2010 world economic dynamic has ended, and a new 
international system is emerging — one that was not anticipated as recently 
as just five years ago. From the 1960s through 1980s, the international 
economy was polarizing between indebted raw-materials producers in Africa, 
Latin America and large parts of Asia — “the South” — and the 
industrialized North, led by North America, Europe and Japan. Economists 
analyzing this polarization focused on:
 
(1) the terms of trade for raw materials as compared to industrial goods, 
(2) the failure of World Bank programs to help “the South” cure its food 
dependency and other import dependency, and 
(3) the failure of IMF austerity programs to stabilize the balance of 
payments. The IMF-World Bank model promoted austerity, low wage 
standards, trade dependency, and deepening foreign debt. It was applauded as 
a success story in the creditor-investor nations.
 
Today’s world is dividing along quite different lines. The main actor is 
still “the North” composed of the United States and Europe. But the 
counterpart economic bloc that is emerging is growing less dependent and 
indebted. It is led by a rapidly growing China, India, Brazil and even Russia 
(the BRIC countries), joined by the strongest Middle Eastern economies 
(Turkey and potentially Iran) and Asian economies such as Korea, Taiwan, 

Malaysia and Singapore. This “BRIC bloc” and its allies are in payment 
surplus, not deficit. It is now the U.S. and European governments that find 
themselves debt-ridden beyond their ability to pay, especially when it comes 
to paying foreign governments, central banks and bondholders.
Yet the world is now seeing a race to convert electronic (“paper”) credit 
creation from these already debt-ridden economies into asset ownership 
before governments in the payments-surplus economies to erect protective 
walls. Easy credit in the United States and Japan is fueling speculation in 
economies that are not so heavily loaded down with debt. This flight out of 
the U.S. dollar into Asian and Third World currencies is changing the global 
economy’s orientation — in such a way as to restore financial dominance to 
nations running balance-of-payments surpluses, whose currencies promise to 
rise (or at least remain stable) rather than to fall along with the dollar. 
As the U.S. and European domestic markets shrink in response to debt 
deflation, Asian countries and raw-materials exporters from Australia to 
Africa have recovered mainly because of China’s growth. As in 1997, the 
problem they face is how to keep predatory U.S. and allied financial 
speculation at bay. This makes these countries the most likely to find capital 
controls attractive. But this time around, they are trying to keep speculators 
from buying into their assets and currencies, not selling them. Targeted 
economies are ones that are strong, not ones that are weak.
Since the mid-19th century, central banks raised interest rates to hold their 
currencies stable when trade moved into deficit. The universal aim was to 
gain financial reserves. In the 1930s, money and credit systems were still 
based on gold. Protective tariffs and trade subsidies aimed at running trade 
and balance-of-payments surpluses in order to gain financial reserves. But 
today’s problem is too much liquidity, in the form of keyboard bank credit 
that can be created without limit. 
This has turned the world of half a century ago upside-down. National 
economies in the United States, Japan leading nations are lowering their rates 
to 1% or less, encouraging capital outflows rather than payments surpluses, 
while their banks and investors are seeking to gain more by financial 
speculation than by trade.
 

Conclusion
The American economy may be viewed as a tragic drama. Its tragic flaw 
was planted and flowered in the 1980s: a combination of deregulation leading 
to financial fraud so deep as to turn the banking system into a predatory gang, 
while shifting the tax burden off real estate and the higher tax brackets onto 
wage earners and sales taxes. This increased the economy’s cost of doing 
business in two ways. First, taxes on employees (including FICA withholding 
for Social Security and Medicare) and on business profits increase the cost of 
doing business for American industry.
Second, untaxing the site value of land (and most “capital gains” are 
actually land-value gains) has “freed” rental income to be pledged to banks 
for yet higher mortgage loans. This obliged new homebuyers to take on more 
and more debt as taxes were shifted off property. So homeowners working 
for a living did not really gain from low property taxes. What the tax 
collector relinquished ended up being paid to banks as interest on the loans 
that were bidding up housing prices, creating a real estate bubble. 
Meanwhile, governments had to make up the property-tax cuts by taxing 
employees and employers all the more. So the United States became a high-
cost economy.
It didn’t have to be this way — and that is the tragedy of the U.S. economy 
over the past thirty years. It was a fiscal and financial tragedy, with the tragic 
flaw being the propensity for the financial sector to engage in wholesale fraud
and “junk economics.” A flawed tax policy was endorsed by a failure of 
economic thought to explain the costs entailed in trying to get rich by running 
into debt. What Alan Greenspan famously called “wealth creation” during his 
tenure as Federal Reserve Chairman sponsoring asset-price inflation turned 
out simply to be debt leveraging — that is, debt creation when the dust settled 
and prices fell back into negative equity territory.
To rescue the increasingly irresponsible financial sector from its 
mortgage-debt gambles, the United States is taking a path that is losing its 
international position, ending the long epoch of what was actually a free 
lunch — the U.S. Treasury-bill standard of international finance. All that U.S. 
diplomats can do at this point is play for time, hoping to prolong the existing 

double standard favorable to the United States and its Treasury-debt a bit 
further, to permit U.S. bankers to get just one more year of enormous 
bonuses, in keeping with the American motto, “You only need to make a 
fortune once.”
What no doubt will amaze future historians is why the rest of the U.S. 
economy has let the banking sector get away with this! Apart from the Soviet 
Union’s self-destruction in 1990–91, it is hard to find a similar blunder in 
economic diplomacy. It reflects the banking system’s success in shifting 
economic planning out of the hands of government into those of finance-
sector lobbyists.
U.S. officials always have waged American foreign trade and financial 
policy in reference to their own domestic economic interests without much 
regard for foreigners. The history of U.S. protective tariffs, dollar policy and 
interest-rate policy has been to look only at home. Other countries have had 
to raise interest rates when their balance of trade and payments move into 
deficit, above all, for military adventures. The United States alone is immune 
— thanks to the legacy of the dollar being “as good as gold” during the 
decades when it was running a surplus. To quote Joseph Stiglitz once again:
 
[T]he irony is that money that was intended to rekindle the American 
economy is causing havoc all over the world. Those elsewhere in the world 
say, what the United States is trying to do is the twenty-first century version 
of ‘beggar thy neighbor’ policies that were part of the Great Depression: you 
strengthen yourself by hurting the others.6
 
It is natural enough for the United States to shape its international policy 
with regard to its own interests, to be sure. The self-interest principle is a 
foundation assumption of political theory as it is economic logic. What is less 
understandable is why other countries have not acted more effectively in their 
own interests — and why U.S. diplomats and economic officials should be so 
upset today when other nations in fact begin to do so.
 

1 I am indebted to Eric Janszen of i-tulip for bringing the Einzig quote to my attention.
2 “Stiglitz Calls for Jail Time for Corporate Crooks,” DailyFinance: http://srph.it/aRwI4I, October 21, 
2010.
3 Tim Geithner, “Five Myths about Tarp,” Washington Post, October 10, 2010.
4 Martin Wolf, “Why America is going to win the global currency battle,” Financial Times, October 
13, 2010.
5 William C. Dudley, “The Outlook, Policy Choices and Our Mandate,” Remarks at the Society of 
American Business Editors and Writers Fall Conference, City University of New York, Graduate 
School of Journalism, New York City, October 1, 2010. http://www.zerohedge.com/article/why-imf-
meetings-failed-and-coming-capital-controls.
6 Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz: “Foreclosure Moratorium, Government Stimulus Needed to Revive 
US Economy,” Democracy Now, Oct. 21, 2010.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 14
____________

***** 
15. America’s Monetary Imperialism
 
It is not hard to find examples of coercive exploitation in today’s global 
economy. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) imposes austerity on 
debtor economies, shrinking their investment and production. This causes 
unemployment and a domestic fiscal crisis, while making them more 
dependent on foreign suppliers. A widening trade deficit ensues, financed by 
further borrowing whose interest charges aggravate the overall payments 
deficit in a deteriorating spiral.
The World Bank demands that debtor countries raise money by privatizing 
their public domain, despite the notorious underpricing of assets, exorbitant 
underwriting fees, insider dealings, and falling post-privatization service 
standards. The World Trade Organization (WTO) blocks governments from 
taxing the profits and rents generated by these privatized assets. Its neoliberal 
agenda aims at turning control over markets to the multinational corporations, 
while promoting tax codes that enable companies to deduct from taxable 
profits all interest and insurance charges, management fees, and the fatal 
slack variable of intra-company transfer pricing through offshore tax havens. 
This starves governments fiscally, forcing them to borrow more even as they 
slash public services. 
Debtor countries thus suffer from a proliferating debt pollution — the 
buildup of debts beyond their ability to pay, as well as suffering from 
ecological standards being cut back by economic distress conditions. 
Austerity blocks governments from making the social investment needed to 

avert long-term educational cleanup costs to repair a broken social system, 
debt cleanup costs to cope with the creditor leverage held over their heads, 
and the physical cleanup costs that result from hosting some of the world’s 
most environmentally destructive industries.
The thrust of the Washington Consensus enforced by the IMF, World 
Bank and WTO is to dismantle the regulatory and fiscal power of 
governments throughout the world. Not only are debtor-country governments 
blocked from running the budget deficits that the United States runs freely in 
response to its own unemployment, but even the European Central Bank 
(ECB) blocks member-country governments from running sustained budget 
deficits of more than 3% of GDP, despite the continent’s unemployment and 
balance-of-payments surplus.
These payments-surplus nations find themselves unable to cope with the 
influx of dollars stemming from America’s trade deficit, now overlayered by 
a military deficit that threatens to escalate as the United States expands its 
adventurism in the Near East. In exchange for these excess dollars, Europe 
and Asia supply exports and sell off their companies and other assets. But 
what do they get in return?
A double standard has been implicit in the world’s economic rules since 
the dollar was decoupled from gold in 1971, when the U.S. trade deficit of 
$10 billion deficit was the equivalent of more than half the U.S. gold stock. 
But today there is no gold convertibility and hence no major constraint on 
U.S. spending abroad or at home. The United States has not subjected itself 
to any of the distressing fiscal conditions that all other countries feel obliged 
to follow. What makes this asymmetry so ironic is that it was made possible 
by what seemed to be a financial defeat for the United States. Once America 
stopped paying gold, there was not much that other central banks could ask 
for as they found themselves flooded with dollars obtained by private-sector 
exporters and asset sellers in excess of their needs. 
America was not about to yield control of its strategic sectors to foreign 
holders of these dollars, even as foreign countries have privatized their major 
public-sector utilities and infrastructure. In 1973, U.S. diplomats made it 
clear that if OPEC countries tried to use their dollars to buy out major 
companies, this would be treated as a belligerent act. The Islamic countries 

were told that they could earn interest by leaving their money in American 
banks, or they could buy U.S. Treasury bonds or — considering their 
religious strictures against usury — they could buy minority shares of U.S. 
stocks, an activity that would bid up the stock market and thus help create a 
boom in the United States, but they could not buy enough shares to dominate 
these companies. They could buy real estate, Japan-style, helping to inflate 
the U.S. property market. But one way or another, OPEC and other dollar 
holders would have to keep their dollar inflows in the form of dollars. There 
was no alternative, politically and indeed militarily speaking.
So much for the patina of free-market rhetorical glove in which this iron 
fist was wrapped! Now that gold has been demonetized, all that foreign 
central banks can do with their excess dollars is to send them back to the U.S. 
Government by buying Treasury bonds. If they do not do this, their 
currencies will surge against the dollar, threatening to price their 
manufacturers and food exporters out of foreign markets.
What may cause a break between the United States and foreign dollar-
holders is a non-economic strain: America’s war in Iraq and its threat of 
preventive (that is, unprovoked) attacks on Iran, North Korea, Syria and 
North Africa. In the 1960s military spending in Vietnam pushed America’s 
balance of payments into deficit, drained the gold stock that had been the 
source of international power since World War I. Back then at least the 
private sector was in balance. But today it is deep in deficit, while military 
spending is frightening the world not merely by financially undercutting the 
dollar’s already deteriorating value, but by the political adventurism that is 
sparking popular protests around the entire world. Other countries now fear 
America’s military aggressiveness as well as its unchecked financial 
unilateralism. Although the Iraq War is only the most recent cap to the 
unconstrained growth of America’s trade and payments deficit, the anti-war 
protests around the world have given the problem a highly political 
coloration. 
The world still remembers how it was the Vietnam War that forced 
America off gold, as the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit during the 1960s 
stemmed entirely from overseas military spending. By 1971 the United States 
stopped redeeming foreign-held dollars in gold, and the dollar ceased to be a 
gold proxy. As the U.S. payments deficit shifted to the private sector, it 

expressed itself in the form of a demand for foreign products. This was 
welcomed by foreign countries on the grounds that at least it helped spur their 
domestic employment. But America’s new military adventurism has no 
visible side benefits for Europe, Asia or other countries. It has given the U.S. 
Treasury-bill standard the coloration of a political and military threat as well 
as being merely an economic form of exploitation.
Having taken over three decades for the crisis to reach today’s critical 
mass, the multilateral character of international finance is now beginning to 
crumble because other countries are now coming to see that the Dollar 
Standard has enabled the United States to obtain the largest free lunch in 
history. Whereas the world’s financial system formerly rested on gold, 
central bank reserves now are held in the form of U.S. Treasury IOUs that are 
being run up without limit. America has been buying the exports and even the 
companies of Europe, Asia and other regions with paper credit whose volume 
now exceeds America’s ability to pay, and which the United States has made 
it clear that it has little intention of paying off. That is the essence of today’s 
“paper gold.” 
The widening U.S. payments deficit and the dollar’s consequent plunge 
pose the question of whether any practical balance-of-payments constraint 
exists — or can be imposed — to the United States spending as much as it 
wants. The problem is that it is paying for non-U.S. goods and services in 
exchange for Treasury IOUs that are rapidly losing the fiction that they ever 
will be paid. 
This is where the unfair double standard comes into play. If Latin 
American and African countries — and now, Iraq — cannot be expected to 
pay their exponentially growing debts and ask for debt write-offs, can the 
United States be far behind? And if the U.S. debt is written off, what will 
Europe and East Asia have got in exchange for having provided a rising 
torrent of automobiles and other manufactures, and even the sale of their 
companies for dollars? The United States for its part will have got a free ride, 
even as its economists promise the world that there is no such thing as a free 
lunch.
 
What Makes Super Imperialism Different from Past “Private Enterprise” 

Imperialism
A new mode of international exploitation has been created. As Henry C. 
K. Liu has noted recently in the Asia Times, “Dollar hegemony is a structural 
condition in world finance and trade in which the United States produces 
dollars and the rest of the world produces things dollars can buy.” Primarily 
financial in character, this new kind of imperialism is turning the more 
classical forms of imperialism upside down. Unlike former modes of 
imperialism, it is a strategy that only one power, the United States, has been 
able to employ. Also novel is the fact that the U.S. Treasury-bond standard 
does not rely on the corporate profits or the drives of private companies 
investing in other countries to extract profits and interest. Monetary 
imperialism operates primarily through the balance of payments and central 
bank agreements, which ultimately are government functions. It occurs 
between the U.S. Government and the central banks of nations running 
balance-of-payments surpluses. The larger their surpluses grow, the more 
U.S. Treasury securities they are obliged to buy.
I recently have updated and republished a book that I wrote when this 
process was just getting underway, in 1972: Super Imperialism: The Origins 
and Fundamentals of U.S. World Dominance. It gives a fuller explanation 
than I can afford here of how America went off gold in 1971, obliging the 
world’s central banks to finance the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit by 
using their surplus dollars to buy U.S. Treasury bonds. It explains why there 
is little Europe or Asia can do about the situation except reject the dollar. The 
problem is that to do that would lead their currencies to appreciate, hurting 
their own exporters in world markets.
Gold was the source of America’s financial power since World War I, 
when arms sales and related material exports to the Allies turned the United 
States from a debtor into a creditor nation. From 1917 through 1950 the 
United States used its creditor position to domineer international diplomacy. 
The British Loan of 1944 was granted on the condition that the British 
Empire and its Sterling Area would be wound down after World War II 
ended and made virtually into an extension of the U.S. economy. Similar 
creditor power has been used against third world debtors since the 1950s, 
once they exhausted the foreign-exchange reserves built up during World 

War II as a result of providing raw materials to the Allies and not finding 
many consumer or investment goods to import.
When the United States was forced off gold it appeared that this era had 
ended. Most observers assumed that creditor nations would call the tune. An 
era had ended, in the sense that the United States was becoming the world’s 
largest debtor. But what replaced its creditor power was a new debtor power, 
based on America’s power to wreck the world financial system if other 
countries asserted their own creditor interests at the expense of U.S. demands 
that it be permitted to become a reckless debtor.
Chart follows: Classical “Private Enterprise” Imperialism vs. Today’s Super 
Imperialism

The Seignorage Benefits of Dollar Hegemony
The free ride that America receives from its ability to run a balance-of-
payments deficit has been likened to the seignorage a government gets when 
it prints paper currency and spends it on goods and services. More U.S. paper 
currency is held abroad than that of any other country, more even than is held 
in the United States itself. Most consists of $100 bills. Russia accounts for a 
large proportion, and the world’s drug traders, tax dodgers and other 
criminals have absorbed most of the balance. Foreign countries get paper, 
while Americans get their goods and services.

But most of the benefits of U.S. dollar credit have come from foreign 
central banks receiving bank drafts denominated in dollars. Over and above 
what their private sector spends to buy U.S. exports, pay interest and 
dividends to U.S. investors or remit profits to U.S.-owned firms, nearly a 
trillion dollars have mounted up in the world’s central banks for which the 
private sector has no use, and hence has turned them over in exchange for 
their own domestic currency.
Central banks find themselves with the equivalent of the $100 bills 
collected by the Russians. At least the central banks are able to get interest 
credited to these holdings, for they return these dollars to the United States to 
buy its Treasury bonds. These form the growth in their international reserves. 
Europe, China and Japan have been the major regions building up such 
reserves. They finally are beginning to ask themselves just what practical use 
these reserves are, and how much value these dollar claims will retain as they 
become increasingly fictitious. When it comes down to the essence of 
matters, what will today’s U.S. Government let foreign governments spend 
their monetary reserves on? The U.S. economy has been hollowing itself out 
by treating its industry as a financial vehicle to turn profits into interest 
payments. Its labor is rendered high-cost not only by its current living 
expenses paid for goods and services, but for its sharp rise in debt service, 
headed by mortgage-debt service on the increasingly expensive cost of 
buying homes.
Although the U.S. real estate and financial bubble has been welcomed as 
post-industrial “wealth creation,” it is rendering the American economy 
uncompetitive in world markets and hence unable to pay off its foreign debt 
by running a trade surplus. U.S. labor is obliged to pay for high-cost housing 
and pay debt service on the loans needed to stay afloat in today’s economy. 
Agriculture remains the mainstay of U.S. exports, but the nation’s farm 
protectionism finally is coming under criticism by food-deficit countries. It 
has been a sticking point in new global trade negotiations ever since the 
Common Agricultural Policy triggered U.S.-European rivalry 45 years ago.
 
The Irony of Dollar Hegemony: Power and Unlimited Credit through the 
Threat of Bankruptcy

The United States achieves hegemony not by its creditor status as it did 
prior to the Korean War, but by its payments-deficit status. This seeming 
weakness enables it to run a trade deficit that is now approaching half a 
trillion dollars annually and shows no sign of abating. The world finds itself 
confronted by America running this deficit without constraint, importing as 
much as it wants from abroad and permitting its investors to buy as many 
foreign companies, stocks and bonds as they want, without limit. 
By “without limit” I mean without having to provide a quid pro quo 
beyond Treasury IOUs whose prospects for repayment are diminishing as 
their volume grows. As fewer and fewer economic analysts are able to see a 
way for these official obligations to be paid, the question becomes which 
nations will succeed in dropping the dollar first, and what political upheavals 
may result as they draw the line against accepting more dollars in their 
reserves.
As far as domestic U.S. fiscal and monetary relations are concerned, the 
government can finance its budget deficit by foreign central-bank demand for 
U.S. Treasury securities rather than borrowing from or taxing U.S. citizens. 
The larger the balance-of-payments deficit grows, the more money central 
banks have to recycle to finance America’s budget deficit. Both deficits thus 
can increase together, financing each other.
The Treasury-bond standard is thus a more specific term than dollar 
hegemony. It explains how this hegemony is achieved. Other countries 
running budget deficits are obliged to raise interest rates. But America has 
lowered its interest rates, pursuing a tax policy and related fiscal and 
monetary policy of “benign neglect” in the face of its trade and payments 
deficit. The United States alone is able to lower its interest rates to spur 
domestic economic activity, even to the point of spurring a stock market and 
real estate bubble. This freedom is not available to European, Asian or other 
countries. No country ever before has been able to do this. 
When other countries run sustained trade deficits, they must finance these 
by selling off domestic assets or running into debt — debt which they actually 
are obliged to pay. It seems that only the Americans are so bold as to say 
“Screw the world. We’re going to do whatever we want.” Other countries 

simply cannot afford the chaos from which the U.S. economy is positioned to 
withstand as a result of the fact that foreign trade plays a smaller role in its 
economy than in those of nearly all other nations in today’s interdependent 
world.
Using debtor leverage to set the terms on which it will refrain from 
causing monetary chaos, America has turned seeming financial weakness into 
strength. U.S. Government debt has reached so large a magnitude that any 
attempt to replace it will entail an interregnum of financial chaos and political 
instability. American diplomats have learned that they are well positioned to 
come out on top in such grab-bags. 
No other country is able to play the game of international finance in this 
way. Other countries running balance-of-payments deficits are obliged to sell 
off the assets in their public domain and run up debts that indeed must be 
paid. Free of such constraint, America keeps on supplying paper or electronic 
dollars to the world at will.
The upshot is that although at first appearing as a sign of weakness, the 
U.S. trade and payments deficit supplies its consumers and companies with 
foreign goods, while spending abroad militarily and lowering its interest rates 
to inflate a bubble economy without international constraint. This 
asymmetrical ability to exploit is a double standard that is implicit in the 
dollar standard. It enables America to play both sides of the creditor-debtor 
street.
As a debtor country the United States exploits Europe and Asia by running 
a balance-of-payments deficit now approaching half a trillion dollars 
annually. It pays for its net imports and buyouts of foreign industry by with 
Treasury bonds that its diplomats have long hinted they have little intention 
of paying off. Central banks end up with paper or electronic IOUs bearing 
4% or 5% interest, which the U.S. Treasury simply adds to the balance of 
what it owes, while U.S. investors buy foreign companies, resources and 
hitherto public enterprises expected to yield in the neighborhood of 20% in 
earnings and capital gains.
Meanwhile, the United States uses traditional “hard-money” creditor 
leverage toward third world debtor countries. Through the IMF and World 
Bank it forces these countries to pay foreign debts by privatizing their natural 

resources and public enterprises which, for thousands of years, have been 
considered to be the national patrimony and guarantee of self-determination 
in economic and fiscal policy.
The fact that much of the foreign debt being used as leverage over third 
world countries can be traced to capital flight and interest accruals building 
up on past loans to kleptocracies and client oligarchies backed by the United 
States adds a further note of asymmetry to illustrate America’s remarkable 
ability to get the best of both worlds in applying this dual international 
strategy. It buys whatever imports and foreign companies it wants, with a line 
of credit that seems to have no end, and whose modest interest charges are 
simply added onto the balance hypothetically due, while using its ability to 
create bank credit (in dollars) at will as leverage over the governments of 
indebted countries. Their alternative is to suffer the fate that Cuba, Iraq and 
other exiles from the Washington Consensus have suffered.
 
Engine of Global Economic Growth, or Financial Exploitation?
American diplomats represent U.S. foreign spending as an “engine of 
growth” pumping dollars into the world economy to provide a source of 
market demand that saves other nations from unemployment and recession. 
The logic is that foreign labor would not be employed without U.S. consumer 
demand, as if Europe and Asia could not replace U.S. imports with growth in 
their own markets. 
If this were true, it would be an indictment of Europe’s central banking 
system, reflecting the extent to which the ECB and central banks throughout 
the world have become part of the monetarist Washington Consensus — a 
monetary stranglehold outside of the United States while the U.S. banking 
system creates credit freely and cut taxes as foreign central banks finance the 
resulting budget deficit. 
A related euphemism is that the U.S. economy is doing so well that it 
“attracts” money, which provides it with the resources to buy more abroad 
than it sells. The implied line of causation turns what is happening inside-out. 
Under today’s geopolitical conditions these dollars have nowhere to go 
except back to the U.S. economy, which pushes dollars on the world in the 

knowledge that like a boomerang foreign central banks must return them. 
No active steps are needed to attract these dollars back. All that is needed 
is to prevent the euro and sterling, the yen and yuan from being used to 
expand domestic market demand and finance social democratic programs, 
creating securities that other countries could hold as alternatives to U.S. 
Treasury debt. Not to see that depicting the dollar as the world’s “engine of 
growth” is a euphemism for dollar hegemony and the American free ride is to 
lose touch with financial reality by reversing the actual arrow of causality at 
work. 
The question that needs to be asked is how the rest of the world came to be 
dependent on the U.S. trade and payments deficit to obtain enough money to 
spend domestically. Money historically has been a government creation. It 
also is an instrument of debt — today, mainly debt owed by the U.S. 
Government. How did the creation of international monetary reserves pass 
out of the hands of all governments except that of the United States?
Part of the answer is IMF and World Bank imposition of the Washington 
Consensus. When American advisors were given a free hand in Russia in the 
mid-1990s, the insisted that the central bank hold U.S. dollars as counterparts 
to their creation of rubles to pay domestic labor. The central bank notoriously 
paid 100% interest for these dollars — dollars that had nothing whatsoever to 
do with the ruble credit being created to pay labor, but everything to do with 
creating huge profits for well-connected U.S. investors and speculators. The 
problem is ideological, not economically necessary.
In all such questions the surest answer is supplied by following the money. 
As Willy Sutton is said to have remarked, he robbed banks because that’s 
where the money was. Empires follow the same strategy. A century ago John 
Hobson pointed out that the imperial nations invested mainly in each other. It 
is they that have the money and markets, after all, and whose real estate, 
stock and bond markets offer the best opportunities for asset-price gains. The 
problem is not rich exploiting the poor as much as the rich exploiting other 
rich nations. That has been the key to empire-building throughout history.
It was not labor that America wanted when it sent its advisors to Russia. 
Its investors wanted the country’s raw materials, its oil and gas, minerals, and 
especially its urban land, as land and subsoil resources are still the major 

assets of every economy. This is why they are the main objectives of 
imperialism, yielding rent and capital gains whose magnitude exceeds the 
profits gained on employing wage labor.
 
Was the Oil War in Iraq about the Dollar Standard?
 
The 2003 Iraq War has inspired speculation that it is was fought to keep 
OPEC oil priced in dollar rather than in euros. The problem with this theory 
is that when OPEC-held dollars or U.S. Treasury bonds are sold for securities 
denominated in euros, yen or yuan, these dollar securities are passed on to the 
central banks of Europe, Japan and China respectively. These central banks 
then find themselves obliged to do just what they have been doing all along 
to prevent their currencies from rising against the dollar: They recycle the 
dollar inflows into U.S. Treasury bonds. If they receive balance-of-payments 
inflows as a result of OPEC purchases, overall global central bank holdings 
of Treasury securities will not decline, but will merely shift out of OPEC 
central banks to those of Europe and East Asia. OPEC will have divested 
itself of its dollar problem by passing the problem on like the proverbial hot 
potato.
This means that concerns about the euro threatening the dollar have been 
overdrawn. If the oil-exporting countries shift their international reserves 
from dollars to euros, they will do so by selling U.S. Treasury bonds and 
buying the government bonds or other securities of European countries. This 
would force up the euro’s exchange rate against the dollar, confronting 
Europe with the same dilemma it has faced since the dollar was cut off from 
gold in 1971. If it stops recycling its surplus dollars — that is, its trade and 
payments surpluses — into loans back to the U.S. Treasury, its currencies 
will rise, hurting its exporters. This is the dilemma spelled out in the final two 
chapters of Super Imperialism.
The effect of a shift out of dollars into euros by OPEC would be much like 
Europe exporting more goods directly to the United States or other dollar-
using countries, or selling more companies, stocks and bonds to U.S. 
investors. As the euro rises against the dollar, European exporters already are 
complaining that products denominated in their own currency were being 

priced out of world markets. To prevent this from occurring, European 
countries receiving central bank inflows from the Organization of Petroleum-
Exporting Countries (OPEC) already are coming under pressure to hold down 
the euro’s exchange rate by using these dollar inflows to buy yet more U.S. 
Treasury bills.
The 2003 Oil War therefore is not part of a currency rivalry between the 
dollar and euro, for Europe and East Asia remain the residual absorbers of the 
world’s surplus dollars. No opposition has arisen as yet to U.S. dollar 
hegemony because, as Mrs. Thatcher might put it, there is as yet no 
alternative. 
But this does not mean that one is not in the gestation stage. As the United 
States works both sides of the creditor/debtor street, Europe, Asia, Latin 
America and Africa (and even Canada) find themselves obliged out of self-
protection to create a fairer system of world debt and payments.
 
Steps toward a Counter-Strategy
 
One tempting response would be to revert to the old system of two 
exchange rates, one for trade and another for financial movements. This 
would have to be done in a way that did not let speculators arbitrage between 
the two rates by selling proxies and matching buy and sell orders. Such a task 
would involve a complex regulatory management that would run the risk of 
futility.
A simpler option is to do what the United States did in 1922 when it was 
threatened by low-priced imports from Germany as the mark’s exchange rate 
collapsed under the burden of paying reparations. Congress restored the 1909 
American Selling Price (ASP) tariff against countries with depreciating 
currencies. A floating tariff was imposed equal to the price advantage of 
foreign imports below U.S. domestic prices. This denied Germany and other 
countries a price advantage resulting either from depreciation or even from 
superior efficiency. Europe and Asia could impose such a retaliatory tariff, 
and use the proceeds or other dollar inflows to subsidize its exports in 
markets competing with U.S. exports to offset the price benefit from the 

depreciating dollar.
Most important, foreign countries must realize that they do not need 
dollars in order to re-inflate their home markets. Their Treasuries can create 
their own money based on their own economic needs rather than letting their 
central bank reserves be a derivative of the U.S. payments deficit.
To date, U.S. diplomats have used the clash of political cultures to their 
own advantage. It is as if only the United States acts in its own national 
interest, while Europe, Asia and the third world acquiesce in the Washington 
Consensus as if they were client oligarchies. Only by pushing back can they 
create a more equitable arrangement between the dollar, the euro and the yen 
and yuan. And only by running a balance-of-payments deficit can Europe and 
East Asia follow the U.S. path in providing a vehicle for other countries to 
hold their international monetary reserves. This requires an abandonment of 
the world’s dependence on the Washington Consensus and its imposition of 
monetarist austerity outside of the United States.
 
PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 15-01]
The larger the balance-of-payments deficit grows, the more money central 
banks have to recycle to finance America’s budget deficit. — Michael 
Hudson
_____________________

***** 
16. How the Dollar Glut Finances America’s 
Military Build-Up
 
U.S. media are silent about the most important topic that Asian and 
European policy makers are discussing these days: how to protect their 
countries from three inter-related dynamics: 
 
(1) the surplus dollars pouring into the rest of the world for yet further 
financial speculation and corporate takeovers; 
(2) the fact that central banks are obliged to recycle these dollar inflows to 
buy U.S. Treasury bonds to finance the federal U.S. budget deficit; and most 
important (but most suppressed in the U.S. media; and 
(3) the military character of the U.S. payments deficit and the domestic 
federal budget deficit.
 
Strange as it may seem — and irrational as it would be in a more logical 
system of world diplomacy — the dollar glut is what finances America’s 
global military build-up. It forces foreign central banks to bear the costs of 
America’s expanding military empire. The result is a new form of taxation 
without representation. Keeping international reserves in dollars means 
recycling dollar inflows to buy U.S. Treasury bills — U.S. government debt 
issued largely to finance the military spending that has been a driving force in 

the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit since the Korean War broke out in 
1950.
To date, countries have been as powerless to defend themselves against 
the fact that compulsory financing of U.S. overseas military spending is built 
into the global financial system. Neoliberal economists applaud foreign dollar 
recycling (a suitably bloodless term) as equilibrium, as if it is part of 
economic nature and free markets rather than bare-knuckle diplomacy 
wielded with increasing aggressiveness by U.S. officials. The mass media 
chime in, pretending that recycling the dollar glut to finance U.S. military 
spending is showing global faith in U.S. economic strength by sending their 
dollars here to “invest.” The pretense is that earning a marginal low rate of 
return on Treasury securities is a free market-driven investment choice, not 
financial and diplomatic compulsion to choose between “Yes” (from China, 
reluctantly), “Yes, please” (from Japan and the European Union) and “Yes, 
thank you” (Britain, Georgia and Australia).
It is not “foreign faith in the U.S. economy” that leads foreigners to “put 
their money here.” This is an anthropomorphic caricature of a much more 
sinister dynamic. The foreigners in question are not consumers buying U.S. 
exports, nor are they private-sector investors buying U.S. stocks and bonds. 
The largest and most important foreign entities putting “their money” here 
are central banks. And what they are sending back are the dollars that foreign 
exporters and other recipients turn over to their central banks for domestic 
currency, which they — “the market” — prefer to dollars. 
When the U.S. payments deficit pumps dollars into foreign economies, 
these banks have little option except to buy U.S. Treasury bills and bonds — 
which the Treasury spends on financing a hostile military build-up to encircle 
the major dollar-recyclers — China, Japan and Arab OPEC oil producers. 
These governments are forced to recycle dollar inflows in a way that funds 
U.S. military policies in which they have no say in formulating, and which 
threaten them with more and more belligerent saber rattling. That is why 
China and Russia took the lead in forming the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) a few years ago.
In Europe there is a clear awareness that the U.S. payments deficit is much 
larger than just the trade deficit. One need merely look at Table 5 of the U.S. 

balance-of-payments data compiled by the Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(BEA) and published by the Dept. of Commerce in its Survey of Current 
Business to see that the deficit does not stem merely from consumers buying 
more imports than the United States exports as the financial sector de-
industrializes the economy. Congress has told foreign investors in the largest 
dollar holder, China, not to buy anything except perhaps used-car dealerships 
and maybe more packaged mortgages and Fannie Mae securities — the 
equivalent of Japanese investors being steered into paying $1 billion for 
Rockefeller Center, on which they subsequently suffered a total  loss, and 
Saudi investment in Citigroup. That’s the kind of “international equilibrium” 
U.S. officials love to see. “China National Offshore Oil Corporation go 
home” is the motto when foreign governments try to use their sovereign 
wealth funds (central bank departments trying to figure out what to do with 
their dollar glut) to make direct investments in American industry, as 
happened when China’s national oil company sought to buy Unocal in 2005. 
The U.S. payments deficit stems from military spending not only for the 
war in Iraq and its extension into Afghanistan and Pakistan, but also for the 
expensive build-up of U.S. military bases in Asian, European, post-Soviet 
and Third World countries. So Europeans and Asians see U.S. companies 
pumping more dollars into their economies not only to buy their exports (in 
excess of providing them with goods and services in return), not only to buy 
their companies and commanding heights of privatized public enterprises 
(without giving them reciprocal rights to buy important U.S. companies), and 
not only to buy foreign stocks, bonds and real estate. The U.S. media neglect 
to mention that the U.S. Government spends hundreds of billions of dollars 
abroad — not only in the Near East for direct combat, but to build military 
bases to encircle the rest of the world, and to install radar systems, guided 
missile systems and other forms of military coercion, including the “color 
revolutions” that have been funded all around the former Soviet Union.
Spending on the military-industrial complex is much like the debt 
overhead paid to Wall Street banks and other financial institutions. It absorbs 
revenue from the economic surplus, leaving less for new capital investment 
and personal affluence. In this respect the federal budget deficit stems not 
only from “priming the pump” to subsidize today’s emerging  financial 
oligarchy. It contains an enormous military component. Pallets of shrink-

wrapped $100 bills adding up to tens of millions of the dollars at a time have 
become familiar visuals on some TV broadcasts, but the link is not made with 
U.S. military and diplomatic spending and foreign central-bank dollar 
holdings, which are reported simply as faith in the U.S. economic recovery 
and presumably the monetary magic being worked by Wall Street’s Tim 
Geithner at Treasury and Helicopter Ben Bernanke at the Federal Reserve.
Here’s the problem: The Coca Cola company recently tried to buy China’s 
largest fruit-juice producer and distributor. China holds some $2 trillion in 
U.S. securities — far more than it needs or can use, inasmuch as Congress 
and various government refuse to let it buy meaningful U.S. companies. If the 
U.S. buyout of Chinese firms would have been permitted to go through, this 
would have confronted China with a dilemma: Choice Number 1 would be to 
let the sale go through, accepting payment in yet more dollars, reinvesting the 
growing glut in U.S. Treasury bonds yielding about 1%. China would take a 
capital loss on these if and when U.S. interest rates rise or the dollar declines. 
Choice Number 2 would be for China not to recycle the dollar inflows. 
This would lead the renminbi to rise against the dollar, eroding China’s 
export competitiveness in world markets. So China chose a third way, which 
brought U.S. protests. It turned down the sale of its tangible company for 
“paper” U.S. dollars to fund further U.S. military encirclement. American 
mass media showed little interest in explaining China’s logic, and economists 
have little to say about the lack of constraint on U.S. payments outflows. The 
Federal Reserve can create dollars freely, now that they no longer are 
convertible into gold or even into purchases of U.S. companies as Congress 
refuses to let sovereign wealth funds invest in important U.S. sectors. The 
U.S. Treasury prefers foreign central banks to keep funding its domestic 
budget deficit — which means financing the cost of America’s war in the 
Near East and encirclement of foreign countries with military bases. The 
more “capital outflows” U.S. investors spend to buy up foreign economies — 
the most profitable sectors, where the new U.S. owners can extract the 
highest monopoly rents — the more funds end up in foreign central banks to 
support America’s global military build-up. 
No textbook on political theory or international relations has suggested 
axioms to explain how nations act in a way so adverse to their own political, 
military and economic interests. Yet this is what has been happening for the 

past generation. 
So the ultimate question turns out to be what countries can do to counter 
this financial attack. It is not simply a problem of regulation to control 
speculative capital movements. The problem is how nations can act as real 
nations, in their own interest rather than being roped into serving whatever 
U.S. diplomats decide is in America’s interest.
The path of least resistance would seem to be nationalization of credit as a 
basic public utility. That was the idea of 19th-century reformers. It is ironic 
that the word “nationalization” recently has become synonymous with bailing 
out the largest and most reckless banks from their bad loans, and bailing out 
hedge funds and non-bank counterparties for losses on their bad gambles on 
derivatives that A.I.G. and other players on the losing side end are unable to 
pay. Such bailouts are not nationalization in the traditional sense of the term, 
i.e., bringing credit creation and other basic financial functions back into the 
public domain. They are the opposite. The idea is to print new government 
bonds to turn over to the financial sector, endowing a 21st-century power 
elite.
Economies now face a choice between democracy and oligarchy. The 
question is who will control the government that is regulating and 
“nationalizing.” If the central bank and major congressional finance and 
banking committees are chosen by Wall Street or subject to its veto power, 
this will not help steer credit into productive uses. It will merely continue the 
Greenspan-Paulson-Geithner era of larger free lunches for their financial 
constituencies. 
The financial oligarchy’s idea of “regulation” is to install deregulators in 
key positions and give them only minimal skeleton staffs and funding. 
Despite Chairman Greenspan’s announcement that he saw the light and come 
to realize that self-regulation doesn’t work, the Treasury and the Fed still are 
run by a Wall Street apparatchiks. Their concern isn’t ideology as such, but 
naked self-interest for their clients. Wall Street seeks out the proverbial well-
meaning fools, especially prestigious academics to serve as front men. Such 
individuals also are put in place as gate-keepers of the major academic 
journals to censor  ideas that do not well serve the financial lobbyists.
The cover story to justify excluding  meaningful regulation is that finance 

is by other than Wall Street lobbyists is so complex that only someone from 
the financial sector is capable of regulating it. To add insult to injury, it is 
claimed that a hallmark of democracy is to make the central bank 
independent of elected government. In reality this is the opposite of 
democracy. Finance is the crux of the economic system. If it is not regulated 
democratically in the public interest, then it is “free” to be captured by special 
interests.
The danger is that governments will let the financial sector determine how 
to “regulate.” It seeks to make money from the economy in an extractive 
way. Finance today is acting in a way that de-industrializes economies, not 
builds them up. The business plan is austerity for labor, industry and all 
sectors outside of finance, as in the IMF programs imposed on Third World 
debtor countries. The experience of Iceland, Latvia and other financialized 
economies should be examined as object lessons, if only because they top the 
World Bank’s ranking of countries in terms of the “ease of doing business.”
Meaningful regulation can only come from outside the financial sector. 
Otherwise, countries will suffer what the Japanese call “descent from 
heaven”: regulators are selected from the ranks of bankers and their “useful 
idiots,” and upon retiring from government they return to the financial sector 
to receive lucrative consulting jobs, speaking engagements and kindred 
paybacks. Knowing this, they regulate in favor of financial special interests, 
not that of the public at large.
The problem of speculative capital movements goes beyond drawing up a 
set of specific regulations. It concerns the scope of national government 
power. The International Monetary Fund’s Articles of Agreement prevent 
countries from restoring the dual exchange rate systems that many retained 
down through the 1950s and even into the ’60s. It was widespread practice 
for countries to have one exchange rate for goods and services (sometimes 
various exchange rates for different import and export categories) and another 
for capital movements. Under American pressure, the IMF enforced the 
pretense that there is an equilibrium rate that happens to be the same for 
goods and services as for capital movements. Governments that did not buy 
into this ideology were excluded from membership in the IMF and World 
Bank, or were overthrown.

The implication today is that the only way a nation can block capital 
movements is to withdraw from the IMF, the World Bank and the World 
Trade Organization (WTO). For the first time since the 1950s this looks like 
a real possibility, thanks to growing worldwide awareness of how the U.S. 
economy is glutting the global economy with surplus dollars. From the U.S. 
vantage point, stopping its free ride.is an attempt to curtail its international 
military program. This is precisely what is inspiring the BRICs nations to 
seek a financial alternative.
__________________

***** 
17. De-Dollarization and the End of 
America’s Empire
 
For Chinese President Hu Jintao, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and 
other top officials of the six-nation Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
(SCO), challenging America was the prime focus of meetings in 
Yekaterinburg, Russia (formerly Sverdlovsk) on June 15–16, 2009. The SCO 
alliance is composed of Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrghyzstan 
and Uzbekistan, with observer status for Iran, India, Pakistan and Mongolia. 
It was joined on June 16 by Brazil for trade discussions among the BRIC 
nations (Brazil, Russia, India and China).
The attendees assured American diplomats that dismantling the U.S. 
financial and military empire was not their aim. They simply wanted to 
discuss mutual aid — but in a way that had no role for the United States, 
NATO or the U.S. dollar as a vehicle for conducting future international 
trade. But U.S. diplomats rightfully worried that the meeting was a move to 
make U.S. hegemony obsolete. That is what a multipolar world means, after 
all.
For starters, in 2005 the SCO asked Washington to set a timeline to 
withdraw from its military bases in Central Asia. Two years later the SCO 
countries aligned themselves with the former CIS republics belonging to the 
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), established in 2002 as a 
counterweight to NATO.

Yet despite its agenda to replace the global dollar standard with a new 
financial and military defense system, the meeting has elicited only a 
collective yawn from the U.S. and even European press. Whistling in the 
dark, a Council on Foreign Relations spokesman said that he hardly could 
imagine that Russia and China can overcome their geopolitical rivalry,1 
suggesting that America would be able to use the divide-and-conquer that 
Britain employed so deftly for many centuries to fragment foreign opposition 
to its own empire. But George W. Bush (“I’m a uniter, not a divider”) built 
on the Clinton administration’s legacy in driving Russia, China and their 
neighbors to find a common ground when it comes to crafting an alternative 
to the dollar and hence to the U.S. ability to run balance-of-payments deficits 
ad infinitum.
What may prove in time to be the last rites of American hegemony began 
already in April, 2009, at the G-20 conference, and became more explicit at 
the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum on June 5 when Mr. 
Medvedev called for China, Russia and India to “build an increasingly 
multipolar world order.” What this meant in plain English was: “We have 
reached our limit in subsidizing the United States’ military encirclement of 
Eurasia while also allowing the United States to appropriate our exports, 
companies, stocks and real estate in exchange for paper money of 
questionable worth.”
“The artificially maintained unipolar system,” Mr. Medvedev spelled out, 
is based on “one big centre of consumption, financed by a growing deficit, 
and thus growing debts, one formerly strong reserve currency, and one 
dominant system of assessing assets and risks.”2 At the root of the global 
financial crisis, he concluded, was that the United States makes too little and 
spends too much. Especially upsetting was its stepped-up military aid to 
Georgia announced earlier in June, the NATO missile shield in Eastern 
Europe and the U.S. military buildup in the oil-rich Middle East and Central 
Asia.
The sticking point with all these countries is the U.S. ability to print 
unlimited amounts of dollars. Overspending by U.S. consumers on imports in 
excess of exports, U.S. buy-outs of foreign companies and real estate, and the 
dollars that the Pentagon spends abroad all end up in foreign central banks. 
These agencies then face a hard choice: either to recycle these dollars back to 

the United States by purchasing U.S. Treasury IOUs, or to let the “free 
market” force up their currency relative to the dollar — thereby pricing their 
exports out of world markets, creating domestic unemployment and 
insolvency.
When China and other countries recycle their dollar inflows by buying 
U.S. Treasury bills to “invest” in the United States, this buildup is not really 
voluntary. It does not reflect faith in the U.S. economy enriching foreign 
central banks for their savings, or any calculated investment preference, but 
simply a lack of alternatives. “Free markets” U.S.-style hook countries into a 
dollarized payments system that forces them to accept fiat dollars without 
limit. They have wanted out for a number of years now. 
This means creating a new alternative. Rather than making merely 
“cosmetic changes as some countries and perhaps the international financial 
organisations themselves might want,” Mr. Medvedev ended his St. 
Petersburg speech, “what we need are financial institutions of a completely 
new type, where particular political issues and motives, and particular 
countries will not dominate.”
When foreign military spending forced the U.S. balance of payments into 
deficit and drove the United States off gold in 1971, central banks were left 
without the traditional asset used to settle payments imbalances. The 
alternative by default was to invest their subsequent payments inflows in U.S. 
Treasury bonds, as if these still were “as good as gold.” Central banks have 
been holding some $4 trillion of these bonds in their international reserves for 
the past few years — and these loans have financed most of the U.S. 
Government’s domestic budget deficits for over three decades. Given the fact 
that about half of U.S. Government discretionary spending is for military 
operations — including more than 750 foreign military bases and increasingly 
expensive operations in the oil-producing and transporting countries — the 
international financial system is organized in a way that finances the 
Pentagon, along with U.S. buyouts of foreign assets expected to yield much 
more than the Treasury bonds that foreign central banks hold.
The main political issue confronting the world’s central banks is therefore 
how to avoid adding yet more dollars to their reserves and thereby financing 
yet further U.S. deficit spending — including military spending on their 

borders? 
For starters, the six SCO countries and BRIC countries have been moving 
to trade in their own currencies so as to get the benefit of mutual credit that 
the United States until now has monopolized for itself. China started by 
striking bilateral deals with Argentina and Brazil to denominate their trade in 
renminbi rather than the dollar, sterling or euros.3 In June, just before the 
Yekaterinburg meetings, China reached an agreement with Malaysia to 
denominate trade between the two countries in renminbi.4 Former Prime 
Minister Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad explained to me in January, 2009, half 
a year earlier, that as a Muslim country, Malaysia wanted to avoid doing 
anything that would facilitate U.S. military action against Islamic countries. 
The nation had too many dollar assets, his colleagues explained. Central bank 
governor Zhou Xiaochuan of the People’s Bank of China wrote an official 
statement on its website that the goal was to create a reserve currency “that is 
disconnected from individual nations.”5 This was the aim of the discussions 
in Yekaterinburg.
In addition to avoiding having to finance the U.S. buyout of their domestic 
industry and U.S. military encirclement of the globe, China, Russia and other 
countries no doubt would like to get the same kind of free ride that America 
has been getting since it went off gold in 1971. As matters stand, they see the 
United States as a lawless nation, financially as well as militarily. How else 
to characterize a nation that holds out a set of laws for others — on war, debt 
repayment and treatment of prisoners — but ignores them itself? The United 
States has long been the world’s largest debtor, yet has avoided the pain of 
“structural adjustments” imposed on other debtor economies. U.S. interest-
rate and tax reductions in the face of exploding trade and budget deficits are 
seen as the height of hypocrisy in view of the austerity programs that 
Washington forces on other countries via the IMF and other U.S.-controlled 
vehicles.
The United States tells debtor economies to sell off their public utilities 
and natural resources, raise their interest rates and increase taxes while 
gutting their social safety nets to squeeze out money to pay creditors. At 
home, Congress blocked China’s National Offshore Oil Co. (CNOOC) from 
buying Unocal on grounds of national security, much as it blocked Dubai 
from buying U.S. ports, and other sovereign wealth funds from buying key 

infrastructure. Foreigners are invited to emulate the Japanese purchase of 
white elephant trophies such as Rockefeller Center, on which investors 
quickly lost a billion dollars and ended up walking away. 
In this respect the United States has not given China and other payments-
surplus nations much alternative but to find a way to avoid further dollar 
buildups. At first, China’s attempts to diversify its dollar holdings beyond 
Treasury bonds were only marginal. For starters, Hank Paulson of Goldman 
Sachs steered its central bank into higher-yielding Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac securities, explaining that these were de facto public obligations. They 
collapsed in 2008, but the U.S. Government took these two mortgage-lending 
agencies over, formally adding their $5.2 trillion in obligations onto the 
national debt. In fact, it was largely foreign official investment that prompted 
the bailout. Imposing a loss for foreign official agencies would have broken 
the Treasury-bill standard then and there, destroying U.S. credibility. The 
problem is that there are too few Government bonds to absorb the dollars 
being flooded into the world economy by the soaring U.S. balance-of-
payments deficits.
Seeking more of an equity position to protect the value of their dollar 
holdings as the Federal Reserve’s credit bubble drove interest rates down, 
China’s sovereign wealth funds sought to diversify in late 2007. China 
bought stakes in the well-connected Blackstone equity fund and Morgan 
Stanley on Wall Street, Barclays in Britain, South Africa’s Standard Bank 
(once affiliated with Chase Manhattan back in the apartheid 1960s), and the 
soon-to-collapse Belgian financial conglomerate Fortis. But the U.S. financial 
sector was collapsing under the weight of its debt pyramiding, and prices for 
shares plunged for banks and investment firms across the globe. China took a 
loss — on dollars flowing in to buy its own companies whose value was 
soaring!
Foreigners are coming to see the IMF, World Bank and World Trade 
Organization as Washington surrogates in a financial system backed by 
American military bases and aircraft carriers encircling the globe. But this 
military domination is a vestige of an American empire no longer able to rule 
by economic strength. U.S. military power is muscle-bound, based more on 
atomic weaponry and long-distance air strikes than on ground operations, 
which have become too politically unpopular to mount on any large scale. 

On the economic front there is no foreseeable way in which the United 
States can work off the $4 trillion it owes foreign governments, their central 
banks and the sovereign wealth funds set up to dispose of the global dollar 
glut. America has become a deadbeat — and indeed, a militarily aggressive 
one as it seeks to hold onto the unique power it once earned by economic 
means. The problem is how to constrain its behavior. Yu Yongding, a former 
Chinese central bank advisor now with China’s Academy of Sciences, 
suggested that U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner be advised that the 
United States should “save” first and foremost by cutting back its military 
budget. “U.S. tax revenue is not likely to increase in the short term because of 
low economic growth, inflexible expenditures and the cost of ‘fighting two 
wars.’”6 
For the past decade it has been foreign savings, mainly by the BRIC 
countries, that have financed the U.S. budget deficit, by buying most 
Treasury bonds. Meanwhile, America’s own saving rate has been negative, 
except for paying down debts since 2009. The effect is taxation without 
representation for foreign voters as to how the U.S. Government uses their 
forced savings. It therefore is necessary for financial diplomats to broaden the 
scope of their policy-making beyond the private-sector marketplace. 
Exchange rates are determined by many factors besides “consumers 
wielding credit cards,” the usual euphemism that the U.S. media cite for 
America’s balance-of-payments deficit. Since the 13th century, war has been 
a dominating factor in the balance of payments of leading nations — and of 
their national debts. Ever since Adam Smith explained the steady buildup of 
Britain’s national debt mainly from its interminable wars with France, 
government bond financing has consisted mainly of rolling over the buildup 
of war debts, as normal peacetime budgets tend to be balanced. This links the 
war budget directly to the balance of payments and exchange rates.
In times past, foreign bankers have gone bankrupt financing Britain’s war 
debts and those of Habsburg Spain and other militarily ambitious nations. 
Today, foreign central banks see themselves stuck with unpayable IOUs — 
under conditions where, if they move to stop the U.S. free lunch, the dollar 
will plunge and their dollar holdings will fall in value relative to their own 
domestic currencies and other currencies. If China’s currency rises by 10% 

against the dollar, its central bank will show the equivalent of a $200 billion 
loss on its $2 trillion of dollar holdings as denominated in yuan. This explains 
why, when bond ratings agencies talk of the U.S. Treasury securities losing 
their AAA rating, they don’t mean that the government cannot simply print 
the paper dollars to “make good” on these bonds. They mean that dollars will 
depreciate in international value. 
That is just what has been occurring. When Mr. Geithner put on his 
serious face and told an audience at Peking University in early June that he 
believed in a “strong dollar” and China’s U.S. investments therefore were 
safe and sound, he was greeted with derisive laughter.7 
Anticipation of a rise in China’s exchange rate provides an incentive for 
speculators to seek to borrow in dollars to buy renminbi and benefit from the 
appreciation. For China, the problem is that this speculative inflow would 
become a self-fulfilling prophecy by forcing up its currency. So the problem 
of international reserves is inherently linked to that of capital controls. Why 
should China see its profitable companies sold for yet more freely-created 
U.S. computer keyboard dollars, which its central bank must use to buy low-
yielding U.S. Treasury bills or lose yet further money on Wall Street?
To avoid this quandary it is necessary to reverse the philosophy of open 
capital markets that the world has held since Bretton Woods in 1944. On the 
occasion of Mr. Geithner’s 2009 visit to China, “Zhou Xiaochuan, minister of 
the Peoples Bank of China, the country’s central bank, said pointedly that this 
was the first time since the semiannual talks began in 2006 that China needed 
to learn from American mistakes as well as its successes” when it came to 
deregulating capital markets and dismantling controls.8 
An era therefore is coming to an end. In the face of continued U.S. 
overspending, de-dollarization threatens to force countries to return to the 
kind of dual exchange rates common between World Wars I and II: one 
exchange rate for commodity trade, another for capital movements and 
investments, at least from dollar-area economies.
Even without capital controls, the nations meeting at Yekaterinburg took 
steps to avoid being the unwilling recipients of yet more dollars. Seeing that 
U.S. global hegemony cannot continue without spending power that they 
themselves supply, governments sought to hasten what Chalmers Johnson has 

called “the sorrows of empire” in his book by that name — the bankruptcy of 
the U.S. financial-military world order. If China, Russia and their non-
aligned allies ultimately have their way, the United States no longer will be 
able to live off the savings of others (in the form of its own recycled 
electronic dollars) nor have the money for unlimited military expenditures 
and adventures. 
U.S. officials wanted to attend the Yekaterinburg meeting as observers. 
They were told No. It is a word that Americans have been hearing ever since, 
and will hear yet more in the future.
 
1 Andrew Scheineson, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization,” Council on Foreign Relations, 
updated March 24, 2009: “While some experts say the organization has emerged as a powerful anti-
U.S. bulwark in Central Asia, others believe frictions between its two largest members, Russia and 
China, effectively preclude a strong, unified SCO.”
2 Kremlin.ru, June 5, 2009, in Johnson’s Russia List, June 8, 2009, #8.
3 Jamil Anderlini and Javier Blas, “China reveals big rise in gold reserves,” Financial Times, April 24, 
2009. See also “Chinese political advisors propose making yuan an int’l currency.” Beijing, March 7, 
2009 (Xinhua): “The key to financial reform is to make the yuan an international currency, said [Peter 
Kwong Ching] Woo [chairman of the Hong Kong-based Wharf (Holdings) Limited] in a speech to the 
Second Session of the 11th National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative 
Conference (CPPCC), the country’s top political advisory body. That means using the Chinese 
currency to settle international trade payments …”
4 Shai Oster, “Malaysia, China Consider Ending Trade in Dollars,” Wall Street Journal, June 4, 2009.
5 Jonathan Wheatley, “Brazil and China in plan to axe dollar,” Financial Times, May 19, 2009.
6 “Another Dollar Crisis inevitable unless U.S. starts Saving — China central bank adviser. Global 
Crisis ‘Inevitable’ Unless U.S. Starts Saving, Yu Says,” Bloomberg News, June 1, 2009. 
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601080&sid=aCV0pFcAFyZw&refer=asia
7 Kathrin Hille, “Lesson in friendship draws blushes,” Financial Times, June 2, 2009.
8 Steven R. Weisman, “U.S. Tells China Subprime Woes Are No Reason to Keep Markets Closed,” 

The New York Times, June 18, 2008.

ENDNOTES – Chapter 17
______________

***** 
18. Incorporating the Rentier Sectors into a 
Financial Model
 
Now that the Bubble Economy has given way to debt deflation, the world 
is discovering the shortcoming of models that fail to explain how most credit 
creation today: 
 
(1) inflates asset prices without raising commodity prices or wage levels, 
and 
(2) creates a reciprocal flow of debt service. This debt service tends to rise 
as a proportion of personal and business income, outgrowing the ability of 
debtors to pay — leading to 
(3) debt deflation. The only way to prevent this phenomenon from 
plunging economies into depression and keeping them there is 
(4) to write down the debts so as to free revenue for spending once again 
on goods and services.
 
By promoting a misleading view of how the economy works, the above 
omissions lead to a policy that fails to prevent debt bubbles or deal 
effectively with the ensuing depression. To avoid a replay of the recent 
financial crisis — and indeed, to extricate economies from their present debt 
strait-jacket that subordinates recovery to the overhang of creditor claims 

(that is, saving the banks from taking a loss on their bad loans and gambles) 
— it is necessary to explain how credit creation inflates housing and other 
asset prices, while interest and other financial charges deflate the “real” 
economy, holding down commodity prices, shrinking markets and 
employment, and holding down wages in a downward economic spiral. We 
are dealing with two price trends that go in opposite directions: asset prices 
and commodity prices. It therefore is necessary to explain how credit 
expansion pushes asset prices up while simultaneously causing debt 
deflation.
The typical MV = PT monetary and price model focuses on commodity 
prices and wages, not on the asset prices inflated by debt leveraging. In the 
real world most credit today is spent to buy assets already in place. Some 
80% of bank loans in the English-speaking world are real estate mortgages, 
and much of the balance is lent against stocks and bonds already issued. 
Banks lend to buyers of real estate, corporate raiders, ambitious financial 
empire-builders, and to management for debt-leveraged buyouts. 
Extending credit to purchase assets already in place bids up their price. 
Prospective homebuyers need to take on larger mortgages to obtain a home. 
The effect is to turn property rents into a flow of mortgage interest. These 
payments divert the revenue of consumers and businesses from being spent 
o0n consumption or new capital investment. The effect is deflationary for the 
economy’s product markets, and hence consumer prices and employment, 
and therefore wages. 
Debt-leveraged buyouts and commercial real estate purchases turn 
business cash flow (ebitda: earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and 
amortization) into interest payments. Likewise, bank or bondholder financing 
of public debt (especially in the Eurozone, which lacks a central bank to 
monetize such debt) has turned a rising share of tax revenue into interest 
payments. It was to extricate themselves from this situation that nations 
created central banks, starting with the Bank of England in 1694. The aim 
was to avoid reliance on commercial banks for credit, by creating money by 
the state itself.
As creditors recycle their receipts of interest and amortization (and capital 
gains) into new lending to buyers of real estate, stocks and bonds, a rising 

share of employee income, real estate rent, business revenue and even 
government tax revenue diverted to pay debt service. By leaving less to spend 
on goods and services, the effect is to reduce new investment and 
employment. So wages do not increase, even as prices for property and 
financial securities rise. This price divergence has become the major 
characteristic of the post-2001 Bubble Economy, and indeed of the post-1980 
period throughout the Western economies. 
It is especially the case since 1991 in the post-Soviet economies, where 
neoliberal (that is, pro-financial) policy makers have had a free hand to shape 
tax and financial policy in favor of banks (mainly foreign bank branches). 
Latvia is cited as a neoliberal success story, but it would be hard to find an 
example where rentier income and prices have diverged more sharply from 
wages and the “real” production economy.
The more that credit creation takes the form of inflating asset prices — 
rather than financing purchases of goods or direct investment employing 
labor — the more deflationary its effects are on the “real” economy of 
production and consumption. Housing and other asset prices crash, causing 
negative equity. Yet homeowners and businesses still have to pay off their 
debts. The national income accounts classify this pay-down as “saving,” 
although the revenue is not available to the debtors doing the “saving.” 
The moral is that using homes as what Alan Greenspan referred to as 
“piggy banks” to take out home-equity loans was not really like drawing 
down a bank account at all. When a bank account is drawn down there is less 
money available, but no residual obligation to pay. New income can be spent 
at the discretion of its recipient. But borrowing against a home implies an 
obligation to set aside future income to pay the banker — and hence a loss of 
future discretionary spending.
Creating a more realistic model of today’s financialized economies to 
trace this phenomenon requires a breakdown of the national income and 
product accounts (NIPA) to see the economy as a set of distinct sectors 
interacting with each other. These accounts juxtapose the private and public 
sectors as far as current spending, saving and taxation is concerned. But the 
implication is that government budget deficits inflate the private-sector 
economy as a whole. However, a budget deficit that takes the form of transfer 

payments to banks, as in the case of the post-September 2008 bank bailout, 
the Federal Reserve’s $2 trillion in cash-for-trash financial swaps and the 
$700 billion QE II credit creation by the Federal Reserve to lend to banks at 
0.25% interest in 2011, has a different effect from deficits that reflect social 
spending programs, Social Security and Medicare, public infrastructure 
investment or the purchase of other goods and services. The effect of transfer 
payments to the financial sector — as well as the $5.3 trillion increase in U.S. 
Treasury debt from taking Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac onto the public 
balance sheet — is to support asset prices (above all those of the banking 
system), not inflate commodity prices and wages.
 
Figure 1 follows: U.S. Private Sector, Government Sector and International 
Sector
 
 

Most models treat the international sector either as a “leakage” (as Keynes 
termed foreign trade and capital flows) or as a balancing item in the private/ 
public sector surplus or shortfall (as in the Levy Institute model). But the 
international sector involves not only export and import trade and other 
current account items (emigrants’ remittances, and above all, military 
spending) but also foreign investment and income — and foreign central bank 
reserves held in U.S. Treasury and other securities, that is, in loans to the 
U.S. Government. 
So the international sphere may either provide inflows or record an 
outflow to the U.S. economy and its financial markets. For instance, U.S. 
consumers and businesses ran a trade deficit, and banks used the entire $700 
billion QEII supply of Fed credit for foreign currency arbitrage and other 
international speculation, not for lending to the domestic U.S. economy. But 
the U.S. Treasury received an inflow from foreign central banks building up 
their dollar reserves by buying Treasury securities and other U.S. financial 
securities.
This model can be used to trace U.S. transactions with China. The 
economy runs a trade deficit with China, and also a private-sector investment 
outflow to China. There is some return of earnings from these investments to 
U.S. companies. But on balance, there is a dollar outflow to China — which 
also receives dollars from its exports to third countries. China’s central bank 
has recycled most of these dollar receipts to the U.S. Treasury (and earlier, 
into Fannie Mae bonds and kindred investments), but was not permitted to 
buy U.S. companies such as Unocal’s refinery operations.
 
Figure 2 follows: U.S. Transactions With China, Broken Down Between 
Private and Government Sectors
 

 
This public/private/international model may be made more realistic by 
treating the financial, insurance and real estate (FIRE) sector as distinct from 
the underlying production and consumption economy. The FIRE sector deals 
with the economy’s balance sheet of assets and debts, real estate, stocks and 
bonds, mortgages and other bank loans — and the payment of interest, money 
management commissions and other fees to the financial sector, as well as 
insurance payments and also rental payments for housing. 
In principle, monopolies should be included in this rentier sector, as they 
represent a special privilege (control over markets, especially for necessities) 
whose return in the form of prices and income in excess of necessary costs of 
production is a form of economic rent, that is, a transfer payment rather than 
“earned” income.
Classical political economists from the Physiocrats through Adam Smith, 
John Stuart Mill and their Progressive Era followers were reformers in the 
sense that they treated the rentier sectors as extracting transfer payments 
rather than earning a return for producing actual output (“services”). Their 
labor theory of value found its counterpart in the “economic rent theory of 
prices” to distinguish the necessary costs of production and doing business 

(reduced ultimately to the value of labor) from “unearned income” consisting 
mainly of land rent, monopoly rent, and financial interest and fees. The 
various categories of rentier income were depicted as the “hollow” element of 
prices. Land rent, natural resource rent, monopoly rent and returns to 
privilege (including financial interest and fees) had no counterpart in 
necessary costs of production. They were historical and institutional products 
of privileges handed down largely from the medieval conquests that created 
Europe’s landed aristocracy and banking practice that developed largely by 
insider dealing. What legitimized interest was, pragmatically, lending to 
kings to finance war debts, in an epoch when money and credit were the 
sinews of war. So banking as well as military rivalries for land essentially 
involved the foreign sector. 
The political aim of classical analysis was to minimize the economy’s cost 
structure by freeing industrial capitalism from these carry-overs from 
feudalism. The reformers’ guiding idea was to minimize the role of rentier 
income (economic rent) by (1) direct public investment in basic 
infrastructure, including education, transportation systems, communication 
systems and other enterprises that were long kept in the public domain or 
publicly regulated from the late 19th century onward, (2) tax policy (taxing 
land and natural resources), and (3) regulatory policy to keep the prices 
charged by natural monopolies such as railroads, power and gas companies in 
line with actual production costs plus normal profit.
 
Figure 3 follows: The FIRE Sector’s Role in the Domestic Economy
 

 
The financial sector has become the leading rentier sector. Its “product” is 
debt claims on the “real” economy, underwriting, and money management on 
a fee basis. For this it receives interest and dividends from real estate and 
business borrowers, and from consumers. Over time, real estate buyers 
typically pay more in interest to their mortgage lenders than the original 
purchase price paid to the property seller.
In its interactions with the government, the financial sector buys bonds 

(and also makes campaign contributions). The Federal Reserve pumps money 
into the banking system by purchasing bonds and, when the system breaks 
down, makes enormous bailout payments to cover the bad debts run up by 
banks and other institutions to mortgage borrowers, businesses and 
consumers. The government also enhances the real estate sector by providing 
transportation and other basic infrastructure that enhances the site value of 
property along the routes. Finally, the government acts as direct purchaser of 
monopoly services from health insurance providers, pharmaceutical 
companies and other monopolies. In the other direction, the U.S. Government 
receives a modicum of taxes from real estate (mainly at the local level for 
property taxes), not much income tax but some capital gains tax in good 
years.
 
Figure 4 following: Interaction Between the FIRE and Government Sectors
 

 
Hardly by surprise, the financial sector prefers to make itself invisible — 
not only to the tax collector and government regulators, but to voters. What 
the classical reformers called economic rent is now called “earnings.” So the 
failure to break out the rentier sector from the rest of the economy — and 
hence, balance sheet and debt transactions from the purchase of goods and 
services — has helped soften criticism of shifting the tax burden off land and 
monopoly rent, and off finance. Yet the NIPA report that some 40% of U.S. 
corporate profits in 2010 were registered by the financial sector. 
This reflects the fact that interest and other financial charges have risen 
steadily as a proportion of GDP. Credit card companies report higher returns 
from late fees and penalties than they receive in interest. And other payments 
to the FIRE sector also are increasing as a rising proportion of employee 
budgets is spent on housing (largely for mortgage interest), other debt 

service, and payments to the government in the form of FICA withholding, 
taxes and user fees that have been shifted off FIRE onto employers and 
employees in the “real” production sector.
 
Figure 5 follows: Overall Model of the FIRE Sector, Producers, Consumers 
and Government
 
 
The distinction between rentier and “earned” income was not incorporated 
into the NIPA. This is largely the result of a long political and ideological 

fight back by the real estate and financial sectors against the Progressive 
Era’s economic reforms. Financial and real estate interests preferred 
descriptions of an economy in which all income was earned by playing a 
productive role, and in which money (and hence, credit and debt) was 
“neutral,” only a “veil,” that does not affect the distribution of income and 
wealth. Credit was spent only on goods and services, not on assets. And the 
financial sector’s loans always took the form of productive credit, enabling 
businesses to pay back the loans out of future earnings while consumers paid 
out of rising future incomes. There thus was no explanation of how a credit 
bubble could inflate real estate prices and then collapse into a negative equity 
disaster. Finance seemed only to create wealth, not impoverish the underlying 
economy.
Nor was there any way for mainstream models to distinguish government 
transfer payments to the financial sector (e.g., the $13 trillion in post-2008 
financial bailouts in the United States) from Keynesian-style deficit spending. 
Such transfer payments did not “jumpstart” the economy. They turned a 
politically well-connected financial elite into new vested interests.
One can understand why the financial sector has had so little interest in 
tracing the effect of rising money and credit on diverting income from the 
circular flow between producers and consumers, diverting business revenue 
from new capital formation, and stripping industrial assets and natural 
resources. Most model builders isolate these long-term structural, 
environmental and demographic feedbacks as “externalities.” But they are 
part and parcel of reality. So one is tempted to say that the financial element 
of economic models is too important to be left to the self-interested tunnel 
vision of bankers.
 
Environmental Asset Stripping as an Analogue for Debt Deflation 
 
Just as debt deflation diverts income to pay interest and other financial 
charges — often at the cost of paying so much corporate cash flow that assets 
must be sold off to pay creditors — so the phenomenon leads to stripping the 
natural environment. This is what occurs, for instance, when the IMF and 
World Bank act on behalf of global banks to demand that Brazil pay its 

foreign debt by privatizing its Amazon forest so that loggers can earn enough 
foreign exchange to pay foreign bankers. The analogy is absentee landlords 
who pay their mortgages by not repairing their property but letting it 
deteriorate. In all these cases debt deflation caused by extracting interest 
affects not only spending — and hence current prices — but also the 
economy’s long-term ability to produce. It eats into natural resources and the 
environment as well as society’s manmade capital stock.
Demographically, the effect of debt deflation is emigration and other 
negative effects. For example, after Latvian property prices soared as 
Swedish bank branches fueled the real estate bubble, living standards 
plunged. Families had to take on a lifetime of debt in order to gain the 
housing that was bequeathed to the country debt-free when the Soviet Union 
broke up in 1991. When Latvia’s government imposed neoliberal austerity 
policies in 2009–10, wage levels plunged by 30% in the public sector, and 
private-sector wages followed the decline. Emigration and capital flight 
accelerated. In debt-strapped Iceland, the census reported in 2011 that 8% of 
the population had emigrated (mainly to Norway).
 
The Effect of Credit-Financed Asset Prices on the “Real” Economy
 
Inasmuch as investors today have come to aim more at “total returns” (net 
income + capital gains) rather than simply income by itself, a realistic model 
should integrate capital gains and investment into the current production-
consumption model. Producers not only pay wages and buy capital goods as 
in “current economy” models; they also use their cash flow (and even 
borrow) to buy other companies, as well as their own stock. When they make 
acquisitions on credit, the resulting debt leveraging finds its counterpart in 
interest payments that absorb a rising share of corporate cash flow. 
This has an effect on the government’s fiscal position, because interest is a 
tax-deductible expense. By displacing taxable profits, creditors receive the 
business revenue hitherto paid out as income taxes. The result in the early 
1980s, when debt-leveraged buyouts really gained momentum, was that 
financial investors were able to obtain twice as high a return (at a 50% 
corporate income tax rate) by debt financing than they could get by equity 

financing. This tax incentive for debt leveraging rather than equity 
investment is the reverse of what Saint-Simon and his followers urged in the 
19th century to become the wave of the future.
Only a portion of FIRE sector cash flow is spent on goods and services. 
The great bulk is recycled into the purchase of financial securities and other 
assets, or lent out as yet more interest-bearing debt — on easier and easier 
credit terms as the repertory of bankable direct investments is exhausted. So 
the pressing task today is to trace how directing most credit into the asset 
markets affects asset prices much more than commodity prices. Loan 
standards deteriorate as debt/equity ratios increase and creditors “race to the 
bottom” to find borrowers in markets further distanced from the “real” 
economy. This increasingly unproductive character of credit explains why 
wealth is being concentrated in the hands of the population’s wealthiest 10 %. 
It is the dysfunctional result of economic parasitism.
Keynes recognized a “leakage” in the form of saving (specifically, 
hoarding). But at the time he wrote in the midst of the Great Depression there 
was little motivation to focus on debt service, or on the distinction between 
direct capital investment (tangible capital formation) and financial securities 
speculation or real estate speculation (which had all but dried up as asset 
markets were shrinking to reflect the economy’s shrinking). Saving took the 
form of non-spending, not of paying down debt. There was little lending 
under depression conditions.
Today’s post-bubble attempts to incorporate balance-sheet analysis into 
NIPA statistics on current activity are too crude. Stock averages do not give 
an adequate quantitative measure distinguishing the flow of funds into land 
and capital improvements or industrial capital formation in contrast to 
speculation in financial securities. So monetary analysis needs to be 
reformulated along with a better structural breakdown of NIPA to distinguish 
between money and credit spent on goods and services from that spent on 
financial assets and debt service.
__________________

**********

PART IV: The Need for a Clean Slate
___________________

*****
19. From Democracy to Oligarchy: National 
Economies at the Crossroads
 
What is called “capitalism” has passed through a series of stages. For all 
its brutality, Industrial Capitalism raised productivity and vastly increased 
output. Selling this surplus depended on the ability of employees to buy what 
they produced. But Finance Capitalism’s dynamic is extractive, with each 
new stage imposing deeper austerity. What appeared primarily as a class war 
between industry and labor a century ago has become a broader war of 
finance against the economy as a whole. By imposing debt deflation, Finance 
Capitalism is cannibalizing industry as well as reducing labor to debt 
peonage.
The end product is a Neo-Rentier Economy — precisely what Industrial 
Capitalism and classical economists set out to replace during the Progressive 
Era from the late 19th to early 20th century. Finance capital extracts interest 
and inflates asset prices by attaching debt to the economy’s means of 
production and income streams. This interrupts the circular flow between 
production and consumption, causing economic shrinkage. So instead of 
producing new value or output, the “miracle of compound interest,” 
reinforced by fiat credit creation, cannibalizes industrial capital as well as the 
returns to labor. Most land rent and monopoly rent is now paid out as interest 
to a financial class has usurped the role that landlords used to play: a class 
living off special privilege and claims on the economy at large. 
Centered in the United States since the aftermath of World Wars I and II, 

Finance Capitalism promised to end class warfare with the Pension-Fund 
Capitalism that has steered employment savings into the stock and bond 
markets since the 1950s. The idea is for pension funds to build up financial 
claims on the economy by turning their savings over to money managers to 
earn interest and make capital gains, increasingly by using debt leverage. The 
problem is that this financial maneuvering does not fund tangible new capital 
formation or give workers a real ownership voice in investment and 
workplace decisions.
Since U.S. overseas military spending forced the dollar off gold in 1971, a 
U.S.-centered Monetary Imperialism has involved fiat dollar creation. Instead 
of holding foreign reserves in gold, the world’s central banks hold U.S. 
Treasury bonds. These are issued mainly to finance U.S. global military 
spending. Removing gold as a limiting factor on the ability of the United 
States to run domestic budget deficits and balance-of-payments deficits, 
American banks have been able to create credit and flood the global economy 
with fiat credit. This has enabled U.S. financial firms and companies to buy 
up foreign industry with low-interest fiat dollars — which the foreign 
recipients turn over to their central banks to recycle back to the U.S. economy 
by buying more Treasury securities, to finance the domestic budget deficit 
and payments deficit … and so on, seemingly ad infinitum.
This fiat dollar credit made possible the Bubble Economy after 1980, 
which soon evolved into Casino Capitalism. Inherently unstable, these 
economically radioactive stages decayed into Debt Deflation after 2008, and 
now are settling into a leaden Debt Peonage and the austerity of Neo-
Serfdom.
Politically, Industrial Capitalism’s drive to lower production costs 
required checking the power of landlords, bankers and monopolists. The 
landed interest’s control of the House of Lords, Senate or other upper houses 
of government gave it a stranglehold on national tax systems. Taxing away 
this hereditary power required raising that of the lower house of government. 
Democratic reform extended the vote to a wider portion of the population, in 
the expectation that this would lead to policies to check the extraction of 
economic rent.
By contrast, today’s finance capital is inherently oligarchic. It seeks to 

capture the government — first and foremost the Treasury, central bank and 
the courts — to enrich (indeed, to bail out) and un-tax the banking sector and 
its major clients: real estate and monopolies. This is why Germany opposed a 
public referendum on the European Central Bank’s austerity program in 
Greece, and imposed “technocrats” to act on behalf of high finance.
 
“The Future of Capitalism” — What Kind of Capitalism Do We Mean?
 
What is so striking in the recent debates about the future of capitalism is 
blurriness over just what kind of capitalism is being talked about. Industrial 
capitalism invested in plant and equipment, making profits by employing 
labor to produce output at a markup. But the Western world is now on a path 
of austerity and downsizing. Companies are using their cash flow and 
borrowing mainly for stock buybacks, raids and buyouts of assets already in 
place. Most bank lending is for real estate and to other financial institutions 
for arbitrage speculation on interest rates, foreign exchange rates or other 
financial instruments, not to industry or consumers — who find themselves 
obliged to pay down debts taken out in the past rather than buying new 
output.
This is not what was envisioned when the Industrial Revolution was 
peaking in the 19th and early 20th century. To promote growth and increase 
their nations’ competitive position, classical economists sought to free 
society from the legacies of feudalism — a landed aristocracy extracting land 
rent, and a banking class extracting interest and converting national debts into 
monopoly trading privileges. Progressive Era reformers defined a free market 
as one in which land rent was taxed away and monopolies either were broken 
up or socialized in the public domain along with basic infrastructure. The aim 
was to bring market prices in line with minimum necessary cost-value. This 
required a strong enough government to tax and check the vested financial, 
insurance and real estate (FIRE) interests.
When Joseph Schumpeter spoke about creative destruction driving 
capitalism forward, he was referring to technology raising productivity, 
enabling new companies to unseat the old by using more efficient means of 
production or creating better products, as when the automobile replaced the 

horse and buggy. Lower costs were supposed to be passed on to consumers in 
the form of falling prices. This principle was written into John F. Kennedy’s 
wage-productivity guidelines with the steel industry in the early 1960s.1 
Liberal economists believed that market forces would raise wage levels in 
keeping with productivity, if only because production required a parallel 
growth in consumer demand.
To early supporters and strategists of industrial capitalism, the driving 
dynamic was what the Wharton Business School professor Simon Patten 
called the “Economy of Abundance.” Innovations in modes of financial 
takeovers of industry were more in the character of parasitic destruction. Few 
observers anticipated just how “creative” — in the pejorative sense of 
perversely inventive — this destructive appropriation might become. No one 
imagined that it might take over government agencies, the central bank and 
the Treasury to post-industrialize the economy. Schumpeter certainly did not 
envision that productive companies were to be destroyed by financial 
takeovers leaving them bankrupt shells of their former selves. Like most 
observers, he expected banking to be modernized to promote industrial 
capital investment, not to load industry down with debt, stock options, high 
dividend payouts and financial fees by raiders wielding junk bonds as their 
weapon of choice. 
Today’s financial operators have given a new meaning to the notion of 
creative destruction. Their innovations take the not-so-creative form of 
predatory destruction of the economy for their own benefit, as if co-opting 
government to give them tax favoritism for interest payouts and other non-
production expenses entailed by transferring income into the hands of 
financial rather than industrial engineers. Industrial technology plays little 
role in this post-industrial creativity.
The upshot is that despite the rise in labor and capital productivity, prices 
have not fallen, and real wages have not increased since the late 1970s in the 
United States. The Finance, Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) sector, 
dominated mainly by high finance, has appropriated almost all the economic 
gains. Industrial capitalism has evolved into finance capitalism in ways not 
dreamed of a century ago. Finance capitalism itself is a family of offshoots: 
pension-fund capitalism, the bubble economy, debt deflation and austerity. 
Each stage is characterized by new tactics to extracting wealth from the 

economy without contributing to its real growth. This path is now leading to 
what threatens to be a terminal stage of debt peonage and neofeudalism.
Instead of the promised economy of abundance, economic policy from the 
United States to Europe is now directed at imposing austerity to carry the 
debts run up by a Bubble Economy in which most gains have been made not 
by industrial investment, but by borrowing to buy assets whose price is being 
inflated by bank credit. The shift of focus from industrial profits to debt-
leveraged “capital” gains been spurred mainly by falling interest rates, easier 
(indeed, reckless) mortgage credit, and higher capitalization multiples for 
stocks and bonds. 
Debt leveraging inflated property prices for a while, but the rise was 
reversed when there was no underpinning in the “real” production-and-
consumption economy. Since 2008 this price reversal has left a trail of 
negative equity (when debts exceed asset valuation) that has dragged down 
balance sheets not only for indebted households but also for the banks and 
insurance companies whose loans and default guarantees went bad. These 
defaults reflect the degree to which fraudulent mortgage lending was backed 
by AAA ratings from the credit rating agencies for “toxic waste” consisting 
largely of the “liars’ loans” pushed by crooked mortgage originators 
associated with Countrywide Financial, Washington Mutual and similar 
banksters. This was a libertarian travesty of “free markets,” turning the 
economy into a market free from the regulation or anti-fraud protection that 
governments are supposed to provide.
So foreclosure time has arrived. Shrinking markets, mounting arrears and 
bankruptcies have caused equity and real estate prices to plunge, leading 
banks to stop lending. Unable to refinance their mortgages, homeowners are 
obliged to pay back what they borrowed prior to 2008. Debt-strapped 
populations are buying less, so vacancy rates have risen for retail outlets. The 
combination of shrinking markets, unemployment and lower tax revenues has 
squeezed state and local budgets in the United States, while government 
budgets from Alabama to Ireland and Greece face an insurmountable debt 
burden. Localities as well as companies claim that they face bankruptcy if 
they are not permitted to roll back pensions, health care commitments and 
current wage levels. This is the cruel face of debt deflation — combined with 
the refusal to roll back tax cuts for property owners, capital gains and high-

income earners.
When debtors no longer can pay the interest charges, they fall prey to debt 
peonage. In the case of government debtors, creditors seek to take payment in 
the form of property transfers, by privatizing the public domain. Buyers of 
basic infrastructure being sold off raise prices for hitherto public services, 
adding a fiscal and budget squeeze to the debt squeeze.
Instead of suffering a merely temporary cyclical downturn, economies 
have entered a fatal phase in which debt service falling due exceeds the 
economic surplus. The problem is not illiquidity — sound long-term 
investments that cannot find ready buyers because of a credit crunch — but 
insolvency, an inability to earn enough to pay debts under foreseeable normal 
conditions. An overgrowth of debt expands autonomously by its own 
dynamics (“the miracle of compound interest” plus the banks’ electronic 
creation of new credit). The economic system shrinks, unless governments 
either annul debts or fuel recovery by lending enough to carry the debts.
To deter governments from acting, banks have promoted the fiction that a 
deus ex machina of “automatic stabilizers” will correct the debt problem, if 
only governments bail out the banks with enough money to lend out to get 
people and companies spending again. This pretense aims at deterring public 
policy from acting to rein in the banks from their over-lending, speculation, 
and helping clients avoid taxes by moving their funds offshore. 
The solution ultimately must be political and involve debt write-down. 
Near Eastern economies are documenting restored balance and growth from 
c. 2500 BC to 500 BC by royal Clean Slates. Solon banned debt bondage in 
Athens in 594 BC, paving the way for the democratic take-off. Sparta’s kings 
Agis IV and Cleomenes III sought to reverse the financial polarization 
between creditors and debtors in the late third century BC by canceling the 
debts. Jesus announced that he had come to proclaim the Jubilee Year, the 
50th year in which Leviticus 25 prescribed that personal debts should be 
forgiven, debtors released from bondage, and self-support land returned to 
debtors who had forfeited them. In more modern times, Germany’s Economic 
Miracle was triggered by the 1948 Allied monetary reform and debt 
cancellation and subsequent 1953 settlement of accumulated past 
international obligations. 

Ignoring this history, the most damaging economic fiction of our time is 
that all debts can be paid — if only countries submit to enough austerity, 
impoverish their labor force, close down enough industry and let banks 
foreclose on enough factories — and while they are at it, cut back Social 
Security, health care and social spending. These cutbacks are a tactic in the 
financial warfare that the 1% is waging against the rest of the economy. 
Trying to impose this fiction on reality can only stifle industrial prosperity, 
“post-industrializing” economies by destroying the circular flow of spending 
and payments between domestic consumers and producers.
It seems ironic that today’s socialist, Social Democratic and Labour 
parties — ostensibly on the left wing of political spectrum — tend to support 
the financial sector’s neoliberal policies, even that of privatization. In Britain, 
Tony Blair’s Labour Party went even further than Margaret Thatcher’s 
Conservatives in privatizing the railways. Throughout continental Europe, 
Social Democrats have not proposed an alternative to neoliberal austerity. 
And in the United States under Presidents Clinton and Obama, the 
Democratic Party has embraced the deregulatory “Rubinomics” wing, named 
for former Goldman Sachs CEO and Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin.
A strong Marxist tradition on the left blames the financial crisis on the 
drive by industrial employers to pay as low wages as possible. In this view, 
capitalists accumulate industrial profits by not paying labor enough to buy the 
products it creates. This becomes systemically self-destructive as badly paid 
labor lacks the purchasing power to buy what it produces, causing 
underconsumption or over-production. Savings and debt are an industrial 
problem, not specifically financial.
More Schumpeterian approaches blame today’s crisis on technological 
advance causing unemployment, while neoclassical trade theory focuses on 
the offshoring of production to low-wage countries. The underlying logic is 
that less labor is required to produce the means of livelihood than in times 
past. But why then is our world not one of abundance, shorter workdays and 
longer vacations — the leisure economy that technology was supposed to 
introduce? The answer is that people are working longer to pay down their 
debts. Interest and other financial overhead — and debt-inflated housing 
costs — have absorbed more than productivity gains have provided.

 
Finance Capitalism vs. Industrial Capitalism, and Their Respective Modes of 
Exploitation
The problems between employers and employees are eternal, but labor 
today is exploited increasingly in a financial way. Bankers extract revenue 
from consumers by interest, fees and penalties on credit cards, personal loans, 
mortgages and student loans. Corporate raiders empty out Employee Stock-
Ownership Plans (ESOPs) and pension funds, or downsize payouts by 
threatening or declaring bankruptcy. In the fiscal sphere the financial sector 
has gained sufficient power to shift the tax burden off itself and its major 
clients onto consumers. Since 1982, FICA wage withholding now absorbs 
over 15% of labor’s paychecks for Social Security and Medicare, producing 
large enough fiscal surpluses to cut taxes on the wealthy. 
Like household budgets, the corporate sector has been financialized. 
Instead of raising funds for new capital investment, the stock market has 
become a vehicle for raiders to buy companies on credit, replacing equity 
capital with debt. Debt-leveraged corporate buyouts, raids, mergers and 
acquisitions earmark corporate cash flow for debt service (e.g., to pay junk 
bond holders who advanced takeover funding) instead of investing in new 
capital formation to employ labor and produce more. Most corporate debt is 
taken on for leveraged buyouts — or for “poison pills”: so much debt that no 
raiders will want to take over companies that defend themselves against such 
financial aggression by financial self-immolation. 
Most bank credit is lent to other financial institutions, not to industry or 
consumers. To focus on the production and employment dynamics of 
industrial capitalism rather than the debt dynamics of finance capitalism 
leaves out of account the fact that banks make loans and create debt (and 
deposits) on their computer keyboards. An autonomous financial dynamic is 
at work, not merely savings by the industrial sector. For non-financial debt, 
by far the largest category in today’s economies takes the form of mortgages 
to buy housing and office buildings. 
This is not what economic observers expected when the Industrial 
Revolution was just getting under way. Banks sided with manufacturing, 

largely because their major loan market was import and export trade, foreign 
investment or other international transfers. In Britain, the center of the 
Industrial Revolution, industrial dominance required under-selling 
competitors. This was done not merely through technological advance but by 
minimizing the rake-off of income by the nation’s landlord class. So tax 
reform became a leading aim, from David Ricardo’s attack on the Corn Laws 
(Britain’s protectionist agricultural tariffs that enhanced groundrent) after 
1817 to later attempts to tax urban as well as rural land as the fiscal base.
Marx pointed to the industrialists’ hatred of privileged landlords, as 
reflected from Ricardo through Henry George, for siphoning off rent from the 
industrial circular flow without producing value.2 As he and Engels 
expressed matters in the Communist Manifesto: “The bourgeoisie, wherever 
it has got the upper hand, has put an end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic 
relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man 
to his “natural superiors…” Paramount among these ties were the hereditary 
right to ground rent, the privilege of bankers to charge interest and also to put 
pressure on debtor governments to create and sell off monopoly rent-
extracting rights for payment in government war bonds.
Industrial capitalists made profits by investing in plant and equipment to 
employ labor to sell output at a markup. Most profits were to be reinvested in 
this way, and retained earnings indeed are still the main source of tangible 
capital investment, not bank lending or the stock market. But as “balance 
sheet wealth” has become financialized for industrial companies, investment 
has become more debt-leveraged.
The problem is not merely one of personal greed; it is built into the 
inexorable mathematics of compound interest (see Chapters 2 and 11) and, 
since 1971, fiat credit creation (see Chapters 14 and 15). From the classical 
vantage point, the buildup of claims for groundrent, monopoly rent and 
financial charges reflects Industrial Capitalism’s failure to free economies 
from these rentiers. Led by finance capital, the vested interests have managed 
to reverse the Progressive reform movement, gaining control over election 
campaigns to un-tax themselves and disable public regulation. 
The unforeseen result is that post-industrial wealth derives more from 
debt-leveraged capital gains (asset-price inflation) on real estate and 

monopolies than from new tangible capital formation. It is appropriate to 
speak of debt pollution of the environment, turning the industrial surplus and 
disposable personal income into debt service. Real estate rents are paid out as 
mortgage interest, corporate cash flow is paid to corporate raiders, and the tax 
surplus is used to bail out banks that have succumbed to the economy’s 
plunge into negative equity.
Industrial potential cannot be recovered without winding down the debt 
overhead that has been used to bid up asset prices. For exporters to compete 
internationally, it is necessary to roll back debt-leveraged prices for real 
estate, health care and education. Yet instead of confronting this problem, 
U.S. and European leaders blame China. They attribute its success to low-
wage manufacturing, not to the mixed public/private economy.
Misinterpretation of the West’s financial overhead and the consequences 
of its untaxing of finance, insurance and real estate reflects the success of 
rentiers in packing economics departments with professors who reject 
classical value and price theory, and its corollary distinction between earned 
and unearned income, productive and unproductive labor. These concepts no 
longer are taught. Neoliberal ideology has been able to expunge the history of 
economic thought and history itself from the curriculum, and from popular 
thought and discussion.
By rejecting the classical distinctions between productive and 
unproductive investment, credit and employment, the post-classical 
economists receiving the charitable largesse of rentiers and awarded the 
“badge of true science” insist that all income and wealth is earned 
productively. Everyone earns whatever he or she makes, so there is no 
unearned wealth. There are no idle rich.
The post-classical (confusingly called “neoclassical”) and Austrian 
counter-revolution treats rentiers as playing a necessary and essential role in 
production, by allocating resources efficiently and with foresight. This 
approach dismisses as a mere witticism Balzac’s quip that most great family 
fortunes are grounded in long-forgotten and suppressed thefts of the public 
domain or by political or financial insider dealing. Also in the spirit of 
Proudhon’s declaration that “Property is theft,” Gustavus Myers’ History of 
the Great American Fortunes (1907) details the acquisition of wealth by 

insider dealing and skullduggery. But such books are dismissed as 
muckraking, not as the core of most wealth.
Many 19th-century economists distinguished material welfare from what 
Thorstein Veblen called “pecuniary” wealth. In 1804, James Maitland, eighth 
earl of Lauderdale, wrote An Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Public 
Wealth, and into the Means and Causes of its Increase emphasizing the 
distinction between material wealth and commercial exchange value. Farmers 
often make more from a failed harvest that raises food prices to distress levels 
than from abundance. High prices and income thus reflect “a degree of 
scarcity,” although “The common sense of mankind would revolt [at schemes 
to increase private riches] by creating a scarcity of any commodity generally 
useful and necessary to man.” Yet this is precisely what monopolists and 
privatizers aim at doing, including bankers dispensing credit. The distinction 
between “real wealth” and financial claims was a central theme of Friedrich 
List’s National System of Political Economy (1841), Calvin Colton’s Public 
Economy for the United States (1848) and the American School of 
technological and protectionist writers in general. 
As for financial wealth in the form of stocks, bonds and bank loans, the 
physicist Frederick Soddy’s Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt (1926) 
distinguished between material “real” wealth in the means of production and 
financial or property claims on this wealth. These financial claims tend to 
expand more rapidly than the surplus available to pay, especially as banks 
appropriate the privilege of credit creation. In the European Union this 
privilege has been pressed to the point of blocking governments from 
creating their own money to monetize their budget deficits — the purpose for 
which central banks were founded! 
Interest owed on this credit tends to rise to the point where it plunges the 
non-financial economy into deficit — and on into austerity as bankers and 
bondholders squeeze out payments from government, industry, real estate and 
consumers. Wealth is concentrated in financial hands even as the economy 
shrinks. As economies fall into negative equity, debt arrears and foreclosures 
mount up in what has become an economic trap in which it is almost 
impossible to win or even to survive.
Permitting this incursion of finance into the “real” production-and-

consumption economy requires suspending democratic choice in debt-
strapped countries. Most recently in Greece, German Chancellor Angela 
Merkel pressured Prime Minister Papandreou not to permit a voter 
referendum on the European Union’s austerity and privatization plan imposed 
in late 2011. Neoliberal Latvia and its Baltic neighbors have retained 
democratic formalities by staging political distractions to win voters to 
neoliberal parties on a platform of ethnic nationalism. In the United States 
religious and sexual issues play a prominent role in shifting election 
campaigns away from economic and financial issues. 
This political turn away from economic issues was not anticipated by 19th 
and early 20th century parliamentary reformers. It runs against the basic 
Enlightenment assumption that voters act knowledgeably in their self-
interest. This hardly is a realistic assumption to make these days!
Turning economic theory into a logic justifying rentier takings dissuades 
discussion of policy alternatives by presenting this rent extraction as natural 
and apparently inevitable. “There is no alternative,” say the neoliberals. Yet 
this direction of evolution is the opposite from what classical economists and 
Progressive Era reformers expected to see. It renders economies high-cost, 
not low-cost and hence presumably more competitive. It is expensive to 
support a financial class lording it over the rest of the population, after all. 
Rentier lobbyists hope that people will not notice how the economic map 
they draw fails to correspond to the territory it claims to depict. Post-classical 
theory assumes that everyone earns what they take, by providing productive 
services. Equilibrium theory postulating that “automatic stabilizers” make 
government intervention and reform unnecessary all but denies that today’s 
polarization of wealth can really be occurring. Mainstream economics is 
turned into science fiction about a happy “trickle down” parallel universe 
where financiers are “job creators,” everyone is fairly rewarded, and the 
world becomes more equal and prosperous. 
 
Financial Drains on the Economy’s Circular Flow between Producers and 
Consumers
 

The concept of circular flow underlies national income accounting. The 
first major such account was pioneered by the French surgeon doctor 
François Quesnay, calling his analysis Physiocracy, because it used the 
circular flow of blood in the human body as an analogy for how national 
income is circulated between producers and consumers, and between the 
government and the private sector. 
Known as Les Économistes, the Physiocrats saw France’s landed 
aristocracy and royalty siphoning off groundrent as a kind of tax, while 
throwing the cost of government onto the towns, industry and labor by a 
proliferation of excise taxes and other burdens. The Physiocrats argued for a 
Single Tax (l’Impôt Unique) to collect this rent in place of other taxes. Adam 
Smith credited them with founding economic science and backed their land 
tax, as did subsequent British economists through John Stuart Mill and the 
“Ricardian socialists.” The American journalist Henry George attracted a 
world following by making this tax the focus of political reform. 
As noted above, a tax on land rent was the aim of industrial capitalism to 
minimize the diversion of revenue away from the domestic market of 
producers and consumers. Speaking in defense of landlords, Reverend 
Thomas Malthus argued that they were in a fact a key to the circular flow by 
spending their rents on coachmen, tailors and servants. But most classical 
economists deemed such luxury consumer spending unproductive because it 
did not employ wage labor to produce goods to sell at a profit. However, 
Keynes praised Malthus at least for emphasizing the need to address the need 
for consumer demand to maintain the economy’s circular flow from the 
vantage point popularly now called Say’s Law.
Although the past century has seen a democratization of land ownership, 
the fact that this has occurred on credit has made banks the recipients of the 
groundrent paid to mainly to absentee landlords prior to the 20th century. 
Homebuyers and commercial real estate investors buy real estate by taking 
out mortgages. The purchase price usually ends up with the winning buyer 
being whoever outbids others to pledge the most rent to the bank as interest. 
Much the same is true of the public infrastructure and monopolies being sold 
off. To the extent that these enterprises are bought on credit, their extraction 
of monopoly rent — like land rent — ends up being paid out as interest. 

Writing during the Great Depression, Keynes blamed saving for 
interrupting this circular flow. Debt was not a major problem, as neither 
business nor consumers were borrowing. Keynes in fact saw recovery 
dependent on banks lending once again to spur investment and employment. 
But today, three-quarters of a century later, it is mainly bankers who are 
diverting consumer income (wages), corporate cash flow and tax revenues to 
pay interest and amortization, leaving less available for spending on goods 
and services. Banks and other financial institutions receiving this debt service 
do not use it to finance tangible investment. They lend it out, to mount up 
into additional claims on the bottom 99%, on corporate industry and on 
government borrowers. This is what makes today’s drain from the circular 
flow different from the post-feudal landlord class in Europe and its colonies, 
and from government over-taxation to wage wars in times past.
What also has changed matters is the symbiosis that has developed 
between banking and government by making government bonds the 
foundation of bank reserves. Most of this public debt originated as war debt, 
because wars traditionally have been the major cause of budget deficits 
(although today’s deficits stem largely from slashing taxes on high-bracket 
wealth and property). Adam Smith urged nations to finance wars on a pay-as-
you-go basis so that populations would feel their immediate expense and 
make an informed choice for peace instead of burdening economies with war 
debts and the taxes attached to them. The way to bring prices in line with 
nonfinancial costs of production — and hence to win export markets — was 
to replace war with peace. Along with minimizing or taxing away land rent, 
monopoly rent and financial charges, this became the dream of classical 
economics as national strategy as well as a political reform program.
 
Pension-Fund Finance Capitalism
 
American finance capitalism took a quantum leap forward in the 1950s 
with the innovation of pension fund capitalism. Applauded by Peter Drucker 
as “pension fund socialism,” the idea was to set aside part of the employer’s 
wage budget, and turn it over to Wall Street to invest in the stock and bond 
markets. General Motors took the lead, hoping that this would give workers a 

stake in industrial capitalism by turning them into capitalists in miniature. 
The problem with this partnership between labor and finance capital was 
that labor’s savings were invested in financial claims on the means of 
production rather than financing it directly. By the wild 1980s pensions were 
being consigned to the likes of Michael Milken at Drexel Burnham to finance 
raids on industry, downsizing and outsourcing of labor. 
Although equities are ownership shares in principle, they do not give labor 
much voice in management or on corporate boards, even for workplace 
conditions as was the case in Germany. The situation is similar to that which 
prompted minority New York Yankees baseball investor John McMullen to 
complain: “There is nothing in life quite so limited as being a limited partner 
of [managing partner] George Steinbrenner.”
The problem was worst in the case of Employee Stock Ownership Plans 
(ESOPs) in which employee savings are managed directly by employers. 
They typically use these employee savings to buy the company’s stock — 
thereby enabling managers to cash in their stock options at a higher price. 
About half the savings are looted and left bankrupt by being lent to 
employers or to subsidiaries that are folded. The bankruptcy or merger ploy 
was refined most notoriously in Chile after 1973 under General Pinochet. 
Companies emptied out most of the nation’s pension plans by the end of the 
1970s, refining the tactic to become a model for U.S. financiers. Recently at 
the Chicago Tribune, for example, real estate magnate Sam Zell used the 
company’s ESOP to pay off his creditors, leaving employees with only a 
hollowed out shell and an impending lawsuit for fraudulent conveyance. 
Under the law, if a loan is made with only a fictitious projection of solvency 
under normal operating conditions, the courts may declare it void. Yet this is 
how pension-fund capitalism becomes the quasi-criminalized Ponzi phase of 
finance capitalism.3
What Pinochet (soon echoed by his admirer Margaret Thatcher) called 
“labor capitalism” more accurately should be termed “labor finance 
capitalism.” Pension contributions are invested in financial markets to push 
up prices for bonds, stocks and real estate relative to labor’s wages and 
salaries. This funding has proved to be a boon for managers and venture 
capitalists exercising their stock options as pension funds have bought in. 

That was the basic dream, after all: to create a perpetual motion financial 
machine in which the rising inflow of funding would pay pensions out of 
capital gains, which were projected as rising exponentially without limit.
By the time the dot.com bubble got underway in the 1990s, a rate of 8% 
compounded annually was almost universally projected. It would double any 
given amount every nine years, and quadruple it in eighteen. This means 
ostensibly that only a fairly small amount needs to be paid into a pension plan 
to multiply sufficiently to pay its projected benefits (see Chapters 9 and 10). 
The problem is that no economy in history ever has expanded at this rate.
So pension fund finance capitalism became dependent on the Bubble 
Economy being orchestrated by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. 
The Fed flooded the banking system with easy credit, pushing down interest 
rates from the 1980s, culminating in Mr. Greenspan’s successor, Ben 
Bernanke, reducing the Fed’s discount rate (at which banks could borrow) to 
only 0.25% by 2011 — one-quarter of 1%! Lower interest rates meant that 
real estate rents and corporate profits could be capitalized into bank loans at 
rising multiples. 
So prices rose not because the economy was becoming more prosperous 
and profits were rising, but for purely monetary reasons. This is not what is 
supposed to happen according to rosy textbook pictures. And there is an 
inherent inner contradiction in the idea of paying pensions out of capital 
gains fueled by credit at lower interest rates. As the interest on the safest 
investment — short-term U.S. Treasury bonds — has fallen to 1%, the idea of 
paying pensions out of 8% compound growth has become illusory. More and 
more pension funds have been driven to take risks that ended up losing all 
their capital to Wall Street sharpies.
An even more serious problem is that contrary to widespread belief, this 
stock market boom was not raising funds for industry. It was becoming 
perverse (see Chapter 9). Just as the financial sector has become independent 
of tangible capital formation, stock ownership has been decoupled from 
management — or rather, management itself aimed at financial objectives 
more than at building up industrial output. “Activist” shareholders were in 
the character of raiders seeking to manipulate balance sheets, downsize and 
outsource labor, and raise productivity simply by working employees harder 

and for longer hours, not by using better technology.
This transformation of the stock market’s role in the industrial economy 
means that as pension funds became part of this financialization process, they 
have played a major role in the leveraged buyouts that loaded down 
companies with junk-bond debt. Threatened by Drexel Burnham raiders 
buying out companies with high-interest junk bonds in the 1980s, healthy 
firms felt obliged to defend themselves by taking “poison pills,” going so 
deeply into debt that it did not make financial sense for raiders to take on any 
more debt to buy them. Some companies used their cash flow and even 
borrowed to buy up their stock to raise its price by enough to leave less 
revenue available for prospective raiders to pay their bankers and 
bondholders. From the vantage point of employees contributing to pension 
plans seeking to profit from such takeovers, the problem is that the new 
financial managers are laying off workers, as well as using cash flow for 
stock buybacks or higher dividend payouts rather than for new direct 
investment and hiring. Labor is supposed to benefit not as employees but 
only as financial investors fallen prey to Wall Street.
 
Fiat Money Based on America’s Militarized Balance-of-Payments Deficit
What made the bubble economy’s wave of credit possible was the 
transformation of international finance in 1971, when overseas U.S. military 
spending finally forced the dollar off gold. Called “the money of the world” 
by James Steuart in 1767, it was obtained by economies running balance-of 
payments surpluses, which countries running payments deficits had to settle 
in gold. Ever since the Korean War broke out in 1950, the entire payments 
deficit stemmed from military spending (the U.S. private sector’s foreign 
trade and investment was in balance during the 1950s and ’60s).4 President 
Nixon’s suspension of gold sales left the world’s central banks without a 
means of settling these deficits (their surpluses). In the ensuing vacuum, U.S. 
Treasury debt bonds became a proxy for gold, turned over to foreign central 
banks to settle international payments imbalances.
The dollar-IOUs ending up as global central bank reserves were the 
embodiment of American military spending. The link between the dollarized 

global monetary system and military force became explicit after OPEC 
quadrupled its oil prices in 1973–74 (following the U.S. quadrupling of grain 
prices). Treasury officials met with Saudi Arabian and other OPEC officials 
and explained that they could charge as much as they wished for oil (which 
provided a price umbrella for U.S. oil companies to make windfall price 
gains), as long as they agreed to hold their reserves in U.S. Treasury bonds or 
otherwise recycle their export earnings into the U.S. economy by buying 
stocks, real estate and other property claims — but not ownership of strategic 
industries. Not to recycle these petrodollars would be treated as an 
“unfriendly act.”
For the United States, this reversed the traditional impact of balance-of-
payments deficits on interest rates. Under the gold standard, countries 
running deficits had to raise rates to borrow enough to stabilize their 
currency’s exchange rate. But for the United States, the larger its payments 
deficit grew, the more dollars ended up in the hands of foreign central banks 
— which had had little alternative but to recycle them to the U.S. economy, 
mainly by buying Treasury bonds. Monetarily, the U.S. payments deficit had 
become inflationary, not deflationary as was the rule in times past. The 
payments deficit thus became the means of financing the domestic budget 
deficit. 
This circular flow enabled a kind of financial perpetual motion machine to 
be set in motion. Banks were able to create their own credit electronically 
without international constraint. U.S. strategists came to realize that their 
government could run domestic budget deficits almost without limit while 
American investors bought up foreign assets and consumers imported more. 
So under the Treasury-bill standard the U.S. economy achieved a free lunch 
unique in history. For the past thousand years the major factor in balance-of-
payments deficits has been military. This often has led to a loss of economic 
sovereignty. But under the new monetary imperialism, foreign central banks 
absorbed the cost of U.S. military spending — and in due course the U.S. 
private-sector takeover of their economies. The United States demanded, and 
received, tribute from all other nations (at least, those holding their central 
bank reserves in dollarized loans to the U.S. Treasury), on a scale that earlier 
empires could only dream of achieving. 
There is something politically transformative as well as fictitious about 

this rising debt. Prior to the 16th century, royal debts died with kings, leaving 
Italian and other international bankers with bad debts. The Dutch Republic 
took the lead in making national debts permanent, by parliamentary 
democracy backing public obligations with specific taxes to pay their interest. 
But that was in an epoch when debts were settled in gold, especially 
international debts. Nobody can come up with a plausible scenario for how 
the United States can pay today’s $4.5 trillion foreign debt — except by 
creating yet more IOUs that simply add more interest charges onto the 
principal. So debtor countries pretend to pay, and creditor countries pretend 
to be paid. This is basically what happens in domestic bubble economies.
 
The Bubble Economy 
 
In the wake of the dot.com stock market bubble’s bursting in 2000, and 
9/11 the next year, the Federal Reserve inflated a full-blown financial and 
real estate bubble. As the Fed pushed interest rates down, prices rose for real 
estate, bonds and stocks, which are worth whatever a bank will lend. The 
failure of real wages to rise after the late 1970s (despite the enormous 
increase in productivity) meant that many families could maintain their 
standard of living by borrowing.
The easiest way to do this was against the bank-inflated price of their 
homes. Buying a more expensive home in fact was the easiest way to make a 
capital gain and thus increase one’s net worth. For the first time in history, 
people were persuaded that the way to get rich was by running into debt, not 
by staying out of it. Alan Greenspan urged homeowners to “cash out” on 
their home equity — the rising market price of their home over and above 
their mortgage debt — by borrowing and spending the loan proceeds, as if it 
were free income, indeed as if the new bank loan either didn’t have to be 
repaid later (with interest) or would be refinanced against yet further real 
estate price gains. 
Many families were tempted to borrow because wages and salaries had 
stagnated since the late 1970s, while medical costs and other prices rose. 
New borrowing against one’s home became almost the only way to maintain 
living standards in the face of this economic squeeze. The old Protestant 

Ethic of living off interest rather than eating into capital or going into debt 
was becoming obsolete. Debt leveraging was applauded not merely as the 
new post-industrial way to get rich, but indeed the only way to break even 
and avoid having to cut back living standards. A rising home ownership rate 
for racial and ethnic minorities (and for low-income families in general) was 
achieved by loading them down heavily with debt, most of it in the form of 
exploding “adjustable” mortgage rates.
The aim of investors across the board shifted way from seeking current 
income to making “total returns” in the form of capital gains. Falling interest 
rates raised asset prices by enabling a given stream of rent or other income to 
be capitalized into a larger bank loan. 
By bidding up real estate and stock market prices, debt leveraging lowered 
current returns. And as noted above, this made it more expensive for pension 
funds to purchase a fixed “defined benefit” retirement income. By 2011, 
California’s giant pension plan CalPERS was making only a 1.1% return — 
far less than the assumed 7.75% annual rate of total returns (interest plus 
dividends) needed for solvency without raising contribution rates (or without 
raising taxes, in the case of state and local pension funds).5 The low interest 
rates required to preserve the inflated value of bank assets wrought special 
havoc for pension funds. The dream of pension fund capitalism was turning 
into a nightmare of insolvency. The capital-gains bubble was over, and 
returns on bonds and stocks remained sank to all-time lows. This left a 
widening swath of corporate, state and local pension funds underfunded, 
while the economy was faced with debts whose carrying charges prevented 
new spending.
Many pension funds tried to catch up by speculating in financial 
derivatives, joining the transition to what was becoming a distinct new stage 
of finance capitalism: Casino Capitalism, buying derivatives that were debt-
financed gambles on which way interest rates, exchange rates or packaged 
securities would move in markets controlled by the largest Wall Street 
players — in a financial market where fraud was effectively decriminalized. 
The Justice Department, Securities and Exchange Commission and other 
regulatory agencies refrained from prosecuting financial fraud. 
Administrators were chosen who were ideologically committed to ignoring 
the rules they had sworn to enforce, and regulatory agencies were 

understaffed. Barack Obama’s Democratic administration appointees (2009–
12) simply continued this “free market” deregulation sponsored by George 
W. Bush’s Republican administration (2001–08), with even greater emphasis. 
So pension funds became financial prey, as did small companies and 
investors in general. 
Banks led and indeed orchestrated the new speculative wave. They lent 
mainly to other financial institutions, not to finance new capital formation or 
employment. The era of asset-price inflation had changed the aim of investors
to ride the tumultuous waves of the Bubble Economy and seek capital gains 
by debt leveraging. Tax policy favored such speculation, by lightening taxes 
on capital gains while shifting the fiscal burden onto wages and consumer 
spending. 
The Bubble Economy was prolonged by what the late economist Hyman 
Minsky called the Ponzi stage of the financial cycle. Investors and 
speculators borrowed the interest falling due, and even borrowed against the 
hoped-for price gains for real estate, stocks and bonds. Easy credit combined 
with pro-debt tax policy encouraged debt leveraging on an unprecedented 
scale. Companies used cash flow and even borrowed to buy back their stock 
to bid up its price, while access to credit was “democratized” in what 
President George W. Bush called “the ownership society.” It turned into the 
Negative Equity economy falling into insolvency and debt peonage.
 
Debt Deflation in the Post-Bubble Economy
 
Financializing pensions by steering their funding into the financial 
markets to build up claims on the economy has the opposite effect of direct 
investment and employment. Falling interest rates enable bank credit to fuel 
rising prices for financial assets. But the economy is left loaded down with 
debt when the bubble has run its course. Paying debt service blocks recovery 
by diverting spending away from goods and services to pay banks. So debt-
burdened economies shrunk, and financial risk rises in the face of spreading 
bankruptcies, forfeitures and foreclosures.
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) record the paying 

down of debts as raising the net saving rate. The negation of a negation 
(lower debt) is counted as a positive (saving): reducing credit card and 
mortgage balances, student loans and other obligations. But these pay-downs 
are a form of saving that does not represent a buildup of funds available for 
spending. Paying debts leaves most people with less to spend. And they are 
less able to borrow as banks pull back their credit lines, seeing the economy 
become more risky. 
Meanwhile, low interest rates created a policy quandary once the asset-
price inflation had run its course. To let interest rates rise back toward normal 
levels would reduce the capitalized value of real estate rents, corporate 
earnings, stock and bond payments. That would exacerbate the fall of real 
estate prices, driving the banks themselves into negative equity. So central 
banks kept interest rates low, hoping to re-inflate asset prices. Mortgage rates 
were pushed down below 4% as the Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing 
policy of 2010–11 pressed rates at which banks could borrow down nearly to 
zero in the hope that they would lend more and re-inflate property prices by 
enough to save homeowners — and banks — from negative equity. 
But the economy already had become too over-burdened with debt for 
banks to lend, or real estate buyers to borrow as asset prices fell. Banks are 
unwilling to lend their inflow of loan paybacks to the “real” economy, 
because it has become too risky, and companies no longer could borrow by 
issuing their own commercial paper IOUs, because the wave of deregulation 
has destroyed the trust needed for the market to work. So most of the $800 
billion in the Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing of 2011 (QE II) was used 
for foreign exchange and interest rate arbitrage gambles. Banks took the 
bailout money and ran — keeping the rest on deposit with the Fed to rebuild 
their reserves. 
 
Europe’s Financial Self-Immolating Austerity
 
Credit dried up even more drastically in Europe. An ideological obsession 
with budget deficits prevented the European Central Bank (ECB) from 
supplying the economy with spending power. Decades of bank propaganda 
have implanted a false memory in Germany’s population, blaming the 

Weimar hyperinflation of the early 1920s on the Reichsbank financing 
Germany’s domestic budget deficit. The reality is that the central bank tried 
to meet its unpayably high foreign currency reparations by printing 
reichsmarks and desperately selling them on the foreign exchange market to 
raise the hard currency demanded by the Allies. The problem was not 
domestic money creation to finance German spending (much less for 
productive uses or to revive the economy), but to pay war debts denominated 
in foreign currency. And the Allied economies for their part refused to spend 
these payments back in Germany to enable it to pay. In fact, the United States 
imposed special tariffs (the “American Selling Price” system of valuing 
imports from countries with depreciating currencies) to protect its market 
from German exports.
German and other European bankers have crafted a narrative that has 
drowned out memory of what actually happened. Misrepresenting how 
central banks are supposed to work in practice, bank lobbyists parrot the 
falsehood that central bank financing of budget deficits is inherently 
inflationary — indeed, hyperinflationary. The only responsible policy, 
bankers insist, is to deter today’s governments from having their own central 
banks monetize their deficits. The EU’s Lisbon Treaty and the German 
constitution forbid the ECB from monetizing deficits in this way. Instead, 
governments are told to borrow from commercial banks and bondholders, as 
if these are “honest brokers” lending wisely only for viable productive 
purposes.
The problem is that if the central bank is blocked from putting money into 
the economy, taxes will have to be raised or public spending cut back. This 
commitment to austerity is plunging Eurozone economies needlessly into 
depression by limiting the ability of governments to run deficits. Latvia and 
Greece limp along as object lessons to show how financial and fiscal 
austerity leads to plunging employment, collapsing property prices and 
bankruptcies. Debtors default and national budget deficits worsen. Unable to 
find work, labor emigrates. 
It is all so needless! Even a cursory look at recent U.S. and British 
experience should dispel the idea that central bank money creation must 
inflate commodity prices. Since 2008 the Federal Reserve has overseen the 
largest money creation in history, yet U.S. consumer prices and wages have 

barely risen, and the dollar has held steady. The same has occurred with 
British consumer prices, wages and the pound’s exchange rate. By 
monetizing public budget deficits, the Federal Reserve and Bank of England 
are doing what central banks were founded to do. And this is what is needed 
to save today’s economies from plunging into depression. 
In U.S. and global financial bubble resulted not from government deficits 
or central bank money creation, but from commercial banks lending to inflate 
real estate and stock market prices. The increase in public debt has stemmed 
mainly from bailing out the banks from having indulged in this self-seeking 
short-term behavior. The problem is private-sector indebtedness.
Yet even as Europe’s economies are being driven into depression, the 
Troika of the EU Commission, ECB and IMF are calling for balanced 
budgets instead of public spending to revive employment. They demand that 
governments bail out bad private-sector debts, paying banks and bondholders 
by raising taxes on the non-financial sector. This adds a tax burden onto the 
economy’s rising debt overhead. The social safety net is to be scaled back so 
as to make economies more “competitive” — as if public spending on the 
“real” economy makes them less so.
The United States threatens to go down this road, making Europe a dress 
rehearsal for how fiscal austerity works (or fails to work). Ignoring the 
problems caused by private-sector debt helps free banks from blame for 
inflating prices for houses and other assets with loans that have left a residue 
of negative equity — for the largest and most reckless banks as well as for a 
quarter of U.S. homeowners. Banks in fact are using the financial crisis as an 
opportunity to demand a “solution” that gives them bailouts and tax benefits 
as well as loan guarantees — and to cap matters, privatization of public assets 
as in Greece, creating new buyout markets for new bank credit. 
To distract attention from their role in this mess, bank spokesmen 
misrepresent the debt problem as a demographic one. People are living 
longer, so governments should balance their budgets by slashing Social 
Security — and privatizing it. This is akin to corporate financial managers 
downscaling “defined benefit” pension plans into amorphous “defined 
contribution” plans, leaving retirees with the risks while financial firms take 
their commissions off the top. Wall Street’s hope is that sending Social 

Security wage withholding into the stock market will achieve what pension-
fund finance capitalism was supposed to do: fuel a great price run-up. Social 
Security is to be drawn into the Casino Capitalist stage of finance capitalism.
Meanwhile, governments are told to cut taxes for the wealthy and the 
banks so as to revive the economy by getting the debt bubble expanding 
again. What makes this so hypocritical is that the government is told to break 
contracts with Social Security contributors who have not gambled with their 
savings. This annulling of obligations owed to labor changes the meaning of 
“sanctity of contracts” — simply to bail out the banks. The Congressional 
Budget Office (backed by James K. Galbraith, Robert Reich, Dean Baker and 
other economists) has shown that Social Security is solvent for at least 
another 25 years, and can be made solvent indefinitely simply by raising the 
cap on the payroll tax so that it falls on the upper brackets earning over 
$100,000. 
 
The Bailout Economy
 
In the single case where government budget deficits are urged to increase 
— indeed, soar to veritable wartime levels — the purpose is not to revive 
economies but to take bad bank loans onto the public balance sheet. The 
government must bear the loss — a travesty of a free market. But then, most 
fortunes in history have come from the public domain. 
Just as aggravating depression by debt deflation and fiscal tightening to 
balance government budgets is unnecessary, so are these bank bailouts at 
public expense. For example Sheila Bair, head of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corp. (FDIC), argued that Citibank could have been permitted to 
go under without disturbing its basic consumer-banking operations. Known 
for “stretching the legal envelope,” the bank had sufficient assets to back its 
insured deposits. What would have been wiped out was the financial web of 
cross claims and gambles among large institutions. Instead, Treasury 
Secretaries Hank Paulson and Tim Geithner protected the speculators — 
ostensibly to save their “bread and butter” banking activities — by giving 
Citigroup $45 billion. Other banks “too big to fail” received proportionally 
large handouts.

What used to be deemed criminal has been decriminalized either by being 
deregulated, or more covertly simply by not enforcing rules that are on the 
book. In America, the Justice Department has become the chief fundraising 
arm of whatever party is in power. Much like the Catholic Church selling 
indulgences in Martin Luther’s Europe, so justice departments throughout the 
world are selling “get out of jail free” cards to major campaign contributors. 
This has added a new term to the American language: “pay to play” politics.
The German expressionist movie “The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari” (1920) is 
about a madhouse in which a crazy director hypnotizes somnambulists to kill 
or abduct victims. The director claims to cure the inmates of the delusion that 
he is himself a madman — a metaphor for Weimar Germany. There is a 
certain resemblance to America’s Justice Department and local police being 
run by the crooks on top. It has become a crime even to stage peaceful 
protests urging the government to bring financial criminals to justice! Occupy 
Wall Street protestors in New York City have been arrested for peacefully 
demonstrating their desire to bring criminal charges against financial 
fraudsters, while not a single bank has been charged with fraud for the multi-
trillion rip-offs in what UMKC Prof. Bill Black calls a criminogenic binge.
While politicians make hypocritical calls for new laws while refraining 
from using those already on the books, Wall Street deters prosecution simply 
by recycling part of their plunder as campaign contributions to gain the right 
to name (or at least veto) the key public administrators. Public office thus is 
made part of the “free market” by permitting campaign contributions by 
business lobbyists without limit. Regulatory agency appointees reap rewards 
for their inactivity by what the Japanese call “descent from heaven”: They 
receive enormously well paying jobs and “speaking fees” when they join the 
sectors they were charged with regulating. 
Nowhere is this corruption more visible than in Goldman Sachs’s placing  
its managers in charge of the U.S. Treasury. $182 billion was paid to bail out 
the A.I.G. insurance conglomerate rather than letting it default on the high-
risk casino guarantees that its London office had written for junk mortgages. 
The Treasury could have paid nothing while preserving A.I.G.’s “plain 
vanilla” insurance operations. But the priority was to preserve the financial 
tangle of cross default swaps and collateralized debt obligations, leaving the 

Treasury holding the bag. More giveaways and tax credits made A.I.G. 
profitable enough to resume paying its bonuses, salaries and dividends. 
Ratings agencies had given most of this toxic waste an AAA prime rating 
— as high as U.S. Government securities. Ratings were up for sale in a 
financial “free market” similar to the accounting sector when Arthur 
Andersen gave Enron a clean bill of health. No Wall Street institution 
received a criminal charge or prosecution. Financial bonuses and salaries 
hardly missed a beat — while home foreclosures soared for the economy at 
large. To save speculators from loss, the government made good on this 
fraud. The financial “fat” was saved at the expense of the industrial “bone” 
and the government’s balance sheet. Debts owed by honest home borrowers 
were left in place, but those owed by defaulting financial insiders for bad 
gambles were made good as the Treasury paid the winning bettors when the 
losers came up short. 
A similar government payback for its largest class of campaign 
contributors occurs by permitting companies to claim profits and pay out 
dividends by routinely underfunding their pension and health retirement 
funds. The next stage in this game is for financial managers to threaten 
bankruptcy to wipe out pension plans and health obligations, leaving the 
underfunded Public Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) to pick up the 
wreckage. 
 
Using Junk Economics to Oppose Public Regulation and Taxation 
 
Economic theory serves as a tool to shape peoples’ views of what kind of 
tax policy, regulations and other government programs they should support. 
This makes economic theory an arena for every interest group because it 
shapes the map of how society is perceived. For example, do bankers and 
landlords earn their interest, speculative gains and rents productively by 
adding to national output? Or are they simply taking a free lunch, one that is 
not really necessary — revenue that is paid out of the surplus that the “real” 
economy produces?
The most important decisions to be taken concern who should be taxed (or 

untaxed), and the answers depend on how one views the economic surplus. 
Self-interest in determining the policy conclusion explains the seeming 
madness of today’s unrealistic mainstream theory. Its pro-financial 
worldview steers government regulation and tax policy to maximize the 
measures used by the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) 
depicting the FIRE sector as productive rather than as overhead. Rent and 
interest (and monopoly price gouging) are lumped together as “earnings” 
rather than distinguishing between earned income and unearned rent. By 
conflating the “real” economy’s surplus with the FIRE sector’s rake-off, the 
NIPA engage in double counting to make it appear that this surplus is 
“growth.” The financial sector, for instance, now accounts for some 40% of 
reported U.S. corporate earnings. But they consist largely of revenue 
transferred from industry to the banks and kindred institutions.
It is easy enough to see where mainstream economics and its statistical 
map of reality confuse matters. The culprit is the conflict between rentier 
interests and the rest of the economy. Bankers know quite well that their 
gains are achieved at the expense of their customers — mainly other financial 
institutions. By the 1990s, Bankers Trust officers were quite callously calling 
their transfer of wealth from clients to themselves the “Rip-Off Factor” — 
“the amount the bank could take from unsuspecting clients.”6 Yet the NIPA 
treat this price gouging and outright deception as additive elements of real 
output of “services.” Their “value” includes the high salaries, expense 
accounts, bonuses, luxury rents, lobbying payments and legal fees.
By contrast, classical rent theory treated interest, fees, penalties and bank 
winnings on speculation as “false costs of production,” as deductions from 
national output rather than adding to it. Accountants call such exploitation 
transfer payments — something for nothing, a quid with no quo, not earnings 
by providing a real service. The FIRE sector’s revenue is in the character of 
transfer payments. Siphoning off income is a zero-sum activity in which one 
party’s gain is another’s loss. Instead of counting these rentier charges as 
“providing a service,” they should be recognized as a tax paid to privilege, 
adding to the cost of living and doing business without being productive. This 
is the logic that led classical economic reformers writing during the Industrial 
Revolution’s upsweep to bring into plain sight — and public oversight — the 
unearned rentier income being siphoned off by a hereditary landlord class, 

predatory bankers and monopolists. 
To the classical economists a free market is one that has freed itself from 
such unearned income. The way to increase economic efficiency is to cut 
financial and other rentier overhead. This was the political program of Britain 
and other nations seeking to become world industrial powers: to become 
more efficient and lower-cost by minimizing such payments, mainly by 
taxing away economic rent and keeping natural monopolies in the public 
domain. 
So when today’s Occupy Wall Street protesters accuse the 1% of 
corrupting the economy and democracy, they are right on target, and saying 
basically what Adam Smith and his classical successors were arguing. A free 
market is not one that frees the 1% to prey on the 99% by loading it down 
with debt and grabbing public infrastructure to install tollbooths over the key 
access points to meeting basic needs. Matt Taibbi has described how recent 
financial fraud by Bank of America “resulted in one of the biggest reverse 
transfers of wealth in history — from pensioners to financiers. What the 99% 
should understand is that Wall Street knowingly inflated the bubble by 
engaging in rampant mortgage fraud — and then profited from the collapse of 
their own exuberance by devising a way to shift the losses to countless 
pension funds, endowments and other innocent investors.”7 Official statistics 
value the income made from such losses as if it is embodied in an output of 
financial services!
Today’s neoliberals likewise differ from the original classical liberals in 
their depiction of government spending and investment. To the classical 
economists a free market was not one that was free from public intervention 
or having a government small and weak enough to be “drowned in a 
bathtub.” They recognized that keeping markets free requires a strong enough 
government to protect the 99% from the predatory behavior of the 1%. A 
strong government is needed to check the drive by landlords, bankers and 
monopolists to take it over to serve their own interests. This is what the past 
two centuries of democratic parliamentary reform have been all about. It is 
why classical liberals evolved from opponents of governments controlled by 
the landed aristocracy (such as the House of Lords) to supporters of 
governments chosen by the population in general (such as the House of 
Commons).

The aim of classical theories of economic rent was to bring prices and 
incomes in line with necessary costs of production. This is the concept of 
cost-value used by public utility regulators to keep electricity and gas rates in 
line. As licensed monopolies, these utilities are not permitted to include 
exorbitant executive salaries in their rate base, or high debt leveraging fees to 
the banks. (An equal split between debt and equity capital typically is 
required.) Likewise the Interstate Commerce Commission was created to 
regulate railroad fares and freight charges, to prevent predatory rates 
channeling into their own pockets what rightly should be the farmer’s or 
other shipper’s income.
Consider the elevators in the Empire State skyscraper. If a separate entity 
owned them, it could extract huge tolls, gaining for itself nearly the entire 
rental value of the upper floors. The NIPA would report whatever the 
elevator owners paid themselves and their backers as earnings for providing 
transport service as output, a “cost of production” for producing a service. 
These free-lunch rents provide the classical source of taxes, headed by 
groundrent and land-price gains, mineral rents (provided freely by nature and 
long treated as national patrimony), and what monopolies charge over and 
above normal profit rates. Unlike taxes on labor, these taxes on rent do not 
add to the cost of living; they are paid out of the margin of price over value.
Banks do, of course, undertake justifiable expenses in providing a 
payments-clearing system of checking accounts, credit cards and other means 
of payment. It is a job that governments originally were expected to provide. 
Real estate developers likewise make bona fide capital investments in 
architectural complexes. But what is not necessary is “empty” pricing without 
cost. The “Rip-Off Factor” is an extortionate return to monopoly privilege, 
not really “earnings” or “product” as if it reflects a real-cost value. 
What bankers charge in excess of the real cost of providing basic services 
is not to a “real” cost of production. That is why classical economists deemed 
such charges to be a form of unearned rent. It was to measure this free lunch, 
obtained without labor or other technologically necessary outlay, that they 
defined economic rent — to tax it away. Misrepresenting Adam Smith and 
other original free market reformers as patron saints of deregulating and 
untaxing rentier charges is just the first part of rentier propaganda inverting 

the idea of what a free market really is. The key step has been to obfuscate 
classical value, price and rent theory, above all the definition of rent as the 
excess of market price over real cost-value. This was the analytic tool 
designed to steer public tax policy under Industrial Capitalism in the 19th 
century. Rentier interests have replaced it with a “value-free” theory denying 
that any income is unearned. Pre-industrial land ownership and post-
industrial finance capital are treated as industrial capital. Their “cost” is 
whatever their owner has paid for them, without regard to an original cost of 
production (which would be zero for natural resources and land sites, and 
quite low for most monopoly privileges). Rent has disappeared from view, 
replaced by “earnings” of the real estate sector, which the NIPA often 
combine with the financial sector because the two are so hard to untangle. 
Monetary theory is equally narrow. It correlates the money supply only 
with commodity prices, not asset prices. Yet the defining feature of the recent 
Bubble Economy has been an attempt by banks (and the government) trying 
to keep illiquid borrowers (and many bankers) afloat by lending enough more 
credit to inflate prices for real estate, stocks and bonds. Asset-price inflation 
is how the financial sector postpones a crash, or how the United States is 
seeking to recover, by loading the economy down with debt in the hope that 
this will bid up asset prices.
This narrowing of focus is not scientific progress toward greater realism. It 
is the product of political lobbying by rentier interests. Factotums for the 
financial class have distorted the classical orthodoxy of Industrial Capitalism 
into an anti-government, anti-regulatory and anti-labor exercise on behalf of 
Finance Capitalism. It has inverted the idea of free markets to mean a market 
free for landlords, bankers and monopolists to extract economic rent (what 
the classical economists called unearned income), without regulation or 
taxation. Locking in its academic victory after the Thatcher-Reagan turning 
point in the 1980s, the neoliberal Chicago School depicts these financial and 
property interests not as overhead but as necessary and even key contributors 
to growth.
It is all a con job. From the bankers’ vantage point, putting people, 
businesses and governments deeper into debt means that more income, real 
estate rent, monopoly rent and tax revenue will be paid as interest. The 
banker’s “product” is society’s debt overhead. Interest and fees on this debt 

are paid out of the “real economy’s” surplus. But for bank marketing 
departments, the surplus exists to pay interest and fees.
The marketing problem is how to convince society that all this credit is 
good. Banks point out that debt leveraging will increase balance-sheet wealth 
as long as credit is used to make profits or bid up prices. A 100% debt-
leveraged society maximizes the borrower’s return on equity — if profits or 
capital gains are made. During the debt upswing, bankers urge homeowners 
to “treat your home like a piggy bank” by taking out an equity loan against 
these asset-price gains. This is euphemized as “equity withdrawal.” But it is 
simply going deeper into debt. These debts remain in place when property 
prices turn down. 
In Ricardo’s tradition, Chicago School monetarists claim that debt cannot 
be a problem. Along with mainstream economists, they claim that economies 
are self-regulating, and that wealthy individuals at the top of the pyramid 
make the greatest contribution to production, “earning” their income and 
wealth (and indeed being society’s “job creators,” as Malthus argued). Left 
out of account is how bank credit increases interest charges on the debt 
overhead, and how this raises costs of living and doing business (and 
conducting government).
The logic starts with the conclusion that “What’s good for banks (and their 
major clients) is good for the economy.” It then works backward, carefully 
selecting assumptions that will prove this deductively. Public spending, taxes 
and regulation appear merely as deadweight, increasing the cost of doing 
business — and hence, raising prices without adding to output. This 
aggravates unemployment by making economies less competitive. This 
means that nations get richer by cutting social spending, charging user fees 
for education, health care and other public services, and dismantling 
government regulations that “interfere with the free market.” 
By limiting the variables being studied to the money supply, government 
budget deficits and consumer prices, it is implied that budget deficits must be 
inflationary. They require more money — which is linked to price rises, not 
to employment and output. These over-simplifications rule out the idea that 
budget deficits may promote income growth and employment. To cap 
matters, wages are to be lowered to increase competitive export power to earn 

the revenue to pay creditors — on the assumption that austerity will not 
reduce productivity.
The effect of this “free market” logic is to rationalize the privatization of 
land rent and public monopolies — as if paying their rent to the banks instead 
of taxing or socializing it is more efficient. If an activity cannot be privatized 
to make a gain for investors, it should not be undertaken. Governments are 
told to un-tax the 1% and balance their budget by selling whatever roads, 
water systems, jails and other infrastructure remain in the public domain. 
They then describe their added charges as “output,” not simply higher costs 
of producing it. 
So instead of asking how government programs may help economies 
grow, neoliberal ideology speculates about how economies might work 
without public infrastructure — by privatizing Social Security and health 
care, roads and communications, and financing such programs by user fees, 
not by progressive wealth and property taxation or by central bank money 
creation. The pretense is that these privatized services will be offered at 
minimum cost without any need for price controls, anti-monopoly rules or 
consumer protection. These allegedly would only raise costs (“more 
paperwork”).
This denial of a positive role for government is a science fiction exercise 
describing a parallel but imaginary universe. The aim is to make people 
believe that there is no alternative to leaving bankers to act as the economy’s 
planners — as if their allocation of resources is not more centralized and 
bureaucratic than planning by public officials. On the same logic, there seems 
to be no alternative to selling off the public domain, on credit to bank 
customers who build rentier charges into the economy’s price structure. 
Pensions, Social Security and health care are to be financialized and turned 
into “market transactions” at a user price for each category. Denouncing 
public spending and the classical aim of regulating prices in line with cost-
value is as “socialist,” this financialization has reversed the direction in which 
Western civilization was moving until World War I. It is as if the past three 
or four centuries have been a mistake — what Frederick Hayek called the 
road to serfdom, not away from it by limiting rentier power. 
 

Is Finance Capitalism Leading to Social Democracy, or to Oligarchy?
 
The new mode of conquest is financial, not overtly military. It is by 
financial means that creditors (mainly foreign) privatize a nation’s land, 
public infrastructure and mineral rights, and buy out leading companies and 
choke points to install rent-extracting tollbooths. These rentier privileges 
ostensibly have been democratized by being consolidated into corporations 
whose shares can be freely bought and sold by anyone. But most are owned 
by the wealthy, who can pass down their rent-extracting rights and privileges 
to their heirs — or sell to whoever has the money (or access to credit) to buy 
them. Privatizing the privilege of credit creation (with government guarantee 
and subsidy) has enabled banks to become the new “land barons,” evolving 
into a neofeudal creditor oligarchy. 
It has not been necessary for financial barons to rule directly, as long as 
they control a central bank made “independent” of democratic politics — 
which itself has been financialized and made part of the market economy. 
Purchase of the mass media and political campaigns waged now largely 
through television and the press has inverted the ideology of economic 
democracy, politicians depict their major contributors, the privileged rentiers, 
as “job creators,” and warn that taxing their income will “reduce jobs.” This 
confuses the old industrial way to make wealth — by employing people — 
with the financial mode of getting rich in ways that shrink the economy, e.g., 
by downsizing, outsourcing and increasing the debt overhead in a system of 
zero-sum rent extraction that “creates wealth” for the 1% at the expense of 
the 99%. 
To lock in its victory — and block public regulatory agencies from 
fighting back — the financial sector has redefined “rent-seeking” to mean 
what government bureaucrats do (in raising taxes to broaden their 
administrative power), not what the FIRE sector does. Regulating and taxing 
the FIRE sector is called an economic burden. While government spending is 
deemed deadweight, the NIPA count all rentier revenue as being “earned” 
productively. 
The aim is to persuade the public that the pain of debt deflation is natural 
and inevitable. Banking elites depict their takings as a process of justly 

collecting debts that are owed to them, telling national economies the 
equivalent of “Your money, or your life!” When populations riot against the 
austerity that dries up new investment and employment (while wealth is 
passed up to the top of the economic pyramid), voters are told that the time 
has come to suspend democracy and bring in neoliberal “technocrats” (a 
euphemism for bank lobbyists) such as were imposed on Greece and Italy in 
2012. Countries that resist are isolated by sanctions, Cuba- or Iran-style.
 
Germany’s Reparations Experience as a Paradigm
 
Bankers suggest that debt crises should be solved by providing enough 
new credit to enable borrowers to keep paying their creditors. “Borrowing 
their way out of debt” is supposed to get economies moving again. But in 
practice it only diverts more revenue to pay the financial sector.
That is how Germany tried to pay its reparations debt in the 1920s. It 
stabilized the mark in the same way that France had paid its reparations debt 
to Germany after the Franco-Prussian war ended in 1871: by borrowing. 
France had done this with comparative ease, but Germany’s World War I 
reparations were out of all proportion to the ability to pay. Keynes and a few 
other economists recognized this, but the ethic that “All debts must be paid” 
was so strong that all the German political parties sought to devise means to 
pay.
What happened in practice was that German states and cities borrowed 
dollars in New York, and converted them into an equivalent value of marks 
that the Reichsbank printed. The Reichsbank then used these dollar receipts 
to pay the Allies — which then turned around and paid the dollars back to the 
United States for their arms debts. An illusion of stability was achieved by 
German cities and states owing the foreign debt rather than the national 
government. But none of this debt shuffling enabled the economy to create 
enough exports to earn the foreign exchange to pay foreign creditors. The 
domestic market suffered from fiscal and financial austerity.
Today’s international debts also are unpayably high. Unlike the German 
case, however, European and U.S. governments are taking the commercial 

banking system’s bad debts onto the public balance sheet, not shifting debts 
off national governments. This “socialization” (or rather, “oligarchization”) 
of debt has occurred most notoriously in Ireland. Governments are serving 
global creditors rather than promoting domestic growth, investment and 
employment.
In 1931 the pretense was ended by an international moratorium on 
German reparations and Inter-Allied debts together. Today’s debt overhead 
must end in a similar moratorium or write-down, for the obvious reason that 
debts that can’t be paid, won’t be. Postponing the day of reckoning imposes a 
needlessly destructive interregnum of austerity in which the financial sector 
extracts as much revenue as it can get away with, and forecloses on as much 
property as governments will permit — leaving the economy poorer and 
poorer.
 
From Debt Peonage to Neofeudalism: Is Rome a Good Analogy?
 
Making itself into a new ruling elite to lord it over the 21st century, Wall 
Street’s conquest threatens to emulate the Nordic conquests of Europe, 
Spain’s conquest of the New World, and indeed Rome’s conquest of its 
Empire two thousand years ago. As noted above, the new mode of conquest 
is financial, not military. But the results are equally devastating. And finance 
capitalism is more impersonal than the military conquests that used to parcel 
out land and the commons among the conquerors. Devoid of battlefield 
heroism, an almost banal array of banking institutions appropriates the land, 
natural resources and monopolies of debtor economies. Or, they simply buy 
resources of debt-strapped governments (after first tying the hands of 
governments by blocking them from creating a real central bank). Boris 
Yeltsin’s 1994 loans-for-shares privatization saw Russia’s “Seven Bankers” 
foreclose on the nation’s most valuable natural resources and monopolies to 
become an analogue for the post-feudal “Seven Boyars.”
Financial interests use the mathematical language of physical science to 
popularize economic models pretending that austerity will cure the 
government’s budget deficit and improve the balance of payments. The 
reality is that a shrinking economy is less able to pay taxes and debts. But 

neoliberal logic is not empirical science. It is a public relations tactic in 
today’s financial war against society at large. Its aim is to lock in power the 
way Rome did: by reducing as much of the population as possible to debt 
dependency. 
As was the case in Rome, today’s debt overhead cannot be paid. The 
question is, just how will it not be paid? There are the two choices: If society 
does not realize the need for debt write-downs, it will permit massive 
foreclosure to tear society apart and reduce debtors to neoserfdom. 
As far as domestic populations are concerned, debt peons are free to live 
wherever they wish — or at least wherever they can afford. Unlike serfs, they 
may buy land by taking out a mortgage and paying its rental value to the bank 
over the course of their working lives. But wherever they live they take their 
debts with them, from student loans to credit card debt. 
The resulting debt deflation polarizes society and imposes austerity that 
dries up the internal market and leads to economic collapse — and to 
demographic collapse as well. By causing poverty, debt deflation discourages 
family formation, marriage and birth rates, and shortens lifespans. This 
prompted Vladimir Putin to note that Russia had lost more population 
through its neoliberal policies and privatizations since 1990 than the nation 
had lost in World War II — between 5 and 10 million after 1990. About 5% 
emigrated abroad, headed by the most highly educated and skilled labor.8 
The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that Russia’s population will decline by 25 
percent by 2050, from 148 million in the 1990s to 111 million — a loss of 
nearly 40 million people. So unlike military warfare, financial conquest does 
not kill people directly. It is much more genteel.
Rome was the first major society not to cancel its debts. It took from the 
first century BC’s Social War (133–29 BC) to the fourth century AD turning 
point for economic life to decentralize and revert to self-sufficient landed 
estates. But in the end Rome’s creditor-oriented economy collapsed into the 
Dark Age, plunging the Empire into debt peonage.
Today a similar debt deflation is polarizing society and imposing austerity 
to dry up the internal market. The dream of bank marketing departments, 
after all, is for all disposable income and corporate cash flow to be paid as 
debt service. The “final” stage of finance capitalism thus threatens to 

deteriorate into debt peonage so widespread as to become neofeudalism. A 
financial elite will take control of the economic surplus to make itself as 
hereditary as the old landed aristocracies.
 
It Doesn’t Have to Be This Way
 
Classical political economy began as moral philosophy, but went beyond 
the obvious fairness of bringing prices in line with cost value so as to free 
society from special privileges that create rentier income without work. As 
“political arithmetic” it served as a guide to making societies more productive 
and efficient, by freeing society from rentier charges that added “empty” 
pricing to the cost of living and doing business.
The major initial beneficiary of reforms designed to minimize these 
economic rents was industry. That is why governments promoting 
manufacturing saw the classical reform program as a strategy for how to 
modernize. The same logic that evolved into socialism via Saint-Simon, 
Marx and other 19th-century reformers provided the model for industrial 
promoters to make France, Germany and other economies more competitive 
so as to overtake Britain. While pro-labor reformers characterized themselves 
as socialists, pro-industrial reformers were characterized as “state socialists.” 
Despite their obvious class conflict, employers and wage labor shared a 
common interest in freeing society from the rents extracted by landlords, 
monopolists and the financial sector. This approach held out hope for an olive 
branch between industrial “state socialism” and labor socialism.
In addition to taxing or nationalizing land rent, the classical reform 
program was to keep basic infrastructure and natural monopolies in the public 
domain to provide their services at cost or at subsidized rates. This meant a 
mixed economy in which an active public sector paid for education, health 
care and pensions mainly by taxing land and natural resource rents. Simon 
Patten (mentioned above as the first professor of economics at the Wharton 
School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania from the 1880s up to 
World War  I) described public infrastructure as a “fourth factor of 
production,” whose return was measured not by the profits it made but by its 
ability to lower the national price level. This was the logic that prompted the 

United States, Germany, France and Japan to provide a widening array of 
infrastructure services at subsidized rates, and indeed free of charge for roads, 
education and other basic needs.
Many pro-business economists as well as socialists hoped that 
governments would provide a widening range of services freely outside of the 
market economy. British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli’s social welfare 
legislation was capped by the public health system promoted from 1874 to 
1881 under his motto Sanitas sanitatum, “Health, all is health.” This helped 
the Conservative Party evolve as a sometimes “state socialist” party, 
especially from World WarII to Harold Macmillan in the 1960s. In Germany, 
Bismarck enacted a pension plan for the population at large, not just army 
members as in the past. These public services were to be paid for out of 
progressive taxation — or as America’s greenbacks issued during its Civil 
War had shown, simply by public money creation so as to save taxpayers 
from having to pay bondholders.
Banking reform focused on making lending productive by financing 
industrial investment rather than wars. Adam Smith had emphasized that the 
way to minimize an economy’s fiscal overhead was to refrain from wars, 
above all from financing them by borrowing. The logic of free market reform 
interfaced with the advocacy of peace as a major way to lower the cost of 
living and doing business so as to win out in international price competition 
by. The hope was that as rivalry among nations would be commercial rather 
than military, the old high-cost rentier economies would lose out to reformed 
“statist” economies reducing economic rent while subsidizing production 
costs, above all in their major export industries (for the U.S. economy, this 
has meant agriculture and military arms). 
The ability of governments to create their own money to fuel economies 
becomes most obvious in war emergencies. When World War I broke out, 
many economists believed that complex industrial economies could not 
afford war, and that the belligerents would run out of money in a few months. 
But governments quickly discovered what the United States had shown in its 
own Civil War half a century earlier: It is not necessary to tax or borrow. 
(Taxes are indeed needed, not so much to finance government as to give 
value to government money, while taxes on unearned income prevent special 
interests from developing.) Central banks can create much more money than 

was anticipated. An all-powerful commercial banking class is no more 
necessary than a dominant landlord class when it comes to supplying the 
economy with money and credit!
Should we be surprised that banks prefer to silence such discussion? To 
gain interest on their lending to government, they have blocked the European 
Central Bank from creating its own money to finance national budget 
deficits. To build up their market among real estate borrowers and 
monopolists, banks lobby to un-tax economic rent. Most recently they lobby 
to privatize public infrastructure, most notoriously for education, health care 
and basic utilities.
If today’s economic malstructuring had been forecast a century ago, most 
futurists would have found it unlikely, because it makes economies high-cost 
and therefore would seem to be an evolutionary loser. International 
competition was expected to favor a world free of rentiers as governments 
moved toward progressive income taxation, infrastructure investment and 
public monetary systems. No major economist expected the rentier classes to 
fight back with any great success. Libertarian and “Austrian” ideas of an 
economy composed only of individuals, without a government sector, were 
viewed as navel-gazing academics living in a hypothetical fantasy world.
But the financial sponsors of the past century’s ideological counter-reform 
movement have convinced many voters and public officials that the classical 
dream is unworkable, and that there is no alternative to today’s post-
industrial finance capitalism. History has been rewritten, headed by that of 
economic thought. In their dress rehearsal for neoliberal policy in Pinochet’s 
Chile, the Chicago Boys realized that to impose their travesty of free markets, 
they needed totalitarian control of academic discussion, censorial power over 
the press, and ultimately the threat of violence. So they closed down every 
economics department in the country except for their own bastion at the 
Catholic University, and inaugurated Operation Condor as a Latin American 
assassination campaign to silence dissidents, reaching into the United States 
itself. This is the Inquisitional side of free-market economics. As Naomi 
Klein has explained in The Shock Doctrine, the success of Friedman’s anti-
government Chicago School rests literally on the graves of its opponents.
 

The Financial Source of Economic Imbalance and Polarization, and Policies 
to Cope with It
 
Today’s creditor interests are pursuing a similar road to that which Rome 
followed two thousand years ago when its oligarchy initiated a century-long 
Social War (133–29 BC) by political assassination and widespread violence. 
Reducing a quarter of the population to debt servitude, Rome relied on 
imperial looting (“spreading peace”) as the last gain-seeking opportunity in a 
shrinking economy — a far cry from Schumpeterian creative destruction.
Rome’s collapse reflected a privatization of credit, in contrast to the 
preceding three thousand years of ancient economic development. Credit — 
and hence debt — has been needed ever since a specialization of labor 
developed with the seasonal rhythms of planting and harvesting in the 
Neolithic. It is implicit wherever there is a time gap between initial 
investment and the final product being delivered and paid for. However, the 
original recipients of interest-bearing debts were not a self-serving oligarchy 
preying on the economy at large. Low-surplus economies simply could not 
afford to permit exploitative credit expropriate the lands of citizens and 
reducing them to bondage.
The charging of interest seems to have inspired in the third millennium BC 
by Sumerian temples and palaces advancing workshop handicrafts to 
traveling merchants. Doubling the loan balance in five years was a way for 
these large semi-public institutions to estimate their fair share of their gains 
on commercial advances. The period from the time the merchants received 
consignments of goods to their return to pay their backers comprised 60 
months — so that the rate of interest worked out to 1/60 per month, one 
shekel per mina (which was divided into 60 shekels). This worked out to 1/5 
annually (20% in decimalized terms).9 
Most Near Eastern agrarian debts were owed to royal collectors, for land 
rental fees, water and shipping, and consumer loans. When these “barley 
debts” grew too large on an economy-wide basis, rulers restored order with 
Clean Slates. There was no preconception that economies automatically 
would settle in balance without such public intervention. Instability was 
caused by natural disasters and wartime disruption, and simply by interest 

accruals increasing the debt balances beyond what debtors in low-surplus 
economies could pay. Rather than trying to design a utopian system that 
would not get out of balance, archaic rulers dealt with the inevitable 
insolvency when it became necessary to annul consumer debts. 
The fact that most debts were owed to palace and temple collectors meant 
that the authorities were basically canceling debts owed to themselves 
(commercial silver debts for productive loans among merchants were left in 
place). These Clean Slates restored order in times of natural disaster or 
emergencies, and customarily when new rulers took their first full year on the 
throne. The aim was to inaugurate their reign with the economy in balance, 
by clearing away the accumulation of unpaid obligations that had built up.
Today’s financial interests seek to block governments from pursuing tax 
and financial policies that would counter the tendency of today’s economies 
to veer out of balance and polarize between creditors and debtors. Unlike the 
early Near Eastern rulers, they pretend that automatic stabilizers will restore 
normalcy. But no such stabilizers are strong enough to rectify financial 
imbalance and predatory behavior. 
It is axiomatic that when false assumptions about how economies work are 
maintained in the face of repeated failure, we should look for special interests 
as the beneficiaries of such wrongheadedness. It is not “insane” from the 
vantage point of the beneficiaries. Bankers and creditors support economists 
who tell populations and public officials not to worry about debt because 
economies are self-adjusting. This is not the case. It is a lobbying effort to 
dull perceptions that the debt overhead cannot be paid without plunging 
economies into depression.
This disinformation tactic is similar to what parasites do to their host: 
They numb its ability to perceive that a free financial rider has taken over. 
The financial sector fears public recognition that the debt overhead cannot be 
paid without plunging economies into depression. Its position is analogous to 
Milton Friedman’s popularization of the science fiction writer Robert 
Heinlein’s motto, “There is no such thing as a free lunch.” Wealth-seeking 
today is all about obtaining rentier income without real work, by special 
privileges and insider dealing. Its acronym, TINSTAAFL, has taken its place 
alongside Margaret Thatcher’s TINA (“There is no alternative”). The aim is 

to deter the study of just how much of the economy has indeed become a free 
lunch (economic rent), who gets it, and who is being exploited. 
Just as parasites love to “deregulate” the host’s defense mechanisms and 
criminals like police-free opportunities, the financial sector loves “free 
markets.” At the cost of being repetitious, exploiters seek to erase the contrast 
between fair pricing as compared to exploitative rent extraction — or, for that 
matter, the outright fraud that permeates today’s financial sector. 
Biological parasites trick the host into believing that they are part of its 
own body, even to be nurtured as if they were its offspring. But what 
flourishes is the parasite’s own life cycle. The tax authorities lavish care on 
the financial free luncher by making interest tax-deductible, enabling the 
financial sector to nourish its growth at the expense of the host economy. 
And the Treasury favors the proliferation of unproductive debt (e.g., to inflate 
housing prices or allow hostile corporate takeovers) by taxing capital gains 
from asset-price inflation at a fraction of the rate levied on industrial profits, 
wages and salaries.
In biological nature a smart parasite will keep the host alive and even help 
it find new sources of food, and perhaps keep it disease-free in a symbiotic 
relationship. The aim, of course, is to obtain most of the nourishment for 
itself and its offspring. But parasites lose interest in the welfare of their host 
as they approach the final stage of the relationship. Realizing that the game is 
up, the free luncher does the equivalent of taking the money and running. 
This is what today’s financial free riders are doing by abandoning ship to 
enter into a new symbiosis with fresh host economies. When the Federal 
Reserve gave banks $800 billion in QEII in 2012, most was spent in the 
BRIC countries and other healthy targets via exchange rate and interest rate 
arbitrage.
So what will happen to the host economies left as emptied out shells? Will 
the United States and Europe be left nearly for dead, having been turned into 
financialized zombies? 
Here’s the problem: Savings in the United States and Britain exceed real 
capital formation. The pension funding and tax codes of these nations are 
based on the assumption that saving via the stock and bond markets will 
automatically promote “real” growth. But that logic is fallacious. Buying 

stocks or bonds does not fund plant modernization or start-up companies. In 
practice the financial system’s push for unproductive credit creation adds to 
debt deflation and rent-extracting overhead, not tangible capital formation.
So today’s industrial economies stand at a crossroads. To survive, they 
need to reverse the disabling of their regulatory defense mechanisms against 
finance run wild. The first step must be to revive classical political 
economy’s distinction between cost-value and price as an analytical tool to 
isolate economic rent — “unearned income” because it has no counterpart in 
necessary costs of production.
The fight to bring prices in line with cost-value involved nothing less than 
a political revolution against feudal privileges in Europe and the regions it 
colonized. On the eve of World War I the reform program seemed to be 
succeeding. In Europe, Parliamentary reform was expected to be the political 
catalyst, assuming that voters would act in their enlightened self-interest. 
Britain cleaned up its “rotten boroughs” in the 19th century, and the 
constitutional crisis of 1910 was resolved by an agreement that the House of 
Lords never again could block a House of Commons revenue bill. The way 
was freed for reformers to tax unearned land rent.
However, rentier-backed demagogues rejected the classical fiscal and 
monetary reform program. Over the past century the “real” host economy has 
had its analytic perception and regulatory organs disabled. A false narrative 
about “free markets” has been promoted and gained sufficient momentum 
since 1980 to replace the approach that eight centuries of economic analysis 
had been refining, from the 13th-century Churchmen through the classical 
economists and Progressive Era reformers. Elections now are fought over 
ethnic rivalries (in the Baltics and the American South) and conservative 
horror at the thought of legalizing women’s rights and sexual equality (in 
right-wing religious areas and white collar urban precincts). Economic 
democracy has given way to a financial oligarchy whose machinations have 
negated the Enlightenment’s assumption that self-interest will guide voters to 
back economic policies producing the greatest good for the greatest number.
Such enlightened self-interest will require a revival of the Progressive 
Era’s reform program. The revival must start by re-establishing the 19th 
century’s discussion of value, price and rent theory, the tax policy that 

follows from it, and monetary theory as it applies to financing public budget 
deficits. The problem is that mainstream economists and Chicago School 
censors exclude such discussion from the journals and curriculum where they 
hold sway — not always at gunpoint as in Chile, but by controlling young 
professors’ access to tenure-track positions under “publish or perish” in 
refereed journals fallen prey to the blind spots favored by rentiers.
One result has been to leave the critique of pro-rentier markets largely to 
Marxists. As Patten pointed out, it was the socialists who pushed classical 
analysis to its logical conclusion, using the labor theory of value to isolate 
economic rent as unearned and hence unnecessary income. Classical 
economics culminated in Marx, and in Henry George’s advocacy of taxing 
land rent. The concept of unearned income (economic rent) then was applied 
to banking and finance (where bond broker Ricardo never applied it!) as well 
as to land ownership and monopolies. But although Marxist analysis gained 
ascendency over most reform movements, it was derailed by Russian 
Communism eclipsing the voices of reformers who rejected Stalin’s 
bureaucratic collectivism. By turning Marxism into a travesty of what it 
earlier meant, the Soviet experience served to discredit the classical reformist 
logic as a whole.
But even by the time World War I broke out, the classical focus on freeing 
markets from technologically and socially unnecessary overhead charges 
frightened high finance and its rentier clients, inspiring them to back anti-
classical alternatives. Marginalists, Austrians, followers of John Bates Clark 
in the United States and “equilibrium theorists” abroad shared a common 
denominator of conflating land, monopolies and finance with industrial 
capital. A similar conflation of money and credit was occurring, and a shift of 
analysis from asset prices (such as the land-price gains on which John Stuart 
Mill focused and which his contemporaries called the “unearned increment”) 
to commodity prices and wages.
Economic theory remains traumatized by the ideological conflict between 
scientific economics and the vested interests. The conflict ultimately is 
between rentier interests and those of industry and labor. Something has to 
give: Economic rent either exists, or it does not. Rentier income is either 
earned or unearned. Debts either can be paid, or they cannot. Economies 
either have automatic stabilization mechanisms, or they polarize.

The trauma caused by this conflict is now affecting how Western 
civilization defines its identity. Rentiers are seeking to reverse the 
Enlightenment by re-defining a free market to mean one that is free from 
taxes on their unearned income and from price regulation. Seeking to block 
progressive taxation and associated classical policies, they are all in favor of 
“big government” now that the major rise in public debt stems from bank 
bailouts and tax cuts for the wealthy. And they are against democracy when it 
seeks to subordinate finance to public welfare rather than making central 
banks “independent” and hence under the financial sector’s control.
This is not a stable situation. The attempt to save creditors from loss, by 
taking bad private-sector debts onto the public balance sheet, must grow so 
large that it inevitably must self-destruct. Governments find themselves 
directed to support and re-inflate the Bubble Economy’s debt overhead to 
avoid debt writedowns — as if these can be avoided in the end.
The conflict between creditors and debtors has occurred ever since 
antiquity succumbed to the post-Roman Dark Age. Today’s debt-ridden 
economies from Iceland and Latvia to Greece and Ireland are suffering the 
demographic consequences of austerity: emigration, falling family formation 
and birthrates, shortening lifespans and rising suicide rates. 
Unless economic democracy re-asserts its interests over financial 
oligarchy, the West can expect austerity programs of the sort that the 
European Troika has imposed on Greece to impose an economic Dark Age. 
The tactic is to load economies down with debt beyond their ability to pay, 
and then demand that governments absorb the losses, paying by privatizing 
public infrastructure to sell off to buyers on credit to create yet more rent-
extracting monopolies. 
This Dark Age policy rules out writing down debts to what can be paid 
under normal conditions. It refuses to recapture for society the wealth raked 
off by the 1%. It permits widespread forfeiture of property and a siphoning 
off of wealth to the top of the economic pyramid. Instead of taxing land and 
other rent-extracting activities, governments are shifting the burden onto 
labor and industry. Instead of defending debtor interests and writing down 
debts, they urge that progressive taxation be abandoned in favor of a flat tax, 
excluding capital gains and other rentier income.

The enormous productivity gains since World War II — and indeed, since 
1980 — should suffice to show that today’s deepening financial and fiscal 
austerity is not the result of an inevitable natural process. It reflects the greed 
of the few. Policies dictated by the financial sector have gained control over 
governments and the economy. Siphoning off the surplus for itself, its 
lobbyists have replaced progressive taxation with regressive sales and income 
taxes on labor and industry, crippled public regulatory agencies and even the 
prosecution of financial fraud, and used central banks to serve the interests of 
creditors and speculators rather than those of the production-and-
consumption economy. 
So the fight must be waged over who will control the government, its tax 
and regulatory system. Economic theory will shape how people perceive this 
fight and restructure the financial and tax arena in which it is being waged.
 
PULL QUOTES
[PULL QUOTE 19-01]
The way to bring prices in line with nonfinancial costs of production — and 
hence to win export markets — was to replace war with peace. Along with 
minimizing or taxing away land rent, monopoly rent and financial charges, 
this became the dream of classical economics as national strategy as well as a 
political reform program. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-02]
As the interest on the safest investment (short-term U.S. Treasury bonds) has 
fallen to 1%, the idea of paying pensions out of 8% compound growth has 
become illusory. More and more pension funds have been driven to take risks 
that ended up losing all their capital to Wall Street sharpies. — Michael 
Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-03]
As pension funds became part of the financialization process, they have 

played a major role in the leveraged buyouts that loaded down companies 
with junk-bond debt. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-04]
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) depicts the FIRE sector 
as productive rather than as overhead. Rent and interest (and monopoly price 
gouging) are lumped together as “earnings” rather than divided into earned 
income and unearned rent. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-05]
When today’s Occupy Wall Street protesters accuse the 1% of corrupting the 
economy and democracy, they are right on target, and saying basically what 
Adam Smith and his classical successors were arguing. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-06]
The banker’s “product” is society’s debt overhead. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-07]
To lock in its victory — and block public regulatory agencies from fighting 
back — the financial sector has redefined “rent-seeking” to mean what 
government bureaucrats do (in raising taxes to broaden their administrative 
power), not what the FIRE sector does. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-08]
Debts that can’t be paid, won’t be. Postponing the day of reckoning imposes 
a needlessly destructive interregnum of austerity in which the financial sector 
extracts as much revenue as it can get away with, and forecloses on as much 
property as governments will permit. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-09]

The same logic that evolved into socialism via Saint-Simon, Marx and other 
19th-century reformers provided the model for industrial promoters to make 
France, Germany and other economies more competitive so as to overtake 
Britain. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-10]
Many pro-business economists as well as socialists hoped that governments 
would provide a widening range of services freely outside of the market 
economy. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-11]
The hope was that as rivalry among nations would be commercial rather than 
military, the old high-cost rentier economies would lose out to reformed 
“statist” economies reducing economic rent. — Michael Hudson
[PULL QUOTE 19-12]
Today’s industrial economies stand at a crossroads. To survive, they need to 
reverse the disabling of their regulatory defense mechanisms against finance 
run wild. The first step must be to revive classical political economy’s 
distinction between cost-value and price as an analytical tool to isolate 
economic rent — “unearned income” because it has no counterpart necessary 
costs of production. — Michael Hudson
1 I elaborate the linkages between wages and productivity in my 2003 Counterpunch interview with 
Standard Schaefer, “Tech Bubble: Who Benefited,” available on http://michael-
hudson.com/2003/08/tech-bubble-who-benefited/. “There are two kinds of productivity. Most people 
think of capital equipment increasing output per work hour. Labor does the same amount of work, but 
produces more. And as it produces more, it does not need to work as hard, because capital saves labor 
by doing jobs more quickly and cheaply than manual labor, or doing work that people can’t do at all. 
This is the kind of productivity that one associates with investment in machinery, computers and 
information technology (IT).
However, today’s productivity is taking a different form. It is associated with laying off employees and 
working the remaining workers harder. There is little technology at work here, but rather the kind of 
drudgery from which technology was supposed to free employees. Work has become more unpleasant 

and stressful as companies let their work force shrink by attrition. When workers leave, their work is 
distributed among the remaining employees.” Hence, wages have not risen with productivity.
2 The political aim of Ricardo’s rent theory, Marx wrote, was to buttress the program of taxing the land 
rather than industry. Upon being sent copies of Progress and Poverty in 1881, Marx dismissed the book 
as saying what his 1847 critique of Proudhon had forecast: “We understand such economists as Mill, 
Cherbuliez, Hilditch and others demanding that rent should be handed over to the state to serve in place 
of taxes. That is a frank expression of the hatred the industrial capitalist bears towards the landed 
proprietor, who seems to him a useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of bourgeois 
production.” (The Poverty of Philosophy [1847] (Moscow, Progress Publishers, n.d.: 155.)
3 See for instance Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Workers Pay for Debacle at Tribune,” The New York Times, 
December 9, 2008, and Mike Spector, Jenny Strasburg and Shira Ovide, “At Tribune, Battle Expands,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2011. Zell bought the newspaper from stockholders in a heavily debt-
leveraged buyout. Employee holdings (controlled by the Tribune as employer) were replaced by 
promises to pay pensions. But the debt overhead was so large that the company went bankrupt.
4 I describe this process in Super Imperialism: The Economic Strategy of American Empire (1972). See 
also chapters 15, 16 and 17.
5 CalPERS reduced its assumed rate of return to 7.5% on March 14. 2012. “Calpers’s board considered 
lowering the rate to 7.5% last year but backed off after local California agencies said the increased 
contributions would exacerbate their financial hardships,” by obliging “the state to eventually 
contribute an additional $300 million annually.” (Michael Corkery, “Calpers Lowers Investment Target 
to 7.5%,” Wall Street Journal, March 15, 2012.) The problem seems insolvable, because a more 
realistic rate of return would plunge California’s budget billions of dollars further into annual deficit.
6 Floyd Norris, “Paving Path to Fraud on Wall St.,” The New York Times, March 16, 2012, notes that 
Goldman Sachs banker Greg Smith cited a similarly revealing lingo in his March 14, 2012 New York 
Times op-ed, “Why I Am Leaving Goldman Sachs”: “Goldman referred to its clients as “Muppets,” 
talked about “ripping eyeballs out” and rewarded employees for “hunting elephants,” a term he said 
meant persuading clients to do whatever would be most profitable for Goldman.”
7 Matt Taibbi, “Bank of America: Too Crooked to Fail,” Rolling Stone, March 14, 2012. He adds: “The 
bank has defrauded everyone from investors and insurers to homeowners and the unemployed. So why 
does the government keep bailing it out?”
8 See Putin’s speech before the Duma, May 10, 2006, as well as TV Interview with Professor Sergei 
Kapitsa on Russia’s Demographic Problems, Vesti Podrobnosti TV Russia Program, with Dmitry 
Kiselyov, June 7, 2005, www.fednews.ru, translated on Johnson’s Russia List, June 12, 2005, #9, and 
the Interview with Jeffrey Sachs, “Good Health, Good Wealth,” Discover magazine. April 2002: 
“There is a very sharp divide of what happened between Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. 

Half of Poland’s debts were cancelled, and Poland actually had a significant improvement of health, 
higher life expectancy, and a much improved diet: much more fruit and vegetables, much less lard and 
cholesterol. But the West did not want to help Russia. It was too close to the Cold War. So in Russia 
and the former Soviet Union there was a terrible health decline.” Life expectancy plunged accordingly.
9 I trace the origins and early documentation of interest-bearing debt and Clean Slates in Debt and 
Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East (ed. with Marc Van De Mieroop, CDL Press, Bethesda, 
2002).

ENDNOTES – Chapter 19
______________

*****
20. Scenarios for Recovery: How to Write 
Down the Debts and Restructure the 
Financial System
 
I. The Choice Before Us: Suffer Debt Deflation, or Write Down the Debts
 
The world faces a choice between trying to recover the Bubble Economy’s 
debt-leveraged gains, or realizing that the financial sector has careened along 
an unsustainable path since 1980 and therefore that a fresh start has to be 
made. 
The “business as usual” approach is to keep today’s debt overhead on the 
books and bail out insolvent banks. This policy implies that financialization 
was a viable way to get rich in the first place. But the effect is to polarize 
economies further between creditors and debtors. Economies will shrink as a 
result of debt deflation, and falling tax revenues will push government 
budgets deeper into deficit — unless they cut back spending, which will make 
the downturn worse and threaten full-fledged depression. Unemployment will 
lead to emigration, the balance of payments will worsen and economies will 
be even less able to pay their debts. 
The alternative is to see where this path is leading, and to write down 
debts sooner rather than later. This restores a more progressive distribution of 
wealth and income, and revives the economy’s competitive position. The 

problem is that annulling debts also annuls financial claims on the “savings” 
side of the balance sheet. Creditors — led by the 1%, who have obtained most 
of the economic gains over the past thirty years — prefer to maintain their 
financial gains even at the cost of undercutting society’s longer-term growth. 
This opposition of interests obliges nations to choose between resuming 
prosperity or vesting a financial oligarchy to lord it over the remainder of the 
21st century. 
 
1. Trying to preserve today’s debt overhead entails shrinking economies by 
imposing financial and fiscal austerity, and polarizing nations further 
between creditors and debtors
 
It is intellectually uncomfortable to think that society has taken a seriously 
wrong path. It is even harder to reverse a path from which powerful interests 
are obtaining rich windfalls. The recent generation’s drive to get rich by debt-
leveraging has given banks, other financial institutions and the wealthiest 1% 
a dominant voice in government, the mass media and the academic 
curriculum that shapes how people think about the economy. This poses a 
political problem as well as a purely intellectual and scientific one when it 
comes to proposals to bring the economy’s debt overhead back within the 
ability to pay.
The problem is that one party’s debt is another’s savings. More to the 
point, the debts of the 99% are the savings of the 1% (or at least the 10%). 
The past thirty years have seen an enormous transfer of income and wealth to 
creditors. Yet many people think it unfair that these savers should lose (even 
if they have quickly gotten much richer), or that “free riders” should benefit 
from having their debts forgiven. This view looks at the debt overhead from 
an individualistic vantage point, not in terms of the long-term economic 
consequences for how a neo-rentier society is being created — one in which 
rent and other monopoly fees are extracted from the broader economy, at the 
expense of capital investment and social progress.
Today’s vested interests understandably want to avoid taking a loss on 
their bad loans, investments and financial gambles. But somebody must lose. 

The debt overhead cannot be kept on the books without a massive transfer of 
property to the financial sector and, via it, to the wealthiest 1%. Their rising 
share of wealth has taken the form primarily of creditor claims on the bottom 
99%, or on governments that have taken bad bank loans and reckless gambles 
onto the public balance sheet, as in Ireland. So one way or another the 99% 
will suffer, either directly as debtors or indirectly as taxpayers.1
While the 99% have not yet put forth an alternative program, the 1% echo 
Margaret Thatcher’s claim that “There Is No Alternative” (TINA). If this 
really is the case, then the Western economies are in deep trouble. Trying to 
keep today’s high debt levels on the books imposes debt deflation and fiscal 
austerity, and hence shrinks the economy. And if the economy shrinks, more 
loans will go bad, in a deteriorating spiral. That is what happens in debt 
deflation.
The longer an alternative policy is delayed, the more the economy will 
polarize, making subsequent reforms even more difficult by bolstering the 
economic power of creditors to sustain today’s home foreclosures, real estate 
defaults, property sales at distress prices, and spreading personal bankruptcy. 
It also will cause more corporate bankruptcy. This will raise the bargaining 
leverage of managers to replace defined-benefit pension plans with defined 
contribution plans (where employees have no idea of what they actually will 
receive upon retirement.) 
On the public sector balance sheet matters are even worse — and more 
difficult to reverse. Tax receipts decline as economies shrink. Debt-strapped 
governments come under pressure to cut back their spending, starting with 
underfunding their pension plans. The end game is for cities, states and 
national governments to balance their budgets by selling off public 
infrastructure and other assets in the public domain. 
Prospective buyers — and their bankers — depict privatization as a move 
toward efficiency and hence presumably lower prices. The opposite is more 
typically the case. The decision to pay bondholders rather than to write down 
or annul public debts enriches a set of rent-extracting interests adverse to 
those of the economy at large. Their business plan is to get richer by raising 
“tollbooth” fees on the infrastructure monopolies they have bought. This 
makes economies higher-cost, even as markets shrink for output produced by 

labor and industry. Privatization of the telephone sector from Mexico to the 
Baltics is a paradigmatic example.
 
2. “Business as usual” means debt deflation 
 
This dynamic of credit expanding to divert the economic surplus away 
from public and private investment or rising living standards has occurred 
often in history, most notoriously in the way in which the Roman Republic 
and Empire collapsed. Yet it does not appear in economic models. That is 
part of the problem: The narrow assumptions made by these models distract 
attention from the corrosive financial and other rentier dynamics that occur in 
the real world.
The business-as-usual choice (“The debts must be paid!”) threatens to 
derail attempts to recover, because income that is paid for debt service is not 
available for spending on goods and services. Diverting income to pay 
creditors dries up the domestic market and causes unemployment. This 
blocks financialized and debt-strapped economies from growing. And 
inasmuch as debt service is an element of price, it blocks debt-strapped 
economies from being able to export their way out of debt. This is why IMF-
style austerity plans do not stabilize the balance of payments, but drive 
countries adopting such plans even deeper into debt.
What makes the post-2008 economic situation different from the crashes 
familiar from the 19th century through the Great Depression is that debts 
(and their counterpart financial claims or savings) were not wiped out. 
Governments have intervened to “save” financial markets from running the 
course followed in earlier times. The major creditors (but not employee 
contributors to pension funds) have been saved from loss by bailouts that 
have kept bad debts on the books, often by giving them public guarantees (as 
in U.S. mortgage debt and “toxic waste”) or taking them directly onto the 
government’s balance sheet as noted above. 
The financial dynamic over the past thirty years has been for debts to 
mount up exponentially, at compound interest plus “free” electronic credit 
(debt) creation toward the point where they absorb the entire economic 

surplus — and then continue growing. Paying interest, amortization and 
penalties on this debt overhead shrinks the economy, plunging it into 
negative equity. A rising debt overhead prevents the economy from “growing 
its way out of debt,” because corporate cash flow is used to pay creditors, and 
markets are not growing sufficiently to warrant new investment and hiring. 
And the economy certainly cannot “borrow its way out of debt.” Over a 
quarter of U.S. real estate already is in negative equity and prices are still 
falling, so banks understandably have tightened their loan standards. The 
Federal Reserve’s policy of lower interest rates for mortgage credit has not 
sufficed to overcome the continued unwinding of the real estate bubble. And 
its bursting has thrown state and local finances into deficit, forcing cutbacks 
in public service. The result is a cascade of lower spending.
Mathematically, the debt overhead tends to expand to the point where it 
absorbs the entire economic surplus (real estate rent, corporate cash flow, 
disposable personal income and government tax revenue), crowding out new 
capital investment, infrastructure investment and rising living standards. The 
“business as usual” scenario seeks to sustain this trend. Collapse of the 
Bubble Economy since 2008 has left the debt overhead on the books — while 
prices have plunged for real estate and other assets, reversing the rise in net 
worth that homeowners and retail investors thought was making them rich by 
taking on more and more debt.
The Federal Reserve has flooded the financial system with enough credit 
to re-inflate the balance sheets of debtors, and hence also of the banks and 
financial institutions holding mortgages and other claims. The problem is that 
trying to save the financial sector from loss in this way merely adds to the 
debt overhead. This implies a post-Bubble austerity, not recovery. New credit 
is debt, and it is being created not to finance new capital investment and 
employment, but simply to enable debtors to pay their creditors rather than 
writing down debts. The resulting debt service will divert consumer 
spending, corporate cash flow and government tax revenue (and new money 
creation) to sustain a debt overhead that has been decoupled from “real” 
economic growth (rising production and consumption).
 
3. The alliance of banking with real estate, and monopolies — and corporate 

takeover financing
 
The policies chosen to resolve today’s financial and tax problems will 
follow largely from the diagnosis of what has caused them. The first step 
therefore must be to describe how the financial system has loaded the 
economy down with debt, mainly unproductive debt that is a form of 
overhead rather than one that increases the economic surplus and ability to 
pay.
It does not do so in the way that most textbooks describe. The popular 
image (encouraged by the banks) is a world in which banks recycle the 
savings of depositors to finance new industrial investment and hiring. This 
was indeed the dream of bank reformers in the 19th century. But it does not 
characterize today’s world. Industrial companies now bypass the banking 
system, borrowing by issuing their commercial paper directly, to investors 
who also bypass the banks.
From the 13th century down to Ricardo’s day, banks found their major 
markets in international lending to finance export trade and related payments, 
including loans to governments to finance military spending abroad. This 
gave banks an interest in promoting a specialization of labor in which each 
country would produce what it was “best” at producing. 
Britain’s landed interests threatened this plan. After the Napoleonic Wars 
with France ended and trade resumed in 1815, rural landlords sought to block 
low-priced food imports. Lower prices would reduce the agricultural land 
rents that land lords received — rents that had risen in keeping with food 
prices during the decades of wartime isolation. So Parliament, dominated by 
the landed aristocracy, imposed agricultural tariffs — the Corn Laws.
Higher food prices increased the price that employers had to pay to cover 
labor’s basic cost of living. The price of grain determined the price of bread, 
which most economists took as a proxy for wage levels. (Housing was 
nowhere near as large an element of the family budget as it has become 
today.) The Corn Laws thus threatened to impair Britain’s attempt to 
undersell industrial competitors and become the workshop of the world. 
To bankers, protectionism implied a world of largely self-sufficient 

balanced agricultural and industrial economies. That would not provide as 
great an opportunity for trade financing as specialization of labor would offer.
Acting as the banking sector’s major economic spokesman (and, in effect, 
lobbyist), David Ricardo’s 1817 Principles of Political Economy and 
Taxation described how international specialization of production was more 
efficient than autarchy. Chapter 2, on economic rent, put forth a labor theory 
of value isolating land rent as the excess of market price over intrinsic cost-
value, describing how the Corn Laws would increase prices and undercut 
competitiveness.
There was something ironic in using the concept of economic rent against 
landlords. The original distinction between cost-value and market price was 
discussed by the 13th-century Churchmen specifically with regard to what a 
Just Price would be for bankers to charge for converting foreign exchange 
(agio) and charging interest. But Ricardo’s analysis left the financial sector 
out of account. Subsequent British political economy focused on returns to 
landlords, labor and capitalists receiving rent, wages and profits. But because 
money and credit were not viewed as “factors of production,” its role in the 
economy remained indistinct. Credit was a precondition for the production 
and sale of goods, but was viewed simply as influencing price levels, not as 
debt requiring the economy to sustain interest payments.
The political upshot of Ricardian analysis (and indeed, that of the French 
Physiocrats, Adam Smith and other advocates of taxing landed wealth) was 
for British banking to support manufacturing against the landed interest. 
Parliament repealed the Corn Laws in 1846. On the continent of Europe, 
Germany and France also took the lead in steering banking increasingly to 
finance industry. And as the cities gained political power over the 
countryside, industry (and labor) gained power over the landed interest.
The past century has seen this alliance inverted. Instead of financing 
tangible capital formation to make profits by investing in plant and 
equipment, research and development, bankers have found their major market 
in lending against real estate. Whereas landed aristocracies in times past 
owned most of the land free and clear, property ownership has been 
democratized — on credit. Banks find their main business to be the financing 
of homeowners and commercial owners or absentee investors. The largest 
debt categories are real estate (mainly land) and basic infrastructure — the 

economy’s two largest asset categories. As rent-yielding assets, however, 
they (or at least, their economic rent) were widely expected to remain in the 
public domain. 
The old landed fortunes have been transmuted into financial fortunes, 
receiving interest, dividends and financial gains in place of land rent. Finance 
is today’s major source of wealth and recipient of economic rent. Buyers bid 
against each other for bank loans to buy property that formerly was held free 
and clear. The winner is whoever agrees to pay the most rental income to the 
banks. This financialization of land ownership ends up transferring the 
expected rent to the bankers — and recently some of the site’s price gain as 
well.
The fact that some 80% of bank loans in the United States, Britain and 
Scandinavia are mortgage loans has created a symbiosis of the Finance, 
Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE) sectors. Banks have joined real estate 
lobbyists to minimize the property tax and related taxes — knowing full well 
that what the tax collector relinquishes will be available to be paid as interest. 
This campaign has rolled back property taxes from an average 70% for U.S. 
cities and states in 1930 to under 16% today.2
Pledging most real estate rent, natural resource rent and other economic 
rent as interest to bankers and bondholders means that it no longer is 
available to the tax collector. Contrary to what a century of classical 
economists recommended, the fiscal burden has been shifted onto labor and 
industry. This tax shift off the land, natural resources and monopolies is the 
opposite of basing the tax system on land rent as the Physiocrats, Adam 
Smith, John Stuart Mill and subsequent Progressive Era reformers urged. 
Their classical policy would have left untaxed and hence “free” to be 
capitalized into bank loans — and thereby would have held down prices for 
housing and infrastructure services.
The problem today is that any attempt to reverse course and move back to 
the classical ideal of taxing away rent as the major source of public revenue 
would cause a break in the chain of payments — because the rent already has 
been pledged to creditors as backing for most of the economy’s savings and 
credit. Posing this quandary for the economy has convinced the banking 
sector that it has made its appropriation of rent away from government 

irreversible. 
The stock market has not been much better in replacing debt with equity 
capital. The ideal developed by Saint-Simon and his followers in 19th-
century France was for banks to take their returns as a share of profits, not as 
fixed debt payments. The idea was for financial returns to rise and fall in 
keeping with the ability of borrowers to pay, and that new stock issues would 
be used to fund new tangible investment. This is how most textbooks 
describe stock markets, as vehicles to raise shares in business earnings, e.g., 
via Initial Public Offerings (IPOs). 
Since 1980, however, the net flow of funds has been increasingly out of 
the stock market. Drexel Burnham and other investment banks pioneered the 
use of high-interest “junk” bonds to buy out stockholders and “take 
companies private.” The epoch of corporate raiding had arrived, and the tax 
laws subsidized replacing equity with bonds. At a 50% corporate tax rate, a 
company could pay out twice as much profit as tax-deductible interest to 
bondholders than it could as after-tax dividends to stockholders. So the 
financial return was doubled — leaving the tax collector with only half of 
what formerly was received. 
When markets turn down and profits decline, companies cannot simply cut 
back payments to bankers or bondholders as they can with shareholders. 
Missing a debt payment means default and bankruptcy. Corporate managers 
use this fact as a threat to declare bankruptcy and wipe out employee pension 
funding unless the plans are renegotiated downward. 
Instead of promoting the production of goods and services or spurring 
employment, the banking and tax systems have been distorted to promote the 
transfer of assets (mainly rent-extracting privileges) on credit — with interest 
being tax-deductible, as if banks deserved subsidy for playing a productive 
role rather than indebting industry, labor and privatized infrastructure to a 
point that threatens to drive many families, much industry and even 
governments into bankruptcy. 
The term “socializing the losses” is not a good description of taking 
financial losses onto the public balance sheet. Today’s governments are not 
socialist, or even “state socialist” as the term was applied to Bismarck’s 
Germany with its subsidies for industry and agriculture. From America’s 

$700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) in 2008 through the 
Federal Reserve’s subsequent $2 trillion “cash for trash” swaps and bailouts 
of A.I.G., Citibank and other “Too Big to Fail” institutions, to Europe’s 
bailouts of sovereign debt bondholders, new public credit and debts are being 
created not to revive economies but to preserve the financial claims of 
creditors at the top of the pyramid holding the rest of the economy in debt. 
These subsidies to the financial sector are unprecedented in magnitude. So a 
better term would be “oligarchizing” the losses as governments act on behalf 
of the new financial elite.
The game plan by the 1% to transfer the hard work and wealth of the 99% 
into their own pockets starts by cornering the market on obtaining credit from 
banks. Banks now lend mainly to other financial institutions, not the real 
economy. They then use debt leveraging for computerized casino gambling 
and to inflate the value of their real estate and securities. Homeowners also 
are advised to debt leverage and take out equity loans to make up the shortfall 
in living standards that their paychecks are not supporting. Alan Greenspan 
chimed in by informing the public that U.S. real estate is resilient against 
broad collapse, and that any problems were merely local.
When the bubble bursts, the strategy is to cry havoc and make sure that the 
government’s monetary agencies — the Treasury and Federal Reserve — 
enable the bondholders, the 1%, to get their money back, while leaving 
owners of underwater real estate and toxic mortgage waste to absorb the 
losses. The crowning ploy is to have the Federal Reserve keep the large 
banks and financial institutions intact by buying their money-losing assets. 
This is what makes today’s situation so different from the stock market crash 
in 1929, when the 1% lost their “paper gains” as the financial slate was wiped 
clean via bankruptcies and liquidations.
Even casual observers are now coming to recognize the hypocrisy of the 
1% in pretending to be for “free markets” while insisting that the government 
bail them out and protect their booty to make their financial gains 
irreversible. Their cry of “There Is No Alternative” is the opposite of a free 
market policy. It aims to block discussion of where all this is leading.
 
4. Mainstream remedies make the problem worse

 
The world keeps on being given bad old economic medicine in new 
bottles. Today’s neoliberal policies imposing austerity on Europe (leading to 
a capital and labor flight) are the same Washington Consensus policies that 
created the post-Soviet anti-labor tax philosophy, shock therapy and 
kleptocratic privatizations after 1991 (leading to a capital and labor flight), 
and before that the IMF austerity programs in the 1970s that led to the post-
1982 Third World debt crisis (leading to a capital and labor flight). By the 
time the U.S.-European financial crisis hit in 2008, the IMF’s former 
customers had rejected its financial philosophy while Russia was deploring 
the path that had reduced it to a raw-materials exporter with a shrinking 
population. 
But the same “medicine” (like a medieval doctor bleeding his patient in 
the belief that this will “restore balance” rather than kill the patient) is being 
dictated today in an attempt to use the financial crisis as an opportunity to 
squeeze out enough tax revenue and debt service to keep the illusion that 
somehow the “financialization” path was a viable one, not ending in deadly 
economic shrinkage, falling tax revenues and deepening government budget 
deficits.
It is easy enough to see what steered today’s economies into their financial 
cul de sac. Debt leveraging raises the cost of living and doing business, 
pricing financialized economies out of world markets. And by reducing 
taxable income, it contributes to the government’s budget deficit — which the 
financial sector then uses as an opportunity to demand privatization and 
cutbacks in social spending. This adds fiscal austerity onto debt deflation.
Privatization has become the name of the new, non-military asset grab. 
While domestic markets for labor and goods are being shrunk, privatizers 
engage in rent extraction to erect tollbooths on the economy’s key access and 
pressure points. Their business model is to raise the price of basic 
infrastructure services by building in interest and other financial charges, 
much higher executive salaries, and transfer payments to offshore tax-
avoidance enclaves. Their rent extraction is tax-deductible because they have 
bought this infrastructure on credit, depriving governments even of user fees 
from sharply rising “tollbooth” charges for access to roads, railroads, ports 

and other transportation, education, water and sewer services, tourist sites, 
etc. This raises the cost of living and doing business even while the overall 
economy shrinks.
More of the above neoliberal policies are now being promoted as a cure. 
Economic theory (or at least, policy advocacy) has become much like a 
novel, with the author hoping that the reader can suspend disbelief long 
enough to follow the fictional world being created.
 
5. International aspects of post-crash financial reform.
 
Failure to resolve the debt problem will lead financialized economies to 
suffer deepening trade and payments deficits with less debt-ridden 
competitors. The problem is how to start reversing the financialization costs 
that have already been built into North American and European economies. 
As in the 1920s, the U.S. economy has become the most extreme example 
(outside of Latvia, that is). FIRE sector expenditures absorb as much as 75% 
of blue-collar family budgets in the United States. There is no way in which 
an economy with such a high monthly break-even “nut” can compete with 
less financialized ones.
 
U.S. Monthly Break-Even “Nut” –
- Rent or home ownership costs:  35% to 40%
- FICA wage withholding (Social Security and Medicare):  15%
- Other debt service (credit cards, student loans, etc.):  10%
- Other taxes (income and sales taxes):  10% to 15%
TOTAL   75%
 
Only about a quarter of family budgets remains available for spending on 
current output. This is how financialization leads to debt deflation, even 
while prices rise as a result of higher banking and other economic rent 
charges that have no “real” cost basis.

The international effects of this fatal combination of debt deflation and 
rent extraction include capital flight and an emigration of labor in response to 
shrinking employment opportunities. The neoliberalized Baltic economies 
and bank-stricken Iceland are the most recent examples, and Greek 
emigration and capital flight also have picked up during the past year.
This dynamic is the opposite from what was expected a century ago. 
Instead of evolution favoring high-wage nations out-competing the old 
rentier-ridden post-feudal and post-colonial economies, wages and living 
standards are being scaled back under the political umbrella of financial 
emergency. Politically, power is being shifted from democratically elected 
governments to technocrats governing on behalf of international banks and 
financial institutions as international finance today achieves what armed 
conquest did in times past. 
The effect of these policies is to centralize planning in the hands of 
financial managers. Their strategy is to privatize public enterprises and 
increase profits by de-unionizing formerly public sector labor, and to scale 
back Social Security, pension plans, health insurance and other social support 
programs. This is the treadmill on which financialized post-Bubble Eurozone 
social democracies are to be placed.
 
II. The Remedies 
 
Fortunately, there is an alternative to letting economies be stifled by trying 
to pay debts at the cost of further economic growth. In fact there is an array 
of alternatives, and many dovetail into each other. Their common 
denominator is to restore the primacy of the “real” economy — labor and 
tangible capital on the asset side of the balance sheet — over financial and 
property claims on the liabilities side, and to restore balance between the 
public and private sectors. The aim is to minimize technologically 
unnecessary costs of living and production.
 
1. The fraudulent conveyance principle
 

A broad guideline for writing down debts was developed more than two 
centuries ago in the American colonies. British speculators and sharpies eyed 
the rich farmlands of upstate New York and refined the practice of making 
loans to farmers against their crops. Their strategy was to call in loans at an 
inconvenient time (e.g., just before harvest), or simply to loan the farmer 
more than could realistically be repaid in the epoch’s low-surplus economy. 
They then would foreclose.
To cope with this problem, the colony of New York passed the Fraudulent 
Conveyance law. This was retained when New York joined the United States, 
and remains on the books today. Its principle is that if a lender makes a loan 
that the borrower cannot reasonably be expected to pay off in the normal 
course of business — that is, without forfeiture of property — the loan should 
be declared null and void, and the debt cancelled. The legal assumption is 
that such a loan was a ploy to gain control of property pledged as collateral, 
over and above simply earning interest.
The aim is to keep debts within the ability to pay, by placing an obligation 
on bankers and other creditors to make viable loans rather than covert 
property grabs. This principle has two major implications for today’s debt-
strapped economies. It was cited in the 1980s as a defense against corporate 
raiders buying out stockholders with high-interest “junk” bonds. Victims of 
debt-leveraged buyouts claimed that there was no way that the loan could 
have been expected to be paid in the normal course of business and subject to 
existing employee contracts without selling off assets and, as noted above, 
downgrading their pension contracts with employees. The aim was to loot the 
company and leave it a bankrupt shell. The best-known recent case is the suit 
brought by Chicago Tribune employees against the real estate magnate Sam 
Zell who drove the company bankrupt and emptied out the Employee Stock 
Ownership Plan to pay his creditors. About half such ESOPs typically end up 
in bankruptcy through such financial sleight of hand.
The Fraudulent Conveyance principle may be applied to the public sector 
with regard to pressure brought on debt-strapped governments to sell off 
public enterprises to pay creditors. This situation is much like that of colonial 
farmers in upstate New York. Banks and bondholders have lent governments 
credit as if this were risk-free. This was done in the belief that if these 

governments have difficulty paying bondholders — especially in foreign 
currency — the IMF and other Washington Consensus institutions will step in 
and lend governments the foreign exchange to pay private-sector bankers, or 
simply strong-arm the sovereign debtor into paying, willy-nilly. Bondholders 
and banks are thus in the position of the British financial sharpies making 
ostensibly reckless loans in the belief that the local sheriff and other colonial 
officials would back up their property grab. The effect is to replace private-
sector debt with debt to inter-governmental institutions and “hard currency” 
governments such as the United States or European Union.
As the breakdown of Inter-Ally debts and German reparations 
demonstrated in the 1920s, debts among governments are more difficult to 
write down than debts owed to private-sector banks and bondholders. 
Although governments are sovereign, they are subject to pressure to isolate 
them by the type of trade and financial sanctions imposed against Cuba and 
Iran. The tacit threat of such sanctions was used as an attempt to keep 
Argentina and other Latin American debtors in line for many years.
It has long been a basic principle of international finance not to take on 
debts in foreign currency. As Keynes explained in the 1920s, foreign debts 
add the “transfer problem” (running a trade and payments surplus to obtain 
foreign currency) to the domestic “budgetary problem” of governments 
taxing enough surplus to pay domestic-currency creditors. The global 
economy becomes “oligarchized” under conditions of increasing distress (the 
word “distress” originally meant the property taken by creditors as collateral 
to ensure loan payment. Distraint is the act of seizing property to obtain 
payment for money owed).
Just as the Allied Powers refused to acknowledge the transfer problem as 
distinct from the domestic budgetary problem with regard to World War I 
arms debts and German reparations in the 1920s, the IMF’s “absorption” 
models likewise fail to draw this distinction.3 They are the official equivalent 
of corporate raiders maintaining solvency with their creditors by downsizing 
and outsourcing, breaking up the assets and stiffing the smaller creditors 
(employees who agreed to lower wages in exchange for pension security) in 
the tradition of “big fish eat little fish.”
The basic principle of Fraudulent Conveyance is that loans which cannot 

be paid under normal conditions were made irresponsibly at best, and with 
predatory intentions at worst. In either case they should be written down. The 
ethical principle is that the debtor suffers less than the creditor, especially in a 
world where international credit is now created electronically on computer 
keyboards — while repayment of such credit polarizes and impoverishes 
debtor economies.
 
2. Attempts to legislate reasonable ability to pay under normal conditions
 
How should the courts define the reasonable ability to pay under normal 
conditions? Sheila Bair, head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC), 
suggested that mortgage-financed housing costs on new loans should be 
limited to 32% of the borrower’s family income. This proportion is higher 
than the 25% rule of thumb applied by most banks before deregulation 
changed matters in the 1980s. But it is lower than current distress levels, 
which are in the neighborhood for 50% for many families, especially those 
with “exploding rate” variable-interest mortgages. This fact prompted Ms. 
Bair to propose that mortgage servicers should reset adjustable-rate 
mortgages back to the original rate so that the “exploding” interest rates 
would not cause defaults. “Avoiding foreclosure would protect neighboring 
properties and hasten the recovery.”4 
Another palliative would be to reduce mortgage debt service to the current 
rental equivalent of housing. Estimating a fair market price for real estate by 
capitalizing its rental value is how land prices were set in earlier centuries, 
when buying a property was like buying a government bond. Capitalizing the 
rent at the going rate of interest provided an equivalent current value. Fannie 
Mae has proposed a “deed for lease” program permitting defaulting mortgage 
debtors to remain in their homes for one year in exchange for paying the 
market rent — presumably much less than the existing mortgage terms. 
Democratic Arizona Congressman Raul Grijalva has proposed extending the 
homeowner’s “right to rent” for five years, leaving the courts to estimate fair-
market rent. 
These solutions involve scaling back the value of nominal mortgage 
claims. Unwilling to compromise, intransigent bankers resist this — unless 

they are reimbursed in full. Despite public relations “jawboning” by Obama 
Administration regulatory agencies, banks have stonewalled against writing 
down mortgages. Their strategy has been to hold out for government 
reimbursement of any write-downs — so that the public sector (“taxpayers”) 
will absorb the loss, not themselves. To pressure the government to capitulate 
(as the administration finally did in March 2012), financial institutions have 
held the economy hostage. Their position was that if they were not bailed out, 
they would destroy the real estate market.
This stance confronts governments with an all-or-nothing alternative. The 
banks’ position is that debtors or the government must bear the entire burden 
of the unpayably high debts — debts that are the result of their own 
irresponsible and in many cases fraudulent loans. The financial sector’s 
intransigence on this demand, and its power to threaten at least temporary 
economic collapse if it does not get its way and shift its loss onto 
“taxpayers,” has upped the ante to force an all-or-nothing alternative — not a 
partial haircut, but a broad debt write-down. 
 
3. A public option for a credit infrastructure
 
When Citibank, A.I.G., the Royal Bank of Scotland and Anglo-Irish Bank 
failed, governments became their de facto owners. U.S. authorities made a 
political decision to recognize claims by existing stockholders, bondholders 
and counterparties at public expense. For the economy at large, all countries 
kept the bad debt overhead on the books as far as debtors were concerned. 
Economies shrank as a result of debt deflation, the property bubble 
accordingly crashed, and much was simply abandoned. 
Also lost was the opportunity for governments to provide a public option 
of banking and credit. These are in the character of basic infrastructure, after 
all. Instead of simply reselling these banks to new buyers — or in the case of 
Citibank and Bank of America, leaving their stockholders in place — the 
governments could have operated these institutions to provide credit cards 
and related services at cost rather than at a profit. Furthermore, a publicly run 
bank presumably would not write junk mortgages and create kindred toxic 
financial waste based on fraudulent “liars’ loans,” exploding interest-rate 

loans and other predatory practices that marked Citibank, Bank of America, 
Washington Mutual and other major offenders. The enormous public Post 
Office Savings Banks of Japan and Russia do not lend for such financial 
speculation.
The financial sector wielded sufficient political power to discourage 
governments from taking this option. The government did not fold up the 
banks or even wipe out A.I.G.’s counter-party speculators on their reckless 
credit default contracts. Sheila Bair argued in vain that there was no need to 
bail out the casino-capitalist gamblers. The FDIC could readily have taken 
over insolvent banks and saved insured depositors with their existing loan 
portfolios. This what the FDIC did when it wound down WaMu and other 
reckless lenders. “We have a resolution process that we’ve used for decades, 
and when we put a bank into receivership, we have the right to break all 
contracts, we can fire people, we can take away bonuses and we don’t get 
into this kind of problem.”5
A.I.G. had enough resources to maintain its “plain vanilla” insurance 
operations. The FDIC (and similar government agencies abroad) could have 
become major shareholders in the “systemically important” Too Big to Fail 
banks. After wiping out their superstructure of bad debt claims, it could have 
written down bad or outright fraudulent mortgages to realistic prices based on 
current rental values. But this would have caused losses for banks holding 
“second” mortgages and equity loans. To preserve their claims, they insisted 
that the economy be wrecked. Instead of representing the broad public 
interest, the Obama Administration went along with this demand.
In her interview with New York Times reporter Joe Nocera upon retiring 
from the FDIC, Ms. Bair emphasized: “Our job is to protect bank customers, 
not banks.” But Wall Street institutions (the major contributors to both 
Democratic and Republican lawmakers, after all). Treasury Secretary Tim 
Geithner and other defenders of high finance told Ms. Bair: “‘You have to do 
this or the system will go down.’ If I heard that once, I heard it a thousand 
times. ‘Citi is systemic, you have to do this.’ No analysis, no meaningful 
discussion. It was very frustrating.”
She blamed the Bush-Obama Administrations for acting to save the large 
investors rather than the overall economy when they bailed out the banks to 

save high-income investors from taking a loss. “It was all about the 
bondholders,” she said. “They did not want to impose losses on bondholders, 
and we did. We kept saying: ‘There is no insurance premium on 
bondholders,’ you know? For the little guy on Main Street who has bank 
deposits, we charge the banks a premium for that, and it gets passed on to the 
customer. We don’t have the same thing for bondholders.” With this 
comment she put to rest the rhetoric refined by the 1% claiming that they 
believe in free markets untouched by government hands or free-lunch 
welfare.
Ultimately at issue is the belief that the asset side of the balance sheet 
needs the liabilities side to function. A further implication is that 
governments need to protect the banks not only from insolvency but losing 
their status as the economy’s most profitable sector (“Where are the 
customers’ yachts?”) by keeping the existing debt overhead in place. 
What was lost in the 2008 rush to act was an opportunity to achieve what 
Progressive Era reformers had spent a lifetime trying to promote: a public 
option for banking. The aim of public ownership historically has been to 
minimize the cost of living and doing business. Just as public roads, school 
systems and other basic infrastructure services are offered at cost or at 
subsidized prices — or freely — so the financial payments system is a basic 
public utility. A public option can offer less costly credit cards, savings and 
checking accounts than can private banks. But banks have gained control of 
the regulatory process and used it to disable government power to keep their 
charges in line with technologically necessary costs of production. They have 
made finance extractive — the bankers’ equivalent of landlords rack-renting 
their tenants.
 
4. An economy-wide debt cancellation (the “German Economic Miracle” 
option)
 
The traditional path of least resistance has been to wipe out savings and 
debts together in a convulsion of bankruptcy. The 1929 and 1931 crashes led 
to the 1931 moratorium on German reparations and Inter-Ally debts. The 
Mexican and subsequent Latin American insolvencies led to the Brady Plan 

sovereign debt write-downs in the 1980s. But by far the most important 
example was the 1948 Allied Currency Reform in Germany. Savings over 
and above a basic amount were cancelled — on the logic that most belonged 
to members of the former Nazi regime. The main debts kept on the books 
were normal paycheck obligations owed by employers to their work force, 
and basic working bank balances. Rendering Germany free of a financial 
overhead, this catalyzed its Economic Miracle, making its experience a model 
modern Clean Slate. 
Yet this prospect strikes most economists with horror in fear that it would 
disrupt the payments system. Monetary theory has ignored the role of money 
and credit as debt, as if it only affects prices — the “counters” for goods, 
services, sages and other payments. (Asset prices usually are left out of 
account, as noted above). As a mind expansion exercise it therefore is 
instructive to review the long history of how debt cancellations have 
preserved overall balance and restored prosperity rather than plunging 
economies into anarchy and poverty.
From the early third millennium BC in Sumer down through the Near East 
in Greek and Roman antiquity, societies proclaimed Clean Slates. When 
Sumerian, Babylonian and other Near Eastern rulers took the throne, or when 
droughts, floods or military disturbances made agrarian debts unpayable, 
rulers proclaimed “economic order”: amargi in Sumerian, misharum and 
andurarum in Babylonian, and cognate terms in other Near Eastern languages 
extending down to deror in Judaism’s Jubilee Year. This did not create 
economic disruption, but was a key to preventing widespread debt bondage 
and forfeiture of land rights.6
Such acts were relatively easy to proclaim in an epoch when most debts 
were owed to palace or temples collectors as in the ancient Near East, or 
placed at the center of Mosaic Law as in Judaism (Leviticus 25). What 
stopped the practice in classical Greece and Rome was the fact that debts 
were owed to private creditors — and unlike rulers, they found their interest 
to lie in reducing their debtors to a state of bondage and clientage. They did 
this despite the fact that this led to a flight of debtors from the land. That is 
why the prophet Isaiah denounced landlords and creditors who joined plot to 
plot and house to house until there was no more room left in the land for 
people.

An analogous condition exists today as creditors have imposed such 
extreme austerity on Iceland, Latvia and Greece that the youth must emigrate 
to find employment. Unemployment rate among young adults in Spain’s is 
reported to be 50%, and the national rate 23%.7 These countries are losing 
their most productive and highly educated labor. The most extreme 
experience is that of the former Soviet Union after neoliberals were given a 
free hand to financialize their economies into rentier rent-extraction 
opportunities after 1991. The moral is that unthinkable as debt writedowns 
may appear politically, the alternative — stagnation — is worse.
All the major Roman historians — Livy, Plutarch, Diodorus, followed by 
modern writers such as Arnold Toynbee — blamed the decline and fall of the 
Roman Republic on creditor intransigence leading to a century-long Social 
War (133–29 BC) that polarized society between creditors and debtors. A 
quarter of the Empire’s population was reduced to debt bondage and 
hereditary slavery, plunging economic life into a Dark Age. The dynamics of 
debt worked much like radioactive decay, ending at the point where 
economies finally stabilized in a leaden state of serfdom. Economic life 
reverted from cities to the countryside, centered largely on church estates, 
leaving only subsistence production throughout most of the land.
The relevance is that what blocks a reversal of toxic creditor power today 
— or even writedowns of more than a “haircut” — is that wiping out debts on 
the “liabilities” side of the balance sheet also wipes out savings on the 
“assets” side. The most politically problematic savings are those of the 1% 
that take the form of debts owed by the 99%. The 1% have achieved such 
great political influence in today’s that they are able — and willing — to 
sacrifice the economy at large, and even to bring on depression rather than 
relinquish their financial claims. 
This is what makes today’s financial situation a political as well as 
economic crisis point in the global economy. Creditors never like to take a 
loss — and what makes the situation so different today is that they have 
achieved a political ability to drive the economy into depression in order to 
maintain their financial claims.
In the Great Depression, high finance and other investors lost fortunes 
(paper fortunes, to be sure) as stock market and real estate prices plunged and 

debtors defaulted. But there was a silver lining. The liquidations of wealth 
wiped out debts. This freed the economy from interest and principal 
obligations, enabling recovery to take place. But unlike the case in the 1930s, 
today’s 1% are unwilling to absorb a loss. They have used government 
agencies originally created to regulate high finance to enforce harsh creditor 
terms and make the economy’s nonfinancial sectors absorb the losses, partly 
by foreclosure and partly by taking bad debts onto the government’s balance 
sheet (“taxpayers”). As a bonus, banks (most notoriously Bank of America) 
and A.I.G. received long-term tax credits that render them largely tax-free 
institutions. 
Keeping these debts on the books blocks recovery, as described earlier. 
But the response of the bank lobbyists is blunt: “We don’t care. Make us 
whole.” It is in the character of private creditors to be more interested in their 
own wealth than in the survival of society. History attests to their willingness 
to see entire economies shrink. That is why a public checks and balances are 
needed — to subordinate financial dynamics to serve overall long-term 
welfare. 
What has been lost is enlightened self-interest at the top of the economic 
pyramid. The financial sector’s stars are nouveaux riches unschooled in the 
lessons of economic history and seemingly unfamiliar with the concept of 
noblesse oblige. Their lobbyists appear not to care that if the overall economy 
shrinks, wealth at the top must shrink too. 
This attitude has characterized much of history. In many societies the 1% 
has cared more about its relative power over the 99% than about its own 
gains. It realizes that polarization widens as economies shrink and become 
poorer. One could only wish that the object lessons of history were taught as 
an integral part of how money, finance and debt interact with the overall 
economic and political system.
Shifting planning out of the hands of democratic government into those of 
Wall Street, the City of London and other financial centers has not created an 
enlightened despotism. The Roman model becomes relevant once again 
today: government acting on behalf of creditors to a point that reduces the 
population to debt dependency, dismantles the economy, empties out the 
cities, and replaces democracy with a Praetorian Guard. The Chicago Boys’ 

applause of Pinochet’s Chile as a “free market” experiment should stand as 
warning that a police state is the only way to keep this neofeudalism in place 
and to make it so irreversible that (again, in Mrs. Thatcher’s words): There Is 
No Alternative.
 
5. Sovereign debt repudiation 
 
Most recently, Argentina had no alternative to chronic depression and 
shrinkage but to revoke the foreign debts that global advisors had advised it 
to take on. The open question at this point is how soon Ireland, Iceland and 
other debt-strapped countries will face the pressures that led Argentina to 
save itself from being stripped by creditors. No sovereign nation should be 
obliged to pay foreign debts that cannot be paid in the normal course of 
business. It also should be a basic premise of international finance that debts 
should be denominated in one’s own currency. All hyperinflations have 
stemmed from trying to pay foreign debts, not central banks monetizing 
domestic spending. 
 
6. Re-introduction of national usury laws and more debtor-oriented 
bankruptcy laws 
 
The rise of interest rates to over 20% in 1980 led to an abolition of usury 
laws in the United States. Creditors were able to sidestep state laws by 
locating in states that provided no protection to debtors. The rewritten U.S. 
bankruptcy laws in 2005 reversed an eight-century trend toward more 
humanitarian rules enabling debtors to make a fresh start. U.S. student loans 
are the capstone of creditor harshness. They cannot be wiped out by 
bankruptcy.
A related problem is the corporate bankruptcy practice putting employee 
claims behind those of wealthier financial creditors. The basic principle here 
is “Big fish eat little fish.” Instead of using bankruptcy to restore overall 
economic balance, the practice reflects the power of bank and credit card 
lobbyists to rewrite the law in their own interest.

 
7. A central bank to monetize government deficits
 
From the Bank of England in 1694 through the U.S. Federal Reserve in 
1913, the purpose of a central bank has been to create money to finance 
government deficits. But the European Union has blocked this option. The 
European Central Bank is restricted to lend only to banks, not to 
governments. This obliges governments to finance their deficits by selling 
interest-bearing debt to banks and bondholders rather than simply creating 
interest-free “greenbacks.”
In practice, central banks have created money mainly in times of war. The 
U.S. Federal Reserve, however, created over $2 trillion after the 2008 
financial crash to re-inflate the banking system, as an alternative to taking 
over and “socializing” insolvent banks. As noted above, this “oligarchizes” 
the losses to subsidize a new rentier elite. 
Long before the post-2008 bailouts, wartime money creation showed how 
strong the power of governments is to create money when there is a will. But 
what if instead of creating this new money and public debt, the government 
had let a real “free market” wipe out the superstructure of debts? 
Governments could have turned the Too Big To Fail banks and other 
insolvent institutions into a public option to provide credit cards, bank loans 
and other credit to the economy. At the very least they could have separated 
“vanilla” banking operations from risky speculation.
A public option may be the most practical way to separate retail from 
wholesale banking — that is, staid credit operations from high-risk 
speculation. The big FDIC-insured banks fought proposals to block 
speculative gambling on derivatives, futures options and arbitrage loans. 
Their aim is to make the Clinton Administration’s 1999 repeal of the Glass-
Steagall act irreversible. Now that election campaigns have been 
“privatized,” Wall Street contributors can buy the support of politicians to 
block attempts to legislate the “Volcker Rule” to re-separate the two types of 
banking. The big-bank ploy is to threaten a scorched earth “take it or leave it” 
attack on new attempts to regulate the financial system. 

Their intransigence has left the line of least resistance to be sidestepping 
the Congressional blockage of bank reform is to create a public option out of 
the remnants of the failed giant banks. They could be operated in a similar 
way to how savings banks and S&Ls used to be run in the United States, 
before raiders financialized them into commercial banks.
The fear often is expressed that a public option might prove to be as prone 
to fraud and insider dealing as Bank of America, Citibank and other private-
sector institutions. France’s experience with “socializing” its banks — that is, 
turning management over to insiders — showed that this is indeed a danger. 
The Saint-Simonian Credit Mobilier founded in the 1850s as an alternative to 
commercial banking was undone by insider dealing under Napoleon III. The 
implication is that the same kind of checks and balances are needed for public 
banking that used to be applied to commercial banking before the neoliberal 
deregulators destroyed this balance. One need simply look at Iceland’s 
privatization of public banking to see how much greater the danger of fraud 
and risk-taking is once public oversight is destroyed.
An under-appreciated advantage of this public option is that it is easier for 
governments to cancel debts owed to themselves than those owed to private-
sector creditors. This is what explains the contrast between the Bronze Age 
Near East and subsequent Greek and Roman antiquity. The oligarchies that 
gained control of society (replacing kings either with Senates as in Rome, or 
with rulers beholden to the oligarchy) ended the tradition of debt cancellation,
accelerating antiquity’s financial polarization into debt bondage.
 
Summary: Debts that can’t be paid, won’t be
 
A common denominator runs throughout recorded history: a rising 
proportion of debts cannot be paid. Adam Smith remarked that no 
government ever had repaid its debt, and today the same can be said of the 
overall volume of private-sector debt. One way or another, there will be 
defaults — unless debts are paid in an illusory fashion, simply by adding the 
interest charges onto the debt balance until the sums finally grow to so 
fictitious a magnitude that the illusion of viability has to be dropped.

But freeing an economy from illusion may be a traumatic event. The great 
policy question therefore concerns just how the various types of debts won’t 
be paid. The choice is between forfeiting property to foreclosing creditors, or 
writing debts down at least to the ability to pay, and possibly all the way 
down to make a fresh start. Somebody must lose, and their loss will appear 
on the other side of the balance sheet as another party’s gain. Debtors lose 
when they have to forfeit their property or cut back other spending pay their 
debts. Creditors lose when the debts are written down or go bad. 
The balance of gains and losses in such foreclosures depends — in narrow 
accounting terms — on the value of collateral being transferred. But from an 
economy-wide perspective the resolution of a debt overhead needs to be 
looked at as a long-term dynamic. Any such analysis turns on the role of 
specific classes of debtors and creditors within the economy — the 99% and 
the 1%, the “real” economy and the financial sector. It is not simply a matter 
of what contracts say (“A debt is a debt, and all debts must be paid”). The 
effect of debt on the economy’s overall cost structure is most important — 
including the international dimension cited earlier with regard to the extent to 
which debt service and debt-leveraged housing prices and other output 
increase the cost of living and doing business.
Writing down debts reduces the overall economy’s financial costs. 
Keeping debts on the books retains these costs. So when the financial sector 
(or the 1%) insists on maintaining the debts that have been run up — and 
supporting the debt-leveraged price of real estate pledged as collateral — 
securing its past “savings” gains are incompatible with maintaining a viable 
economy. The debt overhead becomes an expense that must be shed if the 
economy is not to shrink — and if it does shrink, more debts will go bad and 
a deteriorating spiral will set in.
Perception of this long-term macroeconomic dynamic is what has led the 
past few centuries of legal trends and political ideology to favor indebted 
labor and industry, and indebted governments as well. It explains why 
debtors’ prisons have been closed, and bankruptcy laws become increasingly 
humanitarian to enable debtors to make a fresh start. This idea of clean slates 
is only recently being extended to the economy-wide scale, starting with 
government debts to global creditors.

Today’s financial trend threatens to reverse this pro-debtor reform 
tendency. Without acknowledging the economic and social consequences, the 
“business as usual” approach is a euphemism for sacrificing economies to 
creditors. It seeks to legitimize the disproportionate gains of banks and their 
rentier partners who have monopolized the past generation’s surplus. And it 
is to protect these accumulations that the FIRE sector has spent part of these 
gains to become the dominant voice in government, including the courts, as 
well as academia. The aim in practice is to impose austerity and economic 
shrinkage on the private sector, while the public sector sells off its assets in a 
voluntary pre-bankruptcy. 
The internal contradiction in this policy is that austerity makes the debts 
even harder to pay. A shrinking economy yields less tax revenue and has less 
ability to create a surplus out of which to pay creditors. Debt repayment is not 
available for spending on current goods and services. So markets shrink 
more.
This is not an inevitable scenario. Governments are sovereign with regard 
to their creditors. They still posses the alternative power to wipe out the debts 
— along with the savings that are their counterpart on the opposite side of the 
balance sheet. The German Currency Reform of 1948 remains a model. But it 
calls for creditors to take a loss. 
This has happened again and again in history for the past five thousand 
years. Until recently it was the normal result of financial crashes — the final 
stage of the business cycle, so to speak. But as economies have been 
financialized, creditors have gained political power — and also the power to 
disable realistic academic discussion of the debt problem. What they fear 
most of all are thoughts of how to avoid today’s arrangements that have given 
them a free lunch at the rest of the economy’s expense.
 
III. How to Restructure the Financial and Tax System 
 
The economic tragedy of our time is the failure to mobilize saving and 
new credit creation to fund economic growth. Bank lending has sustained its 
growth by inflating prices for buying a home or a retirement income. Yet 

mainstream monetary theory relates the money supply only to commodity 
prices, not asset prices. It therefore misses the major dynamic polarizing 
economies and loading them down with debt.
A well-structured financial system should steer credit and saving 
productively — that is, into loans that provide the borrower with the means to 
pay. After a financial crash such as the West is experiencing today, the aim 
should be to help economies grow again — this time, in a way that will avoid 
a financial Bubble Economy from recurring as a result of unproductive 
lending and speculation.
At the broadest level the task is to prevent the “free lunch” tollbooth 
opportunities that classical economists sought either to tax away or to move 
into the public domain as subsidized infrastructure services. Nobody a 
century ago expected the financial sector to end up with this economic rent. It 
was expected to become the tax base. But financial lobbyists have promoted a 
slow but steady undermining of classical value and rent theory. Contrary to 
the classical reform program, the aim is to “free” economic rent and asset-
price gains to serve as the basis for the economy’s savings and credit 
creation. 
To defend their appropriation of land rent, natural resource rent, monopoly 
rent and other returns to privilege, the financial sector has taken the lead in 
promoting an anti-government political ideology. Taxes on property and 
wealth are denounced — only to be replaced by interest charges capitalizing 
land rent and other property revenue into bank loans. This inversion of the 
classical reform program calls for a broad restructuring once today’s debt 
rubble is cleared.
 
1. Financial and fiscal reform need to go together
 
Any economy is an overall system. Restructuring the financial sector and 
its debt overhead requires changes throughout the system — above all the tax 
system, because its distortions have aggravated and intensified today’s 
financial malstructuring. 
Contrary to what was expected in Ricardo’s day, the major market for 

bank loans is not industry and commerce. Banks have found their major loan 
market in rent-extracting activities: real estate, insurance and monopolies. 
Mortgage lending accounts for some 80% of bank loans in the English-
speaking economies. Other major bank customers are the oil and mining 
sectors (capitalizing their resource rents into bank loans and paying it out as 
interest), and corporate raiders as industry has become financialized to pay 
out cash flow as interest and dividends (and exorbitant executive salaries, 
bonuses and stock options). Industrial companies now bypass the banks and 
have developed their own direct access to credit markets.
The aim of classical political economy was to tax away “unearned 
income,” defined as economic rent. From the Physiocrats and Adam Smith 
through John Stuart Mill and the Progressive Era reformers, the essence of 
free market theory was to tax the rental value of sites provided by (1) nature, 
(2) by public infrastructure investment in transportation, water and sewer 
systems, power distribution and communications, and (3) the level of general 
prosperity — all of which are extraneous to the landlord’s own investment of 
capital and labor.
An associated virtue of a rent tax is its ability to recapture what kleptocrats 
and other privatizers have taken, especially in the post-Soviet economies. 
Ownership even can remain in private hands, as long as the government 
collects economic rent and windfall gains.
But when this rent has been capitalized into bank loans, it cannot be 
collected as the tax base — without causing loan defaults, because the same 
revenue cannot be paid to two different parties. The fact that the banks have 
aggressively over-lent and put their depositors (and government insurance 
agencies) at risk has convinced the financial sector that its appropriation of 
this rent is irreversible. An attempt to tax rent and asset-price gains today 
would raise the specter of financial crash that bank lobbyists wave as a red 
flag to get this way.
A political problem with having un-taxed economic rent is that 
governments must make up the fiscal shortfall by taxing labor and industry. 
The effect of income taxes and sales or excise taxes is to raise prices. A rent 
tax has the opposite effect. It leaves less “free income” available to be 
capitalized into bank loans to bid up real estate prices or shares of 

monopolies. This closes off the major stream of unproductive mortgage 
“overhead” debt. And inasmuch as asset prices are whatever a bank will lend 
to new buyers, a rent tax prevents the site value of housing, other real estate 
or monopolies from being capitalized into bank loans. 
The public interest therefore lies in taxing land rent, natural resource rent 
and monopoly privilege — including extractive financial privileges — or 
keeping rent-yielding assets and activities in the public domain. But banks 
see their advantage to lie in un-taxing rent, as this has become their major 
loan market. Their interest thus lies in a policy that raises the economy’s cost 
structure and makes it uncompetitive. The proper task of bank regulation thus 
should be to subordinate financial drives to serve the economy. But at 
present, matters are just the opposite: government policy aims at “freeing” as 
much of the economic surplus and property claims as possible to be pledged 
to the financial sector.
Taxes on monopoly rent have been averted in the United States by 
regulating the prices charged by public utilities, railroads and other privatized 
infrastructure, to keep them in line with necessary costs of production. 
Failure to regulate — as is occurring in economies privatizing their public 
domain with no regulatory authority in place — unleashes opportunities to 
extract “tollbooth” user fees, and for banks to develop a great financial 
market to capitalize this rent extraction into loans, whose interest is built into 
higher public user prices. The abuses of America’s railroad barons and 
Gilded Age stock waterings should be an object lesson in the economics 
curriculum for how predatory finance carves out fortunes at the economy’s 
expense — and how these fortunes remain intact to warp generation after 
generation of development, by defending themselves more and more at 
society’s expense.
The link between financial reform and tax policy is completed by the fact 
that public money creation is given value by governments accepting it in 
payment for taxes. These taxes need not be deadweight if they prevent 
unproductive speculation and exploitation. The thrust of classical political 
economy was to show how socially desirable it is to collect economic rent. 
Failure to collect this “free lunch” revenue diverts saving and enterprise away 
from tangible capital accumulation into rent-extracting activities — and as 
noted above, leaves this rent to be built into the economy’s cost structure as 

well as backing for its financial system. So the private sector is backed by the 
flow of rent that originally was supposed to back the public monetary system. 
This is part of the fatal tradeoff that anti-government “free market” ideology 
has backed.
 
2. Remove the tax-deductibility of interest payments so as to favor equity over 
debt financing.
 
As noted above, 19th-century followers of Saint-Simon urged that 
financial systems be steered toward more productive capital formation by 
replacing debt with equity capital, taking bank returns as a share of profits. 
Today’s tax system follows the opposite principle. It permits interest 
payments to be tax deductible (and executive salaries without limit), but not 
dividends or retained earnings re-invested in capital formation. This tax 
philosophy is largely responsible for the post-1980 conversion of stocks into 
bonds, equity investment into interest-bearing debt. 
 
3. De-financialize Social Security, pensions and health care 
 
Public finance is not like a family budget. Individuals have a reason to 
save for the future. If they do not do this, they will have less to spend. Their 
hope is for their savings to be invested productively and that they may get to 
share in the returns that are made.
That is not how public budgets work. Germany and other countries finance 
pensions, health care or other public programs on a pay-as-you-go basis out 
of current tax revenue — that is, on taxes that fall mainly on the higher 
income brackets, or by new money creation. This was the guiding principle 
of progressive tax philosophy until the neoliberal coups of the 1980s. 
Matters changed in the United States in 1982. The Greenspan Commission 
advised an increase in Social Security funding by raising FICA wage 
withholding (presently 12.4% for Social Security and 2.9% for Medicare, or 
15.3% — which is higher than the 15% long term capital gains tax). Pre-

saving to pay future Social Security turned the program into a steeply 
regressive tax. The cutoff point for the Social Security tax is currently at 
$110,100, so the wealthy do not pay anywhere near as high a rate to fund the 
plan as do blue-collar workers. 
Taxing employers and employees to pre-save much larger amounts than 
previously changed the character of Social Security to a “user fee” rather than 
a public program financed largely out of the general budget. In fact, the 
Social Security Administration became a regressive way to pay for the 
general budget! The higher wage set-asides were used to buy Treasury bonds 
— enabling the government to slash taxes on property and the high tax 
brackets. The effect was a regressive tax shift — applauded as “balancing the 
budget” rather than denounced as an aggressive fiscal battle by the wealthy to 
avoid paying their way. 
This was the beginning of the enormous increase in wealth held by the 
1%, while disposable personal income for most people has not risen since the 
late 1970s. By the Clinton years (1993–2000), politicians were celebrating 
the high wage withholding for creating a budget surplus, as if this were a 
positive objective. But it meant that the government stopped providing a 
source of market demand to the private sector by deficit spending. That 
function passed to the commercial banking system — in the form of interest-
bearing debt creation. 
The interim until 2008 was applauded as the Great Moderation — Great 
because it led to unprecedented economic polarization between creditors and 
debtors, and Moderate because there was so little opposition from the non-
financial classes having their taxes raised, their debts raised, their costs of 
education and housing raised, the price they paid for public utility services 
raised, and their social programs cut back.
The tax shift off property to employment and industry was worst in the 
post-Soviet states. Latvia imposes a 24% flat tax for Social Security on top of 
its 25% flat tax on employment (and further excise taxes that fall on labor). 
This diverts wages from being available for spending on the goods that labor 
produces — while making labor so high-cost as to be uncompetitive. Most 
post-Soviet property taxes have been less than 1%, fueling the world’s 
steepest real estate boom since the mid-1990s — increasing the wage squeeze 

on labor by making housing much more expensive. The effect has been to 
impel emigration.
As in the case of Social Security’s pre-saving, pension fund set-asides that 
are turned over to money managers for investment in the financial markets do 
not become a source of market demand. To the extent that financialization 
corrodes industrial capital formation (and hence employment), this undercuts 
future economic surpluses out of which to pay retirees — while leaving 
current labor with less to spend in the short run. The effect is regressive, not 
progressive.
The past half-century has seen an attempt to persuade pension-fund 
contributors to think of themselves as finance capitalists in miniature. Trying 
to convince the 99% to believe that their welfare is the same as that of the 1% 
is the game that General Pinochet and Margaret Thatcher called “labor 
capitalism.” The reality, of course, is that the 99% are debtors to the 1%, 
while their savings are at risk. What employees believed to be their savings 
are being scaled down as employers replace defined-benefit pensions with 
amorphous defined contribution plans or simply annul such obligations in 
bankruptcy, turning the pot over to the 1%. 
Small investors meanwhile have seen their savings stripped by the 
deregulation of high finance as Wall Street lobbyists have disabled the 
Securities and Exchange Commission and other regulatory bodies to the point 
where MF Global can appropriate client savings for its gambles without any 
criminal charges being brought. So the final stage of what was applauded a 
half-century as Pension Fund Capitalism (or even Pension Fund Socialism) 
turns out to be a decriminalized predatory financial system deteriorating into 
post-Bubble austerity. 
 
4. Restore classical value and rent theory, and apply it to the financial sector
 
Imposing austerity on debt-strapped economies is a product of political 
lobbying to promote a false picture of reality, a distorted map that benefits the
financial sector. Restructuring the economy therefore requires a better guide 
to how economies work. The task is inherently political, because wherever 

one finds a wrongheaded and seemingly dysfunctional analysis retained 
decade after decade, special interests are at work.
For the past century the main beneficiary has been the financial sector. In 
an alliance with real estate and monopolies, it has backed a reaction against 
classical economics, above all the distinctions between earned and unearned 
income, and between productive and extractive debt. The aim is to reject the 
idea of free markets held by the Physiocrats and Adam Smith, John Stuart 
Mill and subsequent Progressive Era reformers: markets free from unearned 
income and privilege, above all in the form of land and natural resource rent, 
monopoly rent, and financial charges resulting from the banks’ privilege of 
credit creation.
To ensure the ideological dimension of TINA, the academic curriculum 
has dropped the history of economic thought, along with economic history. 
This blotting out of analytic knowledge has enabled today’s “neoliberals” to 
turn the original liberal approach of Adam Smith and his successors inside 
out, by re-defining a “free market” as one that is free for rent extraction, free 
from government protection, price regulation and taxation of economic rent. 
One must turn to novelists such as Honoré de Balzac to be reminded that 
behind most family fortunes is a great theft — often an undiscovered one, 
usually from the public domain. This is precisely why privatization receives 
such endorsement in high circles. Throughout history the largest fortunes 
have been obtained by such transactions, often by insider dealing. Seeking to 
lower a cloak of invisibility around the manner in which these fortune hunters 
or their forebears got rich, they claim that it was all from the free market, not 
from the public sector or by financial and legal sleight of hand. As another 
Frenchman, the poet Charles Baudelaire quipped, the devil wins at the point 
where the world believes he doesn’t exist.
 
5. Recalculate the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) to 
distinguish between wealth and overhead, and give a sense of proportion to 
“capital gains” and “total returns”
 
Any statistical format applies the categories of economic theory. If the 

theory is off-center, the motto GIGO applies to how the numbers are filled in: 
Garbage In, Garbage Out. A more realistic accounting format would 
segregate the FIRE sector from the production-and-consumption economy. 
The aim should be to calculate the economic surplus and show where it is 
produced (focusing on the “real” economy’s manufacturing, agricultural, 
mining, power production and transportation sectors) and who gets it 
(focusing on the rentiers).
The NIPA also should show the degree to which “total returns” are 
achieved by asset-price inflation (“capital” gains), as well as by rent 
extraction. Adding price-gains to real estate and financial cash flow shows 
sharp zigzagging changes from year to year, giving a truer picture of the 
economy. Quantifying asset-price gains also highlights the cost to society of 
providing today’s tax favoritism to such speculation, steering savings and 
investment into a casino economy.
 
IV. An Ideological Synthesis
 
Matters were not supposed to turn out like they have. Nothing like today’s 
debt-leveraged economy channeling income and capital gains to a narrow 
financial layer (the 1%) was anticipated a century ago. Economic evolution 
was expected to favor the most egalitarian and democratic economies, thanks 
to the fact that higher productivity resulting from rising living standards 
enabled high-wage labor to undersell “pauper labor.” Banking was expected 
to fund industrial capital formation, not load down the economy’s assets with 
debt taken on by absentee owners and raiders on credit. A leisure economy 
appeared to be the wave of the future, not debt deflation and asset stripping.
Cassandras such as Michael Flürscheim, Thorstein Veblen and Frederick 
Soddy were dismissed because their warnings seemed so unlikely to 
materialize. A wave of cognitive dissonance set in with regard to the role of 
debt and credit creation by banks. Reality itself appeared as an anomaly to 
post-classical models. 
Awareness of reality usually leads to new paradigms, although this may 
take a long time in coming. Since the late 1970s, rising labor productivity has 

not been reflected in higher wages. The surplus has been concentrated at the 
top of the economic pyramid. Instead of the anticipated leisure economy, 
families are working harder and longer under more oppressive employment 
conditions to carry their rising overhead of personal, educational, mortgage 
and other debts. The products they buy also have a rising element of debt, 
and the taxes they pay are for increasingly “financialized” public programs. 
And yet it will take at least a generation (or more likely, two) to reverse the 
financial power grab that has been implanted and rectify the junk economics 
that has been sponsored.
The longer that economies keep subsidizing the debt overhead, the more 
they will shrink. The cover story for keeping this overhead on the books is 
that writing it down will destroy savings and disrupt the economy. But recent 
growth in these savings has been monopolized by the 1%, and can be 
preserved only at the cost of imposing a fatal austerity on the economy. So 
shrinking disposable personal income is inevitable if the financial system is 
not restructured. Its present form threatens not only industrial capitalism and 
national self-determination but beyond that, the Enlightenment ideology of 
economic freedom and democracy.
It is a travesty to say that bailing out Citibank, Bank of America and 
A.I.G.’s counterparties was an exercise in a free market. It is not a free 
society to appoint “technocrats” acting as debt collectors to replace elected 
public officials in debt-strapped Greece and Italy. Imposing austerity ends up 
requiring a police state to enforce the maldistribution of wealth and political 
power. Some countries already are approaching this point as families lose 
their ability to provide an education or even food, or to retain their homes — 
or much hope for the future. 
For the past century the path to rise into the middle class (and on upward) 
has been to buy a home, whose price rise has built up their net worth, and to 
get an education to qualify for higher-productivity, high-wage employment. 
But taking on a mortgage and a student loan has now become a road to debt 
peonage. Students face unemployment and must live at home with their 
parents. More than a quarter of U.S. homes are in negative equity, dragging 
down net worth rather than building it up. Student loan debt now exceeds a 
trillion dollars, even more than the credit-card debt that families have taken 
on just to keep their consumption standards from falling. All this threatens to 

turn the final stage of finance capitalism into debt-ridden austerity. That is 
what a neo-rentier economy means. Once entered into, it cannot be escaped 
from except by a violent political clash. The end game of finance capitalism 
will not be a pretty sight.
 
1 The U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve have avoided raising taxes by simply monetizing the bad 
debts, creating new government money, bonds or Fed deposits in exchange for private sector claims. 
But most governments have not made use of this option for public money creation except in wartime, 
not to help the civilian non-financial economy grow, e.g., in the way advocated by Modern Monetary 
Theory (MMT).
2 National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), Table 3.3.
3 I provide a detailed review of discussions of the transfer problem from Ricardo through the 1920s to 
the IMF models in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt (new ed., 2009).
4 Sheila C. Bair, “Fix Rates to Save Loans,” The New York Times, October 19, 2007.
5 Joe Nocera, “Sheila Bair’s Bank Shot,” The New York Times Magazine: July 10, 2011.
6 I provide a long survey and analysis in Debt and Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East (ed. 
with Marc Van De Mieroop, CDL Press, Bethesda, 2002):7–58.
7 http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Unemployment_statistics

ENDNOTES – Chapter 20
_____________
______________________

*****

Interactive Endnotes by Chapter 
(interactive in text only)
 
INTRODUCTION Endnotes
 
1. Dirk Bezemer, “Why some economists could see the crisis coming,”
Financial Times, September 7, 2009. For a roster of financial Cassandras see
Alphaville, Financial Times, July 13, 2009: “Who saw it coming and the
primacy of accounting,” posted by Tracy Alloway.
2. Steven Rattner, “The Rich Get Even Richer,” New York Times op-ed.,
March 26, 2012, based on data from Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez,
“The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and International Perspective,”
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/piketty-saezAEAPP06.pdf
3. I summarize his views in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt: A
History of Theories of Polarization v. Convergence in the World Economy
(2nd ed. ISLET 2010), Chapter 16, pp. 313–336.
4. I discuss Newcomb’s life and writings in America’s Protectionist
Takeoff, 1815–1914: The Neglected American School of Political Economy
(ISLET, 2010).
5. As Ollman (p.c.) has expressed his criticism to me, the problem is that
economists think of markets “simply as a venue for TRANSACTIONS. The
key is, what is being transacted? If it is goods, how are they produced and
how is their price determined, how is credit or payment arranged, and on
what terms. The RESULT of how the overall system operates appears in “the
market.” But that’s not where you start. That’s like starting with Union
Square for the farmers’ market in New York. It focuses on an individual
buyer and seller — not on wholesalers, transportation, fees charged out of
revenues, or farm inputs, taxes, etc.” See “Market Mystification in Capitalist
and Market Socialist Societies,” in Bertell Ollman ed., Market Socialism: The
Debate Among Socialists (Routledge 1998).

 
CHAPTER 1 Endnotes
 
1. I contrast the narrow monetarist approach taken by Ricardo and other
Bullionists to that of the Anti-Bullionists in Ch. 14 of my Trade,
Development and Foreign Debt. How Trade and Development Concentrate
Economic Power in the Hands of Dominant Nations (2nd, rev. and ext, ed.)
[Dresden: ISLET 2009], esp. p. 280; those of Rueff and Ohlin vs. Keynes and
Moulton in Ch. 16; and the IMF’s pro-creditor doctrines of financial austerity
in Chs. 17 and 18.
2. William Keith, History of the British Plantations in America (London
1738: 34 f.)
3. Josiah Tucker, Four Tracts on Political and Commercial Subjects [1774]
(2nd ed. Gloucester 1776: 21–26).
4. Anon., Political Observations on the Population of Countries (London
1782: 19–23).
5. Potter, The Key to Wealth (1650: 10), quoted in Douglas Vickers,
Studies in the Theory of Money: 1690–1776 (Philadelphia 1959: 21).
6. Law, Money and Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying the
nation with Money (Edinburgh 1705: 115f.)
7. Hume, Political Discourses, in E. Rotwein, ed., David Hume: Writings
on Economics (Madison, Wis.: 1970: 34 f.)
8. Op. cit.: 228.
9. Oswald to Hume, October 10, 1749 (in ibid.: 195 and 77).
10. Principles, I.: 268.
11. Principles, I: 405.
12. Schumpeter, History of Economic Analysis (New York 1954: 286.)
13. Hayek, introduction to the 1939 reprint of Henry Thornton, Enquiry
into the Nature and Effect of the Paper credit of Great Britain (London 1802).
Hayek does not explain how Steuart’s ideas were wrong.

14. Vol. I, Book II, ii
15. David Beasley, The Supppression of the Automobile: Skullduggery at
the Crossroads (New York, Greenwood Press, 1988).
16. Georg Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (London
1938):16 f.
17. Thoughts on Political Economy (Baltimore 1820): 429.
18. Simon Newcomb, A Critical Examination of our Financial Policy
during the Southern Rebellion (New York 1865): 37–44. I summarize his
ideas in America’s Protectionst Takeoff 1815–1914. The Neglected
American School of Political Economy (ISLET 2010): 215–225.
19. Newcomb, ibid.:37–44. I summarize his ideas in America’s
Protectionist Takeoff: 1815–1914 (ISLET 2010): 215–225.
20. Ibid.: 66 ff.
21. Ibid.: 114.
22. Newcomb discussed Carey’s economic views in his review article on
“Carey’s Principles of Social Science,” North American Review 103 (1866): 
573–580.
23. Newcomb, Principles of Political Economy (New York 1885): 347,
322, 339, 344, 390–94. His version of the modern quantity theory, MV=PO
(or PT) was K×P = V×R, where K represented the industrial circulation (the
output of goods and services, today signified by O for output or T for
transactions), P the price level, V the volume of money (M for money in
today’s formulation), and R the rapidity of circulation (today called V for
velocity).
24. George W. Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (1938): 51.
25. Capital, vol. III (Chicago 1909): 710, fn 116.
26. Ibid.: 704 f.
27. Capital, vol. III: 712)
28. Ibid.: 607.
29. Ibid.: 699 f.

30. Ibid.: 707.
31. Ibid.: 704 f..
32. Edwards, op. cit.: 68.
33. Capital III: 606.
34. Edwards 1938: 85.
35. Economic Journal 27 (September and December 1917), pp. 323–27
and 502–15.
36. Ibid.: 514.
37. Ibid.
38. Lloyd George called them “the stronghold of reaction.” See Thomas
Johnston, The Financiers and the Nation (London 1934: 138). Ernest Bevin,
G. D. H. Cole and other members of the British Labour Party criticized banks
in The Crisis (London 1931). See also G. D. H. Cole, The Socialisation of
Banking (London 1931), and John Wilmot, Labour’s Way to Control
Banking and Finance (London 1935). The Labour Party’s proposed solution
was to nationalize the Bank of England, and in 1933 recommended the
socialization of the joint-stock banks as well. Keynes was sympathetic in his
article on “A New Economic Policy for England,” Economic Forum, Winter
1932–33: 29–37.
 
CHAPTER 2 Endnotes
 
1. This is done because only the assumption of damping functions can
provide determinate a priori mathematical solutions to economic exercises —
as if it were mathematics that makes economics a science, not the realism of
its assumptions. I survey the unrealistic use of mathematics by economists in
chapter 5 below.
2. The example comes from a Berlin cuneiform text VAT 8528. Karen
Rhea Nemet-Nejat, Cuneiform Mathematical Texts as a Reflection of
Everyday Life in Mesopotamia (New Haven 1993, AOS Series Vol. 75)
provides a bibliography. Most of these exercises are schoolbook problems,

not statistics resulting from real-life examples, but precisely for this reason
their principles illustrate the relationships being expounded.
3. Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, II: 135.
4. I discuss the sexual mathematical imagery of antiquity’s words for
interest in “How Interest Rates Were Set, 2500 BC–1000 AD: Máš, tokos and
fænus as metaphors for interest accruals,” Journal of the Economic and
Social History of the Orient 43 (Spring 2000): 132–161.
5. This arithmetic exercise comes from VAT 8525. It is discussed by
Hildegard Lewy, “Marginal Notes on a Recent Volume of Babylonian
Mathematical Texts,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 67 (1947): 
308 and Nemet-Nejat, op. cit.: 59f.
6. This arithmetic exercise comes from VAT 8525. It is discussed by
Hildegard Lewy, “Marginal Notes on a Recent Volume of Babylonian
Mathematical Texts,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 67 (1947): 
308 and Nemet-Nejat, op. cit.: 59f.
7. I suggest a scenario for how this diffusion is likely to have occurred in
“Did the Phoenicians Introduce the Idea of Interest to Greece and Italy —
And if So, When?” in Gunter Köpcke, ed., Greece Between East and West:
10th–8th Centuries BC (Berlin: 1992): 128–143. For a defense of the still
controversial idea that the charging of interest began in Mesopotamia’s
temples and palaces, see “Reconstructing the Origins of Interest-Bearing
Debt and the Logic of Clean Slates,” in Michael Hudson and Marc Van De
Mieroop, eds., Debt and Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East (CDL
Press: Bethesda, Md., 2002).
8. Jean-Pierre Vernant, Origins of Greek Thought (Ithaca, New York
1982):  82.
9. The passage occurs in Luther’s 1540 Wittenberg pamphlet, An die
Pfarrherren wider den Wucher zu predigen [“That the priests should preach
against usery”]. Although Marx footnoted this passage in Capital (Vol. I,
London 1887: 604 and Vol. III, ch. xxiv: 463 f.), it is missing from Vol. 45 of
Luther’s works (Fortress Press, 1962) dealing ostensibly with his economic
writings. That so important a denunciation of interest would be omitted
attests to the cognitive dissonance with which denunciations of interest strike

modern secular and religious minds. Yet from the Bronze Age onward, such
denunciations have been in the forefront of all religions in societies where
interest has been charged to needy debtors.
10. Quoted in Michael Flürscheim, A Clue to the Economic Labyrinth
(Perth and London 1902): 330 ff.
11. Expressing gratitude for the nine months of hospitality he has
received, the character Polyxenes uses the florid metaphor of a burdensome
debt that can never be repaid. The idea is that to take the time to thank his
host properly would consume yet more time, using up yet more hospitality
for which yet more thanks would be due in a never-ending series. (In this
passage the words “without a burden” mean without debt.)
Nine changes of the watery star [the moon] hath been
The shepherd’s note since we have left our throne
Without a burden: time as long again
Would be fill’d up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore like a cipher,
yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one we-thank-you many thousands more that go before it.
12. Richard Price, Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the National
Debt (London, 1772): 19.
13. Richard Price, Observations on Reversionary Payments (London,
1769): xiii, fn. a.
14. Ibid.
15. Consolidated Goldfields of South Africa used to emphasize in its
annual reports that all the gold produced in the world to date, including
antiquity, could fit into a cube just 15 meters on each side. Official global
gold holdings as of March 2001 amounted to 28,560 metric tonnes. Each
tonne contains 32,151 troy ounces. At the price of $257.70 per ounce, this
worked out to some $8.285.313 per tone, or $236.6 billion for the world’s
central banks taken together. They are estimated to hold just 12% of the

world’s total gold stocks, making the global total in private and government
hands worth an estimated $1.9 trillion. This is only a small proportion of
global debt.
16. Karl Marx, Grundrisse notebooks (1973):  842  f., incorporated into
Capital  III: xxiv).
17. Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, Bk. V.
18. The demographic reality is that fertility rates taper off as incomes rise.
Over time, breakthroughs in agricultural and mining technology have
increased productivity in these sectors more rapidly than has occurred in
manufacturing, so that food and other consumption goods have grown faster
rather than more slowly than population.
19. Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political Economy, citing the Annual
Register (1797) and Chambers’ Encyclopaedia vols. 8 and 10.
20. Geoffrey Gardiner, Towards True Monetarism (London 1993): 135.
21. Francis Bacon, On Usury, Essays (1625).
22. P. J. Proudhon, What is Property, First Memoir, Eighth Proposition
(New York, n.d.: 215).
23. In Volume III of Capital (ch. xxx) and Volume III of Theories of
Surplus Value (both published posthumously from notes made in the early
1850s; Chicago 1909): 461.
24. Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value (Chicago 1971), III: 468.
25. Technocracy, Inc., Technocracy Study Course (New York 1934): 136 
f. (italics in original).
26. Thorold Rogers in Six Centuries of Work and Wages (London 1885):  
539  ff.
27. Ibid.: 151.
28. Ibid.: 49.
29. John Brown, Parasitic Wealth (Chicago 1898): 81f.
30. Ibid.
31. J. W. Bennett (1895): 93.

32. Ibid.: 80.
33. Ibid.: 102
34. Ibid.: 111.
35. Ibid.: 85.
36. Ibid.: 47f.
37. Ibid.
38. Michael Flürscheim, Clue to the Economic Labyrinth (Perth and
London 1902) : 116.
39. Ibid.: 347.
40. Ibid.: 327–333.
41. Edward O. Wilson, Consilience (New York 1998): 313.
 
CHAPTER 3 Endnotes
 
1. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, vol. V, iii; Cannan ed.: 452.
2. Malachy Postlethwayt, Great-Britain’s True System (London 1757): 
165.
3. Ibid.: 20f.
4. Ibid.: 52f.
5. Ibid.: 53.
6. Ibid.: 21.
7. Ibid.: 69.
8. Ibid.: 22 f.
9. James Steuart, Principles of Political Œconomy (London 1767): II, 349 
ff.
10. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Vol. V, iii; Cannan ed., 460 ff.)
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.: 464 f.

13. Ibid.: 450 f.
14. Leland H. Jenks, The Migration of British Capital to 1875 (New York
1927): 14ff.
15. Ibid.
16. “A Monetary Theory of Production” (1933), in The Collected Writings
of John Maynard Keynes 13: The General Theory and After (London 1973): 
409 f. Along these lines Keynes criticized Alfred Marshall for stating
explicitly in his 1890 Principles of Economics (pp. 61 f.) “that he is dealing
with relative exchange values. The proposition that the prices of a ton of lead
and a ton of tin are £15 and £90 means no more to him in this context than
that the value of a ton of tin in terms of lead is six tons … ‘We may
throughout this volume,’ he explains, ‘neglect possible changes in the general
purchasing power of money. Thus the price of anything will be taken as
representative of its exchange value relative to things in general’ [Keynes’s
italics].… In short, though money is present and is made use of for
convenience, it may be considered to cancel out for the purposes of most of
the general conclusions of the Principles.”
17. If money is ignored, then so are savings, debts and their carrying
charges. The role of money as a medium in which to pay debts is missed
entirely, as is the monetization of debt in the form of free credit creation.
18. Ibid.
19. Milton Friedman, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” Essays in
Political Economics (Chicago 1953), repr. in Caves and Johnson, eds.,
Readings in International Economics (Homewood, Ill. 1968): 415 (italics
added).
20. Keynes, op. cit.
21. John H. Williams, “The Theory of International Trade Reconsidered”
(1929), repr. in Postwar Monetary Plans and Other Essays, 3rd ed. (New
York: 1947): 134f.
22. Alfred C. Pigou, The Economics of Welfare (London 1920).
23. “An Economic Analysis of Unemployment” (1931, repr. 1973): 343–
373.

24. Ibid.
25. 1973: 356 f.
26. Letters to Hobson dated Oct. 2 and 14, 1931, in Keynes, Collected
Writings, vol. 13 (1973): 330–336.
27. Collected Writings (1973): 491.
28. Ibid.: 356 ff.
29. “Poverty in Plenty: Is the Economic System Self-Adjusting?” The
Listener, Nov. 21, 1934 (Keynes, ibid.: 488).
30. Capital III: 519 f.
 
CHAPTER 4 Endnotes
 
1. Theories of Surplus Value, Part III (Moscow: Foreign Languages
Publishing House, 1971), p. 468.
2. Capital, Vol. III (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1909), p. 710. All
subsequent quotations from Capital are from this edition, unless specifically
noted (as in footnotes 15 and 36).
3. Ibid., p. 705.
4. See for instance ibid., p. 700: “In place of the old exploiters, whose
exploitation was more or less patriarchal because it was largely a means of
political power, steps a hard money-mad parvenu.”
5. Ibid., p. 716.
6. Ibid., pp. 699 f.
7. Ibid., p. 711 fn. 116.
8. It is only in the English-language translations of Marx’s Theories of
Surplus Value III (1971, pp. 296 f., 527–37) for instance, that one can find
Martin Luther’s denunciation of usurers, not in Luther’s Works published by
Fortress.
9. Capital III, p. 552.

10. In his Grundrisse notebooks (1973, pp. 842 f.) incorporated into
Capital III (ch. xxiv), p. 463.
11. Capital III, p. 699.
12. “Capitalism in the United States is now in a new stage, money
manager capitalism, in which the proximate owners of a vast proportion of
financial instruments are mutual and pension funds. The total return on the
portfolio is the only criteria used for judging the performance of the
managers of these funds, which translates into an emphasis upon the bottom
line in the management of business organizations.” Hyman P. Minsky,
“Uncertainty and the Institutional Structure of Capitalist Economies,”
Working Paper no. 155, Jerome Levy Economics Institute, April 1996, cited
in L. Randall Wray, “The rise and fall of money manager capitalism: a
Minskian approach,” Cambridge Journal of Economics 33 (2009), pp. 807–
828, and also in Wray, “Minsky’s Money Manager Capitalismand the Global
Financial Crisis,” 2010,
13.http://www.levyinstitute.org/pubs/conf_april10/19th_Minsky_PPTs/19th
14. Capital III (Chicago, 1905), p. 713.
15. Capital III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1958), p. 
479.
16. Capital III, p. 461.
17. Ibid., p. 547.
18. Ibid., p. 547.
19. Ibid., pp. 551 f. (Ch. xxix: The Composition of Banking Capital). The
term fictitious capital passed into general circulation. In the United States it
meant capitalized unearned income (“economic rent,” income without cost-
value, mainly in the forms of groundrent and monopoly rent as well as
financial extraction of revenue). Henry George picked it up in The Condition
of Labor (1891), referring to the “fictitious capital that is really capitalized
monopoly” (in The Land Question and Related Writings, New York, Robert
Schalkenbach Foundation, 1982), pp. 201 f.). Book 3, Chapter 4 of George’s
Progress and Poverty (1879) is titled, “Of Spurious Capital And Of Profits
Often Mistaken For Interest.”

20. Capital II (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1957), p. 
532.
21. It often surprises both ends of the political spectrum to learn that it was
Marx who firmly established depreciation as an element of value theory. As
Terence McCarthy wrote in his initial English language translation of Marx’s
Theories of Surplus Value (which he translated under the title of A History of
Economic Doctrines, New York: Langland Press, 1952, p. xv): “As a logical
consequence of his examination of Physiocracy, Marx was led to a study of
the Economic Theory of Depreciation. So complete is his analysis of this
aspect of income formation that, if Capital has been called the bible of the
working class, the History might well be called the bible of the Society of
Cost Accountants. … Over the whole society, failure to provide adequate
depreciation reserves is, Marx implies, to negate economic progress and to
begin consumption of that portion of the value of the product which Marx
believes belongs neither to the laborers in industry, nor to their employers,
but to the economy itself, as something which must be ‘restored’ to it if the
economic process is to continue.”
22. I discuss Ricardo’s views and the more advanced response of his
contemporaries in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt: How Trade and
Development Concentrate Economic Power in the Hands of Dominant
Nations (2nd ed. ISLET 2010 [available on Amazon.com]; orig. pub.
London: Pluto Press, 1992).
23. The Poverty of Philosophy [1847] (Moscow, n.d.), p. 155. Theories of
Surplus Value III, pp. 396-98 quoted Antoine Cherbuliez, Richesse ou
pauvrete (Paris: 1841), p. 128, whose title and content seems to have inspired
Henry George’s Progress and Poverty (1879): “Rent thus would replace all
state revenues. Finally industry, liberated, released from all fetters, would
take an unprecedented leap forward …”
24. Socialism Vs. Single Tax. A Verbatim Report of a Debate held at
Twelfth Street, Turner Hall, Chicago, December 20th, 1905. Chicago:
Charles H. Kerr & Co., [1907], pp. 4 f.
25. H. S. Foxwell, “The Nature of the Industrial Struggle,” Economic
Journal 27, pp. 323–27, and “The Financing of Industry and Trade,” ibid.,
pp. 502–15).

26. Capital III, p. 714, quoting Religion saint-simonienne, Economie
politique et Politique (Paris: 1831, p. 98 and 45). Marx cites the 1831
compilation Religion saint-simonienne describing banks as enabling
“industrious people” to obtain financing for their enterprise, and Charles
Pecqueur, Theorie Nouvelle d’Economie Sociale et Politique (Paris 1842, p.
434) urging that production be ruled by what the Saint-Simonians called the
Systeme general des banques.
27. Capital III, p. 711 fn. 116. Saint-Simon’s weakness, according to
Marx, was that of many land taxers, namely, his failure to see the antagonism
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. He blamed this on the Fourierist
desire to reconcile capital and labor, which Marx believed to be impossible.
28. George W. Edwards, The Evolution of Finance Capitalism (1938), pp.
16f.
29. Lloyd George called them “the stronghold of reaction” (see Thomas
Johnston, The Financiers and the Nation [London 1934, p. 138]). Ernest
Bevin, G. D. H. Cole and other members of the British Labour Party
criticized banks in The Crisis (London 1931). See also Cole, The
Socialisation of Banking (London 1931), and John Wilmot, Labour’s Way to
Control Banking and Finance (London 1935). The Labour Party’s proposed
solution was to nationalize the Bank of England, and in 1933 to recommend
socializing the joint stock banks as well. Keynes was sympathetic in “A New
Economic Policy for England,” Economic Forum, Winter 1932–33, pp. 29–
37.
30. Ibid.
31. I chart these variables in Michael Hudson, “The New Road to
Serfdom: An illustrated guide to the coming real estate collapse,” Harpers,
Vol. 312 (No. 1872), May 2006):39-46.
32. Hyman P. Minsky accordingly called this the Ponzi phase of the
financial cycle in “The Financial Instability Hypothesis,” Levy Institute
Working Paper No. 74, May 1992, and Stabilizing an Unstable Economy
(New York: McGraw-Hill Professional, 1986).
33. Peter Drucker, The Unseen Revolution: How Pension Fund Socialism
Came to America (New York: Harper & Row, 1976). See also Drucker’s

Post-Capitalist Society (New York: Harper Business, 1993), p. 77: “Pension
fund capitalism is fundamentally as different from any earlier form of
capitalism as it is from anything any socialist ever envisage as a socialist
economy.”
34. I trace this campaign in “The $4.7 trillion Pyramid: Why Social
Security Won’t Be Enough to Save Wall Street,” Harpers 310 (No. 1859,
April 2005), pp. 35–40.
35. Since September 2008 the U.S. Federal Reserve has engaged in “cash
for trash” swaps, accepting junk mortgages at their nominal “mark to model”
values. The Treasury has printed bonds for their these swaps, and taken
Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac onto its own balance sheet, giving public
guarantees that “taxpayers” will make good on all losses.
36. Capital III, p. 700
37. Capital III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1958), p. 
532.
 
CHAPTER 5 Endnotes
 
1. John Shield Nicholson, Principles of Political Economy (London
1893): 122.
2. William Roscher, Grundlagen, 67 f. as quoted by J. Reiss,
“Mathematics in Economics: Schmoller, Meyer and Jevons,” Journal of
Economic Studies 27 (2000): 477–91.
3. Henry Adams, The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma (New York,
1919), introduction by Brooks Adams. For a discussion of the application of
exponential growth to the movement of history, especially the economic
applications of energy, see William H. Jordy, Henry Adams: Scientific
Historian (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1953).
4. Freeman J. Dyson, “Mathematics in the Physical Sciences,” Scientific
American 211/3 (Sept. 1964): 132f.
5. I discuss this problem in Trade, Development and Foreign Debt: How
Trade and Development Concentrate Economic Power in the Hands of

Dominant Nations (ISLET 2009, 2nd ed., revised and expanded).
6. Capital, I: 14.
7. Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, p. 213.
8. William Vickery, Microeconomics (New York 1964) :5 (italics added).
9. John Stuart Mill, “On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the
Method of Investigation Proper to it” in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions
in Political Economy (London 1844): V.46.
10. Paul Samuelson, “The Gains from Trade,” Canadian Journal of
Economics and Political Science 5: 1939): 205: reprinted in Papers, 1966 II: 
782 [781–971].
11. Paul Samuelson, “International Factor-Price Equilibrium Once Again,”
Economic Journal 59 (1949): 182 [181–197]; reprinted in Papers, 1966 II: 
869–885.
12. Gerald Meier, The International Economics of Development; Theory
and Policy (New York 1968): 227.
13. Gunnar Myrdal, “How Scientific are the Social Sciences?” see An
International Economy: Problems and Prospects (New York 1956): 336.
14. Edward O. Wilson, Consilience (New York 1998): 313.
15. David Hume, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748): 132
(section xii, part iii).
16. As early as 1849, Daniel Lee attempted to quantify the environmental
depletion suffered by raw-materials exporters in his agricultural supplement
to the U.S. Patent Office report. This “external” effect of foreign trade
became an essential component of E. Peshine Smith’s 1853 Manual of
Political Economy (see Hudson 1975 [2010] for a discussion). Carey’s Law
of Association postulated that economies grow more productive at the
intensive margin as they become more dense. But free traders have ignored
these broad consequences, and used rhetorical invective censorially to
dismiss them as “externalities.”
17. Erik S. Reinert, point he made in a discussion.
 

CHAPTER 6 – None
CHAPTER 7 – None
CHAPTER 8 Endnotes
 
1. William Petty, Treatise of Taxes and Contributions (London 1662), p.
26: “Having found the Rent or value of the usus fructus per annum, the
question is, how many years purchase … is the Fee simple naturally worth?”
Marx (History of Economic Theories, tr. Terence McCarthy [New York:
1952], p. 5) notes that Petty deduces the rate of interest from rent “as the
general form of surplus value.
2. Hyman P. Minsky, The Financial Instability Hypothesis, Working Paper
No. 74, May 1992 (The Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College).
Prepared for Handbook of Radical Political Economy, ed. Philip Arestis and
Malcolm Sawyer (Edward Elgar: Aldershot, 1993).
3. “Recent Changes in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and
2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 2006, pp.
A1–A38.
4. Andrew Mellon, Taxation: The People’s Business (New York 1924): 
63.
5. The Wall Street analyst Terence McCarthy observed that Marx’s
analysis of the Economic Theory of Depreciation was so complete that, “if
Capital has been called the bible of the working class, the History [he is
referring to Theories of Surplus Value] might well be called the bible of the
Society of Cost Accountants.… Over the whole society, failure to provide
adequate depreciation reserves is, Marx implies, to negate economic progress
and to begin consumption of that portion of the value of the product which
Marx believes belongs neither to the laborers in industry, nor to their
employers, but to the economy itself, as something which must be ‘restored’
to it if the economic process is to continue.” Marx, (New York 1952: xv).
This was the first English language translation of Marx’s Theories of Surplus
Value.

6. This phenomenon has far-reaching implications for the so-called
declining rate of profit. Marx attributed this to the rising organic composition
of capital — and hence, an increasing rate of capital consumption
(depreciation) relative to profit. However, his point of reference was
industrial capital, not real estate. The latter’s dominant economic role
requires that it be segregated from the industrial economy’s statistics.
Otherwise, the rate of return on capital investment would be considerably
understated.
7. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System publishes
“Balance Sheets for the US Economy” and has published papers defending
the land-residual method. It is criticized in Ronald Banks, ed., Costing the
Earth (London: Shepheard & Walwyn, 1989).
8. James Politi and Ben White, “Freddie and Fannie in turmoil,” Financial
Times, July 11, 2008, and “The Price of Fannie Mae,” Wall Street Journal
editorial, July 10, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 9 Endnotes
 
1. “Cash-Rich Firms Urged to Spend,” Wall Street Journal, November 21,
2005. The article quotes hedge-fund manager Jeff Matthews as noting that
“investors’ demands for stock buybacks and the like are prompting some
companies to do the wrong thing. . . . hedge-fund managers like himself are
paid based on their portfolios’ annual performance. So they tend to be short-
sighted when they see a company with lots of cash and a languishing share
price. ‘I don’t think it has as much to do with what’s in the long-term interest
of the company as in the long-term interest of the hedge funds,’ he says.”
2. “Big Companies Put Record Sums Into Buybacks. Repurchases Aim to
Bolster Shares but They Also Signal Hesitancy to Invest in Growth,” The
Wall Street Journal, June 12, 2006. Cisco Systems “approved the repurchase
of an additional $5 billion of its own stock, on top of a $35 billion repurchase
plan it announced five years ago. The week before, Tribune Co. announced a
$2 billion buyback, to be financed by debt, in a decision that sparked
controversy on the company’s board, with representatives of the Chandler

family, one of the company’s biggest shareholders, objecting to the massive
outlay.”
3. For the $22 billion Nabisco takeover as the high point of excess from
the 1980s see Bryan Burrough and John Hellyar, Barbarians at the Gate
(1990). Drexel-Burnham’s escapades and the prosecution that bankrupted
Drexel and sent Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky to jail insider dealing are
highlighted in Connie Bruck’s The Predator’s Ball (1988).
4. American Lawyer, May 1986.
5. “Raiders rolling back the years,” Financial Times, August 16, 2006.
6. Wall Street Journal, December 12, 1987.
7. John Gapper, “Google’s auction exposes intermediaries’ phoney war,”
Financial Times, May 5, 2004.
8. “Excerpts from ‘Owner’s Manual’ Included With Offering,” The New
York Times, April 30, 2004.
9. “Google Says To Investors: Don’t Think of Flipping,” and “An
Egalitarian Auction? Bankers Are Not Amused,” The New York Times, April
30, 2004. See also Frank Norris, “Google May Have Pre-empted Regulators
on Public Offerings,” The New York Times, May 4, 2004.
10. John Gapper, “Hedge fund agitators deserve to be heard,” Financial
Times, November 17, 2005.
11. “Cash-Rich Firms Urged to Spend,” Wall Street Journal, November
21, 2005.
12. “Investor urges McDonald’s to sell off restaurants,” Financial Times,
November 14, 2005.
13. Alan Murray, “Attack on McDonald’s Heralds a New Order,” Wall
Street Journal, November 23, 2005.
14. “Icahn Plan For a Split Gets a Push,” The New York Times, February
8, 2006.
15. “Koch Industries Agrees to Buy Georgia-Pacific,” The Wall Street
Journal, November 14, 2005.
16. Gillian Tett, Louisa Mitchell and Peter Smith, “Private equity

acquisitions loaded with debt,” Financial Times: May 25, 2006. Ebitda is an
acronym for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
17. Will Hutton, “Private equity is casting a plutocratic shadow over
British business,” The Guardian, February 23, 2007.
18. “Japanese payout hunters face gamble on cultural change,” Financial
Times, March 30, 2006.
19. Stefan Stern, “The short-term shareholders changing the face of
capitalism,” Financial Times, March 28, 2006.
20. Ibid.
21. Note on Gang8 e-mail list, June 2006.
22. Martin Lipton, Jay W. Lorsch and Theodore N. Mirvis, “Schumer’s
Shareholder Bill Misses the Mark,” Wall Street Journal, May 12, 2009.
 
CHAPTER 10 Endnotes
 
1. Bush’s opponents noted a possible third reason, which is that he hoped
to roll back the New Deal in favor of smaller government. No doubt Bush
disliked the New Deal, but it is hard to envision taxing employees to send
funds into the stock market as a small government alternative. A federally
mandated transfer of funds — whether it is from taxpayer pockets to
Treasury bills, as with Social Security, or from taxpayer pockets to the stock
market, as under Bush’s proposed changes — is still a federally mandated
transfer of funds.
2. Any relationship between the solvency of Social Security and the
prospect of these personal accounts is purely rhetorical. Just before Bush’s
2005 State of the Union address a reporter asked a “senior administration
official” at a background briefing whether it was accurate to say that personal
savings accounts themselves would have “no effect whatsoever on the
solvency issue.” The surprisingly candid response was, yes — “that’s a fair
inference.” Toward the end of his tenure in 2008, Bush admitted that Social
Security holdings were only an accounting book entry on the Treasury, not
actually real.

3. Although as former employees of Enron and WorldCom recently
learned, the price of demonstrating loyalty still can be quite steep.
4. A three-year Treasury bill purchased at the end of 1999 would have
returned 6%. By 2011 they yielded only 2%.
5. Reasonable as these requests seem, they were opposed by the same
corporate managers who created the mess in the first place. In 2004 the
American Benefits Council, the lobbying organization of pension-fund
managers, persuaded regulators to further loosen the requirement that
companies estimate realistic rates of return.
6. That estimate is probably low. The precedent is the bailout of the
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, which ended up costing
taxpayers over $200 billion.
7. After World War II interest rates rose to a peak, in 1980, of more than
21%. The result was nearly four decades of capital losses on bonds — whose
interest rates are fixed at the time you buy them — and a steady rise in
stocks. Since 1980,however, interest rates have fallen back, creating the
greatest bond market boom in history.
8. In Chile, conglomerates invested employee paycheck withholding in
their own stocks or in loans to affiliates whose value then was wiped out in
financially engineered bankruptcies. The problem got so bad by 1980 that the
government turned over management to American and other international
firms. Most discussions of Chile’s “success story” choose to start at the
trough, right after these fraudulent bankruptcies, which gives a steep trough-
to-peak tilt for the rate of return that is claimed to be normal. The equivalent
for America would be to start a new trend right after a 1929type stock market
crash. When one starts from a peak, such as today, it is much harder to give
the statistical impression that a fantastic takeoff is in store.
9. The genius of recent administrations, Democratic and Republican, has
been to transfer inflation to the stock market — that is, to the prices of stocks
and bonds instead of to the prices of labor and production. Real wages today
are lower than they were in 1964.
 
CHAPTER 11 Endnotes

 
1. Keynes noted that Malthus pointed out that landlords helped contribute
to aggregate demand by spending their rental income on hiring servants. But
banks lend to service producers and other labor, increasing the volume of
debt.
2. I review how economists have treated this phenomenon in “The
Mathematical Economics of Compound Interest: A Four-Thousand Year
Overview,” Journal of Economic Studies 27 (2000): 344–363.
CHAPTER 12 – None
CHAPTER 13 Endnotes
 
1. I describe the reparations and arms-debt tangle in Super Imperialism
(2nd ed. 1992), and the distinction between the domestic budget problem and
the international transfer problem in my historical review of theories of
Trade, Development and Foreign Debt (2nd ed., 2010).
2. See for instance Andy Kessler, “The ‘Brady Bond’ Solution for Greek
Debt,” Wall Street Journal, June 29, 2011: “Private buyers are increasingly
skeptical of government guarantees and will demand real collateral. Credit
default swap derivatives, which merely spread the risk, will no longer do.
Some other sweetener will be needed. The solution? Bonds backed by real
Greek assets. ... utilities, railroads, tollways, airports, cellphone services,
tourism, Ouzo factories and maybe even the islands of Santorini and
Mykonos. If (some say when) the Greeks default, the Germans or new
bondholders end up with the assets, much like in a home foreclosure.” This is
why the Financial Times’ Lex column reported (“Greece: reckoning
postponed,” June 29, 2011): “the vote in parliament was held to the sound of
rioting and the smell of tear gas.”
3. I describe the logic in “Simon Patten on Public Infrastructure and
Economic Rent Capture,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 70
(October 2011): 873–903. Patten was the first Professor of Economics at

America’s pre-eminent business school, the Wharton School at the University
of Pennsylvania.
 
CHAPTER14 Endnotes
 
1. I am indebted to Eric Janszen of i-tulip for bringing the Einzig quote to
my attention.
2. “Stiglitz Calls for Jail Time for Corporate Crooks,” DailyFinance:
http://srph.it/aRwI4I, October 21, 2010.
3. Tim Geithner, “Five Myths about Tarp,” Washington Post, October 10,
2010.
4. Martin Wolf, “Why America is going to win the global currency battle,”
Financial Times, October 13, 2010.
5. William C. Dudley, “The Outlook, Policy Choices and Our Mandate,”
Remarks at the Society of American Business Editors and Writers Fall
Conference, City University of New York, Graduate School of Journalism,
New York City, October 1, 2010. http://www.zerohedge.com/article/why-
imf-meetings-failed-and-coming-capital-controls.
6. Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz: “Foreclosure Moratorium, Government
Stimulus Needed to Revive US Economy,” Democracy Now, Oct. 21, 2010.
 
CHAPTER 15 – None
CHAPTER 16 – None
CHAPTER 17 Endnotes
 
1. Andrew Scheineson, “The Shanghai Cooperation Organization,”
Council on Foreign Relations, updated March 24, 2009: “While some experts
say the organization has emerged as a powerful anti-U.S. bulwark in Central

Asia, others believe frictions between its two largest members, Russia and
China, effectively preclude a strong, unified SCO.”
2. Kremlin.ru, June 5, 2009, in Johnson’s Russia List, June 8, 2009, #8.
3. Jamil Anderlini and Javier Blas, “China reveals big rise in gold
reserves,” Financial Times, April 24, 2009. See also “Chinese political
advisors propose making yuan an int’l currency.” Beijing, March 7, 2009
(Xinhua): “The key to financial reform is to make the yuan an international
currency, said [Peter Kwong Ching] Woo [chairman of the Hong Kong-based
Wharf (Holdings) Limited] in a speech to the Second Session of the 11th
National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative
Conference (CPPCC), the country’s top political advisory body. That means
using the Chinese currency to settle international trade payments …”
4. Shai Oster, “Malaysia, China Consider Ending Trade in Dollars,” Wall
Street Journal, June 4, 2009.
5. Jonathan Wheatley, “Brazil and China in plan to axe dollar,” Financial
Times, May 19, 2009.
6. “Another Dollar Crisis inevitable unless U.S. starts Saving — China
central bank adviser. Global Crisis ‘Inevitable’ Unless U.S. Starts Saving, Yu
Says,” 
Bloomberg 
News, 
June 
1, 
2009.
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?
pid=20601080&sid=aCV0pFcAFyZw&refer=asia
7. Kathrin Hille, “Lesson in friendship draws blushes,” Financial Times,
June 2, 2009.
8. Steven R. Weisman, “U.S. Tells China Subprime Woes Are No Reason
to Keep Markets Closed,” The New York Times, June 18, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 18 – None
CHAPTER 19 Endnotes
 
1. I elaborate the linkages between wages and productivity in my 2003
Counterpunch interview with Standard Schaefer, “Tech Bubble: Who

Benefited,” available on http://michael-hudson.com/2003/08/tech-bubble-
who-benefited/. “There are two kinds of productivity. Most people think of
capital equipment increasing output per work hour. Labor does the same
amount of work, but produces more. And as it produces more, it does not
need to work as hard, because capital saves labor by doing jobs more quickly
and cheaply than manual labor, or doing work that people can’t do at all. This
is the kind of productivity that one associates with investment in machinery,
computers and information technology (IT).
2. However, today’s productivity is taking a different form. It is associated
with laying off employees and working the remaining workers harder. There
is little technology at work here, but rather the kind of drudgery from which
technology was supposed to free employees. Work has become more
unpleasant and stressful as companies let their work force shrink by attrition.
When workers leave, their work is distributed among the remaining
employees.” Hence, wages have not risen with productivity.
3. The political aim of Ricardo’s rent theory, Marx wrote, was to buttress
the program of taxing the land rather than industry. Upon being sent copies of
Progress and Poverty in 1881, Marx dismissed the book as saying what his
1847 critique of Proudhon had forecast: “We understand such economists as
Mill, Cherbuliez, Hilditch and others demanding that rent should be handed
over to the state to serve in place of taxes. That is a frank expression of the
hatred the industrial capitalist bears towards the landed proprietor, who seems
to him a useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of bourgeois
production.” (The Poverty of Philosophy [1847] (Moscow, Progress
Publishers, n.d.: 155.)
4. See for instance Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Workers Pay for Debacle at
Tribune,” The New York Times, December 9, 2008, and Mike Spector, Jenny
Strasburg and Shira Ovide, “At Tribune, Battle Expands,” Wall Street
Journal, April 19, 2011. Zell bought the newspaper from stockholders in a
heavily debt-leveraged buyout. Employee holdings (controlled by the Tribune
as employer) were replaced by promises to pay pensions. But the debt
overhead was so large that the company went bankrupt.
5. I describe this process in Super Imperialism: The Economic Strategy of
American Empire (1972). See also chapters 15, 16 and 17.

6. CalPERS reduced its assumed rate of return to 7.5% on March 14.
2012. “Calpers’s board considered lowering the rate to 7.5% last year but
backed off after local California agencies said the increased contributions
would exacerbate their financial hardships,” by obliging “the state to
eventually contribute an additional $300 million annually.” (Michael
Corkery, “Calpers Lowers Investment Target to 7.5%,” Wall Street Journal,
March 15, 2012.) The problem seems insolvable, because a more realistic
rate of return would plunge California’s budget billions of dollars further into
annual deficit.
7. Floyd Norris, “Paving Path to Fraud on Wall St.,” The New York
Times, March 16, 2012, notes that Goldman Sachs banker Greg Smith cited a
similarly revealing lingo in his March 14, 2012 New York Times op-ed,
“Why I Am Leaving Goldman Sachs”: “Goldman referred to its clients as
“Muppets,” talked about “ripping eyeballs out” and rewarded employees for
“hunting elephants,” a term he said meant persuading clients to do whatever
would be most profitable for Goldman.”
8. Matt Taibbi, “Bank of America: Too Crooked to Fail,” Rolling Stone,
March 14, 2012. He adds: “The bank has defrauded everyone from investors
and insurers to homeowners and the unemployed. So why does the
government keep bailing it out?”
9. See Putin’s speech before the Duma, May 10, 2006, as well as TV
Interview with Professor Sergei Kapitsa on Russia’s Demographic Problems,
Vesti Podrobnosti TV Russia Program, with Dmitry Kiselyov, June 7, 2005,
www.fednews.ru, translated on Johnson’s Russia List, June 12, 2005, #9, and
the Interview with Jeffrey Sachs, “Good Health, Good Wealth,” Discover
magazine. April 2002: “There is a very sharp divide of what happened
between Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Half of Poland’s debts
were cancelled, and Poland actually had a significant improvement of health,
higher life expectancy, and a much improved diet: much more fruit and
vegetables, much less lard and cholesterol. But the West did not want to help
Russia. It was too close to the Cold War. So in Russia and the former Soviet
Union there was a terrible health decline.” Life expectancy plunged
accordingly.
10. I trace the origins and early documentation of interest-bearing debt and

Clean Slates in Debt and Economic Renewal in the Ancient Near East (ed.
with Marc Van De Mieroop, CDL Press, Bethesda, 2002).
 
CHAPTER 20 Endnotes
 
1. The U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve have avoided raising taxes by
simply monetizing the bad debts, creating new government money, bonds or
Fed deposits in exchange for private sector claims. But most governments
have not made use of this option for public money creation except in
wartime, not to help the civilian non-financial economy grow, e.g., in the way
advocated by Modern Monetary Theory (MMT).
2. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), Table 3.3.
3. I provide a detailed review of discussions of the transfer problem from
Ricardo through the 1920s to the IMF models in Trade, Development and
Foreign Debt (new ed., 2009).
4. Sheila C. Bair, “Fix Rates to Save Loans,” The New York Times,
October 19, 2007.
5. Joe Nocera, “Sheila Bair’s Bank Shot,” The New York Times
Magazine: July 10, 2011.
6. I provide a long survey and analysis in Debt and Economic Renewal in
the Ancient Near East (ed. with Marc Van De Mieroop, CDL Press,
Bethesda, 2002):7–58.
7.
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Unemployment
Additional Illustrations
Chart 17 follows: Homeowner’s Equity as Percentage of Household Real 
Estate (Source: FRB)
BACK to text Chart 17
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 18 follows: FNMA and Freddie Mac Have Become the Largest 
Mortgage Holders
BACK to text Chart 18

Chart 19 follows: Adding Land-Price Gains to National Income Provides a 
Measure of Total Return
BACK to text Chart 19
 

______________________

*****
Michael Hudson
 
Michael Hudson is President of The Institute for the Study of Long-Term 
Economic Trends (ISLET), a Wall Street Financial Analyst, and 
Distinguished Research Professor of Economics at the University of 
Missouri, Kansas City. He is author of The Bubble and Beyond (2012); 
Super-Imperialism: The Economic Strategy of American Empire (1968 & 
2003); Trade, Development and Foreign Debt (1992 & 2009); and of The 
Myth of Aid (1971).
ISLET engages in research regarding domestic and international finance, 
tax law, and national income and balance-sheet accounting (with regard to 
real estate in particular), as well as sponsoring colloquia on the economic 
history of the ancient Near East.
Michael acts as an economic advisor to governments worldwide including 
Iceland, Latvia and China on finance and tax law. He gives presentations on 
various topics at conferences and meetings and can be booked here. Listen to 

some of his many radio interviews to hear his hyperspeed analysis of the geo-
political machinations of global economics. 
 
Other Books by Michael Hudson
 
Super Imperialism
Trade, Development and Foreign Debt
America’s Protectionist Takeoff: 1815–1914

