
The Developing Human

Clinically Oriented Embryology
Ninth Edition
Keith L. Moore, MSc, PhD, FIAC, FRSM, FAAA Professor Emeritus, Division
of Anatomy, Department of Surgery Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
Former Professor and Head, Department of Anatomy, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada Former Professor and Chair, Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
T.V.N. Persaud, MD, PhD, DSc, FRCPath (Lond.), FAAA Professor Emeritus
and Former Head, Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, Professor
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Associate Professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology,
and Reproductive Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada Professor of Anatomy and Embryology, St.
George’s University, Grenada, West Indies
Mark G. Torchia, MSc, PhD
Associate Professor and Director of Development, Department of Surgery,
Associate Professor, Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Sciences,
Director, University Teaching Services, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada

Saunders

Award


Keith L. Moore Recipient of the inaugural Henry Gray/Elsevier
Distinguished Educator Award in 2007—the American Association of
Anatomists, highest award for excellence in human anatomy education at the
medical/dental, graduate, and undergraduate levels of teaching; the Honored
Member Award of the American Association of Clinical Anatomists (1994)
for significant contributions to the field of clinically relevant anatomy; and the
J.C.B. Grant Award of the Canadian Association of Anatomists (1984) “in
recognition of meritorious service and outstanding scholarly accomplishments in
the field of anatomical sciences.” In 2008 Professor Moore was inducted as a
Fellow of the American Association of Anatomists. The rank of Fellow honors
distinguished AAA members who have demonstrated excellence in science and
in their overall contributions to the medical sciences.
T.V.N. (Vid) Persaud Recipient of the Henry Gray/Elsevier Distinguished
Educator Award in 2010—the American Association of Anatomists’ highest
award for excellence in human anatomy education at the medical/dental,
graduate, and undergraduate levels of teaching; the Honored Member Award of
the American Association of Clinical Anatomists (2008) for significant
contributions to the field of clinically relevant anatomy; and the J.C.B. Grant
Award of the Canadian Association of Anatomists (1991) “in recognition of

meritorious service and outstanding scholarly accomplishments in the field of
anatomical sciences.” In 2010 Professor Persaud was inducted as a Fellow of the
American Association of Anatomists. The rank of Fellow honors distinguished
AAA members who have demonstrated excellence in science and in their overall
contributions to the medical sciences.

Front Matter

The Developing Human Clinically
Oriented Embryology
9th Edition
Keith L. Moore,
MSc, PhD, FIAC, FRSM, FAAA
Professor Emeritus, Division of Anatomy, Department of Surgery Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto,
Former Professor and Head, Department of Anatomy, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada Former Professor and Chair, Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
T.V.N. Persaud,
MD, PhD, DSc, FRCPath (Lond.), FAAA
Professor Emeritus and Former Head, Department of Human Anatomy and Cell
Science Professor of Pediatrics and Child Health
Associate Professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
Professor of Anatomy and Embryology, St. George’s University, Grenada, West
Indies Mark G. Torchia,
MSc, PhD
Associate Professor and Director of Development, Department of Surgery
Associate Professor, Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Sciences Director,
University Teaching Services, University of Manitoba Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada


Copyright
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste 1800
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
THE DEVELOPING HUMAN: CLINICALLY ORIENTED EMBRYOLOGY,
9TH EDITION
ISBN: 978-1-4377-2002-0
Copyright © 2013 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be
found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under
copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new
research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in research
methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and
knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or
experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should
be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for
whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are
advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures
featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify
the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration,
and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their
own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to
determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take
all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors,
contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to
persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or
from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas
contained in the material herein.
Previous editions copyrighted 2008, 2003, 1998, 1993, 1988, 1982, 1977, 1973
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Moore, Keith L.
The developing human: clinically oriented embryology / Keith L. Moore, T.V.N.
Persaud, Mark G. Torchia.—9th ed.
p. ; cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4377-2002-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1.  Embryology, Human.
2.  Abnormalities, Human. I.  Persaud, T. V. N. II.  Torchia, Mark G. III.  Title.
[DNLM: 1.  Embryology. QS 604]
QM601.M76 2013
612.6′4018—dc23
2011022743
Executive Content Strategist: Madelene Hyde
Content Development Specialist: Christine Abshire
Publishing Services Manager: Pat Joiner-Myers
Project Manager: Marlene Weeks
Designer: Steven Stave
Printed in Canada
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Dedication
In Loving Memory of Marion
My best friend, wife, colleague, mother of our five children and grandmother of
our nine grandchildren, for her love, unconditional support, and understanding.
Wonderful memories keep you ever near our hearts.
—KLM and family
To Pam and Ron
I am grateful to my eldest daughter Pam, who assumed the office duties her
mother previously carried out. She is also helpful in many other ways. 1 am also
grateful to my son-in-law Ron Crowe, whose technical skills have helped me
prepare the manuscript for this book.
—KLM
For Gisela
My lovely wife and best friend, for her endless support and patience; our three
children—Indrani, Sunita, and Rainer (Ren)—and grandchildren (Brian, Amy,
and Lucas)
—TVNP
For Barbara, Erik, and Muriel
You have never doubted my dreams and ideas, no matter how crazy they might
be. Nothing could ever mean more to me than each of you. This book is also
dedicated to my mentors, Drs. Rudy Danzinger, Gordon Grahame, and Jim
Thliveris; thank you for sharing your knowledge and wisdom.
—MGT
For Our Students and Their Teachers
To our students: We hope you will enjoy reading this book, increase your

understanding of human embryology, pass all of your exams, and be excited and
well prepared for your careers in patient care, research, and teaching. You will
remember some of what you hear; much of what you read; more of what you see,
and almost all of what you experience and understand fully.
To their teachers: May this book be a helpful resource to you and your students.
We appreciate the numerous constructive comments we have received over the
years from both students and teachers. Your remarks have been invaluable to us
in improving this book. Kindly keep on sending your suggestions by e-mail to:
persaud@cc.umanitoba.ca (Dr. Vid Persaud).

Contributors
David D. Eisenstat, MD, MA, FRCPC, Professor, Departments of Pediatrics and
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta;
Director, Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care,
Department of Pediatrics, Stollery Children’s Hospital and the University of
Alberta; Inaugural Chair, Muriel and Ada Hole and Kids with Cancer Society
Chair in Pediatric Oncology Research
Albert E. Chudley, FRCPC, FCCMG, Professor of Pediatrics and Child Health,
and Biochemistry and Metabolism, University of Manitoba; Program Director,
Genetics and Metabolism, Health Sciences Centre and Winnipeg Regional
Health Authority, Winnipeg, Manitoba Canada
Jeffrey T. Wigle, PhD, Principal Investigator, Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research Centre, Manitoba Research
Chair and Associate Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Medical
Genetics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

Preface
We have entered an era of outstanding achievements in the fields of molecular
biology, genetics, and clinical embryology. The sequencing of the human
genome has been achieved, and several mammalian species, as well as the
human embryo, have been cloned. Scientists have created and isolated human
embryonic stem cells, and suggestions for their use in treating certain intractable
diseases continue to generate widespread debate. These remarkable scientific
developments have already provided promising directions for research in human
embryology, which will have an impact on medical practice in the future.
The 9th edition of The Developing Human (TDH) has been thoroughly revised to
reflect our current understanding of some of the molecular events that guide
development of the embryo. This book also contains more clinically oriented
material than previous editions; these sections are highlighted in color to set
them apart from the rest of the text. In addition to focusing on clinically relevant
aspects of embryology, we have revised the clinically oriented problems with
brief answers and added more case studies online that emphasize that
embryology is an important part of modern medical practice.
This edition follows the official international list of embryological terms
(Terminologia Embryonica, 2011). This list was developed by the Federative
International Committee on Anatomical Terminology (FICAT) and was
approved by the General Assembly of the Federative World Congress of
Anatomy held in Cape Town, South Africa, in August 2009. The assembly
represents the 60 Member Associations of the International Federation of
Associations of Anatomists (IFFA). It is important that doctors and scientists
throughout the world use the same name for each structure.
This edition includes numerous new color photographs of embryos (normal and
abnormal). Many of the illustrations have been improved using three-
dimensional renderings and more effective use of colors. There are also many
new diagnostic images (ultrasound and MRI) of embryos and fetuses to illustrate
their three-dimensional aspects. An innovative set of 16 animations that will help
students to understand the complexities of embryological development now
comes with this book. When one of the animations is especially relevent to a
passage in the text, the 
 icon has been added in the margin. Maximized
animations are available to teachers for their lectures who have adopted TDH

(consult your Elsevier representative).
The coverage of teratology has been increased because the study of abnormal
development of embryos is helpful in understanding risk estimation, the causes
of birth defects, and how malformations may be prevented. Recent advances in
the molecular aspects of developmental biology have been highlighted (in
italics) throughout the book, especially in those areas that appear promising for
clinical medicine or have the potential for making a significant impact on the
direction of future research.
We have continued our attempts to provide an easy-to-read account of human
development before birth. Each chapter has been thoroughly revised to reflect
new findings in research and their clinical significance. The chapters are
organized to present a systematic and logical approach that explains how
embryos develop. The first chapter introduces readers to the scope and
importance of embryology, the historical background of the discipline, and the
terms used to describe the stages of development. The next four chapters cover
embryonic development, beginning with the formation of gametes and ending
with the formation of basic organs and systems. The development of specific
organs and systems is then described in a systematic manner, followed by
chapters dealing with the highlights of the fetal period, the placenta and fetal
membranes, and the causes of human birth defects. At the end of each chapter
there are summaries of key features, which provide a convenient means of
ongoing review. There are also references that contain both classic works and
recent research publications.
Keith L. Moore
Vid Persaud
Mark G. Torchia

Acknowledgments
The Developing Human (TDH) is widely used by medical, dental, and other
students in the health sciences. The suggestions, criticisms, and comments we
received from instructors and students around the world have helped us to
improve this ninth edition of TDH.
When learning embryology, the illustrations are an essential feature to facilitate
both understanding of the subject and retention of the material. Many figures
have been improved, and newer clinical images replace older ones.
We are indebted to the following colleagues (listed alphabetically) for either
critical reviewing of chapters, making suggestions for improvement of this book,
or providing some of the new figures: Dr. Steve Ahing, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg; Dr. Boris Kablar, Department of Anatomy
and Neurobiology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia; Dr. Albert
Chudley, Departments of Pediatrics and Child Health, Biochemistry and Medical
Genetics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg; Dr. Blaine M. Cleghorn, Faculty of
Dentistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia; Dr. Frank Gaillard,
Radiopaedia.org, Toronto, Ontario; Ms. Tania Gottschalk, Neil John Maclean
Health Sciences Library, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg; Dr. Sylvia Kogan,
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta; Dr.
Peeyush Lala, Faculty of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario; Dr. Deborah Levine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts; Dr. Marios Loukas, St.George’s University, Grenada; Professor
Bernard J. Moxham, Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
Wales; Dr. Stuart Morrison, Department of Radiology, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio; Dr. Michael Narvey, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta; Dr. Drew Noden, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Cornell University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, New York;
Dr. Shannon Perry, School of Nursing, San Francisco State University,
California; Professor T.S. Ranganathan, St. George’s University, School of
Medicine, Grenada; Dr. Gregory Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology
and Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg; Dr. L. Ross,
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Texas Medical School,
Houston, Texas; Dr. J. Elliott Scott, Departments of Oral Biology and Human
Anatomy & Cell Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg; Dr. Brad Smith,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru

Health System, Grand Forks, North Dakota; Dr. Richard Shane Tubbs,
Children’s Hospital, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama; Dr. Ed Uthman, Clinical Pathologist, Houston/Richmond, Texas; Dr.
Michael Wiley, Division of Anatomy, Department of Surgery, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, and Dr. Donna L. Young,
Department of Biology, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Manitoba. The new
illustrations were prepared by Hans Neuhart, President of the Electronic
Illustrators Group in Fountain Hills, Arizona.
The stunning collection of animations of developing embryos were produced in
collaboration with Dr. David L. Bolender, Associate Professor, Department of
Cell Biology, Neurobiology & Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin. We
would like to thank him for his efforts in design and in-depth review, as well as
his invaluable advice. Our special thanks go to Ms. Carol Emery for skillfully
coordinating the project.
We are indebted to Ms. Madelene Hyde, Publisher, Elsevier, for her helpful
suggestions, advise and encouragement. We are especially thankful to Ms.
Christine Abshire, our Developmental Editor, and the production staff at
Elsevier. We are also grateful to Ms. Marlene Weeks, Project Manager-Books,
Elsevier and Mr. Mike Ederer, Production Editor, Graphic World Publishing
Services, for their help in the production of this book. This new edition of The
Developing Human is the result of their dedication and technical expertise.
Keith L. Moore
Vid Persaud
Mark G. Torchia

Table of Contents
Instructions for online access
Award
Front Matter
Copyright
Dedication
Contributors
Preface
Acknowledgments
Chapter 1: Introduction to the Developing Human
Chapter 2: First Week of Human Development
Chapter 3: Second Week of Human Development
Chapter 4: Third Week of Human Development
Chapter 5: Fourth to Eighth Weeks of Human Development
Chapter 6: Ninth Week to Birth: The Fetal Period
Chapter 7: Placenta and Fetal Membranes
Chapter 8: Body Cavities and Diaphragm
Chapter 9: Pharyngeal Apparatus, Face, and Neck
Chapter 10: Respiratory System
Chapter 11: Alimentary System
Chapter 12: Urogenital System
Chapter 13: Cardiovascular System
Chapter 14: Skeletal System
Chapter 15: Muscular System
Chapter 16: Development of Limbs
Chapter 17: Nervous System
Chapter 18: Development of Eyes and Ears
Chapter 19: Integumentary System
Chapter 20: Human Birth Defects
Chapter 21: Common Signaling Pathways Used During Development
Discussion of Clinically Oriented Problems
Index

Chapter 1 Introduction to the Developing Human
Developmental Periods 1
Significance of Embryology 5
Historical Gleanings 6
   Ancient Views of Human Embryology 6
   Embryology in the Middle Ages 6
   The Renaissance 7
Genetics and Human Development 8
Molecular Biology of Human Development 10
Descriptive Terms in Embryology 10
Clinically Oriented Problems 10
Human development is a continuous process that begins when an oocyte (ovum)
from a female is fertilized by a sperm (spermatozoon) from a male. Cell
division, cell migration, programmed cell death, differentiation, growth, and cell
rearrangement transform the fertilized oocyte, a highly specialized, totipotent
cell, a zygote, into a multicellular human being. Most changes occur during the
embryonic and fetal periods; however, important changes occur during later
periods of development: infancy, childhood, and adolescence. Development does
not stop at birth. Other changes, in addition to growth, occur after birth (e.g.,
development of teeth and female breasts).

Developmental Periods
It is customary to divide human development into prenatal (before birth) and
postnatal (after birth) periods. The main changes that occur before birth are
illustrated in the Timetable of Human Prenatal Development (Fig. 1-1).
Examination of the timetable reveals that the most visible advances occur during
the third to eighth weeks—the embryonic period. During the fetal period,
differentiation and growth of tissues and organs occur and the rate of body
growth increases.


FIGURE 1–1 Early stages of development. Development of an ovarian follicle
containing an oocyte, ovulation, and the phases of the menstrual cycle are
illustrated. Human development begins at fertilization, approximately 14 days
after the onset of the last normal menstrual period. Cleavage of the zygote in the
uterine tube, implantation of the blastocyst in the endometrium (lining) of the
uterus, and early development of the embryo are also shown. The alternative
term for the umbilical vesicle is the yolk sac; this is an inappropriate term
because the human vesicle does not contain yolk.
Stages of Embryonic Development. Early development is described in stages
because of the variable period it takes for embryos to develop certain
morphologic characteristics. Stage 1 begins at fertilization and embryonic
development ends at stage 23, which occurs on day 56 (see Fig. 1-1).
Trimester. A period of 3 months, one third of the length of a pregnancy.
Obstetricians divide the 9-month period of gestation into three trimesters. The
most critical stages of development occur during the first trimester (13 weeks)
when embryonic and early fetal development is occurring.
Abortion
• Abortion (Latin, aboriri, to miscarry). A premature stoppage of development
and expulsion of a conceptus from the uterus or expulsion of an embryo or fetus
before it is viable—capable of living outside the uterus. An abortus is the
products of an abortion (i.e., the embryo/fetus and its membranes). There are
different types of abortion:
• Threatened abortion (bleeding with the possibility of abortion) is a
complication in approximately 25% of clinically apparent pregnancies. Despite
every effort to prevent an abortion, approximately half of these embryos
ultimately abort.
• A spontaneous abortion is one that occurs naturally and is most common during
the third week after fertilization. Approximately 15% of recognized pregnancies
end in spontaneous abortion, usually during the first 12 weeks.
• A habitual abortion is the spontaneous expulsion of a dead or nonviable
embryo or fetus in three or more consecutive pregnancies.
• An induced abortion is a birth that is medically induced before 20 weeks (i.e.,
before the fetus is viable).
• A complete abortion is one in which all the products of conception are expelled

from the uterus.
• A missed abortion is the retention of a conceptus in the uterus after death of the
embryo or fetus.
• A miscarriage is the spontaneous abortion of a fetus and its membranes before
the middle of the second trimester (approximately 135 days).
Postnatal period. The period occurring after birth. Explanations of frequently
used developmental terms and periods follow.
Infancy. The earliest period of extrauterine life, roughly the first year after birth.
An infant aged 1 month or younger is called a newborn or neonate. Transition
from intrauterine to extrauterine existence requires many critical changes,
especially in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. If neonates survive the
first crucial hours after birth, their chances of living are usually good. The body
grows rapidly during infancy; total length increases by approximately one half
and weight is usually tripled. By 1 year of age, most children have six to eight
teeth.
Childhood. The period between infancy and puberty. The primary (deciduous)
teeth continue to appear and are later replaced by the secondary (permanent)
teeth. During early childhood, there is active ossification (formation of bone),
but as the child becomes older, the rate of body growth slows down. Just before
puberty, however, growth accelerates—the prepubertal growth spurt.
Puberty. The period when humans become functionally capable of procreation
through development of reproductive organs. In females, the first signs of
puberty may be after age 8; in males puberty commonly begins at age 9.
Adulthood. Attainment of full growth and maturity is generally reached
between the ages of 18 and 21 years. Ossification and growth are virtually
completed during early adulthood (21 to 25 years).

Significance of Embryology
Literally, embryology refers to the study of embryos; however, the term
generally means prenatal development of embryos and fetuses. Developmental
anatomy refers to the structural changes of a person from fertilization to
adulthood; it includes embryology, fetology, and postnatal development.
Teratology is the division of embryology and pathology that deals with
abnormal development (birth defects). This branch of embryology is concerned
with various genetic and/or environmental factors that disturb normal
development that produces birth defects (see Chapter 20). Embryology: •
Bridges the gap between prenatal development and obstetrics, perinatal
medicine, pediatrics, and clinical anatomy
• Develops knowledge concerning the beginnings of life and the changes
occurring during prenatal development
• Is of practical value in helping to understand the causes of variations in human
structure
• Illuminates gross anatomy and explains how normal and abnormal relations
develop
• Supports the research and application of stem cells for treatment of certain
chronic diseases
Knowledge that physicians have of normal development and of the causes of
birth defects is necessary for giving the embryo and fetus the greatest possible
chance of developing normally. Much of the modern practice of obstetrics
involves applied embryology. Embryologic topics of special interest to
obstetricians are ovulation, oocyte and sperm transport, fertilization,
implantation, fetal–maternal relations, fetal circulation, critical periods of
development, and causes of birth defects. In addition to caring for the mother,
physicians guard the health of the embryo and fetus. The significance of
embryology is readily apparent to pediatricians because some of their patients
have birth defects resulting from maldevelopment, such as diaphragmatic hernia,
spina bifida, and congenital heart disease.
Birth defects cause most deaths during infancy. Knowledge of the development
of structure and function is essential for understanding the physiologic changes
that occur during the neonatal period and for helping fetuses and neonates in

distress. Progress in surgery, especially in the fetal, perinatal, and pediatric age
groups, has made knowledge of human development even more clinically
significant. Surgical treatment of fetuses is now possible. The understanding and
correction of most defects depend on knowledge of normal development and of
the deviations that may occur. An understanding of common congenital
anomalies and their causes also enables physicians, dentists, and other health-
care providers to explain the developmental basis of birth defects, often
dispelling parental guilt feelings.
Physicians and other health-care professionals who are aware of common birth
defects and their embryologic basis approach unusual situations with confidence
rather than surprise. For example, when it is realized that the renal artery
represents only one of several vessels originally supplying the embryonic
kidney, the frequent variations in number and arrangement of renal vessels are
understandable and not unexpected.

Historical Gleanings
If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
– Sir Isaac Newton, English mathematician, 1643–1727
This statement, made more than 300 years ago, emphasizes that each new study
of a problem rests on a base of knowledge established by earlier investigators.
The theories of every age offer explanations based on the knowledge and
experience of investigators of the period. Although we should not consider them
final, we should appreciate rather than scorn their ideas. People have always
been interested in knowing how they developed and were born, and why some
people develop abnormally. Ancient people developed many answers to these
events.

Ancient Views of Human Embryology
Egyptians of the Old Kingdom, approximately 3000 BC, knew of methods for
incubating birds’ eggs, but they left no records. Akhnaton (Amenophis IV)
praised the sun god Aton as the creator of the germ in a woman, maker of the
seed in man, and giver of life to the son in the body of his mother. The ancient
Egyptians believed that the soul entered the child at birth through the placenta.
A brief Sanskrit treatise on ancient Indian embryology is thought to have been
written in 1416 BC. This scripture of the Hindus, called Garbha Upanishad,
describes ancient ideas concerning the embryo. It states:
From the conjugation of blood and semen (seed), the embryo comes into
existence. During the period favorable for conception, after the sexual
intercourse, (it) becomes a Kalada (one-day-old embryo). After remaining seven
nights, it becomes a vesicle. After a fortnight it becomes a spherical mass. After
a month it becomes a firm mass. After two months the head is formed. After three
months the limb regions appear.
Greek scholars made many important contributions to the science of
embryology. The first recorded embryologic studies are in the books of
Hippocrates of Cos, the famous Greek physician (circa 460–377 BC), who is
regarded as the father of medicine. In order to understand how the human
embryo develops, he recommended:
Take twenty or more eggs and let them be incubated by two or more hens. Then
each day from the second to that of hatching, remove an egg, break it, and
examine it. You will find exactly as I say, for the nature of the bird can be likened
to that of man.
Aristotle of Stagira (circa 384–322 BC), a Greek philosopher and scientist,
wrote a treatise on embryology in which he described development of the chick
and other embryos. Aristotle promoted the idea that the embryo developed from
a formless mass, which he described as a “less fully concocted seed with a

nutritive soul and all bodily parts.” This embryo, he thought, arose from
menstrual blood after activation by male semen.
Claudius Galen (circa 130–201 AD), a Greek physician and medical scientist in
Rome, wrote a book, On the Formation of the Foetus, in which he described the
development and nutrition of fetuses and the structures that we now call the
allantois, amnion, and placenta.
The Talmud contains references to the formation of the embryo. The Jewish
physician Samuel-el-Yehudi, who lived during the second century AD,
described six stages in the formation of the embryo from a “formless, rolled-up
thing” to a “child whose months have been completed.” Talmud scholars
believed that the bones and tendons, the nails, the marrow in the head, and the
white of the eyes, were derived from the father, “who sows the white,” but the
skin, flesh, blood, hair were derived from the mother, “who sows the red.” These
views were according to the teachings of both Aristotle and Galen.

Embryology in the Middle Ages
The growth of science was slow during the medieval period and few high points
of embryologic investigation undertaken during this time are known to us. It is
cited in the Quran (seventh century AD), the Holy Book of Islam, that human
beings are produced from a mixture of secretions from the male and female.
Several references are made to the creation of a human being from a nutfa (small
drop). It also states that the resulting organism settles in the womb like a seed, 6
days after its beginning. Reference is also made to the leech-like appearance of
the early embryo. Later the embryo is said to resemble a “chewed substance.”
Constantinus Africanus of Salerno (circa 1020–1087 AD) wrote a concise
treatise entitled De Humana Natura. Africanus described the composition and
sequential development of the embryo in relation to the planets and each month
during pregnancy, a concept unknown in antiquity. Medieval scholars hardly
deviated from the theory of Aristotle, which stated that the embryo was derived
from menstrual blood and semen. Because of a lack of knowledge, drawings of
the fetus in the uterus often showed a fully developed infant frolicking in the
womb (Fig. 1-2).


FIGURE 1–2 Illustrations from Jacob Rueff’s De Conceptu et Generatione
Hominis (1554) showing the fetus developing from a coagulum of blood and
semen in the uterus. This theory was based on the teachings of Aristotle, and it
survived until the late 18th century.
(From Needham J: A History of Embryology. Cambridge, University Press,
1934; with permission of Cambridge University Press, England.)

The Renaissance
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) made accurate drawings of dissections of
pregnant uteri containing fetuses (Fig. 1-3). He introduced the quantitative
approach to embryology by making measurements of prenatal growth.


FIGURE 1–3 Reproduction of Leonardo da Vinci’s drawing made in the 15th
century AD showing a fetus in a uterus that has been incised and opened.
It has been stated that the embryologic revolution began with the publication of
William Harvey’s book, De Generatione Animalium, in 1651. Harvey believed
that the male seed or sperm, after entering the womb or uterus, became
metamorphosed into an egg-like substance from which the embryo developed.
Harvey (1578–1657) was greatly influenced by one of his professors at the
University of Padua, Fabricius of Aquapendente, an Italian anatomist and
embryologist who was the first to study embryos from different species of
animals. Harvey examined chick embryos with simple lenses and made many
new observations. He also studied the development of the fallow deer; however,
when unable to observe early developmental stages, he concluded that embryos
were secreted by the uterus. Girolamo Fabricius (1537–1619) wrote two major
embryologic treatises, including one entitled De Formato Foetu (The Formed
Fetus), which contained many illustrations of embryos and fetuses at different
stages of development.
Early microscopes were simple but they opened an exciting new field of
observation. In 1672, Regnier de Graaf observed small chambers in the rabbit’s
uterus and concluded that they could not have been secreted by the uterus. He
stated that they must have come from organs that he called ovaries.
Undoubtedly, the small chambers that de Graaf described were blastocysts (Fig.
1-1). He also described vesicular ovarian follicles, which are still sometimes
called graafian follicles.
Marcello Malpighi, studying what he believed were unfertilized hen’s eggs in
1675, observed early embryos. As a result, he thought the egg contained a
miniature chick. A young medical student in Leiden, Johan Ham van Arnheim,
and his countryman Anton van Leeuwenhoek, using an improved microscope
in 1677, first observed human sperms. However, they misunderstood the sperm’s
role in fertilization. They thought the sperm contained a miniature preformed
human being that enlarged when it was deposited in the female genital tract (Fig.
1-4).

FIGURE 1–4 Copy of a 17th-century drawing of a sperm by Hartsoeker. The
miniature human being within it was thought to enlarge after the sperm entered
an ovum. Other embryologists at this time thought the oocyte contained a
miniature human being that enlarged when it was stimulated by a sperm.
Caspar Friedrich Wolff refuted both versions of the preformation theory in
1759, after observing that parts of the embryo develop from “globules” (small
spherical bodies). He examined unincubated eggs but could not see the embryos
described by Malpighi. He proposed the layer concept, whereby division of what
we call the zygote produces layers of cells (now called the embryonic disc) from
which the embryo develops. His ideas formed the basis of the theory of
epigenesis, which states that development results from growth and
differentiation of specialized cells. These important discoveries first appeared in
Wolff’s doctoral dissertation Theoria Generationis. He also observed embryonic
masses of tissue that partly contribute to the development of the urinary and
genital systems—Wolffian bodies and Wolffian ducts—now called the
mesonephros and mesonephric ducts, respectively (see Chapter 12).
The preformation controversy ended in 1775 when Lazaro Spallanzani showed
that both the oocyte and sperm were necessary for initiating the development of
a new individual. From his experiments, including artificial insemination in
dogs, he concluded that the sperm was the fertilizing agent that initiated the
developmental processes. Heinrich Christian Pander discovered the three

germ layers of the embryo, which he named the blastoderm. He reported this
discovery in 1817 in his doctoral dissertation.
Etienne Saint Hilaire and his son, Isidore Saint Hilaire, made the first
significant studies of abnormal development in 1818. They performed
experiments in animals that were designed to produce birth defects, initiating
what we now know as the science of teratology.
Karl Ernst von Baer described the oocyte in the ovarian follicle of a dog in
1827, approximately 150 years after the discovery of sperms. He also observed
cleaving zygotes in the uterine tube and blastocysts in the uterus. He contributed
new knowledge about the origin of tissues and organs from the layers described
earlier by Malpighi and Pander. Von Baer formulated two important embryologic
concepts: corresponding stages of embryonic development and that general
characteristics precede specific ones. His significant and far-reaching
contributions resulted in his being regarded as the father of modern embryology.
Mattias Schleiden and Theodor Schwann were responsible for great advances
being made in embryology when they formulated the cell theory in 1839. This
concept stated that the body is composed of cells and cell products. The cell
theory soon led to the realization that the embryo developed from a single cell,
the zygote, which underwent many cell divisions as the tissues and organs
formed.
Wilhelm His (1831–1904), a Swiss anatomist and embryologist, developed
improved techniques for fixation, sectioning, and staining of tissues and for
reconstruction of embryos. His method of graphic reconstruction paved the way
for producing current three-dimensional, stereoscopic, and computer-generated
images of embryos.
Franklin P. Mall (1862–1917), inspired by the work of His, began to collect
human embryos for scientific study. Mall’s collection forms a part of the
Carnegie Collection of embryos that is known throughout the world. It is now in
the National Museum of Health and Medicine in the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology in Washington, DC.
Wilhelm Roux (1850–1924) pioneered analytical experimental studies on the
physiology of development in amphibia, which was pursued further by Hans
Spemann (1869–1941). For his discovery of the phenomenon of primary

induction—how one tissue determines the fate of another—Spemann received
the Nobel Prize in 1935. Over the decades, scientists have been isolating the
substances that are transmitted from one tissue to another, causing induction.
Robert G. Edwards and Patrick Steptoe pioneered one of the most
revolutionary developments in the history of human reproduction: the technique
of in vitro fertilization. These studies resulted in the birth of Louise Brown, the
first “test tube baby,” in 1978. Since then, many millions of couples throughout
the world who were considered infertile have experienced the miracle of birth
because of this new reproductive technology.

Genetics and Human Development
In 1859, Charles Darwin (1809–1882), an English biologist and evolutionist,
published his book, On the Origin of Species, in which he emphasized the
hereditary nature of variability among members of a species as an important
factor in evolution. Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk, developed the principles
of heredity in 1865, but medical scientists and biologists did not understand the
significance of these principles in the study of mammalian development for
many years.
Walter Flemming observed chromosomes in 1878 and suggested their probable
role in fertilization. In 1883, Eduard von Beneden observed that mature germ
cells have a reduced number of chromosomes. He also described some features
of meiosis, the process whereby the chromosome number is reduced in germ
cells.
Walter Sutton (1877–1916) and Theodor Boveri (1862–1915) declared
independently in 1902 that the behavior of chromosomes during germ cell
formation and fertilization agreed with Mendel’s principles of inheritance. In the
same year, Garrod reported alcaptonuria (genetic disorder of phenylalanine-
tyrosine metabolism) as the first example of Mendelian inheritance in human
beings. Many geneticists consider Sir Archibald Garrod (1857–1936) the
father of medical genetics. It was soon realized that the zygote contains all the
genetic information necessary for directing the development of a new human
being.
Felix von Winiwarter reported the first observations on human chromosomes in
1912, stating that there were 47 chromosomes in body cells. Theophilus Shickel
Painter concluded in 1923 that 48 was the correct number, a conclusion that was
widely accepted until 1956, when Joe Hin Tjio and Albert Levan reported
finding only 46 chromosomes in embryonic cells.
James Watson and Francis Crick deciphered the molecular structure of DNA
in 1953, and in 2000, the human genome was sequenced. The biochemical
nature of the genes on the 46 human chromosomes has been decoded.
Chromosome studies were soon used in medicine in a number of ways, including

clinical diagnosis, chromosome mapping, and prenatal diagnosis. Once the
normal chromosomal pattern was firmly established, it soon became evident that
some persons with congenital anomalies had an abnormal number of
chromosomes. A new era in medical genetics resulted from the demonstration by
Jérôme Jean Louis Marie Lejeune and associates in 1959 that infants with
Down syndrome (Trisomy 21) have 47 chromosomes instead of the usual 46 in
their body cells. It is now known that chromosomal aberrations are a significant
cause of birth defects and embryonic death (see Chapter 20).
In 1941, Sir Norman Gregg reported an “unusual number of cases of cataracts”
and other birth defects in infants whose mothers had contracted rubella (caused
by the rubella virus) in early pregnancy. For the first time, concrete evidence was
presented showing that the development of the human embryo could be
adversely affected by an environmental factor. Twenty years later, Widukind
Lenz and William McBride reported rare limb deficiencies and other severe
birth defects, induced by the sedative thalidomide, in the infants of mothers who
had ingested the drug. The thalidomide tragedy alerted the public and health-care
providers to the potential hazards of drugs, chemicals, and other environmental
factors during pregnancy (see Chapter 20).

Molecular Biology of Human
Development
Rapid advances in the field of molecular biology have led to the application of
sophisticated techniques (e.g., recombinant DNA technology, chimeric models,
transgenic mice, and stem cell manipulation). These techniques are now widely
used in research laboratories to address such diverse problems as the genetic
regulation of morphogenesis, the temporal and regional expression of specific
genes, and how cells are committed to form the various parts of the embryo. For
the first time, we are beginning to understand how, when, and where selected
genes are activated and expressed in the embryo during normal and abnormal
development (see Chapter 21).
The first mammal, Dolly, a sheep, was cloned in 1997 by Ian Wilmut and his
colleagues using the technique of somatic cell nuclear transfer. Since then, other
animals have been successfully cloned from cultured differentiated adult cells.
Interest in human cloning has generated considerable debate because of social,
ethical, and legal implications. Moreover, there is concern that cloning may
result in infants born with birth defects and serious diseases.
Human embryonic stem cells are pluripotential, capable of self-renewal and are
able to differentiate into specialized cell types. The isolation and reprogrammed
culture of human embryonic stem cells hold great potential for the treatment of
chronic diseases including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, and
Parkinson disease as well as other degenerative, malignant, and genetic disorders
(see National Institute of Health Guidelines on Human Stem Cell Research,
2009).

Descriptive Terms in Embryology
The English equivalents of the standard Latin forms of terms are given in some
cases, such as sperm (spermatozoon). Eponyms commonly used clinically
appear in parentheses, such as uterine tube (fallopian tube). In anatomy and
embryology, several terms relating to position and direction are used, and
reference is made to various planes of the body. All descriptions of the adult are
based on the assumption that the body is erect, with the upper limbs by the sides
and the palms directed anteriorly (Fig. 1-5A). This is the anatomical position.

FIGURE 1–5 Drawings illustrating descriptive terms of position, direction, and
planes of the body. A, Lateral view of an adult in the anatomical position. B,
Lateral view of a 5-week embryo. C and D, Ventral views of a 6-week embryo.
E, Lateral view of a 7-week embryo. In describing development, it is necessary
to use words denoting the position of one part to another or to the body as a

whole. For example, the vertebral column (spine) develops in the dorsal part of
the embryo, and the sternum (breast bone) in the ventral part of the embryo.
The terms anterior or ventral and posterior or dorsal are used to describe the
front or back of the body or limbs and the relations of structures within the body
to one another. When describing embryos, the terms dorsal and ventral are used
(Fig. 1-5B). Superior and inferior are used to indicate the relative levels of
different structures (Fig. 1-5A). For embryos, the terms cranial (or rostral) and
caudal are used to denote relationships to the head and caudal eminence (tail),
respectively (Fig. 1-5B). Distances from the center of the body or the source or
attachment of a structure are designated as proximal (nearest) or distal (farthest).
In the lower limb, for example, the knee is proximal to the ankle and the ankle is
distal to the knee.
The median plane is an imaginary vertical plane of section that passes
longitudinally through the body. Median sections divide the body into right and
left halves (Fig. 1-5C). The terms lateral and medial refer to structures that are,
respectively, farther from or nearer to the median plane of the body. A sagittal
plane is any vertical plane passing through the body that is parallel to the median
plane (Fig. 1-5C). A transverse (axial) plane refers to any plane that is at right
angles to both the median and coronal planes (Fig. 1-5D). A frontal (coronal)
plane is any vertical plane that intersects the median plane at a right angle (Fig.
1-5E) and divides the body into anterior or ventral and posterior or dorsal parts.

Clinically Oriented Problems
• What is the human embryo called at the beginning of its development?
• How do the terms conceptus and abortus differ?
• What sequence of events occurs during puberty? Are they the same in males
and females? What are the respective ages of presumptive puberty in males and
females?
• How do the terms embryology and teratology differ?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Readings
Allen GE. Inducers and “organizers”: Hans Spemann and experimental
embryology. Pubbl Stn Zool Napoli. 1993;15:229.
Careson EJ, Caterson SA. Regeneration in medicine: a plastic surgeon’s “tail” of
disease, stem cells, and possible future. Birth Defects Research (Part C).
2008;84:322.
Churchill FB. The rise of classical descriptive embryology. Dev Biol (NY).
1991;7:1.
Dunstan GR, editor. The Human Embryo. Aristotle and the Arabic and European
Traditions. Exeter: University of Exeter Press, 1990.
Fritsch MK, Singer DB. Embryonic stem cell biology. Adv Pediatrics.
2008;55:43.
Gasser R. Atlas of Human Embryos. Hagerstown: Harper & Row; 1975.
Hopwood N. Producing development: The anatomy of human embryos and the
norms of Wilhelm His. Bull Hist Med. 2000;74:29.
Horder TJ, Witkowski JA, Wylie CC, editors. A History of Embryology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Hovatta O, Stojkovic M, Nogueira M, Varela-Nieto I. European scientific,

ethical and legal issues on human stem cell research and regenerative medicine.
Stem Cells. 2010;28:1005.
Kohl F, von Baer KE. 1792–1876. Zum 200. Geburtstag des “Vaters der
Embryologie.”. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 1992;117:1976.
Leeb C, Jurga M, McGuckin C, et al. New perspectives in stem cell research:
beyond embryonic stem cells. Cell Prolif. 2011;44(Suppl 1):9.
Meyer AW. The Rise of Embryology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press;
1939.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K. Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000.
Murillo-Gonzalés J. Evolution of embryology: A synthesis of classical,
experimental, and molecular perspectives. Clin Anat. 2001;14:158.
National Institutes of Health Guidelines on Human Stem Cell Research.
http://stemcells.nih.gov/policy/2009guidelines.htm, 2009. Available at Needham
J. A History of Embryology, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
1959.
Nusslein-Volhard C. Coming to Life: How Genes Drive Development. Carlsbad,
CA: Kales Press; 2006.
O’Rahilly R. One hundred years of human embryology. In: Kalter H, editor.
Issues and Reviews in Teratology, vol 4. New York: Plenum Press; 1988.
O’Rahilly R, Müller F. Developmental Stages in Human Embryos. Washington,
DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington; 1987.
Pera MF, Tam PPL. Extrinsic regulation of pluripotent stem cells. Nature.
2010;465:713.
Persaud TVN. A History of Anatomy: The Post-Vesalian Era. Springfield, IL:
Charles C. Thomas; 1997.
Pinto-Correia C. The Ovary of Eve: Egg and Sperm and Preformation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press; 1997.

Rossant J. Stem cells and early lineage development. Cell. 2008;132:527.
Slack JMW. Essential Developmental Biology, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing; 2006.
Streeter GL. Developmental horizons in human embryos. Description of age
group XI, 13 to 20 somites, and age group XII, 21 to 29 somites. Contrib
Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1942;30:211.
Vichas A, Zallen JA. Deciphering the genetic code of morphogenesis using
functional genomics. J Biol. 2009;8:76.

Chapter 2 First Week of Human Development
He who sees things grow from beginning will have the finest view of them.
Aristotle, 384–322 BC
Gametogenesis 14
Meiosis 14
Spermatogenesis 14
Oogenesis 19
   Prenatal Maturation of Oocytes 19
   Postnatal Maturation of Oocytes 19
Comparison of Gametes (Sex Cells) 19
Uterus, Uterine Tubes, and Ovaries 19
   Uterus 19
   Uterine Tubes 20
   Ovaries 20
Female Reproductive Cycles 20
Ovarian Cycle 23
   Follicular Development 23
   Ovulation 24
   Corpus Luteum 25
Menstrual Cycle 26
   Phases of the Menstrual Cycle 26
Transportation of Gametes 27
   Oocyte Transport 27
   Sperm Transport 27
Maturation of Sperms 28
Viability of Gametes 29
Fertilization 30
   Phases of Fertilization 30
   Fertilization 31
Cleavage of Zygote 32
Formation of Blastocyst 35
Summary of First Week 37
Clinically Oriented Problems 38
Human development begins at fertilization when a sperm fuses with an oocyte to

form a single cell, a zygote. This highly specialized, totipotent cell marks the
beginning of each of us as a unique individual. The zygote, just visible to the
unaided eye, contains chromosomes and genes (units of genetic information) that
are derived from the mother and father. The zygote divides many times and
becomes progressively transformed into a multicellular human being through
cell division, migration, growth, and differentiation.

Gametogenesis
Gametogenesis (gamete formation) is the process of formation and development
of specialized generative cells, gametes (oocytes or sperms). This process,
involving the chromosomes and cytoplasm of the gametes, prepares these sex
cells for fertilization. During gametogenesis, the chromosome number is
reduced by half and the shape of the cells is altered. A chromosome is defined by
the presence of a centromere, the constricted part of a chromosome. Before DNA
replication in the S phase of the cell cycle, chromosomes exist as single-
chromatid chromosomes. A chromatid consists of parallel DNA strands. After
DNA replication, chromosomes are double-chromatid chromosomes.
The sperm and oocyte, the male and female gametes, are highly specialized sex
cells. Each of these cells contains half the number of chromosomes (haploid
number) that are present in somatic (body) cells. The number of chromosomes is
reduced during meiosis, a special type of cell division that occurs during
gametogenesis. Gamete maturation is called spermatogenesis in males and
oogenesis in females (Fig. 2-1). The timing of events during meiosis differs in
the two sexes.

FIGURE 2–1 Normal gametogenesis: conversion of germ cells into gametes (sex
cells). The drawings compare spermatogenesis and oogenesis. Oogonia are not
shown in this figure because they differentiate into primary oocytes before birth.
The chromosome complement of the germ cells is shown at each stage. The
number designates the total number of chromosomes, including the sex

chromosome(s) shown after the comma. Notes: (1) Following the two meiotic
divisions, the diploid number of chromosomes, 46, is reduced to the haploid
number, 23. (2) Four sperms form from one primary spermatocyte, whereas only
one mature oocyte results from maturation of a primary oocyte. (3) The
cytoplasm is conserved during oogenesis to form one large cell, the mature
oocyte. The polar bodies are small nonfunctional cells that eventually
degenerate.

Meiosis
Meiosis is a special type of cell division that involves two meiotic cell divisions;
it takes place in germ cells only (Figs. 2-2 and 2-3). Diploid germ cells give rise
to haploid gametes (sperms and oocytes).

FIGURE 2–2 Diagrammatic representation of meiosis. Two chromosome pairs
are shown. A to D, Stages of prophase of the first meiotic division. The
homologous chromosomes approach each other and pair; each member of the
pair consists of two chromatids. Observe the single crossover in one pair of
chromosomes, resulting in the interchange of chromatid segments. E,

Metaphase. The two members of each pair become oriented on the meiotic
spindle. F, Anaphase. G, Telophase. The chromosomes migrate to opposite
poles. H, Distribution of parental chromosome pairs at the end of the first
meiotic division. I to K, Second meiotic division. It is similar to mitosis except
that the cells are haploid.

FIGURE 2–3 Abnormal gametogenesis. The drawings show how nondisjunction
(failure of one or more pairs of chromosomes to separate at the meiotic stage)
results in an abnormal chromosome distribution in gametes. Although
nondisjunction of sex chromosomes is illustrated, a similar defect may occur in
autosomes. When nondisjunction occurs during the first meiotic division of
spermatogenesis, one secondary spermatocyte contains 22 autosomes plus an X
and a Y chromosome, and the other one contains 22 autosomes and no sex
chromosome. Similarly, nondisjunction during oogenesis may give rise to an
oocyte with 22 autosomes and two X chromosomes (as shown) or may result in
one with 22 autosomes and no sex chromosome.
The first meiotic division is a reduction division because the chromosome
number is reduced from diploid to haploid by pairing of homologous
chromosomes in prophase and their segregation at anaphase. Homologous
chromosomes or homologs (one from each parent) pair during prophase and
separate during anaphase, with one representative of each pair randomly going to
each pole of the meiotic spindle. The spindle connects to the chromosome at the
centromere. At this stage, they are double-chromatid chromosomes. The X and Y
chromosomes are not homologs, but they have homologous segments at the tips
of their short arms. They pair in these regions only. By the end of the first
meiotic division, each new cell formed (secondary spermatocyte or secondary
oocyte) has the haploid chromosome number, that is, half the number of
chromosomes of the preceding cell. This separation or disjunction of paired
homologous chromosomes is the physical basis of segregation, the separation of
allelic genes during meiosis.
The second meiotic division follows the first division without a normal
interphase (i.e., without an intervening step of DNA replication). Each double-
chromatid chromosome divides, and each half, or chromatid, is drawn to a
different pole; thus, the haploid number of chromosomes (23) is retained and
each daughter cell formed by meiosis has the reduced haploid number of
chromosomes, with one representative of each chromosome pair (now a single-
chromatid chromosome). The second meiotic division is similar to an ordinary
mitosis except that the chromosome number of the cell entering the second
meiotic division is haploid.
Meiosis:
• Provides constancy of the chromosome number from generation to generation

by reducing the chromosome number from diploid to haploid, thereby producing
haploid gametes.
• Allows random assortment of maternal and paternal chromosomes between the
gametes.
• Relocates segments of maternal and paternal chromosomes by crossing over of
chromosome segments, which “shuffles” the genes and produces a
recombination of genetic material.
Abnormal Gametogenesis
Disturbances of meiosis during gametogenesis, such as nondisjunction (Fig. 2-
3), result in the formation of chromosomally abnormal gametes. If involved in
fertilization, these gametes with numerical chromosome abnormalities cause
abnormal development such as occurs in infants with Down syndrome (see
Chapter 20).

Spermatogenesis
Spermatogenesis is the sequence of events by which spermatogonia are
transformed into mature sperms. This maturation process begins at puberty.
Spermatogonia are dormant in the seminiferous tubules of the testes during the
fetal and postnatal periods. They increase in number during puberty. After
several mitotic divisions, the spermatogonia grow and undergo changes.
Spermatogonia are transformed into primary spermatocytes, the largest germ
cells in the seminiferous tubules. Each primary spermatocyte subsequently
undergoes a reduction division—the first meiotic division—to form two haploid
secondary spermatocytes, which are approximately half the size of primary
spermatocytes. Subsequently, the secondary spermatocytes undergo a second
meiotic division to form four haploid spermatids, which are approximately half
the size of secondary spermatocytes. The spermatids are gradually transformed
into four mature sperms by a process known as spermiogenesis (Fig. 2-4). The
entire process of spermatogenesis, which includes spermiogenesis, takes
approximately 2 months. When spermiogenesis is complete, the sperms enter the
seminiferous tubules.
FIGURE 2–4 Illustrations of spermiogenesis, the last phase of spermatogenesis.
During this process, the rounded spermatid is transformed into elongated sperm.

Note the loss of cytoplasm, development of the tail, and formation of the
acrosome. The acrosome, derived from the Golgi region of the spermatid,
contains enzymes that are released at the beginning of fertilization to assist the
sperm in penetrating the corona radiata and zona pellucida surrounding the
secondary oocyte.
Sertoli cells lining the seminiferous tubules support and nurture the germ cells
and may be involved in the regulation of spermatogenesis. Sperms are
transported passively from the seminiferous tubules to the epididymis, where
they are stored and become functionally mature during puberty. The epididymis
is the elongated coiled duct along the posterior border of the testis (see Fig. 2-
12). It is continuous with the ductus deferens (vas deferens), which transports the
sperms to the urethra.
Mature sperms are free-swimming, actively motile cells consisting of a head
and a tail (Fig. 2-5A). The neck of the sperm is the junction between the head
and tail. The head of the sperm forms most of the bulk of the sperm and contains
the haploid nucleus. The anterior two thirds of the head is covered by the
acrosome, a cap-like saccular organelle containing several enzymes. When
released, these enzymes facilitate dispersion of the follicular cells of the corona
radiata and sperm penetration of the zona pellucida during fertilization. The tail
of the sperm consists of three segments: middle piece, principal piece, and end
piece (Fig. 2-5A). The tail provides the motility of the sperm that assists its
transport to the site of fertilization. The middle piece of the tail contains
mitochondria, which provide the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) necessary for
activity.

FIGURE 2–5 Male and female gametes (sex cells). A, The main parts of a
human sperm (×1250). The head, composed mostly of the nucleus, is partly
covered by the cap-like acrosome, an organelle containing enzymes. The tail of
the sperm consists of three regions: the middle piece, principal piece, and end
piece. B, A sperm drawn to approximately the same scale as the oocyte. C, A
human secondary oocyte (×200), surrounded by the zone pellucida and corona
radiata.
Many genes and molecular factors are implicated in spermatogenesis. For
example, recent studies indicate that proteins of the Bcl-2 family are involved in
the maturation of germ cells, as well as their survival at different stages. For
normal spermatogenesis, the Y chromosome is essential; microdeletions result in
defective spermatogenesis and infertility.

Oogenesis
Oogenesis is the sequence of events by which oogonia are transformed into
mature oocytes. This maturation of the oocytes begins before birth and is
completed after puberty. Oogenesis continues to menopause, which is the
permanent cessation of the menstrual cycle.

Prenatal Maturation of Oocytes
During early fetal life, oogonia proliferate by mitosis, a special type of cell
division (Fig. 2-2). Oogonia (primordial female sex cells) enlarge to form
primary oocytes before birth; for this reason, no oogonia are shown in Figures
2-1 and 2-3. As the primary oocytes form, connective tissue cells surround them
and form a single layer of flattened, follicular cells (see Fig. 2-8). The primary
oocyte enclosed by this layer of cells constitutes a primordial follicle (see Fig.
2-9A). As the primary oocyte enlarges during puberty, the follicular epithelial
cells become cuboidal in shape and then columnar, forming a primary follicle
(see Fig. 2-1). The primary oocyte soon becomes surrounded by a covering of
amorphous acellular glycoprotein material, the zona pellucida (see Figs. 2-8
and 2-9B). Scanning electron microscopy of the surface of the zona pellucida
reveals a regular mesh-like appearance with intricate fenestrations.
Primary oocytes begin the first meiotic divisions before birth, but completion of
prophase does not occur until adolescence. The follicular cells surrounding the
primary oocytes secrete a substance, oocyte maturation inhibitor, which keeps
the meiotic process of the oocyte arrested.

Postnatal Maturation of Oocytes
Beginning during puberty, usually one follicle matures each month and ovulation
occurs, except when oral contraceptives are used. The long duration of the first
meiotic division (up to 45 years) may account in part for the relatively high
frequency of meiotic errors, such as nondisjunction (failure of paired
chromatids of a chromosome to dissociate), that occur with increasing maternal
age. The primary oocytes in suspended prophase (dictyotene) are vulnerable to
environmental agents such as radiation.
No primary oocytes form after birth, in contrast to the continuous production of
primary spermatocytes (Fig. 2-3). The primary oocytes remain dormant in the
ovarian follicles until puberty. As a follicle matures, the primary oocyte
increases in size and shortly before ovulation, completes the first meiotic
division to give rise to a secondary oocyte and the first polar body. Unlike the
corresponding stage of spermatogenesis, however, the division of cytoplasm is
unequal. The secondary oocyte receives almost all the cytoplasm (Fig. 2-1), and
the first polar body receives very little. This polar body is a small,
nonfunctional cell. At ovulation, the nucleus of the secondary oocyte begins the
second meiotic division, but progresses only to metaphase, when division is
arrested. If a sperm penetrates the secondary oocyte, the second meiotic division
is completed, and most cytoplasm is again retained by one cell, the fertilized
oocyte (Fig. 2-1). The other cell, the second polar body, is also a small
nonfunctional cell. As soon as the polar bodies are extruded, maturation of the
oocyte is complete.
There are approximately 2 million primary oocytes in the ovaries of a newborn
female, but most regress during childhood so that by adolescence no more than
40,000 remain. Of these, only approximately 400 become secondary oocytes and
are expelled at ovulation during the reproductive period. Few of these oocytes, if
any, are fertilized and become mature. The number of oocytes that ovulate is
greatly reduced in women who take oral contraceptives because the hormones in
them prevent ovulation from occurring.

Comparison of Gametes (sex Cells)
The gametes (oocytes or sperms) are haploid cells (have half the number of
chromosomes) that can undergo karyogamy (fusion of the nuclei of two sex
cells). The oocyte is a massive cell compared with the sperm and is immotile
(Fig. 2-5), whereas the microscopic sperm is highly motile. The oocyte is
surrounded by the zona pellucida and a layer of follicular cells, the corona
radiata (Fig. 2-5C).
With respect to sex chromosome constitution, there are two kinds of normal
sperms: 23, X and 23, Y, whereas there is only one kind of normal secondary
oocyte: 23, X (Fig. 2-1). By convention, the number 23 is followed by a comma
and an X or Y to indicate the sex chromosome constitution; for example, 23, X
indicates that there are 23 chromosomes in the complement, consisting of 22
autosomes and one sex chromosome (an X in this case). The difference in the
sex chromosome complement of sperms forms the basis of primary sex
determination.
Abnormal Gametes
The ideal biological maternal age for reproduction is considered to be from 18 to
35 years. The likelihood of chromosomal abnormalities in the embryo gradually
increases as the mother ages. In older mothers, there is an appreciable risk of
Down syndrome or some other form of trisomy in the infant (see Chapter 20).
The likelihood of a fresh gene mutation (change in DNA) also increases with
age. The older the parents are at the time of conception, the more likely they are
to have accumulated mutations that the embryo might inherit.
During gametogenesis, homologous chromosomes sometimes fail to separate, a
pathogenic process called nondisjunction; as a result, some gametes have 24
chromosomes and others only 22 (Fig. 2-3). If a gamete with 24 chromosomes
unites with a normal one with 23 chromosomes during fertilization, a zygote
with 47 chromosomes forms (see Fig. 20-2). This condition is called trisomy
because of the presence of three representatives of a particular chromosome
instead of the usual two. If a gamete with only 22 chromosomes unites with a
normal one, a zygote with 45 chromosomes forms. This condition is called

monosomy because only one representative of the particular chromosome pair is
present. For a description of the clinical conditions associated with numerical
disorders of chromosomes, see Chapter 20.
As many as 10% of sperms ejaculated are grossly abnormal (e.g., with two
heads), but it is believed that these abnormal sperms do not fertilize oocytes due
to their lack of normal motility. Most morphologically abnormal sperms are
unable to pass through the mucus in the cervical canal. Measurement of forward
progression is a subjective assessment of the quality of sperm movement.
Radiography, severe allergic reactions, and certain antispermatogenic agents
have been reported to increase the percentage of abnormally shaped sperms.
Such sperms are not believed to affect fertility unless their number exceeds 20%.
Although some oocytes have two or three nuclei, these cells die before they
reach maturity. Similarly, some ovarian follicles contain two or more oocytes,
but this phenomenon is rare.

Uterus, Uterine Tubes, and Ovaries
A brief description of the structure of the uterus, uterine tubes, and ovaries is
presented as a basis for understanding reproductive ovarian cycles and
implantation of the blastocyst (see Figs. 2-7 and 2-19).

Uterus
The uterus is a thick-walled, pear-shaped muscular organ, averaging 7 to 8 cm in
length, 5 to 7 cm in width at its superior part, and 2 to 3 cm in wall thickness.
The uterus consists of two major parts (Fig. 2-6A): the body, the superior two
thirds, and the cervix, the cylindrical inferior one third.

FIGURE 2–6 A, Parts of the uterus and vagina. B, Diagrammatic frontal section
of the uterus, uterine tubes, and vagina. The ovaries are also shown. C,
Enlargement of the area outlined in B. The functional layer of the endometrium
is sloughed off during menstruation.

The body of the uterus narrows from the fundus, the rounded superior part of
the body, to the isthmus, the 1-cm-long constricted region between the body and
the cervix. The cervix of the uterus is its tapered vaginal end that is nearly
cylindrical in shape. The lumen of the cervix, the cervical canal, has a
constricted opening at each end. The internal os (opening) of the uterus
communicates with the cavity of the uterine body and the external os
communicates with the vagina. The walls of the body of the uterus consist of
three layers (Fig. 2-6B): • Perimetrium, the thin external layer
• Myometrium, the thick smooth muscle layer
• Endometrium, the thin internal layer
The perimetrium is a peritoneal layer that is firmly attached to the
myometrium. During the luteal (secretory) phase of the menstrual cycle, three
layers of the endometrium can be distinguished microscopically (Fig. 2-6C): • A
thin, compact layer consisting of densely packed, connective tissue around the
necks of the uterine glands
• A thick, spongy layer composed of edematous connective tissue containing the
dilated, tortuous bodies of the uterine glands
• A thin, basal layer containing the blind ends of the uterine glands
At the peak of its development, the endometrium is 4 to 5 mm thick. The basal
layer of the endometrium has its own blood supply and is not sloughed off
during menstruation. The compact and spongy layers, known collectively as the
functional layer, disintegrate and are shed during menstruation and after
parturition (delivery of a baby).

Uterine Tubes
The uterine tubes, approximately 10 cm long and 1 cm in diameter, extend
laterally from the horns of the uterus (Fig. 2-6A). Each tube opens at its proximal
end into the horn of the uterus and into the peritoneal cavity at its distal end. For
descriptive purposes, the uterine tube is divided into four parts: infundibulum,
ampulla, isthmus, and uterine part. The tubes carry oocytes from the ovaries and
sperms entering from the uterus to reach the fertilization site in the ampulla (Fig.
2-6B). The uterine tube also conveys the cleaving zygote to the uterine cavity.

Ovaries
The ovaries are almond-shaped reproductive glands located close to the lateral
pelvic walls on each side of the uterus that produce oocytes (Fig. 2-6B). The
ovaries also produce estrogen and progesterone, the hormones responsible for
the development of secondary sex characteristics and regulation of pregnancy.

Female Reproductive Cycles
Commencing at puberty, females undergo reproductive cycles (sexual cycles),
involving activities of the hypothalamus of the brain, pituitary gland, ovaries,
uterus, uterine tubes, vagina, and mammary glands (Fig. 2-7). These monthly
cycles prepare the reproductive system for pregnancy.

FIGURE 2–7 Schematic drawings illustrating the interrelations of the
hypothalamus of the brain, pituitary gland, ovaries, and endometrium. One
complete menstrual cycle and the beginning of another are shown. Changes in
the ovaries, the ovarian cycle, are induced by the gonadotropic hormones
(follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone). Hormones from the

ovaries (estrogens and progesterone) then promote cyclic changes in the
structure and function of the endometrium, the menstrual cycle. Thus, the
cyclical activity of the ovary is intimately linked with changes in the uterus. The
ovarian cycles are under the rhythmic endocrine control of the pituitary gland,
which in turn is controlled by the gonadotropin-releasing hormone produced by
neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus.
A gonadotropin-releasing hormone is synthesized by neurosecretory cells in the
hypothalamus.
The gonadotropin-releasing hormone is carried by the hypophysial portal system
to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. This hormone stimulates the release of
two hormones produced by this gland that act on the ovaries:
• Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates the development of ovarian
follicles and the production of estrogen by the follicular cells.
• Luteinizing hormone (LH) serves as the “trigger” for ovulation (release of
secondary oocyte) and stimulates the follicular cells and corpus luteum to
produce progesterone.
• These hormones also induce growth of the ovarian follicles and the
endometrium.

Ovarian Cycle
FSH and LH produce cyclic changes in the ovaries—the ovarian cycle (Fig. 2-7)
—development of follicles (Fig. 2-8), ovulation, and corpus luteum formation.
During each cycle, FSH promotes growth of several primordial follicles into 5 to
12 primary follicles (Fig. 2-9A); however, only one primary follicle usually
develops into a mature follicle and ruptures through the surface of the ovary,
expelling its oocyte (Fig. 2-10).


FIGURE 2–8 Photomicrograph of a human primary oocyte in a secondary
follicle, surrounded by the zona pellucida and follicular cells. The mound of
tissue, the cumulus oophorus, projects into the antrum.
(From Bloom W, Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology, 10th ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 1975. Courtesy of L. Zamboni.)
FIGURE 2–9 Micrographs of the ovarian cortex. A, Several primordial follicles
are visible (×270). Observe that the primary oocytes are surrounded by follicular
cells. B, Secondary ovarian follicle. The oocyte is surrounded by granulosa cells
of the cumulus oophorus (×132). The antrum can be clearly seen (*).
(From Gartner LP, Hiatt JL: Color Textbook of Histology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2001.)

FIGURE 2–10 Illustrations of ovulation. Note that fimbriae of the infundiulum
of the uterine tube are closely applied to the ovary. The finger-like fimbriae
move back and forth over the ovary and “sweep” the oocyte into the
infundibulum. When the stigma (swelling) ruptures, the secondary oocyte is
expelled from the ovarian follicle with the follicular fluid. After ovulation, the

wall of the follicle collapses and is thrown into folds. The follicle is transformed
into a glandular structure, the corpus luteum.

Follicular Development
Development of an ovarian follicle (Figs. 2-8 and 2-9) is characterized by:
• Growth and differentiation of primary oocyte
• Proliferation of follicular cells
• Formation of zona pellucida
• Development of the theca folliculi
As the primary follicle increases in size, the adjacent connective tissue
organizes into a capsule, the theca folliculi (Fig. 2-7). The theca soon
differentiates into two layers, an internal vascular and glandular layer, the theca
interna, and a capsule-like layer, the theca externa. Thecal cells are thought to
produce an angiogenesis factor that promotes growth of blood vessels in the
theca interna (Fig. 2-9B), which provide nutritive support for follicular
development. The follicular cells divide actively, producing a stratified layer
around the oocyte (Fig. 2-9B). The ovarian follicle soon becomes oval and the
oocyte eccentric in position. Subsequently, fluid-filled spaces appear around the
follicular cells, which coalesce to form a single large cavity, the antrum, which
contains follicular fluid (Figs. 2-8 and 2-9B). After the antrum forms, the
ovarian follicle is called a vesicular or secondary follicle.
The primary oocyte is pushed to one side of the follicle, where it is surrounded
by a mound of follicular cells, the cumulus oophorus, that projects into the
antrum (Figs. 2-9B). The follicle continues to enlarge until it reaches maturity
and produces a swelling on the surface of the ovary (Fig. 2-10A).
The early development of ovarian follicles is induced by FSH, but final stages of
maturation require LH as well. Growing follicles produce estrogen, a hormone
that regulates development and function of the reproductive organs. The vascular
theca interna produces follicular fluid and some estrogen. Its cells also secrete
androgens that pass to the follicular cells (Fig. 2-8), which, in turn, convert them
into estrogen. Some estrogen is also produced by widely scattered groups of
stromal secretory cells, known collectively as the interstitial gland of the
ovary.

Ovulation
Around midcycle, the ovarian follicle, under the influence of FSH and LH,
undergoes a sudden growth spurt, producing a cystic swelling or bulge on the
surface of the ovary. A small avascular spot, the stigma, soon appears on this
swelling (see Fig. 2-10A). Before ovulation, the secondary oocyte and some cells
of the cumulus oophorus detach from the interior of the distended follicle (Fig.
2-10B).
Ovulation is triggered by a surge of LH production (Fig. 2-11). Ovulation
usually follows the LH peak by 12 to 24 hours. The LH surge, elicited by the
high estrogen level in the blood, appears to cause the stigma to balloon out,
forming a vesicle (Fig. 2-10A). The stigma soon ruptures, expelling the
secondary oocyte with the follicular fluid (Fig. 2-10B to D). Expulsion of the
oocyte is the result of intrafollicular pressure and possibly contraction of smooth
muscle in the theca externa owing to stimulation by prostaglandins. Mitogen-
activated protein kinases 3 and 1 (MAPK 3/1), also known as extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) in ovarian glanulosa cells seem to
regulate signaling pathways that control ovulation. Plasmins and matrix
metalloproteins appear also to play a role in controlling rupture of the follicle.
The expelled secondary oocyte is surrounded by the zona pellucida and one or
more layers of follicular cells, which are radially arranged as the corona radiata
(Fig. 2-10C), forming the oocyte-cumulus complex. The LH surge also seems to
induce resumption of the first meiotic division of the primary oocyte. Hence,
mature ovarian follicles contain secondary oocytes (Fig. 2-10A and B). The zona
pellucida (Fig. 2-8) is composed of three glycoproteins (ZPA, ZPB, ZPC), which
usually form a network of filaments with multiple pores. Binding of the sperm to
the zona pellucida (sperm–oocyte interactions) is a complex and critical event
during fertilization.

FIGURE 2–11 Illustration of the blood levels of various hormones during the
menstrual cycle. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates the ovarian
follicles to develop and produce estrogens. The level of estrogens rises to a peak
just before the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge. Ovulation normally occurs 24 to
36 hours after the LH surge. If fertilization does not occur, the blood levels of

circulating estrogens and progesterone fall. This hormone withdrawal causes the
endometrium to regress and menstruation to start again.
Mittelschmerz and Ovulation A variable amount of abdominal pain,
mittelschmerz (German mittel, mid + schmerz, pain), accompanies ovulation in
some women. In these cases, ovulation results in slight bleeding into the
peritoneal cavity, which results in sudden constant pain in the lower abdomen.
Mittelschmerz may be used as a symptom of ovulation, but there are better
symptoms, such as the slight drop in basal body temperature.
Anovulation
Some women do not ovulate (cessation of ovulation—anovulation) because of
an inadequate release of gonadotropins. In some of these women, ovulation can
be induced by the administration of gonadotropins or an ovulatory agent such as
clomiphene citrate. This drug stimulates the release of pituitary gonadotropins
(FSH and LH), resulting in maturation of several ovarian follicles and multiple
ovulations. The incidence of multiple pregnancy increases as much as tenfold
when ovulation is induced. Rarely do more than seven embryos survive.

Corpus Luteum
Shortly after ovulation, the walls of the ovarian follicle and theca folliculi
collapse and are thrown into folds (see Fig. 2-10D). Under LH influence, they
develop into a glandular structure, the corpus luteum, which secretes
progesterone and some estrogen, causing the endometrial glands to secrete and
prepare the endometrium for implantation of the blastocyst.
If the oocyte is fertilized, the corpus luteum enlarges to form a corpus luteum of
pregnancy and increases its hormone production. Degeneration of the corpus
luteum is prevented by human chorionic gonadotropin, a hormone secreted by
the syncytiotrophoblast of the blastocyst (see Fig. 2-19B). The corpus luteum of
pregnancy remains functionally active throughout the first 20 weeks of
pregnancy. By this time, the placenta has assumed the production of the estrogen
and progesterone necessary for the maintenance of pregnancy (see Chapter 7).
If the oocyte is not fertilized, the corpus luteum involutes and degenerates 10 to
12 days after ovulation. It is then called a corpus luteum of menstruation. The
corpus luteum is subsequently transformed into white scar tissue in the ovary,
called a corpus albicans. Ovarian cycles terminate at menopause, the
permanent cessation of menstruation due to ovarian failure; menopause usually
occurs between the ages of 48 and 55. The endocrine, somatic (body), and
psychological changes occurring at the termination of the reproductive period
are called the climacteric.

Menstrual Cycle
The menstrual cycle is the time during which the oocyte matures, is ovulated,
and enters the uterine tube. The hormones produced by the ovarian follicles and
corpus luteum (estrogen and progesterone) produce cyclic changes in the
endometrium (Fig. 2-11). These monthly changes in the internal layer of the
uterus constitute the endometrial cycle, commonly referred to as the menstrual
cycle or period because menstruation (flow of blood from the uterus) is an
obvious event.
The endometrium is a “mirror” of the ovarian cycle because it responds in a
consistent manner to the fluctuating concentrations of gonadotropic and ovarian
hormones (Figs. 2-7 and 2-11). The average menstrual cycle is 28 days, with day
1 of the cycle designated as the day on which menstrual flow begins. Menstrual
cycles normally vary in length by several days. In 90% of women, the length of
the cycles ranges between 23 and 35 days. Almost all these variations result
from alterations in the duration of the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle.
Anovulatory Menstrual Cycles
The typical menstrual cycle, illustrated in Figure 2-11, is not always realized
because the ovary may not produce a mature follicle and ovulation does not
occur. In anovulatory cycles, the endometrial changes are minimal; the
proliferative endometrium develops as usual, but no ovulation occurs and no
corpus luteum forms. Consequently, the endometrium does not progress to the
luteal phase; it remains in the proliferative phase until menstruation begins.
Anovulatory cycles may result from ovarian hypofunction. The estrogen, with or
without progesterone, in oral contraceptives (birth control pills) acts on the
hypothalamus and pituitary gland, resulting in inhibition of secretion of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone and FSH and LH, the secretion of which is
essential for ovulation to occur.

Phases of the Menstrual Cycle
Changes in the estrogen and progesterone levels cause cyclic changes in the
structure of the female reproductive tract, notably the endometrium. The
menstrual cycle is a continuous process; each phase gradually passes into the
next one (see Fig. 2-11).
Menstrual phase. The functional layer of the uterine wall (Fig. 2-6C) is
sloughed off and discarded with the menstrual flow, called menses (monthly
bleeding), which usually lasts 4 to 5 days. The blood discharged through the
vagina is combined with small pieces of endometrial tissue. After menstruation,
the eroded endometrium is thin.
Proliferative phase. This phase, lasting approximately 9 days, coincides with
growth of ovarian follicles and is controlled by estrogen secreted by these
follicles. There is a two-to three-fold increase in the thickness of the
endometrium and in its water content during this phase of repair and
proliferation. Early during this phase, the surface epithelium reforms and covers
the endometrium. The glands increase in number and length and the spiral
arteries elongate.
Luteal phase. The luteal or secretory phase, lasting approximately 13 days,
coincides with the formation, functioning, and growth of the corpus luteum. The
progesterone produced by the corpus luteum stimulates the glandular epithelium
to secrete a glycogen-rich material. The glands become wide, tortuous, and
saccular, and the endometrium thickens because of the influence of progesterone
and estrogen from the corpus luteum, and because of increased fluid in the
connective tissue. As the spiral arteries grow into the superficial compact layer,
they become increasingly coiled (Fig. 2-6C). The venous network becomes
complex and large lacunae (venous spaces) develop. Direct arteriovenous
anastomoses are prominent features of this stage.
If fertilization does not occur:
• The corpus luteum degenerates.
• Estrogen and progesterone levels fall and the secretory endometrium enters an
ischemic phase.
• Menstruation occurs.

Ischemic phase. The phase occurs when the oocyte is not fertilized. Ischemia
(reduced blood supply) occurs as the spiral arteries constrict, giving the
endometrium a pale appearance. This constriction results from the decreasing
secretion of hormones, primarily progesterone, by the degenerating corpus
luteum. In addition to vascular changes, the hormone withdrawal results in the
stoppage of glandular secretion, a loss of interstitial fluid, and a marked
shrinking of the endometrium. Toward the end of the ischemic phase, the spiral
arteries become constricted for longer periods. This results in venous stasis and
patchy ischemic necrosis (death) in the superficial tissues. Eventually, rupture of
damaged vessel walls follows and blood seeps into the surrounding connective
tissue. Small pools of blood form and break through the endometrial surface,
resulting in bleeding into the uterine cavity and from the vagina. As small pieces
of the endometrium detach and pass into the uterine cavity, the torn ends of the
arteries bleed into the cavity, resulting in a loss of 20 to 80 ml of blood.
Eventually, over 3 to 5 days, the entire compact layer and most of the spongy
layer of the endometrium are discarded in the menses. Remnants of the spongy
and basal layers remain to undergo regeneration during the subsequent
proliferative phase of the endometrium. It is obvious from the previous
descriptions that the cyclic hormonal activity of the ovary is intimately linked
with cyclic histologic changes in the endometrium.
If fertilization occurs:
• Cleavage of the zygote and blastogenesis (formation of blastocyst) begin.
• The blastocyst implants in the endometrium on approximately the sixth day of
the luteal phase (day 20 of a 28-day cycle).
• Human chorionic gonadotropin, a hormone produced by the
syncytiotrophoblast (see Fig. 2-19), keeps the corpus luteum secreting estrogens
and progesterone.
• The luteal phase continues and menstruation does not occur.
Pregnancy phase. If pregnancy occurs, the menstrual cycles cease and the
endometrium passes into a pregnancy phase. With the termination of pregnancy,
the ovarian and menstrual cycles resume after a variable period (usually 6 to 10
weeks if the woman is not breast-feeding her baby). Except during pregnancy,
the reproductive cycles normally continue until menopause.

Transportation of Gametes

Oocyte Transport
The secondary oocyte is expelled at ovulation from the ovarian follicle with the
escaping follicular fluid (Fig. 2-10C and D). During ovulation, the fimbriated
end of the uterine tube becomes closely applied to the ovary. The finger-like
processes of the tube, fimbriae, move back and forth over the ovary. The
sweeping action of the fimbriae and fluid currents produced by the cilia of the
mucosal cells of the fimbriae “sweep” the secondary oocyte into the funnel-
shaped infundibulum of the uterine tube. The oocyte then passes into the
ampulla of the tube, mainly as the result of peristalsis—movements of the wall
of the tube characterized by alternate contraction and relaxation—that pass
toward the uterus.

Sperm Transport
The sperms are rapidly transported from the epididymis to the urethra by
peristaltic contractions of the thick muscular coat of the ductus deferens (Fig. 2-
12). The accessory sex glands—seminal glands (vesicles), prostate, and
bulbourethral glands—produce secretions that are added to the sperm-containing
fluid in the ductus deferens and urethra.
FIGURE 2–12 Sagittal section of the male pelvis showing the parts of the male
reproductive system.
From 200 to 600 million sperms are deposited around the external os of the
uterus and in the fornix of the vagina during intercourse (see Fig. 2-6A). The
sperms pass through the cervical canal by movements of their tails. The enzyme
vesiculase, produced by the seminal glands, coagulates some of the semen or

ejaculate and forms a vaginal plug that may prevent the backflow of semen into
the vagina. When ovulation occurs, the cervical mucus increases in amount and
becomes less viscid (sticky), making it more favorable for sperm transport.
The reflex ejaculation of semen may be divided into two phases:
• Emission: Semen is delivered to the prostatic part of the urethra through the
ejaculatory ducts after peristalsis of the ductus deferens; emission is a
sympathetic response.
• Ejaculation: Semen is expelled from the urethra through the external urethral
orifice; this results from closure of the vesical sphincter at the neck of the
bladder, contraction of urethral muscle, and contraction of the bulbospongiosus
muscles.
Passage of sperms through the uterus into the uterine tubes results mainly from
muscular contractions of the walls of these organs. Prostaglandins in the semen
are thought to stimulate uterine motility at the time of intercourse and assist in
the movement of sperms to the site of fertilization in the ampulla of the uterine
tube. Fructose, secreted by the seminal glands, is an energy source for the
sperms in the semen.
The volume of ejaculate (sperms mix with secretions from the accessory sex
glands) averages 3.5 ml, with a range of 2 to 6 ml. The sperms move 2 to 3 mm
per minute, but the speed varies with the pH of the environment. They are
nonmotile during storage in the epididymis, but become motile in the ejaculate.
They move slowly in the acid environment of the vagina, but move more rapidly
in the alkaline environment of the uterus. It is not known how long it takes
sperms to reach the fertilization site in the ampulla, but the time of transport is
probably short. Motile sperms have been recovered from the ampulla 5 minutes
after their deposition near the external uterine os. Some sperms, however, take as
long as 45 minutes to complete the journey. Only approximately 200 sperms
reach the fertilization site; most sperms degenerate and are absorbed in the
female genital tract.

Maturation of Sperms
Freshly ejaculated sperms are unable to fertilize oocytes. Sperms must undergo a
period of conditioning—capacitation—lasting approximately 7 hours. During
this period, a glycoprotein coat and seminal proteins are removed from the
surface of the sperm acrosome. The membrane components of the sperms are
extensively altered. Capacitated sperms show no morphologic changes, but they
are more active. Sperms are usually capacitated in the uterus or uterine tubes by
substances secreted by these parts of the female genital tract. During in vitro
fertilization, capacitation is induced by incubating the sperms in a defined
medium for several hours (see Fig. 2-15). Completion of capacitation permits the
acrosome reaction to occur.
The acrosome of the capacitated sperm binds to a glycoprotein (ZP3) on the
zona pellucida. Studies have shown that the sperm plasma membrane, calcium
ions, prostaglandins, and progesterone play a critical role in the acrosome
reaction. This reaction of sperms must be completed before the sperms can fuse
with the oocyte. When capacitated sperms come into contact with the corona
radiata surrounding a secondary oocyte (Fig. 2-13), they undergo complex
molecular changes that result in the development of perforations in the
acrosome. Multiple point fusions of the plasma membrane of the sperm and the
external acrosomal membrane occur. Breakdown of the membranes at these sites
produces apertures. The changes induced by the acrosome reaction are
associated with the release of enzymes, including hyaluronidase and acrosin,
from the acrosome that facilitate fertilization. Capitation and the acrosome
reaction appear to be regulated by a tyrosine kinase, src kinase.

FIGURE 2–13 Acrosome reaction and sperm penetrating an oocyte. The detail
of the area outlined in A is given in B. 1, Sperm during capacitation, a period of
conditioning that occurs in the female reproductive tract. 2, Sperm undergoing
the acrosome reaction, during which perforations form in the acrosome. 3,
Sperm digesting a path through the zona pellucida by the action of enzymes
released from the acrosome. 4, Sperm after entering the cytoplasm of the oocyte.

Note that the plasma membranes of the sperm and oocyte have fused and that the
head and tail of the sperm enter the oocyte, leaving the sperm’s plasma
membrane attached to the oocyte’s plasma membrane. C, Scanning electron
microscopy of an unfertilized human oocyte showing relatively few sperms
attached to the zona pellucida. D, Scanning electron microscopy of a human
oocyte showing penetration of the sperm (arrow) into the zona pellucida.
(Courtesy of P. Schwartz and H.M. Michelmann, University of Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany.)
Male Fertility
During evaluation of male fertility, an analysis of semen is made. Sperms
account for less than 10% of the semen. The remainder of the ejaculate consists
of the secretions of the seminal glands, prostate, and bulbourethral glands. There
are usually more than 100 million sperms per milliliter of semen in the ejaculate
of normal males. Although there is much variation in individual cases, men
whose semen contains 20 million sperms per milliliter, or 50 million in the total
specimen, are probably fertile. A man with fewer than 10 million sperms per
milliliter of semen is likely to be sterile, especially when the specimen contains
immotile and abnormal sperms. For potential fertility, 50% of sperms should be
motile after 2 hours and some should be motile after 24 hours. Male infertility
may result from a low sperm count, poor sperm motility, medications and drugs,
endocrine disorders, exposure to environmental pollutants, cigarette smoking,
abnormal sperms, or obstruction of a genital duct such as in the ductus deferens
(see Fig. 2-12). Male infertility is detectable in 30% to 50% of involuntary
childless couples.
Vasectomy
The most effective method of permanent contraception in men is vasectomy, or
excision of a segment of each ductus deferens (vas deferens). Following
vasectomy, there are no sperms in the semen or ejaculate, but the volume is
essentially the same. Reversal of vasectomy is technically feasible by
microsurgical techniques; however, the success rate is variable.

Dispermy and Triploidy Although several sperms attach to the corona radiata
and zona pellucida, usually only one sperm penetrates the oocyte and fertilizes it.
Two sperms may participate in fertilization during an abnormal process known
as dispermy, resulting in a zygote with an extra set of chromosomes. Triploid
conceptions account for approximately 20% of chromosomally abnormal
spontaneous abortions. Triploid embryos (69 chromosomes) may appear normal,
but they nearly always abort or die shortly after birth.

Viability of Gametes
Studies on early stages of development indicate that human oocytes are usually
fertilized within 12 hours after ovulation. In vitro observations have shown that
the oocyte cannot be fertilized after 24 hours and that it degenerates shortly
thereafter. Most human sperms probably do not survive for more than 48 hours
in the female genital tract. After ejaculation, sperms are stored in folds of the
mucosa of the cervix and are gradually released into the cervical canal and pass
through the uterus into the uterine tubes. The short-term storage of sperms in the
cervix provides a gradual release of sperms and thereby increases the chances of
fertilization. Sperms and oocytes can be frozen and stored for many years and
can be used for in vitro fertilization.

 Fertilization
The usual site of fertilization is in the ampulla of the uterine tube (Fig. 2-6B). If
the oocyte is not fertilized there, it slowly passes along the tube to the body of
the uterus, where it degenerates and is resorbed. Although fertilization may
occur in other parts of the tube, it does not occur in the body of the uterus.
Chemical signals (attractants), secreted by the oocyte and surrounding follicular
cells, guide the capacitated sperms (sperm chemotaxis) to the oocyte.
Fertilization is a complex sequence of coordinated molecular events that begins
with contact between a sperm and an oocyte (see Fig. 2-13), and ends with the
intermingling of maternal and paternal chromosomes at metaphase of the first
mitotic division of the zygote, a unicellular embryo (Fig. 2-14E).

FIGURE 2–14 Illustrations of fertilization, the procession of events beginning
when the sperm contacts the secondary oocyte’s plasma membrane, and ending
with the intermingling of maternal and paternal chromosomes at metaphase of
the first mitotic division of the zygote. A, Secondary oocyte surrounded by
several sperms, two of which have penetrated the corona radiata. (Only 4 of the

23 chromosome pairs are shown.) B, The corona radiata is not shown, a sperm
has entered the oocyte, and the second meiotic division has occurred, forming a
mature oocyte. The nucleus of the oocyte is now the female pronucleus. C, The
sperm head has enlarged to form the male pronucleus. This cell, now called an
ootid, contains the male and female pronuclei. D, The pronuclei are fusing. E,
The zygote has formed; it contains 46 chromosomes, the diploid number.
Defects at any stage in the sequence of these events might cause the zygote to
die. The fertilization process takes approximately 24 hours. Transgenic and gene
knockout studies in animals have shown that carbohydrate-binding molecules
and gamete-specific proteins on the surface of the sperms are involved in sperm–
egg recognition and their union.

Phases of Fertilization
Fertilization is a sequence of coordinated events (see Figs. 2-13 and 2-14):
• Passage of a sperm through the corona radiata. Dispersal of the follicular
cells of the corona radiata surrounding the oocyte and zona pellucida appears to
result mainly from the action of the enzyme hyaluronidase released from the
acrosome of the sperm, but the evidence of this is not unequivocal. Tubal
mucosal enzymes also appear to assist the dispersal. Movements of the tail of the
sperm are also important in its penetration of the corona radiata.
• Penetration of the zona pellucida. Passage of a sperm through the zona
pellucida is the important phase in the initiation of fertilization. Formation of a
pathway also results from the action of enzymes released from the acrosome.
The enzymes esterases, acrosin, and neuraminidase appear to cause lysis of the
zona pellucida, thereby forming a path for the sperm to follow to the oocyte. The
most important of these enzymes is acrosin, a proteolytic enzyme. Once the
sperm penetrates the zona pellucida, a zona reaction—a change in the properties
of the zona pellucida—occurs that makes it impermeable to other sperms. The
composition of this extracellular glycoprotein coat changes after fertilization.
The zona reaction is believed to result from the action of lysosomal enzymes
released by cortical granules near the plasma membrane of the oocyte. The
contents of these granules, which are released into the perivitelline space (see
Fig. 2-13A), also cause changes in the plasma membrane that make it
impermeable to other sperms.
• Fusion of cell membranes of the oocyte and sperm. The plasma or cell
membranes of the oocyte and sperm fuse and break down at the area of fusion.
The head and tail of the sperm enter the cytoplasm of the oocyte, but the sperm’s
cell membrane (plasma membrane) and mitochondria remains behind (see Fig.
2-13B).
• Completion of the second meiotic division of oocyte and formation of
female pronucleus. Penetration of the oocyte by a sperm activates the oocyte
into completing the second meiotic division and forming a mature oocyte and a
second polar body (see Fig. 2-14B). Following decondensation of the maternal
chromosomes, the nucleus of the mature oocyte becomes the female pronucleus.
• Formation of the male pronucleus. Within the cytoplasm of the oocyte, the
nucleus of the sperm enlarges to form the male pronucleus and the tail of the
sperm degenerates (Fig. 2-14C). Morphologically, the male and female pronuclei

are indistinguishable. During growth of the pronuclei, they replicate their DNA-
1 n (haploid), 2 c (two chromatids). The oocyte containing the two haploid
pronuclei is called an ootid.
• As the pronuclei fuse into a single diploid aggregation of chromosomes, the
ootid becomes a zygote. The chromosomes in the zygote become arranged on a
cleavage spindle (see Fig. 2-14E) in preparation for cleavage of the zygote (see
Fig. 2-16).
The zygote is genetically unique because half of its chromosomes came from the
mother and half from the father. The zygote contains a new combination of
chromosomes that is different from that in the cells of either of the parents. This
mechanism forms the basis of biparental inheritance and variation of the human
species. Meiosis allows independent assortment of maternal and paternal
chromosomes among the germ cells (see Fig. 2-2). Crossing over of
chromosomes, by relocating segments of the maternal and paternal
chromosomes, “shuffles” the genes, thereby producing a recombination of
genetic material. The embryo’s chromosomal sex is determined at fertilization
by the kind of sperm (X or Y) that fertilizes the oocyte. Fertilization by an X-
bearing sperm produces a 46, XX zygote, which develops into a female, whereas
fertilization by a Y-bearing sperm produces a 46, XY zygote, which develops
into a male.

Fertilization
• Stimulates the penetrated oocyte to complete the second meiotic division.
• Restores the normal diploid number of chromosomes (46) in the zygote.
• Results in variation of the human species through mingling of maternal and
paternal chromosomes.
• Determines the chromosomal sex of the embryo.
• Causes metabolic activation of the ootid (nearly mature oocyte) and initiates
cleavage of the zygote.
Preselection of Embryo’s Sex
Because X and Y sperms are formed in equal numbers, the expectation is that the
sex ratio at fertilization (primary sex ratio) would be 1.00 (100 boys per 100
girls). It is well known, however, that there are more male babies than female
babies born in all countries. In North America, for example, the sex ratio at birth
(secondary sex ratio) is approximately 1.05 (105 boys per 100 girls). Various
microscopic techniques have been developed in an attempt to separate X and Y
sperms (gender selection) using:
• The differential swimming abilities of the X and Y sperms
• Different speed of migration of sperms in an electric field
• Differences in the appearance of X and Y sperms
• DNA difference between X (2.8% more DNA) and Y sperms
The use of a selected sperm sample in artificial insemination may produce the
desired sex.
Assisted Reproductive Technologies
In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo Transfer
In vitro fertilization (IVF) of oocytes and transfer of the cleaving zygotes into
the uterus have provided an opportunity for many women who are sterile (e.g.,
owing to tubal occlusion) to have children. The first of these babies was born in

1978. Since then, several million children have been born after an in vitro
fertilization procedure. The steps involved during in vitro fertilization and
embryo transfer are as follows (Fig. 2-15):
• Ovarian follicles are stimulated to grow and mature by the administration of
clomiphene citrate or gonadotropin (superovulation).
• Several mature oocytes are aspirated from mature ovarian follicles during
laparoscopy. Oocytes can also be removed by an ultrasonography-guided needle
inserted through the vaginal wall into the ovarian follicles.
• The oocytes are placed in a Petri dish containing a special culture medium and
capacitated sperms.
• Fertilization of the oocytes and cleavage of the zygotes are monitored
microscopically for 3 to 5 days.
• One to three (depending on the mother’s age) of the resulting embryos (four-to
eight-cell stage or early blastocysts) are transferred by introducing a catheter
through the vagina and cervical canal into the uterus. Any remaining embryos
are stored in liquid nitrogen for later use.
• The patient lies supine (face upward) for several hours. The chances of
multiple pregnancies are higher following IVF as is the incidence of spontaneous
abortion.

FIGURE 2–15 In vitro fertilization (IVF) and embryo transfer procedures.
Cryopreservation of Embryos
Early embryos resulting from in vitro fertilization can be preserved for long

periods by freezing them in liquid nitrogen with a cryoprotectant (e.g., glycerol
or dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO). Successful transfer of four-to eight-cell embryos
and blastocysts to the uterus after thawing is now a common practice. The
longest period of sperm cryopreservation that resulted in a live birth was
reported to be 21 years.
Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection
A sperm can be injected directly into the cytoplasm of a mature oocyte. This
technique has been successfully used for the treatment of couples for whom in
vitro fertilization failed or in cases where there are too few sperms available.
Assisted In Vivo Fertilization
A technique enabling fertilization to occur in the uterine tube is called gamete
intrafallopian (intra tubal) transfer. It involves superovulation (similar to that
used for IVF), oocyte retrieval, sperm collection, and laparoscopic placement of
several oocytes and sperms into the uterine tubes. Using this technique,
fertilization occurs in the ampulla, its usual location.
Surrogate Mothers
Some women produce mature oocytes but are unable to become pregnant, such
as a woman who has had her uterus excised (hysterectomy). In these cases, IVF
may be performed and the embryos transferred to another woman’s uterus for
development and delivery.

 Cleavage of Zygote
Cleavage consists of repeated mitotic divisions of the zygote, resulting in a rapid
increase in the number of cells (blastomeres). These embryonic cells become
smaller with each successive cleavage division (Figs. 2-16 and 2-17). Cleavage
occurs as the zygote passes along the uterine tube toward the uterus (see Fig. 2-
20). During cleavage, the zygote is within the zona pellucida. Division of the
zygote into blastomeres begins approximately 30 hours after fertilization.
Subsequent cleavage divisions follow one another, forming progressively
smaller blastomeres. After the nine-cell stage, the blastomeres change their
shape and tightly align themselves against each other to form a compact ball of
cells. This phenomenon, compaction, is probably mediated by cell-surface-
adhesion glycoproteins. Compaction permits greater cell-to-cell interaction and
is a prerequisite for segregation of the internal cells that form the inner cell mass
or embryoblast of the blastocyst (Fig. 2-16E and F). When there are 12 to 32
blastomeres, the developing human is called a morula. Internal cells of the
morula are surrounded by trophoblastic cells. The morula forms approximately 3
days after fertilization as it enters the uterus (Fig. 2-16D).

FIGURE 2–16 Illustrations of cleavage of the zygote and formation of the
blastocyst. A to D, Various stages of cleavage of the zygote. The period of the
morula begins at the 12-to 16-cell stage and ends when the blastocyst forms. E
and F, Sections of blastocysts. The zona pellucida has disappeared by the late
blastocyst stage (5 days). The second polar bodies shown in A are small,

nonfunctional cells. Cleavage of the zygote and formation of the morula occur as
the dividing zygote passes along the uterine tube. Blastocyst formation occurs in
the uterus. Although cleavage increases the number of blastomeres, note that
each of the daughter cells is smaller than the parent cells. As a result, there is no
increase in the size of the developing embryo until the zona pellucida
degenerates. The blastocyst then enlarges considerably (F).
FIGURE 2–17 A, Two-cell stage of a cleaving zygote developing in vitro.
Observe that it is surrounded by many sperms. B, In vitro fertilization, two-cell
stage human embryo. The zona pellucida has been removed. A small rounded
polar body (pink) is still present on the surface of a blastomere (artificially
colored, scanning electron microscopy, ×1000). C, Three-cell stage human
embryo, in vitro fertilization (scanning electron microscopy, ×1300). D, Eight-
cell stage human embryo, in vitro fertilization (scanning electron microscopy,
×1100). Note the rounded large blastomeres with several spermatozoa attached.
(A, Courtesy of M.T. Zenzes, In Vitro Fertilization Program, Toronto Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; D, From Makabe S, Naguro T, Motta PM: Three-
dimensional features of human cleaving embryo by ODO method and field
emission scanning electron microscopy. In Motta PM: Microscopy of

Reproduction and Development: A Dynamic Approach. Rome, Antonio Delfino
Editore, 1997.)
Mosaicism
If nondisjunction (failure of a chromosome pair to separate) occurs during an
early cleavage division of a zygote, an embryo with two or more cell lines with
different chromosome complements is produced. Individuals in whom numerical
mosaicism is present are mosaics; for example, a zygote with an additional
chromosome 21 might lose the extra chromosome during an early division of the
zygote. Consequently, some cells of the embryo would have a normal
chromosome complement and others would have an additional chromosome 21.
In general, individuals who are mosaic for a given trisomy, such as the mosaic
Down syndrome, are less severely affected than those with the usual nonmosaic
condition.

 Formation of Blastocyst
Shortly after the morula enters the uterus (approximately 4 days after
fertilization), a fluid-filled space, the blastocystic cavity, appears inside the
morula (Fig. 2-16E). The fluid passes from the uterine cavity through the zona
pellucida to form this space. As fluid increases in the blastocystic cavity, it
separates the blastomeres into two parts:
• A thin, outer cell layer, the trophoblast (Greek trophe, nutrition), which gives
rise to the embryonic part of the placenta
• A group of centrally located blastomeres, the embryoblast (inner cell mass),
which gives rise to the embryo
Early pregnancy factor, an immunosuppressant protein, is secreted by the
trophoblastic cells and appears in the maternal serum within 24 to 48 hours after
fertilization. Early pregnancy factor forms the basis of a pregnancy test during
the first 10 days of development.
During this stage of development—known as blastogenesis—the conceptus is
called a blastocyst (Fig. 2-18). The embryoblast now projects into the
blastocystic cavity and the trophoblast forms the wall of the blastocyst. After the
blastocyst has floated in the uterine secretions for approximately 2 days, the
zona pellucida gradually degenerates and disappears (Figs. 2-16F and 2-18A).
Shedding of the zona pellucida and hatching of the blastocyst have been
observed in vitro. Shedding of the zona pellucida permits the hatched blastocyst
to increase rapidly in size. While floating in the uterus, the embryo derives
nourishment from secretions of the uterine glands.

FIGURE 2–18 Photomicrographs of sections of human blastocysts recovered
from the uterine cavity (×600). A, At 4 days: the blastocystic cavity is just
beginning to form and the zona pellucida is deficient over part of the blastocyst.
B, At 4.5 days; the blastocystic cavity has enlarged and the embryoblast and
trophoblast are clearly defined. The zona pellucida has disappeared.
(From Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC: Am J Anat 98:435, 1956. Courtesy of the
Carnegie Institution of Washington.)
Approximately 6 days after fertilization (day 20 of a 28-day menstrual cycle),
the blastocyst attaches to the endometrial epithelium, usually adjacent to the
embryonic pole (Fig. 2-19A). As soon as it attaches to the endometrial
epithelium, the trophoblast proliferates rapidly and differentiates into two layers
(Fig. 2-19B):
• An inner layer of cytotrophoblast
• An outer layer of syncytiotrophoblast consisting of a multinucleated
protoplasmic mass in which no cell boundaries can be observed

FIGURE 2–19 Attachment of the blastocyst to the endometrial epithelium during
the early stages of implantation. A, At 6 days: the trophoblast is attached to the
endometrial epithelium at the embryonic pole of the blastocyst. B, At 7 days: the
syncytiotrophoblast has penetrated the epithelium and has started to invade the
endometrial connective tissue. Note: Some students have difficulty interpreting
illustrations such as these because in histologic studies, it is conventional to

draw the endometrial epithelium upward, whereas in embryologic studies, the
embryo is usually shown with its dorsal surface upward. Because the embryo
implants on its future dorsal surface, it would appear upside down if the
histologic convention were followed. In this book, the histologic convention is
followed when the endometrium is the dominant consideration (e.g., Fig. 2-6C),
and the embryologic convention is used when the embryo is the center of
interest, as in the adjacent illustrations.
Both intrinsic and extracellular matrix factors modulate, in carefully timed
sequences, the differentiation of the trophoblast. Transforming growth factor-β
(TGF-β) regulates the proliferation and differentiation of the trophoblast by
interaction of the ligand with Type I and Type II receptors, serine/threonine
protein kinases. At approximately 6 days, the finger-like processes of
syncytiotrophoblast extend through the endometrial epithelium and invade the
connective tissue. By the end of the first week, the blastocyst is superficially
implanted in the compact layer of the endometrium and is deriving its
nourishment from the eroded maternal tissues (Fig. 2-19B). The highly invasive
syncytiotrophoblast expands quickly adjacent to the embryoblast, the area
known as the embryonic pole (Fig. 2-19A). The syncytiotrophoblast produces
enzymes that erode the maternal tissues, enabling the blastocyst to “burrow” into
the endometrium. At approximately 7 days, a layer of cells, the hypoblast
(primary endoderm), appears on the surface of the embryoblast facing the
blastocystic cavity (Fig. 2-19). Comparative embryologic data suggest that the
hypoblast arises by delamination of blastomeres from the embryoblast.
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis can be carried out 3 to 5 days after in vitro
fertilization of the oocyte. One or two cells (blastomeres) are removed from the
embryo known to be at risk of a single gene defect or chromosomal anomaly.
These cells are then analyzed before transfer into the uterus. The sex of the
embryo can also be determined from one blastomere taken from a six-to eight-
cell dividing zygote and analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) techniques. This procedure has been used to detect
female embryos during in vitro fertilization in cases in which a male embryo
would be at risk of a serious X-linked disorder. The polar body may also be
tested for diseases where the mother is the carrier (Fig. 2-14A).

Abnormal Embryos and Spontaneous Abortions
Many zygotes, morulae, and blastocysts abort spontaneously. Early implantation
of the blastocyst is a critical period of development that may fail to occur owing
to inadequate production of progesterone and estrogen by the corpus luteum.
Clinicians occasionally see a patient who states that her last menstrual period
was delayed by several days and that her last menstrual flow was unusually
profuse. Very likely such patients have had early spontaneous abortions. The
overall early spontaneous abortion rate is thought to be approximately 45%.
Early spontaneous abortions occur for a variety of reasons, one being the
presence of chromosomal abnormalities. More than half of all known
spontaneous abortions occur because of these abnormalities. The early loss of
embryos appears to represent a removal of abnormal conceptuses that could not
have developed normally, that is, natural screening of embryos, without which
the incidence of infants born with birth defects would be far greater.

Summary of First Week (Fig. 2-20)
• Oocytes are produced by the ovaries (oogenesis) and expelled from them
during ovulation. The fimbriae of the uterine tube sweep the oocyte into the
ampulla where it may be fertilized.
• Sperms are produced in the testes (spermatogenesis) and are stored in the
epididymis. Ejaculation of semen results in the deposit of millions of sperms in
the vagina. Several hundred sperms pass through the uterus and enter the uterine
tubes.
• When an oocyte is contacted by a sperm, it completes the second meiotic
division. As a result, a mature oocyte and a second polar body are formed. The
nucleus of the mature oocyte constitutes the female pronucleus.
• After the sperm enters the oocyte, the head of the sperm separates from the tail
and enlarges to become the male pronucleus. Fertilization is complete when the
male and female pronuclei unite and the maternal and paternal chromosomes
intermingle during metaphase of the first mitotic division of the zygote.
• As it passes along the uterine tube toward the uterus, the zygote undergoes
cleavage (a series of mitotic cell divisions) into a number of smaller cells—
blastomeres. Approximately 3 days after fertilization, a ball of 12 or more
blastomeres—a morula—enters the uterus.
• A cavity forms in the morula, converting it into a blastocyst consisting of the
embryoblast, a blastocystic cavity, and the trophoblast. The trophoblast encloses
the embryoblast and blastocystic cavity and later forms extraembryonic
structures and the embryonic part of the placenta.
• Four to 5 days after fertilization, the zona pellucida is shed and the trophoblast
adjacent to the embryoblast attaches to the endometrial epithelium.
• The trophoblast at the embryonic pole differentiates into two layers, an outer
syncytiotrophoblast and an inner cytotrophoblast. The syncytiotrophoblast
invades the endometrial epithelium and underlying connective tissue.
Concurrently, a cuboidal layer of hypoblast forms on the deep surface of the
embryoblast. By the end of the first week, the blastocyst is superficially
implanted in the endometrium (Fig. 2-19B).

FIGURE 2–20 Summary of the ovarian cycle, fertilization, and human
development during the first week. Stage 1 of development begins with
fertilization in the uterine tube and ends when the zygote forms. Stage 2 (days 2
to 3) comprises the early stages of cleavage (from 2 to approximately 32 cells,
the morula). Stage 3 (days 4 to 5) consists of the free (unattached) blastocyst.
Stage 4 (days 5 to 6) is represented by the blastocyst attaching to the posterior
wall of the uterus, the usual site of implantation. The blastocysts have been
sectioned to show their internal structure.

Clinically Oriented Problems
• What is the main cause of numerical aberrations of chromosomes? Define this
process. What is the usual result of this chromosomal abnormality?
• During in vitro cleavage of a zygote, all blastomeres of a morula were found to
have an extra set of chromosomes. Explain how this could happen. Can such a
morula develop into a viable fetus?
• In infertile couples, the inability to conceive is attributable to some factor in the
woman or the man. What is a major cause of (a) female infertility and (b) male
infertility?
• Some people have a mixture of cells with 46 and 47 chromosomes (e.g., some
persons with Down syndrome are mosaics). How do mosaics form? Would
children with mosaicism and Down syndrome have the same stigmata as other
infants with this syndrome? At what stage of development does mosaicism
develop? Can this chromosomal abnormality be diagnosed before birth?
• A young woman who feared that she might be pregnant asked you about the so-
called morning-after pills (postcoital oral contraceptives). How would you
explain to her the action of such medication?
• What is the most common abnormality in early spontaneously aborted
embryos?
• Mary, 26 years old, is unable to conceive after 4 years of marriage. Her
husband, Jerry, 32 years old, appears to be in good health. Mary and Jerry
consulted their family physician who referred them to an infertility clinic. How
common is infertility in couples who want to have a baby? What do you think is
the likely problem in this couple? What investigation(s) would you recommend
first?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Alfarawati S, Goodall N, Gordon T, et al. Cytogenetic analysis of human
blastocysts with the use of FISH, CGH and aCGH: scientific data and technical
evaluation. Hum Reprod. 2010;25(Suppl 1):i41.
American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Revised guidelines for human
embryology and andrology laboratories. Fertil Steril. 2008;90(Supplement):s45.

Antonucc N, Stronati A, Manes S, et al. Setup of a novel in-vitro sperm head
decondensation protocol for a rapid flow cytometric measurement of the DNA
content. Hum Reprod. 2010;25(Suppl 1):i24.
Bouffard C, Viville S, Knoppers BM. Genetic diagnosis of embryos: clear
explanation, not rhetoric, is needed. CMAJ. 2009;181:387.
Barratt CLR, Kay V, Oxenham SK. The human spermatozoa—a stripped down
but refined machine. J Biol. 2009;8:63.
Clermont Y, Trott M. Kinetics of spermatogenesis in mammals: seminiferous
epithelium cycle and spermatogonial renewal. Physiol Rev. 1972;52:198.
Duggavathi R, Murphy BD. Ovulation signals. Science. 2009;324:890.
Fragouli E, Lenzi M, Ross R, et al. Comprehensive molecular cytogenetic
analysis of the human blastocyst stage. Hum Reprod. 2008;23:2596.
Frey KA. Male reproductive health and infertility. Prim Care Clin Office Prac.
2010;37:643.
Hampton T. Researchers discover a range of factors undermine sperm quality,
male fertility. JAMA. 2005;294:2829.
. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis. Harper J, editor, 2nd ed. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2009.
Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC, Menkin MC. Thirty-four fertilized human ova,
good, bad, and indifferent, recovered from 210 women of known fertility.
Pediatrics. 1959;23:202.
Hillier SG. Gonadotropic control of ovarian follicular growth and development.
Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001;179:39.
Gunby J, Bissonnette F, Librach C, Cowan L. Assisted reproductive technologies
(ART) in Canada: 2007 results from the Canadian ART Register. Fertil Steril.
2011;95:542.
Kader AA, Choi A, Orief Y, et al. Factors affecting the outcome of human
blastocyst. Reprod Biol Endocrin. 2009;7:99.

Myers M, Pangas SA. Regulatory roles of transforming growth factor beta
family members in folliculogenesis. WIREs Syst Biol Med. 2010;2:117.
Nusbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in
Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004.
Pauli S, Berga SL, Shang W, et al. Current status of the approach to assisted
reproduction. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009;56:467.
Robertson SA. Immune regulation of embryo implantation – all about quality
control. J Reprod Immun. 2009;81:113.
Rock J, Hertig AT. The human conceptus during the first two weeks of gestation.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1948;55:6.
Shi L. Epigenetic regulation in mammalian preimplantation embryo
development. Rep Biol Endocrin. 2009;7:59.
Steptoe PC, Edwards RG. Birth after implantation of a human embryo. Lancet.
1978;2:36.
Wasserman PM. Mammalian fertilization: the strange case of sperm protein 56.
Bioessays. 2009;31:153.
Weremowicz S, Sandstrom DJ, Morton CC, et al. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) for rapid detection of aneuploidy: experience in 911
prenatal cases. Prenat Diagn. 2001;21:262.
Wilmut I, Schnieke AE, McWhir J, et al. Viable offspring derived from fetal and
adult mammalian cells. Nature. 1997;385:810.

Chapter 3 Second Week of Human Development
Completion of Implantation of Blastocyst 41
Formation of Amniotic Cavity, Embryonic Disc, and Umbilical Vesicle 43
Development of Chorionic Sac 44
Implantation Sites of Blastocysts 48
Summary of Implantation 48
Summary of Second Week 51
Clinically Oriented Problems 51
As implantation of the blastocyst occurs, morphologic changes in the
embryoblast produce a bilaminar embryonic disc composed of epiblast and
hypoblast (Fig. 3-1A). The embryonic disc gives rise to the germ layers that
form all the tissues and organs of the embryo. Extraembryonic structures
forming during the second week are the amniotic cavity, amnion, umbilical
vesicle (yolk sac), connecting stalk, and chorionic sac.

FIGURE 3–1 Implantation of a blastocyst in the endometrium. The actual size of
the conceptus is 0.1 mm, approximately the size of the period at the end of this
sentence. A, Drawing of a section through a blastocyst partially embedded in the
uterine endometrium (approximately 8 days). Note the slit-like amniotic cavity.
B, Drawing of a section through a blastocyst of approximately 9 days implanted
in the endometrium. Note the lacunae appearing in the syncytiotrophoblast.

Completion of Implantation of
Blastocyst
Implantation of the blastocyst is completed during the second week. It occurs
during a restricted time period 6 to 10 days after ovulation. As the blastocyst
implants (Fig. 3-1), more trophoblast contacts the endometrium and
differentiates into two layers:
• An inner layer, the cytotrophoblast that is mitotically active (i.e., mitotic
figures are visible) and forms new cells that migrate into the increasing mass of
syncytiotrophoblast, where they fuse and lose their cell membranes
• The syncytiotrophoblast, a rapidly expanding, multinucleated mass in which no
cell boundaries are discernible
The erosive syncytiotrophoblast invades the endometrial connective tissue and
the blastocyst slowly becomes imbedded in the endometrium (Fig. 3-2).
Syncytiotrophoblastic cells displace endometrial cells at the implantation site.
The endometrial cells undergo apoptosis (programmed cell death), which
facilitates the invasion.

FIGURE 3–2 Embedded blastocysts. A, 10 days; B, 12 days. This stage of
development is characterized by communication of the blood-filled lacunar
networks. Note in B that coelomic spaces have appeared in the extraembryonic
mesoderm, forming the beginning of the extraembryonic coelom (cavity).

The molecular mechanisms of implantation involve synchronization between the
invading blastocyst and a receptive endometrium. The microvilli of endometrial
cells, cell adhesion molecules (integrins), cytokines, prostaglandins, hormones
(hCG and progesterone) growth factors, and extracellular matrix and enzymes
(matrix metalloproteinase and protein kinase A) play a role in making the
endometrium receptive. The connective tissue cells around the implantation site
accumulate glycogen and lipids and assume a polyhedral appearance. Some of
these cells—decidual cells—degenerate adjacent to the penetrating
syncytiotrophoblast. The syncytiotrophoblast engulfs these cells, providing a
rich source of embryonic nutrition.
The syncytiotrophoblast produces a glycoprotein hormone, human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG), which enters the maternal blood via isolated cavities
(lacunae) in the syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 3-1B). hCG maintains the hormonal
activity of the corpus luteum in the ovary during pregnancy. The corpus luteum
is an endocrine glandular structure that secretes estrogen and progesterone to
maintain pregnancy. Highly sensitive radioimmunoassays are available for
detecting hCG and forms the basis for pregnancy tests. Enough hCG is produced
by the syncytiotrophoblast at the end of the second week to give a positive
pregnancy test, even though the woman is probably unaware that she is pregnant.

 Formation of Amniotic Cavity,
Embryonic Disc, and Umbilical
Vesicle
As implantation of the blastocyst progresses, a small space appears in the
embryoblast. This space is the primordium of the amniotic cavity (Figs. 3-1A
and 3-2B). Soon amniogenic (amnion-forming) cells—amnioblasts—separate
from the epiblast and form the amnion, which encloses the amniotic cavity.
Concurrently, morphologic changes occur in the embryoblast (cluster of cells
from which the embryo develops) that result in the formation of a flat, almost
circular bilaminar plate of cells, the embryonic disc, consisting of two layers
(Fig. 3-2A and B):
• Epiblast, the thicker layer, consisting of high columnar cells related to the
amniotic cavity
• Hypoblast, consisting of small cuboidal cells adjacent to the exocoelomic
cavity
The epiblast forms the floor of the amniotic cavity and is continuous peripherally
with the amnion. The hypoblast forms the roof of the exocoelomic cavity (Fig.
3-1A) and is continuous with the thin exocoelomic membrane. This membrane,
together with the hypoblast, lines the primary umbilical vesicle (yolk sac). The
embryonic disc now lies between the amniotic cavity and the vesicle (Fig. 3-1B).
Cells from the vesicle endoderm form a layer of connective tissue, the
extraembryonic mesoderm (Fig. 3-2A), which surrounds the amnion and
umbilical vesicle. The umbilical vesicle and amniotic cavities make
morphogenetic movements of the cells of the embryonic disc possible.
As the amnion, embryonic disc, and primary umbilical vesicle form, lacunae
(small spaces) appear in the syncytiotrophoblast (Figs. 3-1A and 3-2). The
lacunae become filled with a mixture of maternal blood from ruptured
endometrial capillaries and cellular debris from eroded uterine glands. The fluid
in the lacunar spaces—embryotroph—passes to the embryonic disc by diffusion
and provides nutritive material to the embryo.

The communication of the eroded endometrial capillaries with the lacunae in the
syncytiotrophoblast establishes the primordial uteroplacental circulation.
When maternal blood flows into the lacunar networks, oxygen and nutritive
substances pass to the embryo. Oxygenated blood passes into the lacunae from
the spiral endometrial arteries, and poorly oxygenated blood is removed from
them through the endometrial veins.
The 10-day human conceptus (embryo and extraembryonic membranes) is
completely embedded in the uterine endometrium (Fig. 3-2A). Initially there is a
surface defect in the endometrial epithelium that is soon closed by a closing
plug of a fibrin coagulum of blood. By day 12, an almost completely
regenerated uterine epithelium covers the closing plug (see Fig. 3-3B). This
partially results from signaling by cAMP and progesterone. As the conceptus
implants, the endometrial connective tissue cells undergo a transformation, the
decidual reaction. After the cells swell because of the accumulation of glycogen
and lipid in their cytoplasm, they are known as decidual cells. The primary
function of the decidual reaction is to provide nutrition for the early embryo and
an immunologically privileged site for the conceptus.

FIGURE 3–3 Photograph of the endometrial surface of the body of the uterus,
showing the implantation site of the 12-day embryo shown in Figure 3-4. The
implanted conceptus produces a small elevation (arrow) (×8).
(From Hertig AT, Rock J: Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst 29:127, 1941.
Courtesy of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC.)
In a 12-day embryo, adjacent syncytiotrophoblastic lacunae have fused to form
lacunar networks (Fig. 3-2B), giving the syncytiotrophoblast a sponge-like
appearance. The networks, particularly obvious around the embryonic pole, are
the primordia of the intervillous spaces of the placenta (see Chapter 7). The
endometrial capillaries around the implanted embryo become congested and
dilated to form sinusoids, thin-walled terminal vessels that are larger than
ordinary capillaries. The formation of blood vessels in the endometrial stroma is
under the influence of estrogen and progesterone. Expression of connexin 43
(Cx43), a gap junction protein, plays a critical role in angiogenesis at the

implantation site and in maintenance of pregnancy.
The syncytiotrophoblast erodes the sinusoids and maternal blood flows freely
into the lacunar networks. The trophoblast absorbs nutritive fluid from the
lacunar networks, which is transferred to the embryo. Growth of the bilaminar
embryonic disc is slow compared with growth of the trophoblast (Figs. 3-1 and
3-2). The implanted 12-day embryo produces a minute elevation on the
endometrial surface that protrudes into the uterine cavity (Figs. 3-3 and 3-4).

FIGURE 3–4 Embedded blastocyst. A, Section through the implantation site of a
12-day embryo described in Figure 3-3. The embryo is embedded superficially
in the compact layer of the endometrium (×30). B, Higher magnification of the
conceptus (embryo and associated membranes) and uterine endometrium
surrounding it (×100). Lacunae containing maternal blood are visible in the

syncytiotrophoblast.
(From Hertig AT, Rock J: Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst 29:127, 1941.
Courtesy of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC.)
As changes occur in the trophoblast and endometrium, the extraembryonic
mesoderm increases and isolated extraembryonic coelomic spaces appear
within it (Figs. 3-2 and 3-4). These spaces rapidly fuse to form a large isolated
cavity, the extraembryonic coelom (Fig. 3-5A). This fluid-filled cavity
surrounds the amnion and umbilical vesicle, except where they are attached to
the chorion by the connecting stalk. As the extraembryonic coelom forms, the
primary umbilical vesicle decreases in size and a smaller secondary umbilical
vesicle forms (see Fig. 3-5B). This smaller vesicle is formed by extraembryonic
endodermal cells that migrate from the hypoblast inside the primary umbilical
vesicle (Fig. 3-6). During formation of the secondary umbilical vesicle, a large
part of the primary umbilical vesicle is pinched off (Fig. 3-5B). The umbilical
vesicle contains no yolk; however, it has important functions (e.g., it is the site of
origin of primordial germ cells (see Chapter 12)). It may have a role in the
selective transfer of nutrients to the embryo.

FIGURE 3–5 Drawings of sections of implanted human embryos, based mainly
on Hertig and colleagues (1956). Observe (1) the defect in the endometrial
epithelium has disappeared; (2) a small secondary umbilical vesicle has formed;
(3) a large cavity, the extraembryonic coelom, now surrounds the umbilical
vesicle and amnion, except where the amnion is attached to the chorion by the

connecting stalk; and (4) the extraembryonic coelom splits the extraembryonic
mesoderm into two layers: extraembryonic somatic mesoderm lining the
trophoblast and covering the amnion, and the extraembryonic splanchnic
mesoderm around the umbilical vesicle. A, 13-day embryo, illustrating the
decrease in relative size of the primary umbilical vesicle and the early
appearance of primary chorionic villi. B, 14-day embryo, showing the newly
formed secondary umbilical vesicle and the location of the prechordal plate in its
roof. C, Detail of the prechordal plate outlined in B.
FIGURE 3–6 Origin of embryonic tissues. The colors in the boxes are used in
drawings of sections of conceptuses.

 Development of Chorionic Sac
The end of the second week is characterized by the appearance of primary
chorionic villi (Fig. 3-5). The villi form columns with syncitial coverings. The
cellular extensions grow into the syncytiotrophoblast. The growth of these
extensions is thought to be induced by the underlying extraembryonic somatic
mesoderm. The cellular projections form primary chorionic villi, the first stage
in the development of the chorionic villi of the placenta.
The extraembryonic coelom splits the extraembryonic mesoderm into two layers
(Fig. 3-5A and B):
• Extraembryonic somatic mesoderm, lining the trophoblast and covering the
amnion
• Extraembryonic splanchnic mesoderm, surrounding the umbilical vesicle
The extraembryonic somatic mesoderm and the two layers of trophoblast form
the chorion. The chorion forms the wall of the chorionic sac (Fig. 3-5A and B),
within which the embryo, amniotic sac, and umbilical vesicle (yolk sac) are
suspended by the connecting stalk. The term umbilical vesicle is preferred
because yolk is not present in the human vesicle. The extraembryonic coelom is
now called the chorionic cavity.
Transvaginal ultrasonography (endovaginal sonography) is used for measuring
the chorionic sac diameter (Fig. 3-7). This measurement is valuable for
evaluating early embryonic development and pregnancy outcome.

FIGURE 3–7 Endovaginal sonogram (sagittal and axial) of an early chorionic
(gestational) sac (5 weeks) (+). The mean chorionic sac diameter is calculated

from the three orthogonal measurements (d1, d2, d3) and dividing by 3. The
secondary umbilical vesicle (yolk sac) can also be seen.
(Courtesy of E.A. Lyons, M.D., Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and
Gynecology, and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
A 14-day embryo still has the form of a flat bilaminar embryonic disc (Fig. 3-8),
but the hypoblastic cells in a localized area are now columnar and form a
thickened circular area—the prechordal plate (Fig. 3-5B and C). The
prechordal plate indicates the site of the mouth and is an important organizer of
the head region.

FIGURE 3–8 Photomicrographs of longitudinal sections of an embedded 14-day
embryo. Note the large size of the extraembryonic coelom. A, Low-power view
(×18). B, High-power view (×95). The embryo is represented by the bilaminar
embryonic disc composed of epiblast and hypoblast.

(From Nishimura H (ed): Atlas of Human Prenatal Histology. Tokyo, Igaku-
Shoin, 1983)

Implantation Sites of Blastocysts
Implantation of blastocysts usually occurs in the uterine endometrium in the
superior part of the body of the uterus, slightly more often on the posterior than
on the anterior wall of the uterus. Implantation of a blastocyst can be detected by
ultrasonography and highly sensitive radioimmunoassays of hCG as early as the
end of the second week (Figs. 3-9 to 3-11).
FIGURE 3–9 A, Frontal section of the uterus and left uterine tube, illustrating an
ectopic pregnancy in the ampulla of the tube. B, Ectopic tubal pregnancy.
Endovaginal axial sonogram of the uterine fundus and isthmic portion of the
right uterine tube. The ring-like mass is a 4-week ectopic chorionic sac in the
tube.
(Courtesy of E.A. Lyons, M.D., Professor of Radiology and Obstetrics and
Gynecology, and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 3–10 Implantation sites of blastocysts. The usual site in the posterior
wall of the body of the uterus is indicated by an X. The approximate order of
frequency of ectopic implantations is indicated alphabetically (A, most common,
H, least common). A to F, tubal pregnancies; G, abdominal pregnancy; H,
ovarian pregnancy. Tubal pregnancies are the most common type of ectopic
pregnancy. Although appropriately included with uterine pregnancy sites, a
cervical pregnancy is often considered to be an ectopic pregnancy.

FIGURE 3–11 Tubal pregnancy. The uterine tube has been surgically removed
and sectioned to show the 5-week old embryo (10 mm crown-rump length CRL)
within the opened chorionic sac (C). Note the fragments of the amnion (A) and
the thin mucosal folds (M) of the uterine tube projecting into the lumen of the
tube.
(Courtesy of Ed Uthman, M.D., pathologist, Houston/Richmond, TX.)
Extrauterine Implantations
Blastocysts sometimes implant outside the uterus. These implantations result in
ectopic pregnancies; 95% to 98% of ectopic implantations occur in the uterine
tubes, most often in the ampulla and isthmus (Figs. 3-9 to 3-11). The incidence
of ectopic pregnancy has increased in most countries, ranging from 1 in 80 to 1
in 250 pregnancies, depending on the socioeconomic level of the population. In
the United States, the frequency of ectopic pregnancy is approximately 2% of all
pregnancies; tubal pregnancy is the main cause of maternal deaths during the
first trimester.
A woman with a tubal pregnancy has signs and symptoms of pregnancy (e.g.,
misses her menstrual period). She may also experience abdominal pain and

tenderness because of distention of the uterine tube, abnormal bleeding, and
irritation of the pelvic peritoneum (peritonitis). The pain may be confused with
appendicitis if the pregnancy is in the right uterine tube. Ectopic pregnancies
produce β-human chorionic gonadotropin at a slower rate than normal
pregnancies; consequently β-human chorionic gonadotropin assays may give
false-negative results if performed too early. Transvaginal ultrasonography is
very helpful in the early detection of ectopic tubal pregnancies.
There are several causes of tubal pregnancy, and are often related to factors that
delay or prevent transport of the cleaving zygote to the uterus, for example, by
mucosal adhesions in the uterine tube or from blockage of the tube that is caused
by scarring resulting from pelvic inflammatory disease. Ectopic tubal
pregnancies usually result in rupture of the uterine tube and hemorrhage into the
peritoneal cavity during the first 8 weeks, followed by death of the embryo.
Tubal rupture and hemorrhage constitute a threat to the mother’s life. The
affected tube and conceptus are usually surgically removed (Fig. 3-11).
When blastocysts implant in the isthmus of the uterine tube (see Fig. 3-10D), the
tube tends to rupture early because this narrow part of the tube is relatively
unexpandable, and often with extensive bleeding, probably because of the rich
anastomoses between ovarian and uterine vessels in this area. When blastocysts
implant in the uterine (intramural) part of the tube (Fig. 3-10E), they may
develop beyond 8 weeks before expulsion occurs. When an intramural uterine
tubal pregnancy ruptures, it usually bleeds profusely.
Blastocysts that implant in the ampulla or on fimbriae of the uterine tube may be
expelled into the peritoneal cavity where they commonly implant in the
rectouterine pouch (a pocket formed by the deflection of the peritoneum from
the rectum to the uterus). In exceptional cases, an abdominal pregnancy may
continue to full term and the fetus may be delivered alive through an abdominal
incision. Usually, however, the placenta attaches to abdominal organs (Fig. 3-
10G) and causes considerable intraperitoneal bleeding. Abdominal pregnancy
increases the risk of maternal death from hemorrhage by a factor of 90 when
compared with an intrauterine pregnancy, and seven times more than that for
tubal pregnancy. In very unusual cases, an abdominal conceptus dies and is not
detected; the fetus becomes calcified, forming a “stone fetus”—lithopedion
(Greek lithos, stone, + paidion, child).
Simultaneous intrauterine and extrauterine pregnancies are unusual, occurring

approximately 1 in 7000 pregnancies. The ectopic pregnancy is masked initially
by the presence of the uterine pregnancy. Usually the ectopic pregnancy can be
terminated by surgical removal of the involved uterine tube without interfering
with the intrauterine pregnancy (Fig. 3-11).
Cervical implantations are unusual (Fig. 3-10); in some cases, the placenta
becomes firmly attached to fibrous and muscular tissues of the cervix, often
resulting in bleeding and requiring subsequent surgical intervention, such as
hysterectomy (excision of uterus).

 Summary of Implantation
Implantation of the blastocyst in the uterine endometrium begins at the end of
the first week and is completed by the end of the second week. The cellular and
molecular events relating to implantation are complex. Implantation may be
summarized as follows: • The zona pellucida degenerates (day 5). Its
disappearance results from enlargement of the blastocyst and degeneration
caused by enzymatic lysis. The lytic enzymes are released from the acrosomes of
the sperms that surround and partially penetrate the zona pellucida.
• The blastocyst adheres to the endometrial epithelium (day 6).
• The trophoblast differentiates into two layers: the syncytiotrophoblast and
cytotrophoblast (day 7).
• The syncytiotrophoblast erodes endometrial tissues and the blastocyst begins to
embed in the endometrium (day 8).
• Blood-filled lacunae appear in the syncytiotrophoblast (day 9).
• The blastocyst sinks beneath the endometrial epithelium and the defect is filled
by a closing plug (day 10).
• Lacunar networks form by fusion of adjacent lacunae (days 10 and 11).
• The syncytiotrophoblast erodes endometrial blood vessels, allowing maternal
blood to seep in and out of lacunar networks, thereby establishing a
uteroplacental circulation (days 11 and 12).
• The defect in the endometrial epithelium is repaired (days 12 and 13).
• Primary chorionic villi develop (days 13 and 14).
Placenta Previa
Implantation of a blastocyst in the inferior segment of the uterus near the internal
os (opening) of the cervix results in placenta previa, a placenta that partially or
completely covers the os (Fig. 3-10). Placenta previa may cause bleeding
because of premature separation of the placenta during pregnancy or at the time
of delivery of the fetus (see Chapter 7).
Spontaneous Abortion of Embryos and fetuses Miscarriage (early pregnancy

loss) occurs within the first 12 completed weeks of pregnancy with a frequency
of 10% to 20%. Most spontaneous abortions (miscarriage) of embryos occur
during the first 3 weeks. Sporadic and recurrent spontaneous abortions are two
of the most common gynecologic problems. The frequency of early spontaneous
abortions is difficult to establish because they often occur before a woman is
aware that she is pregnant. A spontaneous abortion occurring several days after
the first missed period is very likely to be mistaken for a delayed menstruation.
More than 50% of all known spontaneous abortions result from chromosomal
abnormalities. The higher incidence of early spontaneous abortions in older
women probably results from the increasing frequency of nondisjunction during
oogenesis (see Chapter 2). It has been estimated that 30% to 50% of all zygotes
never develop into blastocysts and implant. Failure of blastocysts to implant may
result from a poorly developed endometrium; however, in many cases, there are
probably lethal chromosomal abnormalities in the embryo. There is a higher
incidence of spontaneous abortion of fetuses with neural tube defects, cleft lip,
and cleft palate.
Inhibition of Implantation
The administration of relatively large doses of progestins and/or estrogens
(“morning-after pills”) for several days, beginning shortly after unprotected
sexual intercourse, usually does not prevent fertilization but often prevents
implantation of the blastocyst. A high dose of diethylstilbestrol, given daily for 5
to 6 days, may also accelerate passage of the cleaving zygote along the uterine
tube. Normally, the endometrium progresses to the luteal phase of the menstrual
cycle as the zygote forms, undergoes cleavage, and enters the uterus. The large
amount of estrogen disturbs the normal balance between estrogen and
progesterone that is necessary for preparation of the endometrium for
implantation.
An intrauterine device inserted into the uterus through the vagina and cervix
usually interferes with implantation by causing a local inflammatory reaction.
Some intrauterine devices contain progesterone that is slowly released and
interferes with the development of the endometrium so that implantation does
not usually occur.

Summary of Second Week
• Rapid proliferation and differentiation of the trophoblast occurs as the
blastocyst completes implantation in the uterine endometrium.
• The endometrial changes resulting from the adaptation of these tissues in
preparation for implantation are known as the decidual reaction.
• Concurrently, the primary umbilical vesicle (yolk sac) forms and
extraembryonic mesoderm develops. The extraembryonic coelom (cavity)
forms from spaces that develop in the extraembryonic mesoderm. The coelom
later becomes the chorionic cavity.
• The primary umbilical vesicle becomes smaller and gradually disappears as the
secondary umbilical vesicle develops.
• The amniotic cavity appears as a space between the cytotrophoblast and
embryoblast.
• The embryoblast differentiates into a bilaminar embryonic disc consisting of
epiblast, related to the amniotic cavity, and hypoblast, adjacent to the
blastocystic cavity.
• The prechordal plate develops as a localized thickening of the hypoblast,
which indicates the future cranial region of the embryo and the future site of the
mouth; the prechordal plate is also an important organizer of the head region.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 3–1
A 22-year-old woman who complained of a severe “chest cold” was sent for a
radiograph of her thorax.
• Is it advisable to examine a healthy female’s chest radiographically during the
last week of her menstrual cycle?
• Are birth defects likely to develop in her conceptus if she happens to be
pregnant?

Case 3–2
A woman who was sexually assaulted during her fertile phase was given large
doses of estrogen twice for 1 day to interrupt a possible pregnancy.
• If fertilization had occurred, what do you think would be the mechanism of
action of this hormone?
• What do laypeople call this type of medical treatment? Is this what the media
refer to as the “abortion pill”? If not, explain the method of action of the
hormone treatment.
• How early can a pregnancy be detected?

Case 3–3
A 23-year-old woman consulted her physician about severe right lower
abdominal pain. She said that she had missed two menstrual periods. A
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was made.
• What techniques might be used to enable this diagnosis?
• What is the most likely site of the extrauterine gestation (pregnancy)?
• How do you think the physician would likely treat the condition?

Case 3–4
A 30-year-old woman had an appendectomy toward the end of her menstrual
cycle; 8-
 months later, she had a child with a congenital anomaly of the brain.
• Could the surgery have produced this child’s congenital anomaly?
• What is the basis for your views?

Case 3–5
A 42-year-old woman finally became pregnant after many years of trying to
conceive. She was concerned about the development of her baby.
• What would the physician likely tell her?
• Can women over 40 have normal babies?
• What tests and diagnostic techniques would likely be performed?
Discussion of these cases appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Bianchi DW, Wilkins-Haug LE, Enders AC, et al. Origin of extraembryonic
mesoderm in experimental animals: relevance to chorionic mosaicism in
humans. Am J Med Genet. 1993;46:542.
Cadmak H, Taylor HS. Implantation failure: treatment and clinical implications.
Hum Reprod Update. 2011;17:242.
Callen PW. Obstetric ultrasound examination. In Callen PW, editor:
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2008.
Cole LA. New discoveries on the biology and detection of human chorionic
gonadotropin. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009;7:8.
Coulam CB, Faulk WP, McIntyre JA. Spontaneous and recurrent abortions. In:
Quilligan EJ, Zuspan FP, editors. Current Therapy in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Vol 3. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1990.
Dickey RP, Gasser R, Olar TT, et al. Relationship of initial chorionic sac
diameter to abortion and abortus karyotype based on new growth curves for the
16 to 49 post-ovulation day. Hum Reprod. 1994;9:559.
Enders AC, King BF. Formation and differentiation of extraembryonic
mesoderm in the rhesus monkey. Am J Anat. 1988;181:327.
Hertig AT, Rock J. Two human ova of the pre-villous stage, having a

development age of about seven and nine days respectively. Contrib Embryol
Carnegie Inst. 1945;31:65.
Hertig AT, Rock J. Two human ova of the pre-villous stage, having a
developmental age of about eight and nine days, respectively. Contrib Embryol
Carnegie Inst. 1949;33:169.
Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC. A description of 34 human ova within the first
seventeen days of development. Am J Anat. 1956;98:435.
Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC, et al. Thirty-four fertilized human ova, good,
bad, and indifferent, recovered from 210 women of known fertility. Pediatrics.
1959;23:202.
Kodaman PH, Taylor HS. Hormonal regulation of implantation. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am. 2004;31:745.
Lessey BA. The role of the endometrium during embryo implantation. Human
Reprod. 2000;15(Suppl 6):39.
Levine D. Ectopic pregnancy. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in
Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Lindsay DJ, Lovett IS, Lyons EA, et al. Endovaginal sonography: Yolk sac
diameter and shape as a predictor of pregnancy outcome in the first trimester.
Radiology. 1992;183:115.
Lipscomb GH. Ectopic pregnancy. In Copeland LJ, Jarrell JF, editors: Textbook
of Gynecology, ed 4, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2000.
Luckett WP. Origin and differentiation of the yolk sac and extraembryonic
mesoderm in presomite human and rhesus monkey embryos. Am J Anat.
1978;152:59.
. The Human Yolk Sac and Yolk Sac Tumors. Nogales FF. Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1993.
Sen C, Yayla M. Chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo. In: Kurjak A,
Chervenak FA, Carrera JM, editors. The Embryo as a Patient. New York:
Parthenon Publishing Group, 2001.

Staun-Ram E, Goldman S, Shalev E. Ets-2 and p53 mediate cAMP-induced
MMP-2 expression, activity and trophoblast invasion. Reprod Biol Endocrinol.
2009;7:135.
Staun-Ram E, Shalev E. Human trophoblast function during the implantation
process. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2005;3:56.
Streeter GL. Developmental horizons in human embryos. Description of age
group XI, 13 to 20 somites, and age group XII, 21 to 29 somites. Contrib
Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1942;30:211.
Zorn AM, Wells JM. Vertebrate endoderm development and organ formation.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2009;25:221.

Chapter 4 Third Week of Human Development
Gastrulation: Formation of Germ Layers 54
Primitive Streak 54
   Fate of Primitive Streak 56
Notochordal Process and Notochord 57
Allantois 58
Neurulation: Formation of Neural Tube 61
   Neural Plate and Neural Tube 61
   Neural Crest Formation 61
Development of Somites 63
Development of Intraembryonic Coelom 64
Early Development of Cardiovascular System 64
   Vasculogenesis and Angiogenesis 64
   Primordial Cardiovascular System 64
Development of Chorionic Villi 65
Summary of Third Week 66
Clinically Oriented Problems 69
Rapid development of the embryo from the trilaminar embryonic disc during the
third week is characterized by:
• Appearance of the primitive streak
• Development of the notochord
• Differentiation of the three germ layers
The third week of development coincides with the week following the first
missed menstrual period, that is, 5 weeks after the first day of the last normal
menstrual period. Cessation of menstruation is often the first indication that a
woman may be pregnant. Approximately 5 weeks after the last normal menstrual
period (Fig. 4-1), a normal pregnancy can be detected with ultrasonography.

FIGURE 4–1 Ultrasonograph sonogram of a 3.5-week conceptus. Note the
surrounding secondary umbilical vesicle (calipers) and the surrounding
trophoblast (bright ring of tissue).
(Courtesy of E.A. Lyons, M.D., Professor of Radiology and Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)

Pregnancy Symptoms
Frequent symptoms of pregnancy are nausea and vomiting, which may occur by
the end of the third week; however, the time of onset of these symptoms varies.
Vaginal bleeding at the expected time of menstruation does not rule out
pregnancy because sometimes there is a slight loss of blood from the
implantation site of the blastocyst. Implantation bleeding results from leakage of
blood from a hole in the closing plug in the endometrial epithelium into the
uterine cavity from disrupted lacunar networks in the implanted blastocyst (see
Fig. 3-5A). When this bleeding is interpreted as menstruation, an error occurs in
determining the expected delivery date of the baby.

 Gastrulation: Formation of Germ
Layers
Gastrulation is the formative process by which the three germ layers, which are
precursors of all embryonic tissues, and axial orientation are established in
embryos. During gastrulation, the bilaminar embryonic disc is converted into a
trilaminar embryonic disc. Extensive cell shape changes, rearrangement,
movement, and alterations in adhesive properties contribute to the process of
gastrulation.
Gastrulation is the beginning of morphogenesis (development of body form)
and is the significant event occurring during the third week. During this period,
the embryo may be referred to as a gastrula. Bone morphogenetic proteins and
other signaling molecules such as FGFs, Shh (sonic hedgehog), Tgifs, and Wnts
play a crucial role in gastrulation.
Each of the three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm) gives rise to
specific tissues and organs: • Embryonic ectoderm gives rise to the epidermis,
central and peripheral nervous systems, the eyes, and internal ears; and as neural
crest cells, to many connective tissues of the head.
• Embryonic endoderm is the source of the epithelial linings of the respiratory
and alimentary (digestive) tracts, including the glands opening into the
gastrointestinal tract and the glandular cells of associated organs such as the liver
and pancreas.
• Embryonic mesoderm gives rise to all skeletal muscles, blood cells and the
lining of blood vessels, all visceral smooth muscular coats, the serosal linings of
all body cavities, the ducts and organs of the reproductive and excretory systems,
and most of the cardiovascular system. In the trunk, it is the source of all
connective tissues, including cartilage, bones, tendons, ligaments, dermis, and
stroma (connective tissue) of internal organs.

 Primitive Streak
The first morphologic sign of gastrulation is formation of the primitive streak on
the surface of the epiblast of the embryonic disc (Fig. 4-2B). By the beginning
of the third week, a thickened linear band of epiblast—the primitive streak—
appears caudally in the median plane of the dorsal aspect of the embryonic disc
(Figs. 4-2C and 4-3). The primitive streak results from the proliferation and
movement of cells of the epiblast to the median plane of the embryonic disc. As
the streak elongates by addition of cells to its caudal end, its cranial end
proliferates to form a primitive node (Figs. 4-2F and 4-3).

FIGURE 4–2 Illustrations of the formation of the trilaminar embryonic disc
(days 15 to 16). The arrows indicate invagination and migration of mesenchymal
cells from the primitive streak between the ectoderm and endoderm. C, E, and
G, Dorsal views of the trilaminar embryonic disc early in the third week,
exposed by removal of the amnion. A, B, D, F, and H, Transverse sections

through the embryonic disc. The levels of the sections are indicated in C, E, and
G. The prechordal plate, indicating the head region in Fig. 4-2C, is indicated by
a light blue oval because this thickening of endoderm cannot be seen from the
dorsal surface.
FIGURE 4–3 A, Dorsal view of an embryo approximately 16 days old. B,
Drawing of structures shown in A.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Concurrently, a narrow groove—primitive groove—develops in the primitive
streak that is continuous with a small depression in the primitive node—the
primitive pit. As soon as the primitive streak appears, it is possible to identify
the embryo’s craniocaudal axis, cranial and caudal ends, dorsal and ventral
surfaces, and right and left sides. The primitive groove and pit result from the
invagination (inward movement) of epiblastic cells, which is indicated by arrows
in Figure 4-2E.
Shortly after the primitive streak appears, cells leave its deep surface and form
mesenchyme, an embryonic connective tissue consisting of small, spindle-
shaped cells loosely arranged in an extracellular matrix of sparse collagen
(reticular) fibers (Fig. 4-4B). Mesenchyme forms the supporting tissues of the
embryo, such as most of the connective tissues of the body and the connective
tissue framework of glands. Some mesenchyme forms mesoblast
(undifferentiated mesoderm), which forms the intraembryonic, or embryonic,
mesoderm (Fig. 4-2D).

FIGURE 4–4 A, Drawing of a dorsal view of a 16-day embryo. The amnion has
been removed to expose the primitive node, primitive pit and primitive streak. B,
Drawing of the cranial half of the embryonic disc. The trilaminar embryonic disc
has been cut transversely to show the migration of mesenchymal cells from the
primitive streak to form mesoblast that soon organizes to form the
intraembryonic mesoderm. This illustration also shows that most of the
embryonic endoderm also arises from the epiblast. Most of the hypoblastic cells
are displaced to extraembryonic regions such as the wall of the umbilical vesicle.
Cells from the epiblast, as well as from the primitive node and other parts of the
primitive streak, displace the hypoblast, forming the embryonic endoderm in
the roof of the umbilical vesicle (Fig. 4-2H). The cells remaining in the epiblast
form the embryonic ectoderm.
Research data suggest that signaling molecules (nodal factors) of the
transforming growth factor β superfamily induce formation of mesoderm. The
concerted action of other signaling molecules (e.g., Wnt3a, Wnt5a, FGFs) also
participates in specifying germ cell layer fates. Moreover, transforming growth
factor β (nodal), a T-box transcription factor (veg T), and the Wnt signaling
pathway appear to be involved in specification of the endoderm.
Mesenchymal cells derived from the primitive streak migrate widely. These
pluripotential cells differentiate into diverse types of cells, such as fibroblasts,
chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (see Chapter 5). In summary, cells of the epiblast,
through the process of gastrulation, give rise to all three germ layers in the
embryo, the primordia of all its tissues and organs.

Fate of Primitive Streak
The primitive streak actively forms mesoderm by the ingression of cells until the
early part of the fourth week; thereafter, production of mesoderm slows down.
The primitive streak diminishes in relative size and becomes an insignificant
structure in the sacrococcygeal region of the embryo (Fig. 4-5D). Normally the
primitive streak undergoes degenerative changes and disappears by the end of
the fourth week.
FIGURE 4–5 Diagrammatic sketches of dorsal views of the embryonic disc
showing how it lengthens and changes shape during the third week. The
primitive streak lengthens by addition of cells at its caudal end, and the
notochordal process lengthens by migration of cells from the primitive node. The
notochordal process and adjacent mesoderm induce the overlying embryonic
ectoderm to form the neural plate, the primordium of the CNS. Observe that as
the notochordal process elongates, the primitive streak shortens. At the end of
the third week, the notochordal process is transformed into the notochord.
Sacrococcygeal Teratoma

Remnants of the primitive streak may persist and give rise to a sacrococcygeal
teratoma (Fig. 4-6). A teratoma is a type of germ cell tumor. Because they are
derived from pluripotent primitive streak cells, these tumors contain tissues
derived from all three germ layers in incomplete stages of differentiation.
Sacrococcygeal teratomas are the most common tumor in newborns and have an
incidence of approximately one in 35,000; most affected infants (80%) are
female. Sacrococcygeal teratomas are usually diagnosed on routine antenatal
ultrasonography; most tumors are benign. These teratomas are usually surgically
excised promptly, and the prognosis is good. A presacral teratoma may cause
bowel or urinary obstruction in the newborn.


FIGURE 4–6 Female infant with a large sacrococcygeal teratoma that developed
from remnants of the primitive streak. The tumor, a neoplasm made up of several
different types of tissue, was surgically removed.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

 Notochordal Process and Notochord
Some mesenchymal cells migrate through the primitive streak and, as a
consequence, acquire mesodermal cell fates. These cells then migrate cranially
from the primitive node and pit, forming a median cellular cord, the
notochordal process (Fig. 4-7C). This process soon acquires a lumen, the
notochordal canal.

FIGURE 4–7 Illustrations of developing notochordal process. The small sketch
at the upper left is for orientation. A, Dorsal view of the embryonic disc
(approximately 16 days) exposed by removal of the amnion. The notochordal
process is shown as if it were visible through the embryonic ectoderm. B, C, and
E, Median sections at the plane shown in A, illustrating successive stages in the

development of the notochordal process and canal. The stages shown in C and E
occur at approximately 18 days. D and F, Transverse sections through the
embryonic disc at the levels shown in C and E.
The notochordal process grows cranially between the ectoderm and endoderm
until it reaches the prechordal plate, a small circular area of columnar
endodermal cells where the ectoderm and endoderm are fused. Prechordal
mesoderm is a mesenchymal population of neural crest origin, rostral to the
notochord. The prechordal plate gives rise to the endoderm of the
oropharyngeal membrane, located at the future site of the oral cavity (Fig. 4-
8C). The prechordal plate serves as a signaling center (Shh and PAX6) for
controlling development of cranial structures, including the forebrain and eyes.

FIGURE 4–8 Illustrations of notochord development by transformation of the
notochordal process. A, Dorsal view of the bilaminar embryonic disc at 18 days,
exposed by removing the amnion. B, Three-dimensional median section of the
embryo. C and E, Similar sections of slightly older embryos. D, F, and G,
Transverse sections of the trilaminar embryonic disc at the levels shown in C
and E.

Mesenchymal cells from the primitive streak and notochordal process migrate
laterally and cranially, among other mesodermal cells, between the ectoderm and
endoderm until they reach the margins of the embryonic disc. These cells are
continuous with the extraembryonic mesoderm covering the amnion and
umbilical vesicle (Fig. 4-2C and D). Some mesenchymal cells from the primitive
streak that have mesodermal fates migrate cranially on each side of the
notochordal process and around the prechordal plate. Here they meet cranially to
form cardiogenic mesoderm in the cardiogenic area where the heart
primordium begins to develop at the end of the third week (see Fig. 4-11B).
Caudal to the primitive streak there is a circular area—the cloacal membrane,
which indicates the future site of the anus (Fig. 4-7E). The embryonic disc
remains bilaminar here and at the oropharyngeal membrane because the
embryonic ectoderm and endoderm are fused at these sites, thereby preventing
migration of mesenchymal cells between them (Fig. 4-8C). By the middle of the
third week, intraembryonic mesoderm separates the ectoderm and endoderm
everywhere except
• At the oropharyngeal membrane cranially
• In the median plane cranial to the primitive node, where the notochordal
process is located
• At the cloacal membrane caudally
Instructive signals from the primitive streak region induce notochordal precursor
cells to form the notochord, a cellular rod-like structure. The molecular
mechanism that induces these cells involves (at least) Shh signaling from the
floor plate of the neural tube. The notochord
• Defines the primordial longitudinal axis of the embryo and gives it some
rigidity
• Provides signals that are necessary for the development of axial
musculoskeletal structures and the central nervous system (CNS)
• Contributes to the intervertebral discs
The notochord develops as follows:
• The notochordal process elongates by invagination of cells from the primitive
pit.
• The primitive pit extends into the notochordal process, forming a notochordal

canal (Fig. 4-7C).
• The notochordal process is now a cellular tube that extends cranially from the
primitive node to the prechordal plate.
• The floor of the notochordal process fuses with the underlying embryonic
endoderm (Fig. 4-7E).
• The fused layers gradually undergo degeneration, resulting in the formation of
openings in the floor of the notochordal process, which brings the notochordal
canal into communication with the umbilical vesicle (Fig. 4-8B).
• The openings rapidly become confluent and the floor of the notochordal canal
disappears (Fig. 4-8C); the remains of the notochordal process form a flattened,
grooved notochordal plate (Fig. 4-8D).
• Beginning at the cranial end of the embryo, the notochordal cells proliferate
and the notochordal plate infolds to form the notochord (Fig. 4-8F and G).
• The proximal part of the notochordal canal persists temporarily as the
neurenteric canal (Fig. 4-8C and E), which forms a transitory communication
between the amniotic and umbilical vesicle cavities. When development of the
notochord is complete, the neurenteric canal normally obliterates.
• The notochord becomes detached from the endoderm of the umbilical vesicle,
which again becomes a continuous layer (Fig. 4-8G).
The notochord extends from the oropharyngeal membrane to the primitive node.
The notochord degenerates as the bodies of the vertebrae form, but small
portions of it persist as the nucleus pulposus of each intervertebral disc.
The notochord functions as the primary inductor (signaling center) in the early
embryo. The developing notochord induces the overlying embryonic ectoderm to
thicken and form the neural plate (Fig. 4-8C), the primordium of the CNS.
Remnants of Notochordal Tissue
Both benign and malignant tumors (chordomas) may form from vestigial
remnants of notochordal tissue. Approximately one third of chordomas occur at
the base of the cranium and extend to the nasopharynx. Chordomas grow slowly
and malignant forms infiltrate bone.

 Allantois
The allantois appears on approximately day 16 as a small diverticulum
(outpouching) from the caudal wall of the umbilical vesicle that extends into the
connecting stalk (Figs. 4-7B, C, and E and 4-8B).
In reptiles, birds, and most mammals, this endodermal sac has a respiratory
function and/or acts as a reservoir for urine during embryonic life. In humans,
the allantoic sac remains very small, but allantoic mesoderm expands beneath
the chorion and forms blood vessels that will serve the placenta. The proximal
part of the original allantoic diverticulum persists throughout much of
development as a stalk called the urachus, which extends from the bladder to
the umbilical region. The urachus is represented in adults by the median
umbilical ligament. The blood vessels of the allantoic stalk become the
umbilical arteries (see Fig. 4-12). The intraembryonic part of the umbilical veins
has a separate origin.
Allantoic Cysts Allantoic cysts, remnants of the extraembryonic portion of the
allantois, are usually found between the fetal umbilical vessels and can be
detected by ultrasonography. They are most commonly detected in the proximal
part of the umbilical cord, near its attachment to the anterior abdominal wall.
The cysts are generally asymptomatic until childhood or adolescence, when they
can become infected and inflamed.

 Neurulation: Formation of Neural
Tube
The processes involved in the formation of the neural plate and neural folds and
closure of the folds to form the neural tube constitute neurulation. Neurulation
is completed by the end of the fourth week, when closure of the caudal
neuropore occurs (Chapter 5).

Neural Plate and Neural Tube
As the notochord develops, it induces the overlying embryonic ectoderm, located
at or adjacent to the midline, to thicken and form an elongated neural plate of
thickened epithelial cells. The neuroectoderm of the neural plate gives rise to the
CNS—the brain and spinal cord. Neuroectoderm also gives rise to various other
structures, for example, the retina. At first, the neural plate corresponds in length
to the underlying notochord. It appears rostral (head end) to the primitive node
and dorsal (posterior) to the notochord and the mesoderm adjacent to it (Fig. 4-
5B). As the notochord elongates, the neural plate broadens and eventually
extends cranially as far as the oropharyngeal membrane (Figs. 4-5C and 4-8C).
Eventually the neural plate extends beyond the notochord.
On approximately the 18th day, the neural plate invaginates along its central axis
to form a longitudinal median neural groove, which has neural folds on each
side (Fig. 4-8G). The neural folds become particularly prominent at the cranial
end of the embryo and are the first signs of brain development. By the end of the
third week, the neural folds have begun to move together and fuse, converting
the neural plate into the neural tube, the primordium of the brain vesicles and
the spinal cord (Figs. 4-9 and 4-10). The neural tube soon separates from the
surface ectoderm as the neural folds meet. Neural crest cells undergo an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and migrate away as the neural folds meet
and the free edges of the surface ectoderm (non-neural ectoderm) fuse so that
this layer becomes continuous over the neural tube and the back of the embryo
(Fig. 4-10E and F). Subsequently, the surface ectoderm differentiates into the
epidermis. Neurulation is completed during the fourth week. Neural tube
formation is a complex cellular and multifactorial process involving a cascade of
molecular mechanisms and extrinsic factors (see Chapter 17).

FIGURE 4–9 Drawings of embryos at 19 to 21 days illustrating development of
the somites and intraembryonic coelom. A, C, and E, Dorsal views of the
embryo, exposed by removal of the amnion. B, D, and F, Transverse sections
through the trilaminar embryonic disc at the levels shown. A, Presomite embryo
of approximately 18 days. C, An embryo of approximately 20 days showing the

first pair of somites. Part of the somatopleure on the right has been removed to
show the coelomic spaces in the lateral mesoderm. E, A three-somite embryo
(approximately 21 days) showing the horseshoe-shaped intraembryonic coelom,
exposed on the right by removal of part of the somatopleure.
FIGURE 4–10 Diagrammatic drawings transverse sections through
progressively older embryos illustrating formation of the neural groove, neural
folds, neural tube, and neural crest. A, Dorsal view of an embryo at
approximately 21 days.

Neural Crest Formation
As the neural folds fuse to form the neural tube, some neuroectodermal cells
lying along the inner margin of each neural fold lose their epithelial affinities
and attachments to neighboring cells (Fig. 4-10). As the neural tube separates
from the surface ectoderm, neural crest cells form a flattened irregular mass, the
neural crest, between the neural tube and the overlying surface ectoderm (Fig.
4-10E). Wnt/β-catenin signaling activates the Gbx2 homeobox gene and is
essential for the development of the neural crest. The neural crest soon separates
into right and left parts that shift to the dorsolateral aspects of the neural tube;
here they give rise to the sensory ganglia of the spinal and cranial nerves. Neural
crest cells subsequently move both into and over the surface of somites.
Although these cells are difficult to identify, special tracer techniques have
revealed that neural crest cells disseminate widely but usually along predefined
pathways. Differentiation and migration of neural crest cells are regulated by
molecular interactions of specific genes (e.g., FoxD3, Snail2, Sox9, and Sox10),
signaling molecules, and transcription factors.
Neural crest cells give rise to the spinal ganglia (dorsal root ganglia) and the
ganglia of the autonomic nervous system. The ganglia of cranial nerves V, VII,
IX, and X are also partly derived from neural crest cells. In addition to forming
ganglion cells, neural crest cells form the neurolemma sheaths of peripheral
nerves and contribute to the formation of the leptomeninges arachnoid mater and
pia mater (Chapter 17). Neural crest cells also contribute to the formation of
pigment cells, the suprarenal (adrenal) medulla, and many connective tissue
components in the head (see Chapter 9).
Laboratory studies indicate that cell interactions both within the surface
epithelium and between it and underlying mesoderm are required to establish the
boundaries of the neural plate and specify the sites where epithelial-
mesenchymal transformation will occur. These are mediated by bone
morphogenetic proteins, Wnt, Notch, and FGF signaling systems. Also,
molecules such as ephrins are important in guiding specific streams of migrating
neural crest cells. Many human diseases result from defective migration and/or
differentiation of neural crest cells.
Birth Defects Resulting from Abnormal Neurulation

Because the neural plate, the primordium of the CNS, appears during the third
week and gives rise to the neural folds and the beginning of the neural tube,
disturbance of neurulation may result in severe birth defects of the brain and
spinal cord (see Chapter 17). Neural tube defects are among the most common
congenital anomalies. Meroencephaly (partial absence of the brain) is the most
severe neural tube defect and is also the most common anomaly affecting the
CNS. Although the term anencephaly (Greek an, without + enkephalos, brain) is
commonly used, it is a misnomer because a remnant of the brain is present.
Available evidence suggests that the primary disturbance (e.g., a teratogenic
drug; see Chapter 20) affects cell fates, cell adhesion, and the mechanism of
neural tube closure. This results in failure of the neural folds to fuse and form the
neural tube. Neural tube defects may also be secondary to or linked to lesions
affecting the degree of flexion imposed on the neural plate during folding of the
embryo.

 Development of Somites
In addition to the notochord, cells derived from the primitive node form
paraxial mesoderm. Close to the primitive node, this cell population appears as
a thick, longitudinal column of cells (Figs. 4-8G and 4-9B). Each column is
continuous laterally with the intermediate mesoderm, which gradually thins
into a layer of lateral mesoderm. The lateral mesoderm is continuous with the
extraembryonic mesoderm covering the umbilical vesicle and amnion. Toward
the end of the third week, the paraxial mesoderm differentiates, condenses, and
begins to divide into paired cuboidal bodies, the somites (Greek soma, body),
which form in a craniocaudal sequence. These blocks of mesoderm are located
on each side of the developing neural tube (Fig. 4-9C to F). About 38 pairs of
somites form during the somite period of human development (days 20 to 30).
By the end of the fifth week, 42 to 44 pairs of somites are present. The somites
form distinct surface elevations on the embryo and are somewhat triangular in
transverse sections (Fig. 4-9C to F). Because the somites are so prominent
during the fourth and fifth weeks, they are used as one of several criteria for
determining an embryo’s age (see Chapter 5, Table 5-1).
Somites first appear in the future occipital region of the embryo. They soon
develop craniocaudally and give rise to most of the axial skeleton and associated
musculature as well as to the adjacent dermis of the skin. The first pair of
somites appears a short distance caudal to the site at which the otic placode
forms (Fig. 4-9C). Motor axons from the spinal cord innervate muscle cells in
the somites, a process that requires the correct guidance of axons from the spinal
cord to the appropriate target cells.
Formation of somites from the paraxial mesoderm involves the expression of
Notch pathway genes (Notch signaling pathway), Hox genes, and other signaling
factors. Moreover, somite formation from paraxial mesoderm is preceded by
expression of the forkhead transcription factors FoxC1 and FoxC2 and the
craniocaudal segmental pattern of the somites is regulated by the Delta-Notch
signaling. A molecular oscillator or clock has been proposed as the mechanism
responsible for the orderly sequencing of somites.

 Development of Intraembryonic
Coelom
The primordium of the intraembryonic coelom (embryonic body cavity) appears
as isolated coelomic spaces in the lateral mesoderm and cardiogenic (heart-
forming) mesoderm (Fig. 4-9A). These spaces soon coalesce to form a single
horseshoe-shaped cavity, the intraembryonic coelom (Fig. 4-9E), which divides
the lateral mesoderm into two layers (Fig. 4-9D): • A somatic or parietal layer of
lateral mesoderm located beneath the ectodermal epithelium and continuous with
the extraembryonic mesoderm covering the amnion
• A splanchnic or visceral layer of lateral mesoderm located adjacent to the
endoderm and continuous with the extraembryonic mesoderm covering the
umbilical vesicle (yolk sac)
The somatic mesoderm and overlying embryonic ectoderm form the embryonic
body wall or somatopleure (Fig. 4-9F), whereas the splanchnic mesoderm and
underlying embryonic endoderm form the embryonic gut or splanchnopleure.
During the second month, the intraembryonic coelom is divided into three body
cavities: pericardial cavity, pleural cavities, and peritoneal cavity. For a
description of these divisions of the intraembryonic coelom, see Chapter 8.

Early Development of Cardiovascular
System
At the end of the second week, embryonic nutrition is obtained from the
maternal blood by diffusion through the extraembryonic coelom and umbilical
vesicle. At the beginning of the third week, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, or
blood vessel formation, begins in the extraembryonic mesoderm of the umbilical
vesicle, connecting stalk, and chorion (Fig. 4-11). Embryonic blood vessels
begin to develop approximately 2 days later. The early formation of the
cardiovascular system is correlated with the urgent need for blood vessels to
bring oxygen and nourishment to the embryo from the maternal circulation
through the placenta. During the third week, a primordial uteroplacental
circulation develops (Fig. 4-12).

FIGURE 4–11 Successive stages in the development of blood and blood vessels.
A, Lateral view of the umbilical vesicle and part of the chorionic sac
(approximately 18 days). B, Dorsal view of the embryo exposed by removing the
amnion (approximately 20 days). C to F, Sections of blood islands showing
progressive stages in the development of blood and blood vessels.

FIGURE 4–12 Diagram of the primordial cardiovascular system in an embryo of
approximately 21 days, viewed from the left side. Observe the transitory stage of
the paired symmetrical vessels. Each heart tube continues dorsally into a dorsal
aorta that passes caudally. Branches of the aortae are (1) umbilical arteries
establishing connections with vessels in the chorion, (2) vitelline arteries to the
umbilical vesicle, and (3) dorsal intersegmental arteries to the body of the
embryo. Vessels on the umbilical vesicle form a vascular plexus that is
connected to the heart tubes by vitelline veins. The cardinal veins return blood
from the body of the embryo. The umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood and
nutrients to f the chorion that provides nourishment to the embryo. The arteries
carry poorly oxygenated blood and waste products to the chorionic villi for
transfer to the mother’s blood.

Vasculogenesis and Angiogenesis
The formation of the embryonic vascular system involves two processes:
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Vasculogenesis is the formation of new
vascular channels by assembly of individual cell precursors called angioblasts.
Angiogenesis is the formation of new vessels by budding and branching from
preexisting vessels. Blood vessel formation (vasculogenesis) in the embryo and
extraembryonic membranes during the third week may be summarized as
follows (Fig. 4-11):
• Mesenchymal cells differentiate into endothelial cell precursors—angioblasts
(vessel forming cells), which aggregate to form isolated angiogenic cell clusters
called blood islands, which are associated with the umbilical vesicle or
endothelial cords within the embryo.
• Small cavities appear within the blood islands and endothelial cords by
confluence of intercellular clefts.
• Angioblasts flatten to form endothelial cells that arrange themselves around the
cavities in the blood islands to form the endothelium.
• These endothelium-lined cavities soon fuse to form networks of endothelial
channels (vasculogenesis).
• Vessels sprout into adjacent areas by endothelial budding and fuse with other
vessels (angiogenesis).
• The mesenchymal cells surrounding the primordial endothelial blood vessels
differentiate into the muscular and connective tissue elements of the vessels.
Blood cells develop from the endothelial cells of vessels as they grow on the
umbilical vesicle and allantois at the end of the third week (Fig. 4-11E and F),
and later in specialized sites along the dorsal aorta. Blood formation
(hematogenesis) does not begin in the embryo until the fifth week. It occurs first
along the aorta and then in various parts of the embryonic mesenchyme, mainly
the liver, and later in the spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. Fetal and adult
erythrocytes are derived from different hematopoietic progenitor cells
(hemangioblasts).

Primordial Cardiovascular System
The heart and great vessels form from mesenchymal cells in the cardiogenic
area (Fig. 4-11B). Paired, longitudinal endothelial-lined channels—the
endocardial heart tubes—develop during the third week and fuse to form a
primordial heart tube. The tubular heart joins with blood vessels in the
embryo, connecting stalk, chorion, and umbilical vesicle to form a primordial
cardiovascular system (Fig. 4-12). By the end of the third week, the blood is
circulating and the heart begins to beat on the 21st or 22nd day.
The cardiovascular system is the first organ system to reach a functional state.
The embryonic heartbeat can be detected using Doppler ultrasonography during
the fifth week, approximately 7 weeks after the last normal menstrual period
(Fig. 4-13).
FIGURE 4–13 Endovaginal ultrasonogram of a 4-week embryo A, Secondary

umbilical vesicle (calipers, 2 mm). B, Bright (echogenic) 4-week embryo
(calipers, 2.4 mm) C, Cardiac activity of 116 beats per minute demonstrated with
motion mode. The calipers are used to encompass two beats.
(Courtesy of E.A. Lyons, M.D., Professor of Radiology and Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)
Abnormal Growth of Trophoblast
Sometimes the embryo dies and the chorionic villi (Fig. 4-14A) do not complete
their development; that is, they do not become vascularized to form tertiary villi.
These degenerating villi form cystic swellings—hydatidiform moles—which
resemble a bunch of grapes. The moles exhibit variable degrees of trophoblastic
proliferation and produce excessive amounts of human chorionic gonadotropin.
Some moles develop after spontaneous abortions, and others occur after normal
deliveries. Three percent to 5% of moles develop into malignant trophoblastic
lesions—choriocarcinomas.

FIGURE 4–14 Diagrams illustrating development of secondary chorionic villi
into tertiary chorionic villi. Early formation of the placenta is also shown. A,
Sagittal section of an embryo (approximately 16 days). B, Section of a secondary
chorionic villus. C, Section of an implanted embryo (approximately 21 days). D,
Section of a tertiary chorionic villus. The fetal blood in the capillaries is

separated from the maternal blood surrounding the villus by the endothelium of
the capillary, embryonic connective tissue, cytotrophoblast, and
syncytiotrophoblast.
Choriocarcinomas invariably metastasize (spread) through the bloodstream to
various sites, such as the lungs, vagina, liver, bone, intestine, and brain.
The main mechanisms for development of complete hydatidiform moles
follow:
Fertilization of an empty oocyte (absent or inactive pronucleus) by a sperm,
followed by duplication (monospermic mole)
Fertilization of an empty oocyte by two sperms (dispermic mole)
A partial (dispermic) hydatidiform mole usually results from fertilization of an
oocyte by two sperms (dispermy). Most complete hydatidiform moles are
monospermic. For both types, the genetic origin of the nuclear DNA is paternal.

Development of Chorionic Villi
Shortly after primary chorionic villi appear at the end of the second week, they
begin to branch. Early in the third week, mesenchyme grows into these primary
villi, forming a core of mesenchymal tissue. The villi at this stage—secondary
chorionic villi—cover the entire surface of the chorionic sac (Fig. 4-14A and B).
Some mesenchymal cells in the villi soon differentiate into capillaries and blood
cells (Fig. 4-14C and D). Villi are called tertiary chorionic villi when blood
vessels are visible in them.
The capillaries in the chorionic villi fuse to form arteriocapillary networks,
which soon become connected with the embryonic heart through vessels that
differentiate in the mesenchyme of the chorion and connecting stalk (Fig. 4-12).
By the end of the third week, embryonic blood begins to flow slowly through the
capillaries in the chorionic villi. Oxygen and nutrients in the maternal blood in
the intervillous space diffuse through the walls of the villi and enter the embryo’s
blood (Fig. 4-14C and D). Carbon dioxide and waste products diffuse from
blood in the fetal capillaries through the wall of the chorionic villi into the
maternal blood. Concurrently, cytotrophoblastic cells of the chorionic villi
proliferate and extend through the syncytiotrophoblast to form an extravillous
cytotrophoblastic shell (Fig. 4-14C), which gradually surrounds the chorionic
sac and attaches it to the endometrium.
Villi that attach to the maternal tissues through the cytotrophoblastic shell are
stem chorionic villi (anchoring villi). The villi that grow from the sides of the
stem villi are branch chorionic villi. It is through the walls of the branch villi
that the main exchange of material between the blood of the mother and the
embryo takes place. The branch villi are bathed in continually changing maternal
blood in the intervillous space (Fig. 4-14C).

Summary of Third Week
• The bilaminar embryonic disc is converted into a trilaminar embryonic disc
during gastrulation. These changes begin with the appearance of the primitive
streak, which appears at the beginning of the third week as a thickening of the
epiblast at the caudal end of the embryonic disc.
• The primitive streak results from migration of epiblastic cells to the median
plane of the disc. Invagination of epiblastic cells from the primitive streak gives
rise to mesenchymal cells that migrate ventrally, laterally, and cranially between
the epiblast and hypoblast.
• As soon as the primitive streak begins to produce mesenchymal cells, the
epiblast is known as embryonic ectoderm. Some cells of the epiblast displace
the hypoblast and form embryonic endoderm. Mesenchymal cells produced by
the primitive streak soon organize into a third germ layer, the intraembryonic
or embryonic mesoderm, occupying the area between the former hypoblast and
cells in the epiblast. Cells of the mesoderm migrate to the edges of the
embryonic disc, where they join the extraembryonic mesoderm covering the
amnion and umbilical vesicle.
• At the end of the third week, the embryo is a flat ovoid embryonic disc (Fig. 4-
2H). Mesoderm exists between the ectoderm and endoderm of the disc
everywhere except at the oropharyngeal membrane, in the median plane
occupied by the notochord, and at the cloacal membrane.
• Early in the third week, mesenchymal cells from the primitive streak form the
notochordal process between the embryonic ectoderm and endoderm. The
notochordal process extends from the primitive node to the prechordal plate.
Openings develop in the floor of the notochordal canal and soon coalesce,
leaving a notochordal plate. This plate infolds to form the notochord, the
primordial axis of the embryo around which the axial skeleton forms (e.g.,
vertebral column).
• The neural plate appears as a thickening of the embryonic ectoderm, induced
by the developing notochord. A longitudinal neural groove develops in the
neural plate, which is flanked by neural folds. Fusion of the folds forms the
neural tube, the primordium of the CNS.
• As the neural folds fuse to form the neural tube, neuroectodermal cells form a
neural crest between the surface ectoderm and neural tube.
• The mesoderm on each side of the notochord condenses to form longitudinal

columns of paraxial mesoderm, which, by the end of the third week, give rise to
somites.
• The coelom (cavity) within the embryo arises as isolated spaces in the lateral
mesoderm and cardiogenic mesoderm. The coelomic vesicles subsequently
coalesce to form a single, horseshoe-shaped cavity that eventually gives rise to
the body cavities.
• Blood vessels first appear in the wall of the umbilical vesicle (yolk sac),
allantois, and chorion. They develop within the embryo shortly thereafter. Fetal
and adult erythrocytes develop from different hematopoietic precursors.
• The primordial heart is represented by paired endocardial heart tubes. By the
end of the third week, the heart tubes have fused to form a tubular heart that is
joined to vessels in the embryo, umbilical vesicle, chorion, and connecting stalk
to form a primordial cardiovascular system.
• Primary chorionic villi become secondary chorionic villi as they acquire
mesenchymal cores. Before the end of the third week, capillaries develop in the
secondary chorionic villi, transforming them into tertiary chorionic villi.
Cytotrophoblastic extensions from these stem villi join to form a
cytotrophoblastic shell that anchors the chorionic sac to the endometrium.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 4–1
A 30-year-old woman became pregnant 2 months after discontinuing use of oral
contraceptives. Approximately 3 weeks later, she had an early spontaneous
abortion.
• How do hormones in these pills affect the ovarian and menstrual cycles?
• What might have caused the spontaneous abortion?
• What would the physician likely have told this patient?

Case 4–2
A 25-year-old woman with a history of regular menstrual cycles was 5 days
overdue on menses. Owing to her mental distress related to the abnormal
bleeding and the undesirability of a possible pregnancy, the doctor decided to do
a menstrual extraction or uterine evacuation. The tissue removed was examined
for evidence of a pregnancy.
• Would a highly sensitive radioimmune assay have detected pregnancy at this
early stage?
• What findings would indicate an early pregnancy?
• How old would the products of conception be?

Case 4–3
A woman who had just missed her menstrual period was concerned that a glass
of wine she had consumed the week before may have harmed her embryo.
• What major organ systems undergo early development during the third week?
• What severe congenital anomaly might result from teratogenic factors (see
Chapter 20) acting during this period of development?

Case 4–4
A female infant was born with a large tumor situated between her anus and
sacrum. A diagnosis of sacrococcygeal teratoma was made and the mass was
surgically removed.
• What is the probable embryologic origin of this tumor?
• Explain why these tumors often contain various types of tissue derived from all
three germ layers.
• Does an infant’s sex make him or her more susceptible to the development of
one of these tumors?

Case 4–5
A woman with a history of early spontaneous abortions had an ultrasound
examination to determine whether her embryo was still implanted.
• Is ultrasonography of any value in assessing pregnancy during the third week?
• What structures might be recognizable?
• If a pregnancy test is negative, is it safe to assume that the woman is not
pregnant?
• Could an extrauterine gestation be present?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Barembaum M, Bronner-Fraser M. Early steps in neural crest specification.
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005;16:642.
De Val S. Key transcriptional regulators of early vascular development.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:1469.
Downs KM. The enigmatic primitive streak: prevailing notions and challenges
concerning the body axis of mammals. Bioessays. 2009;31:892.
Drake CJ. Embryonic and adult vasculogenesis. Birth Defects Res C Embryo
Today. 2003;69:73.
Dubrulle J, Pourquie O. Coupling segmentation to axis formation. Development.
2004;131:5783.
Flake AW. The fetus with sacrococcygeal teratoma. In Harrison MR, Evans MI,
Adzick NS, Holzgrev W, editors: The Unborn Patient: The Art and Science of
Fetal Therapy, ed 3, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2001.
Gasser RF. Evidence that some events of mammalian embryogenesis can result
from differential growth, making migration unnecessary. Anat Rec B New Anat.
2006;289B:53.
Gibb S, Maroto M, Dale JK. The segmentation clock mechanism moves up a

notch. Trends Cell Biol. 2010;20:593.
Hall BK. Bones and Cartilage: Developmental Skeletal Biology. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2005.
Hardin J, Walston T. Models of morphogenesis: the mechanisms and mechanics
of cell rearrangement. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004;14:399.
Harvey NL, Oliver G. Choose your fate: artery, vein or lymphatic vessel? Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2004;14:499.
Hollway G, Currie P. Vertebrate myotome development. Birth Defects Res C
Embryo Today. 2005;75:172.
Hur E-M, Zhou F-Q. GSK3 signalling in neural development. Nature Rev
Neurosci. 2010;11:539.
Lewis J, Hanisch A, Holder M. Notch signaling, the segmentation clock, and the
patterning of vertebrate somites. J Biol. 2009;8:44.
Liu W, Komiya Y, Mezzacappa C, et al. MIM regulates vertebrate neural tube
closure. Development. 2011;138:2035.
Monsoro-Burq AH. Sclerotome development and morphogenesis: when
experimental embryology meets genetics. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49:301.
Ohls RK, Christensen RD. Development of the hematopoietic system. In
Behrman RE, Kliegman Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed
17, Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders, 2004.
Robb L, Tam PP. Gastrula organiser and embryonic patterning in the mouse.
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2004;15:543.
Slack JMW. Essential Developmental Biology, ed 2. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing; 2006.
Tovar JA. The neural crest in pediatric surgery. J Ped Surg. 2007;42:915.
Wang Y, Steinbeisser H. Molecular basis of morphogenesis during vertebrate
gastrulation. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;66:2263.

Zorn AM, Wells JM. Vertebrate endoderm development and organ formation.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2009;25:221.

Chapter 5 Fourth to Eighth Weeks of Human Development
Phases of Embryonic Development 71
Folding of Embryo 72
Folding of Embryo in the Median Plane 72
Folding of Embryo in the Horizontal Plane 72
Germ Layer Derivatives 72
Control of Embryonic Development 74
Highlights of Fourth to Eighth Weeks 76
   Fourth Week 76
   Fifth Week 77
   Sixth Week 77
   Seventh Week 80
   Eighth Week 86
Estimation of Embryonic Age 89
Summary of Fourth to Eighth Weeks 89
Clinically Oriented Problems 90
All major external and internal structures are established during the fourth to
eighth weeks. By the end of this period, the main organ systems have started to
develop. As the tissues and organs form, the shape of the embryo changes and by
the eighth week, it has a distinctly human appearance.
Because the tissues and organs are differentiating rapidly, exposure of embryos
to teratogens during this period may cause major birth defects. Teratogens are
agents such as drugs and viruses that produce or increase the incidence of birth
defects (see Chapter 20).

Phases of Embryonic Development
Human development may be divided into three phases, which to some extent are
interrelated: • The first phase is growth, which involves cell division and the
elaboration of cell products.
• The second phase is morphogenesis (development of shape, size, and other
features of a particular organ or part or the whole body). Morphogenesis is a
complex molecular process controlled by the expression and regulation of
specific genes in an orderly sequence. Changes in cell fate, cell shape, and cell
movement allow them to interact with each other during the formation of tissues
and organs.
• The third phase is differentiation. Completion of differentiation results in the
organization of cells in a precise pattern of tissues and organs that are capable of
performing specialized functions.

 Folding of Embryo
A significant event in the establishment of body form is folding of the flat
trilaminar embryonic disc into a somewhat cylindrical embryo (Fig. 5-1).
Folding occurs in both the median and horizontal planes and results from rapid
growth of the embryo. The growth rate at the sides of the embryonic disc fails to
keep pace with the rate of growth in the long axis as the embryo increases
rapidly in length. Folding at the cranial and caudal ends and sides of the embryo
occurs simultaneously. Concurrently, there is relative constriction at the junction
of the embryo and umbilical vesicle (yolk sac).

FIGURE 5–1 Drawings of folding of embryos during the fourth week. A1,
Dorsal view of an embryo early in the fourth week. Three pairs of somites are
visible. The continuity of the intraembryonic coelom and extraembryonic
coelom is illustrated on the right side by removal of a part of the embryonic
ectoderm and mesoderm. B1, C1, and D1, Lateral views of embryos at 22, 26,

and 28 days, respectively. A2 to D2, Sagittal sections at the plane shown in A1.
A3 to D3, Transverse sections at the levels indicated in A1 to D1.

Folding of Embryo in the Median Plane
Folding of the ends of the embryo ventrally produces head and tail folds that
result in the cranial and caudal regions moving ventrally as the embryo elongates
cranially and caudally (Fig. 5-1A2 to D2).
Head Fold
At the beginning of the fourth week, the neural folds in the cranial region have
thickened to form the primordium of the brain. Initially, the developing brain
projects dorsally into the amniotic cavity. Later, the developing forebrain grows
cranially beyond the oropharyngeal membrane and overhangs the developing
heart (see Fig. 5-2C). At the same time, the septum transversum, primordial
heart, pericardial coelom, and oropharyngeal membrane move onto the ventral
surface of the embryo (Fig. 5-2). During folding, part of the endoderm of the
umbilical vesicle is incorporated into the embryo as the foregut (primordium of
pharynx, esophagus, and lower respiratory system, and so on; see Chapter 11).
The foregut lies between the brain and heart and the oropharyngeal membrane
separates the foregut from the stomodeum, the primordium of the mouth (Fig.
5-2C). After folding of the head, the septum transversum lies caudal to the heart
where it subsequently develops into the central tendon of the diaphragm (see
Chapter 8). The head fold also affects the arrangement of the embryonic coelom
(primordium of body cavities). Before folding, the coelom consists of a
flattened, horseshoe-shaped cavity (Fig. 5-1A1). After folding, the pericardial
coelom lies ventral to the heart and cranial to the septum transversum (Fig. 5-
2C). At this stage, the intraembryonic coelom communicates widely on each side
with the extraembryonic coelom (Figs. 5-1A3 and 5-3).

FIGURE 5–2 Folding of cranial end of embryo. A, Dorsal view of embryo at 21
days. B, Sagittal section of the cranial part of the embryo at the plane shown in
A. Observe the ventral movement of the heart. C, Sagittal section of an embryo
at 26 days. Note that the septum transversum, primordial heart, pericardial
coelom, and oropharyngeal membrane have moved onto the ventral surface of

the embryo. Observe also that part of the umbilical vesicle is incorporated into
the embryo as the foregut.
FIGURE 5–3 Drawings of the effect of the head fold on the intraembryonic
coelom. A, Lateral view of an embryo (24 to 25 days) during folding, showing
the large forebrain, ventral position of the heart, and communication between the
intraembryonic and extraembryonic parts of the coelom. B, Schematic drawing
of an embryo (26 to 27 days) after folding, showing the pericardial cavity
ventrally, the pericardioperitoneal canals running dorsally on each side of the
foregut, and the intraembryonic coelom in communication with the
extraembryonic coelom.
Tail Fold
Folding of the caudal end of the embryo results primarily from growth of the

distal part of the neural tube—the primordium of the spinal cord (Fig. 5-4). As
the embryo grows, the caudal eminence (tail region) projects over the cloacal
membrane (future site of anus). During folding, part of the endodermal germ
layer is incorporated into the embryo as the hindgut (primordium of descending
colon and rectum). The terminal part of the hindgut soon dilates slightly to form
the cloaca (primordium of urinary bladder and rectum; see Chapters 11 and 12.
Before folding, the primitive streak lies cranial to the cloacal membrane (Fig.
5-4A); after folding, it lies caudal to it (Fig. 5-4B). The connecting stalk
(primordium of umbilical cord) is now attached to the ventral surface of the
embryo, and the allantois—a diverticulum of the umbilical vesicle—is partially
incorporated into the embryo.
FIGURE 5–4 Folding of caudal end of the embryo. A, Sagittal section of caudal
part of the embryo at the beginning of the fourth week. B, Similar section at the
end of the fourth week. Note that part of the umbilical vesicle is incorporated
into the embryo as the hindgut and that the terminal part of the hindgut has
dilated to form the cloaca. Observe also the change in position of the primitive
streak, allantois, cloacal membrane, and connecting stalk.

Folding of Embryo in the Horizontal Plane
Folding of the sides of the embryo produces right and left lateral folds (Fig. 5-
1A3 to D3). Lateral folding is produced by the rapidly growing spinal cord and
somites. The primordia of the ventrolateral wall fold toward the median plane,
rolling the edges of the embryonic disc ventrally and forming a roughly
cylindrical embryo. As the abdominal walls form, part of the endoderm germ
layer is incorporated into the embryo as the midgut (primordium of small
intestine; see Fig. 5-1C2 and Chapter 11). Initially, there is a wide connection
between the midgut and umbilical vesicle (Fig. 5-1A2); however, after lateral
folding, the connection is reduced to an omphaloenteric duct (Fig. 5-1C2). The
region of attachment of the amnion to the ventral surface of the embryo is also
reduced to a relatively narrow umbilical region (Fig. 5-1D2 and D3). As the
umbilical cord forms from the connecting stalk, ventral fusion of the lateral folds
reduces the region of communication between the intraembryonic and
extraembryonic coelomic cavities to a narrow communication (Fig. 5-1C2). As
the amniotic cavity expands and obliterates most of the extraembryonic coelom,
the amnion forms the epithelial covering of the umbilical cord (Fig. 5-1D2).

Germ Layer Derivatives
The three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm) formed during
gastrulation (see Chapter 4) give rise to the primordia of all the tissues and
organs. The specificity of the germ layers, however, is not rigidly fixed. The
cells of each germ layer divide, migrate, aggregate, and differentiate in rather
precise patterns as they form the various organ systems. The main germ layer
derivatives are as follows (Fig. 5-5): • Ectoderm gives rise to the central
nervous system, peripheral nervous system; sensory epithelia of the eyes, ears,
and nose; epidermis and its appendages (hair and nails); mammary glands;
pituitary gland; subcutaneous glands; and enamel of teeth. Neural crest cells,
derived from neuroectoderm, give rise to the cells of the spinal, cranial nerves
(V, VII, IX, and X), and autonomic ganglia; ensheathing cells of the peripheral
nervous system; pigment cells of the dermis; muscle, connective tissues, and
bones of pharyngeal arch origin; suprarenal medulla; and meninges (coverings)
of the brain and spinal cord.
• Mesoderm gives rise to connective tissue; cartilage; bone; striated and smooth
muscles; heart, blood, and lymphatic vessels; kidneys; ovaries; testes; genital
ducts; serous membranes lining the body cavities (pericardial, pleural, and
peritoneal); spleen; and cortex of suprarenal glands.
• Endoderm gives rise to the epithelial lining of the digestive and respiratory
tracts, parenchyma of the tonsils, thyroid and parathyroid glands, thymus, liver,
and pancreas, epithelial lining of the urinary bladder and most of the urethra, and
the epithelial lining of the tympanic cavity, tympanic antrum, and
pharyngotympanic tube.

FIGURE 5–5 Schematic drawing of derivatives of the three germ layers:
ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm. Cells from these layers contribute to the
formation of different tissues and organs; for instance, the endoderm forms the
epithelial lining of the gastrointestinal tract and the mesoderm gives rise to
connective tissues and muscles.

Control of Embryonic Development
Embryonic development results from genetic plans in the chromosomes.
Knowledge of the genes that control human development is increasing (see
Chapter 21). Most information about developmental processes has come from
studies in other organisms, especially Drosophila (fruit fly) and mice because of
ethical problems associated with the use of human embryos for laboratory
studies. Most developmental processes depend on a precisely coordinated
interaction of genetic and environmental factors. Several control mechanisms
guide differentiation and ensure synchronized development, such as tissue
interactions, regulated migration of cells and cell colonies, controlled
proliferation, and programmed cell death. Each system of the body has its own
developmental pattern.
Embryonic development is essentially a process of growth and increasing
complexity of structure and function. Growth is achieved by mitosis together
with the production of extracellular matrices (surrounding substances), whereas
complexity is achieved through morphogenesis and differentiation. The cells that
make up the tissues of very early embryos are pluripotential, which under
different circumstances, are able to follow more than one pathway of
development. This broad developmental potential becomes progressively
restricted as tissues acquire the specialized features necessary for increasing their
sophistication of structure and function. Such restriction presumes that choices
must be made to achieve tissue diversification. At present, most evidence
indicates that these choices are determined, not as a consequence of cell lineage,
but rather in response to cues from the immediate surroundings, including the
adjacent tissues. As a result, the architectural precision and coordination that are
often required for the normal function of an organ appears to be achieved by the
interaction of its constituent parts during development.
The interaction of tissues during development is a recurring theme in
embryology. The interactions that lead to a change in the course of development
of at least one of the interactants are called inductions. Numerous examples of
such inductive interactions can be found in the literature; for example, during
development of the eye, the optic vesicle induces the development of the lens
from the surface ectoderm of the head. When the optic vesicle is absent, the eye

fails to develop. Moreover, if the optic vesicle is removed and placed in
association with surface ectoderm that is not usually involved in eye
development, lens formation can be induced. Clearly then, development of a lens
is dependent on the ectoderm acquiring an association with a second tissue. In
the presence of the neuroectoderm of the optic vesicle, the surface ectoderm of
the head adopts a pathway of development that it would not otherwise have
taken. In a similar fashion, many of the morphogenetic tissue movements that
play such important roles in shaping the embryo also provide for the changing
tissue associations that are fundamental to inductive tissue interactions.
The fact that one tissue can influence the developmental pathway adopted by
another tissue presumes that a signal passes between the two interactants.
Analysis of the molecular defects in mutant strains that show abnormal tissue
interactions during embryonic development, and studies of the development of
embryos with targeted gene mutations have begun to reveal the molecular
mechanisms of induction. The mechanism of signal transfer appears to vary with
the specific tissues involved. In some cases, the signal appears to take the form
of a diffusible molecule, such as sonic hedgehog, that passes from the inductor to
the reacting tissue. In others, the message appears to be mediated through a
nondiffusible extracellular matrix that is secreted by the inductor and with which
the reacting tissue comes into contact. In still other cases, the signal appears to
require that physical contacts occur between the inducing and responding
tissues. Regardless of the mechanism of intercellular transfer involved, the signal
is translated into an intracellular message that influences the genetic activity of
the responding cells.
The signal can be relatively nonspecific in some interactions. The role of the
natural inductor in a variety of interactions has been shown to be mimicked by a
number of heterologous tissue sources and, in some instances, even by a variety
of cell-free preparations. Studies suggest that the specificity of a given induction
is a property of the reacting tissue rather than that of the inductor. Inductions
should not be thought of as isolated phenomena. Often they occur in a sequential
fashion that results in the orderly development of a complex structure; for
example, following induction of the lens by the optic vesicle, the lens induces
the development of the cornea from the surface ectoderm and adjacent
mesenchyme. This ensures the formation of component parts that are appropriate
in size and relationship for the function of the organ. In other systems, there is
evidence that the interactions between tissues are reciprocal. During
development of the kidney, for instance, the uteric bud (metanephric

diverticulum) induces the formation of tubules in the metanephric mesoderm
(see Chapter 12). This mesoderm, in turn, induces branching of the diverticulum
that results in the development of the collecting tubules and calices of the
kidney.
To be competent to respond to an inducing stimulus, the cells of the reacting
system must express the appropriate receptor for the specific inducing signal
molecule, the components of the particular intracellular signal transduction
pathway, and the transcription factors that will mediate the particular response.
Experimental evidence suggests that the acquisition of competence by the
responding tissue is often dependent on its previous interactions with other
tissues. For example, the lens-forming response of head ectoderm to the stimulus
provided by the optic vesicle appears to be dependent on a previous association
of the head ectoderm with the anterior neural plate.
The ability of the reacting system to respond to an inducing stimulus is not
unlimited. Most inducible tissues appear to pass through a transient, but more or
less sharply delimited physiologic state in which they are competent to respond
to an inductive signal from the neighboring tissue. Because this state of
receptiveness is limited in time, a delay in the development of one or more
components in an interacting system may lead to failure of an inductive
interaction. Regardless of the signal mechanism employed, inductive systems
seem to have the common feature of close proximity between the interacting
tissues. Experimental evidence has demonstrated that interactions may fail if the
interactants are too widely separated. Consequently, inductive processes appear
to be limited in space as well as by time. Because tissue induction plays such a
fundamental role in ensuring the orderly formation of precise structures, failed
interactions can be expected to have drastic developmental consequences (e.g.,
birth defects such as absence of the lens).

Highlights of Fourth to Eighth Weeks
The following descriptions summarize the main developmental events and
changes in external form of the embryo during the fourth to eighth weeks. The
main criteria for estimating developmental stages in human embryos are listed in
Table 5-1.
Table 5–1 Criteria for Estimating Developmental Stages in Human Embryos


Fourth Week
Major changes in body form occur during the fourth week. At the beginning, the
embryo is almost straight and has four to 12 somites that produce conspicuous
surface elevations. The neural tube is formed opposite the somites, but it is
widely open at the rostral and caudal neuropores (Fig. 5-6). By 24 days, the first
two pharyngeal arches are visible. The first pharyngeal arch (mandibular arch) is
distinct (Fig. 5-7). The major part of the first arch gives rise to the mandible
(lower jaw), and a rostral extension of the arch, the maxillary prominence,
contributes to the maxilla (upper jaw). The embryo is now slightly curved
because of the head and tail folds. The heart produces a large ventral prominence
and pumps blood.

FIGURE 5–6 A, Dorsal view of a five-somite embryo at Carnegie stage 10,
approximately 22 days. Observe the neural folds and deep neural groove. The
neural folds in the cranial region have thickened to form the primordium of the
brain. B, Drawing of the structures shown in A. Most of the amniotic and
chorionic sacs have been cut away to expose the embryo. C, Dorsal view of an

older eight-somite embryo at Carnegie stage 10. The neural tube is in open
communication with the amniotic cavity at the cranial and caudal ends through
the rostral and caudal neuropores, respectively. D, Diagram of the structures
shown in C. The neural folds have fused opposite the somites to form the neural
tube (primordium of spinal cord in this region).
(A and C, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
FIGURE 5–7 A, Dorsal view of a 13-somite embryo at Carnegie stage 11,
approximately 24 days. The rostral neuropore is closing, but the caudal

neuropore is wide open. B, Illustration of the structures shown in A. The embryo
is lightly curved because of folding at the cranial and caudal ends.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Three pairs of pharyngeal arches are visible by 26 days (Fig. 5-8), and the
rostral neuropore is closed. The forebrain produces a prominent elevation of the
head, and folding of the embryo has given the embryo a C-shaped curvature.
Upper limb buds are recognizable by day 26 or 27 as small swellings on the
ventrolateral body walls. The otic pits, the primordia of the internal ears, are
also visible. Ectodermal thickenings (lens placodes) indicating the future lenses
of the eyes are visible on the sides of the head. The fourth pair of pharyngeal
arches and the lower limb buds are visible by the end of the fourth week. Toward
the end of the fourth week, a long tail-like caudal eminence is a characteristic
feature (Figs. 5-8 to 5-10). Rudiments of many of the organ systems, especially
the cardiovascular system, are established (Fig. 5-11). By the end of the fourth
week, the caudal neuropore is usually closed.
FIGURE 5–8 A, Lateral view of a 27-somite embryo at Carnegie stage 12,
approximately 26 days. The embryo is curved, especially its tail-like caudal

eminence. Observe the lens placode (primordium of lens of eye) and the otic pit
indicating early development of internal ear. B, Illustration of the structures
shown in A. The rostral neuropore is closed and three pairs of pharyngeal arches
are present.
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development
of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)
FIGURE 5–9 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 13, approximately
28 days. The primordial heart is large, and its division into a primordial atrium
and ventricle is visible. The rostral and caudal neuropores are closed. B,
Drawing indicating the structures shown in A. The embryo has a characteristic
C-shaped curvature, four pharyngeal arches, and upper and lower limb buds.
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development
of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)

FIGURE 5–10 A, Drawing of an embryo at Carnegie stage 13, approximately 28
days. B, Photomicrograph of a section of the embryo at the level shown in A.
Observe the hindbrain and otic vesicle (primordium of internal ear). C, Drawing
of same embryo showing the level of the section in D. Observe the primordial
pharynx and pharyngeal arches.
(B and D, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

FIGURE 5–11 A, Drawing of an embryo at Carnegie stage 13, approximately 28
days. B, Photomicrograph of a section of the embryo at the level shown in A.
Observe the parts of the primordial heart. C, Drawing of the same embryo
showing the level of section in D. Observe the primordial heart and stomach.
(B and D, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

Fifth Week
Changes in body form are minor during the fifth week compared with those that
occurred during the fourth week, but growth of the head exceeds that of other
regions (Figs. 5-12 and 5-13). Enlargement of the head is caused mainly by the
rapid development of the brain and facial prominences. The face soon contacts
the heart prominence. The rapidly growing second pharyngeal arch overgrows
the third and fourth arches, forming a lateral depression on each side—the
cervical sinus. Mesonephric ridges indicate the site of the mesonephric kidneys,
which are interim excretory organs in humans (Fig. 5-13B).
FIGURE 5–12 A, Scanning electron micrograph of the craniofacial region of a
human embryo of approximately 32 days (Carnegie stage 14, 6.8 mm). Three
pairs of pharyngeal arches are present. The maxillary and mandibular
prominences of the first arch are clearly delineated. Observe the large mouth
located between the maxillary prominences and the fused mandibular
prominences. B, Drawing of the scanning electron micrograph illustrating the
structures shown in A.
(A, Courtesy of the late Professor K. Hinrichsen, Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.)

FIGURE 5–13 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 14,
approximately 32 days. The second pharyngeal arch has overgrown the third
arch, forming the cervical sinus. The mesonephric ridge indicates the site of the
mesonephric kidney, an interim kidney (see Chapter 12). B, Illustration of the
structures shown in A. The upper limb buds are paddle shaped and the lower
limb buds are flipper-like.
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development
of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)

Sixth Week
By the sixth week, embryos show reflex response to touch. The upper limbs
begin to show regional differentiation as the elbows and large hand plates
develop (Fig. 5-14). The primordia of the digits (fingers), called digital rays,
begin to develop in the hand plates.
FIGURE 5–14 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 17,
approximately 42 days. Digital rays are visible in the hand plate, indicating the
future site of the digits. B, Drawing illustrating the structures shown in A. The
eye, auricular hillocks, and external acoustic meatus are now obvious.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Embryos in the sixth week show spontaneous movements, such as twitching of
the trunk and limbs. Development of the lower limbs occurs 4 to 5 days later
than that of the upper limbs. Several small swellings—auricular hillocks—
develop around the pharyngeal groove between the first two pharyngeal arches
(Fig. 5-14B). This groove becomes the external acoustic meatus. The auricular
hillocks contribute to the formation of the auricle, the shell-shaped part of the
external ear. Largely because retinal pigment has formed, the eyes are now
obvious. The head is now much larger relative to the trunk and is bent over the

heart prominence. This head position results from bending in the cervical
(neck) region. The trunk and neck have begun to straighten. The intestines enter
the extraembryonic coelom in the proximal part of the umbilical cord. This
umbilical herniation is a normal event in the embryo. The herniation occurs
because the abdominal cavity is too small at this age to accommodate the rapidly
growing intestine.

Seventh Week
The limbs undergo considerable change during the seventh week. Notches
appear between the digital rays in the hand plates, clearly indicating the digits—
fingers or toes (Fig. 5-15). Communication between the primordial gut and
umbilical vesicle is now reduced to a relatively slender duct, the omphaloenteric
duct (Fig. 5-1C2). By the end of the seventh week, ossification of the bones of
the upper limbs has begun.
FIGURE 5–15 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 19, about 48
days. The auricle and external acoustic meatus are now clearly visible. Note the
relatively low position of the ear at this stage. Digital rays are now visible in the
footplate. The prominence of the abdomen is caused mainly by the large size of
the liver. B, Drawing indicating the structures shown in A. Observe the large
hand and the notches between the digital rays, which clearly indicate the
developing digits or fingers.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

Eighth Week
At the beginning of this final week of the embryonic (organogenetic) period, the
digits of the hand are separated but noticeably webbed (Fig. 5-16). Notches are
now clearly visible between the digital rays of the feet. The caudal eminence is
still present but stubby. The scalp vascular plexus has appeared and forms a
characteristic band around the head. By the end of the eighth week, all regions of
the limbs are apparent, the digits have lengthened and are completely separated
(Fig. 5-17). Purposeful limb movements first occur during this week.
Ossification begins in the femora. All evidence of the caudal eminence has
disappeared by the end of the eighth week. Both hands and feet approach each
other ventrally. At the end of the eighth week, the embryo has distinct human
characteristics (Fig. 5-18); however, the head is still disproportionately large,
constituting almost half of the embryo. The neck region is established, and the
eyelids are more obvious. The eyelids are closing, and by the end of the eighth
week, they begin to unite by epithelial fusion. The intestines are still in the
proximal portion of the umbilical cord.

FIGURE 5–16 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 21,
approximately 52 days. Note that the feet are fan-shaped. The scalp vascular
plexus now forms a characteristic band across the head. The nose is stubby and
the eye is heavily pigmented. B, Illustration of the structures shown in A. The
fingers are separated and the toes are beginning to separate. C, A Carnegie stage
20 human embryo, approximately 50 days after ovulation, imaged with optical
microscopy (left) and magnetic resonance microscopy (right). The three-
dimensional data set from magnetic resonance microscopy has been edited to
reveal anatomic detail from a mid-sagittal plane.
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development
of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977; B, From Moore KL,

Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders 2000; C, Courtesy of Dr. Bradley R. Smith,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.)
FIGURE 5–17 A, Lateral view of an embryo at Carnegie stage 23,
approximately 56 days. The embryo has a distinct human appearance. B,
Illustration of the structures shown in A. C, A Carnegie stage 23 embryo,
approximately 56 days after ovulation, imaged with optical microscopy (left) and
magnetic resonance microscopy (right).
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development

of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977; B, From Moore KL,
Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000; C, Courtesy of Dr. Bradley R. Smith,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.)
FIGURE 5–18 Lateral view of an embryo and its chorionic sac at Carnegie stage
23, approximately 56 days. Observe the human appearance of the embryo.
(From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development of
the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)
Although there are sex differences in the appearance of the external genitalia,
they are not distinctive enough to permit accurate sexual identification in the

eighth week (see Chapter 12).
Estimation of Gestational and Embryonic Age
By convention, obstetricians date pregnancy from the first day of the LNMP (last
normal menstrual period). This is the gestational age. Embryonic age begins at
fertilization, approximately 2 weeks after the LNMP. Fertilization age is used in
patients who have undergone in vitro fertilization or artificial insemination (see
Chapter 2).
Knowledge of embryonic age is important because it affects clinical
management, especially when invasive procedures such as chorionic villus
sampling and amniocentesis are necessary (see Chapter 6). In some women,
estimation of gestational age from the menstrual history alone may be unreliable.
The probability of error in establishing the LNMP is highest in women who
become pregnant after cessation of oral contraception because the interval
between discontinuance of hormones and the onset of ovulation is highly
variable. In others, slight uterine bleeding (“spotting”), which sometimes occurs
during implantation of the blastocyst, may be incorrectly regarded by a woman
as light menstruation. Other contributing factors to LNMP unreliability may
include oligomenorrhea (scanty menstruation), pregnancy in the postpartum
period (i.e., several weeks after childbirth), and use of intrauterine devices.
Despite possible sources of error, the LNMP is a reliable criterion in most cases.
Ultrasound assessment of the size of the chorionic cavity and its embryonic
contents (see Fig. 5-19) enables clinicians to obtain an accurate estimate of the
date of conception.
The day on which fertilization occurs is the most accurate reference point for
estimating age; this is commonly calculated from the estimated time of ovulation
because the oocyte is usually fertilized within 12 hours after ovulation. All
statements about age should indicate the reference point used, that is, days after
the LNMP or after the estimated time of fertilization.

Estimation of Embryonic Age
Estimates of the age of embryos recovered after a spontaneous abortion, for
example, are determined from their external characteristics and measurements of
their length (Figs. 5-19 and 5-20; see Table 5-1). Size alone may be an unreliable
criterion because some embryos undergo a progressively slower rate of growth
before death. The appearance of the developing limbs is a helpful criterion for
estimating embryonic age. Because embryos of the third and early fourth weeks
are straight (see Fig. 5-20A), measurements indicate the greatest length. The
crown–rump length (CRL) is most frequently used for older embryos (see Fig. 5-
20B). Because no anatomic marker clearly indicates the crown or rump, one
assumes that the longest crown–rump length is the most accurate. Standing
height, or crown–heel length, is sometimes measured for 8-week embryos. The
length of an embryo is only one criterion for establishing age (Table 5-1). The
Carnegie Embryonic Staging System is used internationally; its use enables
comparisons to be made between the findings of one person and those of
another.
FIGURE 5–19 Transvaginal sonogram of a 7-week embryo (calipers, CRL
10 mm) surrounded by the amniotic membrane within the chorionic cavity (dark
region).

(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba.)
FIGURE 5–20 Illustrations of methods used to measure the length of embryos.
A, Greatest length (GL). B, C, and D, Crown-rump length (CRL). D, Photograph
of an 8-week-old embryo
(D, Courtesy of Dr. Bradley R. Smith, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.)
Ultrasound Examination of Embryos
Most women seeking obstetric care have at least one ultrasound examination
during their pregnancy for one or more of the following reasons:
• Estimation of gestational age for confirmation of clinical dating
• Evaluation of embryonic growth when intrauterine growth retardation is
suspected
• Guidance during chorionic villus or amniotic fluid sampling (see Chapter 6)
• Examination of a clinically detected pelvic mass
• Suspected ectopic pregnancy (see Chapter 3)
• Possible uterine abnormality
• Detection of birth defects
Current data indicate that there are no confirmed biologic effects of

ultrasonography on embryos or fetuses from the use of diagnostic ultrasound
evaluation.
The size of an embryo in a pregnant woman can be estimated using ultrasound
measurements. Transvaginal sonography permits an earlier and more accurate
measurement of CRL in early pregnancy. Early in the fifth week, the embryo is 4
to 7 mm long (see Fig. 5-13). During the sixth and seventh weeks, discrete
embryonic structures can be visualized (e.g., parts of limbs), and crown–rump
measurements are predictive of embryonic age with an accuracy of 1 to 4 days.
Furthermore, after the sixth week, dimensions of the head and trunk can be
obtained and used for assessment of embryonic age. There is, however,
considerable variability in early embryonic growth and development.
Differences are greatest before the end of the first 4 weeks of development, but
less so by the end of the embryonic period.

Summary of Fourth to Eighth Weeks
• At the beginning of the fourth week, folding in the median and horizontal
planes converts the flat trilaminar embryonic disc into a C-shaped, cylindrical
embryo. The formation of the head, caudal eminence, and lateral folds is a
continuous sequence of events that results in a constriction between the embryo
and the umbilical vesicle.
• As the head folds ventrally, part of the endodermal layer is incorporated into
the developing embryonic head region as the foregut. Folding of the head region
also results in the oropharyngeal membrane and heart being carried ventrally,
and the developing brain becoming the most cranial part of the embryo.
• As the caudal eminence folds ventrally, part of the endodermal germ layer is
incorporated into the caudal end of the embryo as the hindgut. The terminal part
of the hindgut expands to form the cloaca. Folding of the caudal region also
results in the cloacal membrane, allantois, and connecting stalk being carried to
the ventral surface of the embryo.
• Folding of the embryo in the horizontal plane incorporates part of the
endoderm into the embryo as the midgut.
• The umbilical vesicle remains attached to the midgut by a narrow
omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk). During folding of the embryo in the horizontal
plane, the primordia of the lateral and ventral body walls are formed. As the
amnion expands, it envelops the connecting stalk, omphaloenteric duct, and
allantois, thereby forming an epithelial covering for the umbilical cord.
• The three germ layers differentiate into various tissues and organs so that by
the end of the embryonic period, the beginnings of all the main organ systems
have been established.
• The external appearance of the embryo is greatly affected by the formation of
the brain, heart, liver, somites, limbs, ears, nose, and eyes.
• Because the beginnings of most essential external and internal structures are
formed during the fourth to eighth weeks, this is the most critical period of
development. Developmental disturbances during this period may give rise to
major birth defects.
• Reasonable estimates of the age of embryos can be determined from the day of
onset of the LNMP, the estimated time of fertilization, ultrasound measurements
of the chorionic sac and embryo, and examination of external characteristics of
the embryo.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 5–1
A 28-year-old woman who has been a heavy cigarette smoker since her teens
was informed that she was in the second month of pregnancy.
• What would the doctor likely tell the patient about her smoking habit and the
use of other drugs (e.g., alcohol)?

Case 5–2
Physicians usually discuss the critical period of development with their patients.
• Why is the embryonic period such a critical stage of development?

Case 5–3
A patient was concerned about what she had read in the newspaper about recent
effects of drugs on laboratory animals.
• Can one predict the possible harmful effects of drugs on the human embryo
from studies performed in laboratory animals?
• Discuss germ layer formation and organogenesis.

Case 5–4
A 30-year-old woman was unsure when her LNMP was. She stated that her
periods were irregular.
• Why may information about the starting date of a pregnancy provided by a
patient be unreliable?
• What clinical techniques are now available for evaluating embryonic age?

Case 5–5
A woman who had just become pregnant told her doctor that she had taken a
sleeping pill given to her by a friend. She wondered whether it could harm the
development of her baby’s limbs.
• Would a drug known to cause severe limb defects be likely to cause these
abnormalities if it was administered during the eighth week?
• Discuss the mechanism of the action of these teratogens (see Chapter 20).
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Ashe HL, Briscoe J. The interpretation of morphogen gradients. Development.
2006;133:385.
Barnea ER, Hustin J, Jauniaux E, editors. The First Twelve Weeks of Gestation.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
Callen PW. Obstetric ultrasound examination. In Callen PW, editor:
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2008.
Dickey RP, Gasser RF. Computer analysis of the human embryo growth curve:
Differences between published ultrasound findings on living embryos in utero
and data on fixed specimens. Anat Rec. 1993;237:400.
Dickey RP, Gasser RF. Ultrasound evidence for variability in the size and
development of normal human embryos before the tenth post-insemination week
after assisted reproductive technologies. Hum Reprod. 1993;8:331.
Gasser R. Virtual Human Embryo DREM Project. New Orleans: Louisiana State
University; 2007.
Gilbert SF. Developmental Biology, ed 9. Sunderland: Sinauer; 2010.
Hardin J, Walston T. Models of morphogenesis: The mechanisms and mechanics
of cell rearrangement. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004;14:399.

Iffy L, Shepard TH, Jakobovits A, et al. The rate of growth in young human
embryos of Streeter’s horizons XIII and XXIII. Acta Anat. 1967;66:178.
Iwarsson E, Malmgren H, Blennow E. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis: twenty
years of practice. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16:74.
Jirásek JE. An Atlas of Human Prenatal Developmental Mechanics: Anatomy
and Staging. London and New York: Taylor & Francis; 2004.
Kliegman RM. Intrauterine growth restriction. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of
the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Laing FC, Frates MC, Benson CB. Ultrasound evaluation during the first
trimester. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology,
ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K. Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology, ed 2.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000.
Nishimura H, Tanimura T, Semba R, Uwabe C. Normal development of early
human embryos: Observation of 90 specimens at Carnegie stages 7 to 13.
Teratology. 1974;10:1.
O’Rahilly R, Müller F. Developmental Stages in Human Embryos. Washington,
DC: Carnegie Institute of Washington; 1987.
Persaud TVN, Hay JC. Normal embryonic and fetal development. In Reece EA,
Hobbins JC, editors: Clinical Obstetrics: The Fetus and Mother, ed 3, Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
Pooh RK, Shiota K, Kurjak A. Imaging of the human embryo with magnetic
resonance imaging microscopy and high-resolution transvaginal 3-dimensional
sonography:human embryology in the 21st century. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2011;204:77. e1
Shiota K. Development and intrauterine fate of normal and abnormal human
conceptuses. Congen Anom. 1991;31:67.
Steding G. The Anatomy of the Human Embryo. A Scanning Electron-

Microscopic Atlas. Basel: Karger; 2009.
Streeter GL. Developmental horizons in human embryos: Description of age
groups XV, XVI, XVII, and XVIII. Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst.
1948;32:133.
Streeter GL. Developmental horizons in human embryos: Description of age
group XI, 13 to 20 somites, and age group XII, 21 to 29 somites. Contrib
Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1942;30:211.
Streeter GL. Developmental horizons in human embryos: Description of age
group XIII, embryos of 4 or 5 millimeters long, and age group XIV, period of
identification of the lens vesicle. Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1945;31:27.
Streeter GL, Heuser CH, Corner GW. Developmental horizons in human
embryos: Description of age groups XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, and XXIII. Contrib
Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1951;34:165.
Yamada S, Samtani RR, Lee ES, et al. Developmental atlas of the early first
trimester human embryo. Dev Dyn. 2010;239:1585.
Whitworth M, Bricker L, Neilson JP, et al: Ultrasound for fetal assessment in
early pregnancy, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD007058, 2010.
Zhang J, Merialdi M, Platt LD, et al. Defining normal and abnormal fetal
growth: promises and challenges. Am Obstet Gynecol. 2010;202:522.

Chapter 6 Ninth Week to Birth The Fetal Period
Estimation of Fetal Age 95
   Trimesters of Pregnancy 95
   Measurements and Characteristics of Fetuses 95
Highlights of Fetal Period 96
   Nine to Twelve Weeks 96
   Thirteen to Sixteen Weeks 97
   Seventeen to Twenty Weeks 98
   Twenty-One to Twenty-Five Weeks 98
   Twenty-Six to Twenty-Nine Weeks 99
   Thirty to Thirty-Four Weeks 99
   Thirty-Five to Thirty-Eight Weeks 99
Expected Date of Delivery 101
Factors Influencing Fetal Growth 101
   Cigarette Smoking 101
   Multiple Pregnancy 101
   Alcohol and Illicit Drugs 101
   Impaired Uteroplacental and Fetoplacental Blood Flow 102
   Genetic Factors and Growth Retardation 102
Procedures for Assessing Fetal Status 102
   Ultrasonography 102
   Diagnostic Amniocentesis 102
   Alpha-Fetoprotein Assay 103
   Spectrophotometric Studies 103
   Chorionic Villus Sampling 104
   Sex Chromatin Patterns 104
   Cell Cultures and Chromosomal Analysis 104
   Fetal Transfusion 104
   Fetoscopy 105
   Percutaneous Umbilical Cord Blood Sampling 105
   Magnetic Resonance Imaging 105
   Fetal Monitoring 105
Summary of Fetal Period 105
Clinically Oriented Problems 106
The transformation of an embryo to a fetus is gradual, but the name change is
meaningful because it signifies that the embryo has developed a recognizable

human appearance and that the primordia of all major systems have formed.
Development during the fetal period is primarily concerned with rapid body
growth and differentiation of tissues, organs, and systems. A notable change
occurring during the fetal period is the relative slowdown in the growth of the
head compared with the rest of the body. The rate of body growth during the
fetal period is very rapid (Table 6-1), and fetal weight gain is phenomenal during
the terminal weeks. Periods of normal continuous growth alternate with
prolonged intervals of absent growth.
Table 6–1 Criteria for Estimating Fertilization Age during the Fetal Period

Viability of Fetuses Viability is defined as the ability of fetuses to survive in the
extrauterine environment (i.e., after birth). Most fetuses weighing less than 500 g
at birth do not usually survive. Many full-term, low-birth-weight babies result
from intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Consequently, if given expert
postnatal care, some fetuses weighing less than 500 g may survive; they are
referred to as extremely low birth weight or immature infants.
Most fetuses weighing between 750 and 1500 g survive, but complications may
occur; they are referred to as preterm infants. Each year, approximately
500,000 preterm infants are born in the United States. Many of these preterm
infants suffer from severe medical complications or early mortality. The use of
antenatal steroids and postnatal administration of endotracheal surfactant has
greatly improved acute and long-term morbidity. Prematurity is one of the most
common causes of morbidity and perinatal death.

Estimation of Fetal Age
Ultrasound measurements of crown-rump length (CRL) of fetuses are taken to
determine the size and probable age of the fetus and to provide a prediction of
the expected date of delivery. Fetal head measurements and femur length are also
used to evaluate age. Gestational age is commonly used clinically, and it may be
confusing because the term seems to imply the actual age of the fetus from
fertilization of the oocyte. In fact, this term is most often meant to be
synonymous with last normal menstrual period (LNMP) age. It is important that
the person ordering the ultrasound examination and the ultrasonographer use the
same terminology.
The intrauterine period may be divided into days, weeks, or months (Table 6-
2), but confusion arises if it is not stated whether the age is calculated from the
onset of the LNMP or the estimated day of fertilization of the oocyte.
Uncertainty about age arises when months are used, particularly when it is not
stated whether calendar months (28–31 days) or lunar months (28 days) are
meant. Unless otherwise stated, fetal age in this book is calculated from the
estimated time of fertilization.
Table 6–2 Comparison of Gestational Time Units and Date of Birth

Trimesters of Pregnancy
Clinically, the gestational period is divided into three trimesters, each lasting 3
months. At the end of the first trimester, one third of the length of the pregnancy,
all major systems are developed (Fig. 6-1B). In the second trimester, the fetus
grows sufficiently in size so that good anatomic detail can be visualized during
ultrasonography. During this period, most major birth defects can be detected
using high-resolution real-time ultrasonography. By the beginning of the third
trimester, the fetus may survive if born prematurely. The fetus reaches a major
developmental landmark at 35 weeks of gestation and weighs approximately
2500 g, which is used to define the level of fetal maturity. At this stage, the fetus
usually survives if born prematurely.
FIGURE 6–1 Ultrasound image of 9-week fetus (11 weeks gestational age). Note
the amnion, amniotic cavity (A), and chorionic cavity (C). CRL 4.2 cm
(calipers).
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, professor of radiology and obstetrics and
gynecology and anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba,

Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

Measurements and Characteristics of Fetuses
Various measurements and external characteristics are useful for estimating fetal
age (see Table 6-1). CRL is the method of choice for estimating fetal age until
the end of the first trimester because there is very little variability in fetal size
during this period. In the second and third trimesters, several structures can be
identified and measured ultrasonographically, but the most common
measurements are biparietal diameter (diameter of the head between the two
parietal eminences), head circumference, abdominal circumference, femur
length, and foot length. Weight is often a useful criterion for estimating age, but
there may be a discrepancy between the age and the weight, particularly when
the mother had metabolic disturbances such as diabetes mellitus during
pregnancy. In these cases, weight often exceeds values considered normal for the
corresponding CRL.
Fetal dimensions obtained from ultrasound measurements closely approximate
CRL measurements obtained from spontaneously aborted fetuses. Determination
of the size of a fetus, especially of its head, is helpful to the obstetrician for
management of patients.

Highlights of Fetal Period
There is no formal staging system for the fetal period; however, it is helpful to
describe the changes that occur in periods of 4 to 5 weeks.

Nine to Twelve Weeks
At the beginning of the ninth week, the head constitutes approximately half the
CRL of the fetus (Figs. 6-1 and 6-2A). Subsequently, growth in body length
accelerates rapidly so that by the end of 12 weeks, the CRL has more than
doubled (Fig. 6-1B; Table 6-1). Although growth of the head slows down
considerably by this time, it is still disproportionately large compared with the
rest of the body.
At 9 weeks, the face is broad, the eyes are widely separated, the ears are low set,
and the eyelids are fused (Fig. 6-2B). By the end of 12 weeks, primary
ossification centers appear in the skeleton, especially in the cranium (skull) and
long bones. Early in the ninth week, the legs are short and the thighs are
relatively small. By the end of 12 weeks, the upper limbs have almost reached
their final relative lengths, but the lower limbs are still not so well developed and
are slightly shorter than their final relative lengths.
FIGURE 6–2 A 9-week fetus in the amniotic sac exposed by removal from the
chorionic sac. A, Actual size. The remnant of the umbilical vesicle is indicated
by an arrow. B, Enlarged photograph of the fetus (x2). Note the following

features: large head, fused eyelids, cartilaginous ribs, and intestines in umbilical
cord (arrow).
(Courtesy of Professor Jean Hay [retired], Department of Human Anatomy and
Cell Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
The external genitalia of males and females appear similar until the end of the
ninth week. Their mature fetal form is not established until the 12th week.
Intestinal coils are clearly visible in the proximal end of the umbilical cord until
the middle of the tenth week (see Fig. 6-2B). By the 11th week, the intestines
have returned to the abdomen (Fig. 6-3).


FIGURE 6–3 An 11-week fetus (x1.5). Note its relatively large head and that the
intestines are no longer in the umbilical cord.
(Courtesy of Professor Jean Hay [retired], Department of Human Anatomy and
Cell Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
At 9 weeks, the liver is the major site of erythropoiesis (formation of red blood
cells). By the end of 12 weeks, this activity has decreased in the liver and has
begun in the spleen. Urine formation begins between the 9th and 12th weeks,
and urine is discharged through the urethra into the amniotic fluid. The fetus
reabsorbs some amniotic fluid after swallowing it. Fetal waste products are
transferred to the maternal circulation by passing across the placental membrane
(see Chapter 7).

Thirteen to Sixteen Weeks
Growth is rapid during this period (Figs. 6-4 and 6-5; see Table 6-1). By 16
weeks, the head is relatively small compared with that of the 12-week fetus and
the lower limbs have lengthened. Limb movements, which first occur at the end
of the embryonic period, become coordinated by the 14th week but are too slight
to be felt by the mother. Limb movements are visible during ultrasound
examinations.
FIGURE 6–4 Diagram, drawn to scale, illustrating the changes in the size of the
human fetus.


FIGURE 6–5 Enlarged photograph of the head and superior part of the trunk of a
13-week fetus.
(Courtesy of Professor Jean Hay [retired], Department of Human Anatomy and
Cell Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Ossification of the fetal skeleton is active during this period, and the bones are
clearly visible on ultrasound images by the beginning of the 16th week. Slow eye
movements occur at 14 weeks. Scalp hair patterning is also determined during
this period. By 16 weeks, the ovaries are differentiated and contain primordial
ovarian follicles that contain oogonia (see Chapter 12). The genitalia of the
fetuses can be recognized by 12 to 14 weeks. By 16 weeks, the eyes face
anteriorly rather than anterolaterally. In addition, the external ears are close to
their definitive position on the sides of the head.

Seventeen to Twenty Weeks
Growth slows down during this period, but the fetus still increases its CRL by
approximately 50 mm (Figs. 6-4 and 6-6; see Table 6-1). Fetal movements
—quickening—are commonly felt by the mother. The skin is now covered with
a greasy, cheese-like material—vernix caseosa. It consists of a mixture of dead
epidermal cells and a fatty substance (secretion) from the fetal sebaceous glands.
The vernix caseosa protects the delicate fetal skin from abrasions, chapping, and
hardening that result from exposure to the amniotic fluid.
 
FIGURE 6–6 A, A 17-week fetus. Because there is little subcutaneous tissue and
the skin is thin, the blood vessels of the scalp are visible. Fetuses at this age are
unable to survive if born prematurely, mainly because their respiratory systems
are immature. B, A frontal view of a 17-week fetus. Note that the eyes are closed
at this stage.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical

Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000; B, Courtesy of Dr.
Robert Jordan, St. George’s University Medical School, Grenada.)
Eyebrows and head hair are visible at 20 weeks. The fetuses are usually
completely covered with fine downy hair—lanugo—that helps to hold the
vernix caseosa on the skin. Brown fat forms during this period and is the site of
heat production, particularly in the newborn infant. This specialized adipose
tissue, found chiefly at the root of the neck, posterior to the sternum, and in the
perirenal area, produces heat by oxidizing fatty acids.
By 18 weeks, the fetal uterus is formed and canalization of the vagina has begun
and many primordial ovarian follicles containing oogonia are visible. By 20
weeks, the testes have begun to descend, but they are still located on the
posterior abdominal wall, as are the ovaries in female fetuses.

Twenty-One to Twenty-Five Weeks
There is a substantial weight gain during this period and the fetus is better
proportioned (Fig. 6-7). The skin is usually wrinkled and more translucent,
particularly during the early part of this period. The skin is pink to red because
blood is visible in the capillaries. At 21 weeks, rapid eye movements begin and
blink-startle responses have been reported at 22 to 23 weeks. The secretory
epithelial cells (type II pneumocytes) in the interalveolar walls of the lung have
begun to secrete surfactant, a surface-active lipid that maintains the patency of
the developing alveoli of the lungs (see Chapter 10). Fingernails are present by
24 weeks. Although a 22-to 25-week fetus born prematurely may survive if
given intensive care (Fig. 6-7), it may die because its respiratory system is still
immature. The risk for neurodevelopmental disability is high in infants born
before 26 weeks of gestation.


FIGURE 6–7 A 25-week-old normal female newborn weighing 725 g.
(Courtesy of Dean Barringer and Marnie Danzinger.)

Twenty-Six to Twenty-Nine Weeks
During this period, fetuses usually survive if born prematurely and given
intensive care (Fig. 6-8). The lungs and pulmonary vasculature have developed
sufficiently to provide adequate gas exchange. In addition, the central nervous
system has matured to the stage where it can direct rhythmic breathing
movements and control body temperature. The highest neonatal mortality occurs
in infants classified as low (≤2500 g) and very low (≤1500 g) birth weight.
 
 
FIGURE 6–8 Magnetic resonance images (MRIs) of normal fetuses. A, At 18
weeks (20-week gestational age). B, At 26 weeks. C, At 28 weeks.

(Courtesy of Dr. Deborah Levine, Director of Obstetric and Gynecologic
Ultrasound, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.)
The eyelids are open at 26 weeks, and lanugo and head hair are well developed.
Toenails become visible and considerable subcutaneous fat is now present under
the skin, smoothing out many of the wrinkles. During this period, the quantity of
white fat increases to approximately 3.5% of body weight. The fetal spleen has
been an important site of erythropoiesis (formation of red blood cells). This
ends by 28 weeks, by which time bone marrow has become the major site of this
process.

Thirty to Thirty-Four Weeks
The pupillary reflex (change in diameter of pupil in response to stimulus caused
by light) can be elicited at 30 weeks. Usually by the end of this period, the skin
is pink and smooth and the upper and lower limbs have a chubby appearance. At
this age, the quantity of white fat is approximately 8% of body weight. Fetuses
32 weeks and older usually survive if born prematurely.

Thirty-Five to Thirty-Eight Weeks
Fetuses born at 35 weeks have a firm grasp and exhibit a spontaneous orientation
to light. As term approaches, the nervous system is sufficiently mature to carry
out some integrative functions. Most fetuses during this “finishing period” are
plump (Fig. 6-9). By 36 weeks, the circumferences of the head and abdomen are
approximately equal. After this, the circumference of the abdomen may be
greater than that of the head. The fetal foot length is usually slightly larger than
femoral length at 37 weeks, and is an alternative parameter for confirmation of
fetal age (Fig. 6-10). There is a slowing of growth as the time of birth
approaches (Fig. 6-11).
FIGURE 6–9 Healthy newborns. A, At 34 weeks (36-week gestational age). B,
At 38 weeks (40-week gestational age).
(A, Courtesy of Michael and Michele Rice; B, Courtesy of Dr. Jon and Mrs.
Margaret Jackson.)


FIGURE 6–10 Ultrasound scan of the foot of a fetus at 19 weeks.
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)
FIGURE 6–11 Graph showing the rate of fetal growth during the last trimester (3
months). Average refers to babies born in the United States. After 36 weeks, the
growth rate deviates from the straight line. The decline, particularly after full
term (38 weeks), probably reflects inadequate fetal nutrition caused by placental
changes.
(Adapted from Gruenwald P: Growth of the human fetus. I. Normal growth and
its variation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 94:1112, 1966.)
By full term, most fetuses usually reach a CRL of 360 mm and weigh
approximately 3400 g. The amount of white fat is approximately 16% of body
weight. A fetus adds approximately 14 g of fat per day during these last weeks.
The thorax (chest) is prominent and the breasts often protrude slightly in both
sexes. The testes are usually in the scrotum in full-term male infants; premature

male infants commonly have undescended testes. Although the head is smaller at
full term in relation to the rest of the body than it was earlier in fetal life, it still
is one of the largest regions of the fetus. In general, male fetuses are longer and
weigh more at birth than females.
Low Birth Weight
Not all low-birth-weight babies are premature. Approximately one third of those
with a birth weight of 2500 g or less are actually small for gestational age. These
“small for dates” infants may be underweight because of placental insufficiency
(see Chapter 7). The placentas are often small or poorly attached and/or have
undergone degenerative changes that progressively reduce the oxygen supply
and nourishment to the fetus.
It is important to distinguish between full-term infants who have a low birth
weight because of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), and preterm infants
who are underweight because of a shortened gestation (i.e., premature by date).
IUGR may be caused by placental insufficiency, preeclampsia (hypertension),
multiple gestations (e.g., triplets), infectious diseases, cardiovascular anomalies,
inadequate maternal nutrition, and maternal and fetal hormones. Teratogens
(drugs, chemicals, and viruses) and genetic factors are also known to cause
IUGR (see Chapter 20). Infants with IUGR show a characteristic lack of
subcutaneous fat and their skin is wrinkled, suggesting that white fat has actually
been lost.

Expected Date of Delivery
The expected date of delivery of a fetus is 266 days or 38 weeks after
fertilization, that is, 280 days or 40 weeks after LNMP (see Table 6-2).
Approximately 12% of babies are born 1 to 2 weeks after the expected time of
birth.
Postmaturity Syndrome Prolongation of pregnancy for 3 or more weeks beyond
the expected date of delivery occurs in 5% to 6% of women. Some infants in
such pregnancies develop postmaturity syndrome and have an increased risk of
mortality. Because of this, labor is often induced (see Chapter 7). These fetuses
have dry, parchment-like skin; are often overweight; and have no lanugo,
decreased or absent vernix caseosa, long nails, and increased alertness.

Factors Influencing Fetal Growth
The fetus requires substrates (nutrients) for growth and production of energy.
Gases and nutrients pass freely to the fetus from the mother through the
placental membrane (see Chapter 7). Glucose is a primary source of energy for
fetal metabolism and growth; amino acids are also required. These substances
pass from the mother’s blood to the fetus through the placental membrane.
Insulin required for the metabolism of glucose is secreted by the fetal pancreas;
no significant quantities of maternal insulin reach the fetus because the placental
membrane is relatively impermeable to this hormone. Insulin, insulin-like
growth factors, human growth hormone, and some small polypeptides (such as
somatomedin C) are believed to stimulate fetal growth.
Many factors may affect prenatal growth: maternal, fetal, and environmental.
Some factors operating throughout pregnancy, such as maternal vascular disease,
intrauterine infection, cigarette smoking, and consumption of alcohol, tend to
produce intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) infants or small for gestational
age (SGA) infants, whereas factors operating during the last trimester, such as
maternal malnutrition, usually produce underweight infants with normal length
and head size. The terms IUGR and SGA are related, but they are not
synonymous.
IUGR refers to a process that causes a reduction in the expected pattern of fetal
growth as well as fetal growth potential. Constitutionally small for gestational
age infants have a birth weight that is lower than a predetermined cutoff value
for a particular gestational age (<2 standard deviations below the mean or less
than the third percentile). Severe maternal malnutrition resulting from a poor-
quality diet is known to cause restricted fetal growth (see Fig. 6-11).

Cigarette Smoking
Smoking is a well-established cause of IUGR. The growth rate for fetuses of
mothers who smoke cigarettes is less than normal during the last 6 to 8 weeks of
pregnancy (Fig. 6-11). On average, the birth weight of infants whose mothers
smoke heavily during pregnancy is 200 g less than normal, and perinatal
morbidity (medical complications) is increased when adequate medical care is
unavailable. The effect of maternal smoking is greater on fetuses whose mothers
also receive inadequate nutrition.

Multiple Pregnancy
Individuals of multiple births usually weigh considerably less than infants
resulting from a single pregnancy (Fig. 6-11). It is evident that the total
metabolic requirements of two or more fetuses exceed the nutritional supply
available from the placenta during the third trimester.

Alcohol and Illicit Drugs
Infants born to alcoholic mothers often exhibit IUGR as part of the fetal alcohol
syndrome (see Chapter 20). Similarly, the use of marijuana and other illicit drugs
(e.g., cocaine) can cause IUGR and other obstetric complications.

Impaired Uteroplacental and Fetoplacental Blood
Flow
Maternal placental circulation may be reduced by conditions that decrease
uterine blood flow (e.g., small chorionic vessels, severe maternal hypotension,
and renal disease). Chronic reduction of uterine blood flow can cause fetal
starvation resulting in IUGR. Placental dysfunction or defects (e.g., infarction;
see Chapter 7) can also cause IUGR. The net effect of these placental
abnormalities is a reduction of the total area for exchange of nutrients between
the fetal and maternal blood streams. It is very difficult to separate the effect of
these placental changes from the effect of reduced maternal blood flow to the
placenta. In some instances of chronic maternal disease, the maternal vascular
changes in the uterus are primary and the placental defects are secondary.

Genetic Factors and Growth Retardation
It is well established that genetic factors can cause IUGR. Repeated cases of this
condition in one family indicate that recessive genes may be the cause of the
abnormal growth. Structural and numerical chromosomal aberrations have also
been shown to be associated with cases of retarded fetal growth. IUGR is
pronounced in infants with Down syndrome and is very characteristic of fetuses
with trisomy 18 syndrome (see Chapter 20).

Procedures for Assessing Fetal Status
By accepting the shelter of the uterus, the fetus also takes the risk of maternal
disease or malnutrition and of biochemical, immunological and hormonal
adjustment.
– George W. Corner, renowned American embryologist, 1888–1981
Perinatology is the branch of medicine that is concerned with the well-being of
the fetus and newborn infant, generally covering the period from approximately
26 weeks after fertilization to 4 weeks after birth. This subspecialty of medicine
combines aspects of obstetrics and pediatrics.

Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is the primary imaging modality in the evaluation of the fetus
because of its wide availability, low cost, and lack of known adverse effects. The
chorionic sac and its contents may be visualized by ultrasonography during the
embryonic and fetal periods. Placental and fetal size, multiple births,
abnormalities of placental shape, and abnormal presentations can also be
determined. Ultrasound scans give accurate measurements of the biparietal
diameter of the fetal cranium (skull), from which close estimates of fetal age and
length can be made. Figures 6-10 and 6-12 illustrate how details of the fetus can
be observed in ultrasound scans. Ultrasound examinations are also helpful for
diagnosing abnormal pregnancies at a very early stage. Rapid advances in
ultrasonography have made this technique a major tool for prenatal diagnosis of
fetal abnormalities. Biopsy of fetal tissues, such as skin, liver, kidney, and
muscle, can be performed with ultrasound guidance.
FIGURE 6–12 A, Three-dimensional ultrasound (sonogram) of a 28-week fetus
showing the face. The surface features are clearly recognizable. B, Photograph
of the newborn infant (from A) 3 hours after birth.
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)

Diagnostic Amniocentesis
This is a common invasive prenatal diagnostic procedure, usually performed
between 15 and 18 weeks gestation. Amniotic fluid is sampled by inserting a 22-
gauge needle through the mother’s anterior abdominal and uterine walls into the
amniotic cavity by piercing the chorion and amnion (Fig. 6-13A). Because there
is relatively little amniotic fluid before the 14th week, amniocentesis is difficult
to perform before this time. The amniotic fluid volume is approximately 200 ml,
and 15 to 20 ml can be safely withdrawn. Amniocentesis is relatively devoid of
risk, especially when the procedure is performed by an experienced physician
using real-time ultrasonography guidance for outlining the position of the fetus
and placenta.
FIGURE 6–13 A, Illustration of amniocentesis. A needle is inserted through the
lower abdominal and uterine walls into the amniotic cavity. A syringe is attached
and amniotic fluid is withdrawn for diagnostic purposes. B, Drawing illustrating
chorionic villus sampling. Two sampling approaches are illustrated: through the
maternal anterior abdominal wall with a needle and through the vagina and
cervical canal using a malleable catheter. A speculum is an instrument for
exposing the vagina.

Diagnostic Value of Amniocentesis Amniocentesis is a common technique for
detecting genetic disorders (e.g., Down syndrome). The common indications for
amniocentesis are: • Advanced maternal age (38 years or older) • Previous birth
of a trisomic child (e.g., Down syndrome) • Chromosome abnormality in either
parent (e.g., a chromosome translocation; see Chapter 20) • Women who are
carriers of X-linked recessive disorders (e.g., hemophilia) • History of neural
tube defects in the family (e.g., spina bifida cystica; see Chapter 20) • Carriers of
inborn errors of metabolism 

Alpha-Fetoprotein Assay
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a glycoprotein that is synthesized in the fetal liver,
umbilical vesicle, and gut. AFP is found in high concentration in fetal serum,
peaking 14 weeks after the LNMP. Small amounts of AFP normally enter the
amniotic fluid.
Alpha-Fetoprotein and Fetal Anomalies The concentration of AFP is high in the
amniotic fluid surrounding fetuses with severe anomalies of the central nervous
system and ventral abdominal wall. Amniotic fluid AFP concentration is
measured by immunoassay, and, when used with ultrasonographic scanning,
approximately 99% of fetuses with these severe defects can be diagnosed
prenatally. When a fetus has an open neural tube defect, the concentration of
AFP is also likely to be higher than normal in the maternal serum. Maternal
serum AFP concentration is lower than normal when the fetus has Down
syndrome (trisomy 21), trisomy 18, or other chromosome defects.

Spectrophotometric Studies
Examination of amniotic fluid by this method may be used for assessing the
degree of erythroblastosis fetalis, also called hemolytic disease of newborn. This
disease results from destruction of fetal red blood cells by maternal antibodies
(see Chapter 7).

Chorionic Villus Sampling
Biopsies of trophoblastic tissue (5–20 mg) may be obtained by inserting a
needle, guided by ultrasonography, through the mother’s abdominal and uterine
walls (transabdominal) into the uterine cavity (see Fig. 6-13B). Chorionic villus
sampling (CVS) can also be performed transcervically by passing a polyethylene
catheter through the cervix and guided by real-time ultrasonography. For
assessing the condition of a fetus at risk, the fetal karyotype (chromosome
characteristics) can be obtained and a diagnosis made weeks earlier when CVS is
performed, compared with amniocentesis. The risk of miscarriage with CVS is
approximately 1%, more than with amniocentesis.
Diagnostic Value of Chorionic Villus Sampling Biopsies of chorionic villi are
used for detecting chromosomal abnormalities, inborn errors of metabolism, and
X-linked disorders. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) can be performed between
10 and 12 weeks of gestation. The rate of fetal loss is approximately 1%, slightly
more than the risk from amniocentesis. Reports regarding an increased risk of
limb defects after CVS are conflicting. The advantage of CVS over
amniocentesis is that it can be carried out sooner and the results of chromosomal
analysis are available several weeks earlier.

Sex Chromatin Patterns
Fetal sex can be determined by noting the presence or absence of sex chromatin
in the nuclei of cells recovered from amniotic fluid. These tests were developed
after it was discovered that sex chromatin was visible in nuclei of normal female
cells but not in normal male cells (Fig. 6-14A and B). Females with three X
chromosomes (46, XXX) have two masses of sex chromatin (Fig. 6-14C). By
use of a special staining technique, the Y chromosome can also be identified in
cells recovered from the amniotic fluid surrounding male fetuses (Fig. 6-14D).
Knowledge of fetal sex can be useful in diagnosing the presence of severe sex-
linked hereditary diseases, such as hemophilia and muscular dystrophy.
FIGURE 6–14 Oral epithelial nuclei stained with cresyl echt violet (A, B, and C)
and quinacrine mustard (D) (x2000). A, From normal male. No sex chromatin is
visible (chromatin negative). B, From normal female. The arrow indicates a
typical mass of sex chromatin (chromatin positive). C, From female with 47,
XXX trisomy. The arrows indicate two masses of sex chromatin. D, From
normal male. The arrow indicates a mass of Y chromatin as an intensely
fluorescent body.
(A and B, From Moore KL, Barr ML: Smears from the oral mucosa in the
detection of chromosomal sex. Lancet 2:57, 1955.)

Cell Cultures and Chromosomal Analysis
The prevalence of chromosomal disorders is approximately one in 120 live-born
infants. Fetal sex and chromosomal aberrations can be determined by studying
the sex chromosomes in cultured fetal cells obtained during amniocentesis.
These cultures are commonly done when an autosomal abnormality, such as
occurs in Down syndrome, is suspected. Moreover, microdeletions and
microduplications, as well as subtelomeric rearrangements, can now be detected
with fluorescence in situ hybridization technology. Inborn errors of metabolism
in fetuses can also be detected by studying cell cultures. Enzyme deficiencies
can be determined by incubating cells recovered from amniotic fluid and then
detecting the specific enzyme deficiency in the cells (see Chapter 20).

Fetal Transfusion
Fetuses with hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) can be treated by
intrauterine blood transfusions. The blood is injected through a needle inserted
into the fetal peritoneal cavity. With recent advances in percutaneous umbilical
cord blood sampling (PUBS), blood and packed red blood cells are transfused
directly into the umbilical vein for the treatment of fetal anemia due to
isoimmunization. The need for fetal blood transfusions is reduced nowadays
owing to the treatment of Rh-negative mothers of Rh-positive fetuses with anti-
Rh immunoglobulin, which in many cases prevents development of this disease
of the Rh system. Fetal transfusion of platelets directly into the umbilical cord
vein is carried out for the treatment of alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Also, fetal
infusion of drugs in a similar manner for the treatment of a few medical
conditions in the fetus has been reported.

Fetoscopy
Using fiberoptic instruments, parts of the fetal body may be directly observed. It
is possible to visualize the entire fetus looking for birth defects, such as cleft lip
and limb defects. The fetoscope is usually introduced through the abdominal and
uterine walls into the amniotic cavity, similarly to the way in which the needle is
inserted during amniocentesis. Fetoscopy is usually carried out at 17 to 20 weeks
of gestation, but with new approaches such as transabdominal thin-gauge
embryo fetoscopy, it is possible to detect certain defects in the embryo or fetus
during the first trimester. Because of the risk to the fetus compared with other
prenatal diagnostic procedures, fetoscopy now has few indications for routine
prenatal diagnosis or treatment of the fetus. Fetoscopy combined with laser
coagulation has been used to treat fetal conditions such as twin–twin transfusion
syndrome (TTTS). Fetoscopy has also been used for the release of amniotic
bands (see Fig. 7-21).

Percutaneous Umbilical Cord Blood Sampling
Fetal blood samples may be obtained directly from the umbilical vein by
percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling (PUBS) or cordocentesis for the
diagnosis of many fetal abnormal conditions, including aneuploidy, fetal growth
restriction, fetal infection, and fetal anemia. PUBS is usually performed after 18
weeks of gestation under continuous direct ultrasound guidance, which is used to
locate the umbilical cord and its vessels. Moreover, the procedure permits
treating the fetus directly, including the transfusion of packed red blood cells for
the management of fetal anemia resulting from isoimmunization.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
When planning fetal treatment, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used
to provide more information about an abnormality that has been detected in
ultrasonic images. Important advantages of magnetic resonance imaging are that
it does not use ionizing radiation and that it has high soft-tissue contrast and
resolution (Fig. 6-15).


FIGURE 6–15 Sagittal magnetic resonance image of the pelvis of a pregnant
woman. The fetus is in the breech presentation. Note the brain, eyes, and liver.
(Courtesy of Dr. Deborah Levine, Director of Obstetric and Gynecologic
Ultrasound, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.)

Fetal Monitoring
Continuous fetal heart rate monitoring in high-risk pregnancies is routine and
provides information about the oxygenation of the fetus. There are various
causes of prenatal fetal distress, such as maternal diseases that reduce oxygen
transport to the fetus (e.g., cyanotic heart disease). Fetal distress (e.g., indicated
by an abnormal heart rate or rhythm) suggests that the fetus is in jeopardy. A
noninvasive method of monitoring uses transducers placed on the mother’s
abdomen.

Summary of Fetal Period
• The fetal period begins 8 weeks after fertilization (10 weeks after the LNMP)
and ends at birth. It is characterized by rapid body growth and differentiation of
tissues and organ systems. An obvious change in the fetal period is the relative
slowing of head growth compared with that of the rest of the body.
• By the beginning of the 20th week, lanugo and head hair appear and the skin is
coated with vernix caseosa. The eyelids are closed during most of the fetal
period but begin to reopen at approximately 26 weeks. At this time, the fetus is
usually capable of extrauterine existence, mainly because of the maturity of its
respiratory system.
• Up to 30 weeks, the fetus appears reddish and wizened because of the thinness
of its skin and the relative absence of subcutaneous fat. Fat usually develops
rapidly during the 26 to 29 weeks, giving the fetus a smooth, plump appearance.
• The fetus is less vulnerable to the teratogenic effects of drugs, viruses, and
radiation, but these agents may interfere with growth and normal functional
development, especially of the brain and eyes.
• The physician can determine whether a fetus has a particular disease or birth
defect by using various diagnostic techniques, such as amniocentesis, chorionic
villus sampling (CVS), ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI).
• In selected cases, treatments can be given to the fetus, such as the
administration of drugs to correct cardiac arrhythmia or thyroid disorders.
Surgical correction of some congenital anomalies in utero (Fig. 6-16) is also
possible (e.g., fetuses that have ureters that do not open into the bladder).


FIGURE 6–16 Fetus at 21 weeks undergoing bilateral ureterostomies, the
establishment of openings of the ureters into the bladder.
(From Harrison MR, Globus MS, Filly RA [eds]: The Unborn Patient. Prenatal
Diagnosis and Treatment, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1994.)

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 6–1
A woman in the 20th week of a high-risk pregnancy was scheduled for a repeat
cesarean section. Her physician wanted to establish an expected date of delivery.
• How would an expected date of delivery be established?
• When would labor likely be induced?
• How could this be accomplished?

Case 6–2
A 44-year-old pregnant woman was worried that she might be carrying a fetus
with major birth defects.
• How could the status of her fetus be determined?
• What chromosomal abnormality would most likely be found?
• What other chromosomal aberrations might be detected?
• If this was of clinical interest, how could the sex of the fetus be determined in a
family known to have hemophilia or muscular dystrophy?

Case 6–3
A 19-year-old woman in the second trimester of pregnancy asked a physician
whether her fetus was vulnerable to over-the-counter drugs and street drugs. She
also wondered about the effect of her heavy drinking and cigarette smoking on
her fetus.
• What would the physician likely tell her?

Case 6–4
An ultrasound examination of a pregnant woman revealed IUGR of the fetus.
• What factors may cause IUGR? Discuss them.
• Which factors can the mother eliminate?

Case 6–5
A woman in the first trimester of pregnancy who was to undergo amniocentesis
expressed concerns about a miscarriage and the possibility of injury to her fetus.
• What are the risks of these complications?
• What procedures are used to minimize these risks?
• What other technique might be used for obtaining cells for chromosomal
study?
• What does the acronym PUBS stand for?
• Describe how this technique is performed and how it is used to assess the status
of a fetus.

Case 6–6
A pregnant woman is told that she is going to have an AFP test to determine
whether there are any fetal anomalies.
• What types of fetal anomalies can be detected by an AFP assay of maternal
serum? Explain.
• What is the significance of high and low levels of AFP?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Anderson MS, Hay WW. Intrauterine growth restriction and the small-for-
gestational-age infant. In MacDonald MG, Seshia MMK, Mullett MD, editors:
Avery’s Neonatology: Pathophysiology & Management of the Newborn, ed 6,
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Arroyo JA, Winn VD. Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis in the IUGR placenta.
Semin Perinatol. 2008;32:172.
Chiu RW, Lo YM. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis by fetal nucleic acid anlysis
in maternal plasma: the coming of age. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16:88.
Chung R, Kasprian G, Brugger PC, et al. The current state and future of fetal
imaging. Clin Perinatol. 2009;36:685.
Claris O, Beltrand J, Levy-Marchal C. Consequences of intrauterine growth and
early neonatal catch-up growth. Semin Perinatol. 2010;34:207.
Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, Bloom SL, et al. Williams Obstetrics, ed 23. New
York: McGraw-Hill; 2009.
Deprest JA, Devlieger R, Srisupundit K, et al. Fetal surgery is a clinical reality.
Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010;15:58.
Drugan A, Isada NB, Evans MI. Prenatal diagnosis in the molecular age—
indications, procedures, and laboratory techniques. In MacDonald MG, Seshia
MMK, Mullett MD, editors: Avery’s Neonatology: Pathophysiology &

Management of the Newborn, ed 6, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2005.
Durkin EF, Shaaban A. Commonly encountered surgical problems in the fetus
and neonate. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2009;56:647.
Evans MI, Johnson MP, Flake AW, et al. Fetal therapy. In MacDonald MG,
Seshia MMK, Mullett MD, editors: Avery’s Neonatology: Pathophysiology &
Management of the Newborn, ed 6, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2005.
Filly RA, Feldstein VA. Ultrasound evaluation of normal fetal anatomy. In
Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Hinrichsen KV, editor. Humanembryologie. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1990.
Jirásel JE. An Atlas of Human Prenatal Developmental Mechanics: Anatomy and
Staging. London and New York: Taylor & Francis; 2004.
Lyons EA, Levi CS. Ultrasound of the normal first trimester of pregnancy.
Syllabus: Special Course Ultrasound. Radiological Society of North America;
1991.
O’Rahilly R, Müller F. Development Stages in Human Embryos. Publication
637. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington; 1987.
Pergament E. First-trimester genetic counseling: perspectives and considerations.
Clin Lab Med. 2010;30:557.
Persaud TVN, Hay JC. Normal embryonic and fetal development. In: Reece EA,
et al, editors. Clinical Obstetrics: The Fetus and Mother. ed 3. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing; 2006:19-32.
Pooh RK, Shiota K, Kurjak A. Imaging of the human embryo with magnetic
resonance imaging microscopy and high-resolution transvaginal 3-dimensional
sonography: human embryology in the 21st century. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2011;204:77. e1-16
Reed MD, Blumer JL. Pharmacologic treatment of the fetus. In Martin RJ,

Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal
Medicine. Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Steding G. The Anatomy of the Human Embryo. A Scanning Electron-
Microscopic Atlas. Basel: Karger; 2009.
Streeter GL. Weight, sitting height, head size, foot length and menstrual age of
the human embryo. Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1920;11:143.
Whitworth M, Bricker L, Neilson JP, et al: Ultrasound for fetal assessment in
early pregnancy, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4: CD007058, 2010.
Zhang J, Merialdi M, Platt LD, et al. Defining normal and abnormal fetal
growth: promises and challenges. Am Obstet Gynecol. 2010;202:522.

Chapter 7 Placenta and Fetal Membranes
Placenta 109
   Decidua 110
   Development of Placenta 110
   Placental Circulation 113
   Placental Membrane 114
   Functions of Placenta 116
   Placental Endocrine Synthesis and Secretion 119
   Placenta as an Invasive Tumor-like Structure 120
   Uterine Growth during Pregnancy 121
Parturition 121
   Placenta and Fetal Membranes after Birth 123
   Maternal Surface of Placenta 123
   Fetal Surface of Placenta 123
   Umbilical Cord 126
   Amnion and Amniotic Fluid 127
Umbilical Vesicle 132
   Significance of Umbilical Vesicle 132
   Fate of Umbilical Vesicle 132
Allantois 132
Multiple Pregnancies 133
   Twins and Fetal Membranes 133
   Dizygotic Twins 134
   Monozygotic Twins 134
   Other Types of Multiple Births 138
Summary of Placenta and Fetal Membranes 141
Clinically Oriented Problems 142
The placenta and fetal membranes separate the fetus from the endometrium—
the inner layer of the uterine wall. An interchange of substances, such as
nutrients and oxygen, occurs between the maternal and fetal bloodstreams
through the placenta. The vessels in the umbilical cord connect the placental
circulation with the fetal circulation. The fetal membranes include the chorion,
amnion, umbilical vesicle (yolk sac), and allantois.

Placenta
The placenta is the primary site of nutrient and gas exchange between the mother
and fetus. The placenta is a fetomaternal organ that has two components:
• A fetal part that develops from the chorionic sac, the outermost fetal
membrane
• A maternal part that is derived from the endometrium, the mucous membrane
comprising the inner layer of the uterine wall
The placenta and umbilical cord form a transport system for substances passing
between the mother and fetus. Nutrients and oxygen pass from the maternal
blood through the placenta to the fetal blood, and waste materials and carbon
dioxide pass from the fetal blood through the placenta to the maternal blood. The
placenta and fetal membranes perform the following functions and activities:
protection, nutrition, respiration, excretion, and hormone production. Shortly
after birth, the placenta and fetal membranes are expelled from the uterus as the
afterbirth.

Decidua
The decidua is the endometrium of the uterus in a pregnant woman. It is the
functional layer of the endometrium that separates from the remainder of the
uterus after parturition (childbirth). The three regions of the decidua are named
according to their relation to the implantation site (Fig. 7-1):
• The decidua basalis is the part of the decidua deep to the conceptus (embryo
and membranes) that forms the maternal part of the placenta.
• The decidua capsularis is the superficial part of the decidua overlying the
conceptus.
• The decidua parietalis is all the remaining parts of the decidua.

FIGURE 7–1 Development of the placenta and fetal membranes. A, Frontal
section of the uterus showing elevation of the decidua capsularis by the
expanding chorionic sac of a 4-week embryo implanted in the endometrium on
the posterior wall (*). B, Enlarged drawing of the implantation site. The
chorionic villi were exposed by cutting an opening in the decidua capsularis. C

to F, Sagittal sections of the gravid or pregnant uterus from weeks 5 to 22
showing the changing relations of the fetal membranes to the decidua. In F, the
amnion and chorion are fused with each other and the decidua parietalis, thereby
obliterating the uterine cavity. Note in D to F that the chorionic villi persist only
where the chorion is associated with the decidua basalis.
In response to increasing progesterone levels in the maternal blood, the
connective tissue cells of the decidua enlarge to form pale-staining decidual
cells. These cells enlarge as glycogen and lipid accumulate in their cytoplasm.
The cellular and vascular changes occurring in the endometrium as the
blastocyst implants constitute the decidual reaction. Many decidual cells
degenerate near the chorionic sac in the region of the syncytiotrophoblast and,
together with maternal blood and uterine secretions, provide a rich source of
nutrition for the embryo. It has also been suggested that they protect the maternal
tissue against uncontrolled invasion by the syncytiotrophoblast and they may be
involved in hormone production. Decidual regions, clearly recognizable during
ultrasonography, are important in diagnosing early pregnancy.

Development of Placenta
Early placental development is characterized by the rapid proliferation of the
trophoblast and development of the chorionic sac and chorionic villi (see
Chapters 3 and 4). By the end of the third week, the anatomic arrangements
necessary for physiologic exchanges between the mother and embryo are
established. A complex vascular network is established in the placenta by the
end of the fourth week, which facilitates maternal-embryonic exchanges of
gases, nutrients, and metabolic waste products.
Chorionic villi cover the entire chorionic sac until the beginning of the eighth
week (Figs. 7-1C, 7-2, and 7-3). As this chorionic sac grows, the villi associated
with the decidua capsularis become compressed, reducing the blood supply to
them. These villi soon degenerate (see Figs. 7-1D and 7-3B), producing a
relatively avascular bare area, the smooth chorion (chorion laeve). As the villi
disappear, those associated with the decidua basalis rapidly increase in number,
branch profusely, and enlarge. This bushy area of the chorionic sac is the villous
chorion (chorion frondosum).

FIGURE 7–2 A, Lateral view of a spontaneously aborted embryo at Carnegie
stage 14, approximately 32 days. The chorionic and amniotic sacs have been
opened to show the embryo. Note the large size of the umbilical vesicle at this
stage. B, The sketch shows the actual size of the embryo and its membranes.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical

Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
 
FIGURE 7–3 Spontaneously aborted human chorionic sacs. A, At 21 days. The
entire sac is covered with chorionic villi (x4). B, At 8 weeks. Actual size. Some
of the chorionic villi have degenerated forming the smooth chorion.
(From Potter EL, Craig JM: Pathology of the Fetus and the Infant, 3rd ed.
Copyright 1975 by Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago.)
Ultrasonography of Chorionic Sac
The size of the chorionic sac is useful in determining gestational age of embryos
in patients with uncertain menstrual histories. Growth of the chorionic sac is
extremely rapid between weeks 5 and 10. Modern ultrasound equipment,
especially instruments equipped with intravaginal transducers, enables
ultrasonographers to detect the chorionic sac, or gestational sac, when it has a
median sac diameter of 2 to 3 mm (see Fig. 3-7). Chorionic sacs with this
diameter indicate that the gestational age is 4 weeks and 3 to 4 days, that is,
approximately 18 days after fertilization.

The uterus, chorionic sac, and placenta enlarge as the fetus grows. Growth in the
size and thickness of the placenta continues rapidly until the fetus is
approximately 18 weeks old. The fully developed placenta covers 15% to 30%
of the decidua and weighs approximately one sixth that of the fetus.
The placenta has two parts (Figs. 7-1E and F and 7-4):
• The fetal part is formed by the villous chorion. The chorionic villi that arise
from the chorion project into the intervillous space containing maternal blood
(Fig. 7-1C).
• The maternal part of the placenta is formed by the decidua basalis, the part
of the decidua related to the fetal component of the placenta. By the end of the
fourth month, the decidua basalis is almost entirely replaced by the fetal part of
the placenta.
FIGURE 7–4 Drawing of a sagittal section of a gravid uterus at 4 weeks shows
the relation of the fetal membranes to each other and to the decidua and embryo.
The amnion and smooth chorion have been cut and reflected to show their

relationship to each other and the decidua parietalis.
The fetal part of the placenta is attached to the maternal part of the placenta by
the cytotrophoblastic shell, the external layer of trophoblastic cells on the
maternal surface of the placenta (Fig. 7-5). The chorionic villi attach firmly to
the decidua basalis through the cytotrophoblastic shell and anchor the chorionic
sac to the decidua basalis. Endometrial arteries and veins pass freely through
gaps in the cytotrophoblastic shell and open into the intervillous space.
FIGURE 7–5 Schematic drawing of a transverse section through a full-term
placenta, showing (1) the relation of the villous chorion (fetal part of placenta) to
the decidua basalis (maternal part of placenta), (2) the fetal placental circulation,
and (3) the maternal placental circulation. Note that the umbilical arteries carry
poorly oxygenated fetal blood (shown in blue) to the placenta and that the

umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood (shown in red ) to the fetus. Note that
the cotyledons are separated from each other by placental septa, projections of
the decidua basalis. Each cotyledon consists of two or more main stem villi and
many branch villi. In this drawing, only one stem villus is shown in each
cotyledon, but the stumps of those that have been removed are indicated.
The shape of the placenta is determined by the persistent area of chorionic villi
(Fig. 7-1F). Usually this is a circular area, giving the placenta a discoid shape.
As the chorionic villi invade the decidua basalis, decidual tissue is eroded to
enlarge the intervillous space. This erosion produces several wedge-shaped areas
of decidua, the placental septa, that project toward the chorionic plate, the part
of the chorionic wall related to the placenta (see Fig. 7-5). The placental septa
divide the fetal part of the placenta into irregular convex areas—cotyledons.
Each cotyledon consists of two or more stem villi and their many branch villi
(Fig. 7-6A). By the end of the fourth month, the decidua basalis is almost
entirely replaced by the cotyledons. Expression of the transcription factor Gcm1
(glial cells missing-1) in trophoblast stem cells regulates the branching process
of the stem villi to form the vascular network in the placenta.

FIGURE 7–6 A, Drawing of a stem chorionic villus showing its arteriocapillary-
venous system. The arteries carry poorly oxygenated fetal blood and waste
products from the fetus, whereas the vein carries oxygenated blood and nutrients
to the fetus. B and C, Drawings of sections through a branch villus at 10 weeks
and full term, respectively. The placental membrane, composed of extrafetal
tissues, separates the maternal blood in the intervillous space from the fetal
blood in the capillaries in the villi. Note that the placental membrane becomes
very thin at full term. Hofbauer cells are thought to be phagocytic cells.
The decidua capsularis, the layer of decidua overlying the implanted chorionic
sac, forms a capsule over the external surface of the sac (Fig. 7-1A to D). As the
conceptus enlarges, the decidua capsularis bulges into the uterine cavity and
becomes greatly attenuated. Eventually the decidua capsularis contacts and fuses
with the decidua parietalis on the opposite wall, thereby slowly obliterating the
uterine cavity (Fig. 7-1E and F). By 22 to 24 weeks, the reduced blood supply to
the decidua capsularis causes it to degenerate and disappear. After disappearance
of the decidua capsularis, the smooth part of the chorionic sac fuses with the
decidua parietalis. This fusion can be separated and usually occurs when blood
escapes from the intervillous space (see Fig. 7-4). The collection of blood
(hematoma) pushes the chorionic membrane away from the decidua parietalis,
thereby reestablishing the potential space of the uterine cavity.
The intervillous space of the placenta, which contains maternal blood, is
derived from the lacunae that developed in the syncytiotrophoblast during the
second week of development (see Chapter 3). This large blood-filled space
results from the coalescence and enlargement of the lacunar networks. The
intervillous space of the placenta is divided into compartments by the placental
septa; however, there is free communication between the compartments because
the septa do not reach the chorionic plate (see Fig. 7-5).
Maternal blood enters the intervillous space from the spiral endometrial
arteries in the decidua basalis (see Figs. 7-4 and 7-5). The spiral arteries pass
through gaps in the cytotrophoblastic shell and discharge blood into the
intervillous space. This large space is drained by endometrial veins that also
penetrate the cytotrophoblastic shell. Endometrial veins are found over the entire
surface of the decidua basalis. The numerous branch villi—arising from stem
villi—are continuously showered with maternal blood that circulates through the
intervillous space (Fig. 7-5). The blood in this space carries oxygen and
nutritional materials that are necessary for fetal growth and development. The

maternal blood also contains fetal waste products such as carbon dioxide, salts,
and products of protein metabolism.
The amniotic sac enlarges faster than the chorionic sac. As a result, the amnion
and smooth chorion soon fuse to form the amniochorionic membrane (Figs. 7-
4 and 7-5). This composite membrane fuses with the decidua capsularis and,
after disappearance of the latter, adheres to the decidua parietalis (Fig. 7-1F). It
is the amniochorionic membrane that ruptures during labor. Preterm rupture of
this membrane is the most common event leading to premature labor. When the
membrane ruptures, amniotic fluid escapes through the cervix and vagina to the
exterior.

Placental Circulation
The branch chorionic villi of the placenta provide a large surface area where
materials may be exchanged across the very thin placental membrane (“barrier”)
interposed between the fetal and maternal circulations (see Figs. 7-5 and 7-6). It
is through the numerous branch villi that arise from the stem villi that the main
exchange of material between the mother and fetus takes place. The circulations
of the fetus and the mother are separated by the placental membrane consisting
of extrafetal tissues (see Fig. 7-6B and C).
Fetal Placental Circulation
Poorly oxygenated blood leaves the fetus and passes through the umbilical
arteries to the placenta. At the site of attachment of the umbilical cord to the
placenta, these arteries divide into several radially disposed chorionic arteries
that branch freely in the chorionic plate before entering the chorionic villi (Fig.
7-5). The blood vessels form an extensive arteriocapillary-venous system within
the chorionic villi (Fig. 7-6A), which brings the fetal blood extremely close to
the maternal blood. This system provides a very large surface area for the
exchange of metabolic and gaseous products between the maternal and fetal
bloodstreams. There is normally no intermingling of fetal and maternal blood;
however, very small amounts of fetal blood may enter the maternal circulation
when minute defects develop in the placental membrane (Fig. 7-6B and C). The
well-oxygenated fetal blood in the fetal capillaries passes into thin-walled veins
that follow the chorionic arteries to the site of attachment of the umbilical cord.
They converge here to form the umbilical vein. This large vessel carries
oxygen-rich blood to the fetus (Fig. 7-5).
Maternal Placental Circulation
The maternal blood in the intervillous space is temporarily outside the maternal
circulatory system. It enters the intervillous space through 80 to 100 spiral
endometrial arteries in the decidua basalis. These vessels discharge into the
intervillous space through gaps in the cytotrophoblastic shell. The blood flow
from the spiral arteries is pulsatile and is propelled in jet-like fountains by the
maternal blood pressure (Fig. 7-5). The entering blood is at a considerably
higher pressure than that in the intervillous space and spurts blood toward the

chorionic plate that forms the “roof” of the intervillous space. As the pressure
dissipates, the blood flows slowly over the branch villi, allowing an exchange of
metabolic and gaseous products with the fetal blood. The blood eventually
returns through the endometrial veins to the maternal circulation.
The welfare of the embryo and fetus depends more on the adequate bathing of
the branch villi with maternal blood than on any other factor. Reductions of
uteroplacental circulation result in fetal hypoxia (below normal levels of
oxygen) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Severe reductions of
uteroplacental circulation may result in fetal death. The intervillous space of the
mature placenta contains approximately 150 ml of blood that is replenished three
or four times per minute.

Placental Membrane
The placental membrane is a composite structure that consists of the extrafetal
tissues separating the maternal and fetal blood. Until approximately 20 weeks,
the placental membrane consists of four layers (Figs. 7-6 and 7-7):
syncytiotrophoblast, cytotrophoblast, connective tissue of villus, and
endothelium of fetal capillaries. After the 20th week, cellular changes occur in
the branch villi that result in the cytotrophoblast in many of the villi becoming
attenuated. Eventually cytotrophoblastic cells disappear over large areas of the
villi, leaving only thin patches of syncytiotrophoblast. As a result, the placental
membrane consists of three layers in most places (Fig. 7-6C). In some areas, the
placental membrane becomes markedly thinned and attenuated. At these sites,
the syncytiotrophoblast comes in direct contact with the endothelium of the fetal
capillaries to form a vasculosyncytial placental membrane.

FIGURE 7–7 Diagrammatic illustration of transfer across the placental
membrane (barrier). The extrafetal tissues, across which transport of substances
between the mother and fetus occurs, collectively constitute the placental
membrane. Inset, Light micrograph of chorionic villus showing a fetal capillary
and the placental membrane (arrow).
Sometimes the placental membrane is called the placental barrier, an
inappropriate term because there are only a few substances, endogenous or
exogenous, that are unable to pass through the placental membrane in detectable
amounts. The placental membrane acts as a barrier only when the molecule is of
a certain size, configuration, and charge such as heparin. Some metabolites,
toxins, and hormones, although present in the maternal circulation, do not pass

through the placental membrane in sufficient concentrations to affect the
embryo/fetus.
Most drugs and other substances in the maternal plasma pass through the
placental membrane and enter the fetal plasma (Fig. 7-7). Electron micrographs
of the syncytiotrophoblast show that its free surface has many microvilli that
increase the surface area for exchange between the maternal and fetal
circulations. As pregnancy advances, the placental membrane becomes
progressively thinner so that blood in many fetal capillaries is extremely close to
the maternal blood in the intervillous space (Figs. 7-6C and 7-7).
During the third trimester, numerous nuclei in the syncytiotrophoblast aggregate
to form multinucleated protrusions called nuclear aggregations or syncytial
knots (Fig. 7-6B and C). These aggregations continually break off and are
carried from the intervillous space into the maternal circulation. Some knots
lodge in capillaries of the maternal lungs where they are rapidly destroyed by
local enzyme action. Toward the end of pregnancy, eosinophilic fibrinoid
material forms on the surfaces of villi (Fig. 7-6C) and appears to reduce
placental transfer.

Functions of Placenta
The placenta has three main functions:
• Metabolism (e.g., synthesis of glycogen)
• Transport of gases and nutrients
• Endocrine secretion (e.g., human chorionic gonadotropin [hCG])
These comprehensive activities are essential for maintaining pregnancy and
promoting normal fetal development.
Placental Metabolism
The placenta, particularly during early pregnancy, synthesizes glycogen,
cholesterol, and fatty acids, which serve as sources of nutrients and energy for
the embryo/fetus. Many of its metabolic activities are undoubtedly critical for its
other two major placental activities (transport and endocrine secretion).
Placental Transfer
The transport of substances in both directions between the fetal and maternal
blood is facilitated by the great surface area of the placental membrane. Almost
all materials are transported across the placental membrane by one of the
following four main transport mechanisms: simple diffusion, facilitated
diffusion, active transport, and pinocytosis.
Passive transport by simple diffusion is usually characteristic of substances
moving from areas of higher to lower concentration until equilibrium is
established. In facilitated diffusion, there is transport through electrical
gradients. Facilitated diffusion requires a transporter but no energy. Such
systems may involve carrier molecules that temporarily combine with the
substances to be transported. Active transport is the passage of ions or
molecules across a cell membrane. Pinocytosis is a form of endocytosis in
which the material being engulfed is a small amount of extracellular fluid. This
method of transport is usually reserved for large molecules. Some proteins are
transferred very slowly through the placenta by pinocytosis.

Other Placental Transport Mechanisms
There are three other methods of transfer across the placental membrane. In the
first, fetal red blood cells pass into the maternal circulation, particularly during
parturition, through microscopic breaks in the placental membrane. Labeled
maternal red blood cells have also been found in the fetal circulation.
Consequently, red blood cells may pass in either direction through very small
defects in the placental membrane. In the second method of transport, cells cross
the placental membrane under their own power, such as maternal leukocytes and
Treponema pallidum, the organism that causes syphilis. In the third method of
transport, some bacteria and protozoa such as Toxoplasma gondii infect the
placenta by creating lesions and then cross the placental membrane through the
defects that are created.
Transfer of Gases
Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide cross the placental membrane by
simple diffusion. Interruption of oxygen transport for several minutes endangers
survival of the embryo or fetus. The placental membrane approaches the
efficiency of the lungs for gas exchange. The quantity of oxygen reaching the
fetus is primarily flow limited rather than diffusion limited; hence, fetal hypoxia
(decreased levels of oxygen) results primarily from factors that diminish either
the uterine blood flow or fetal blood flow. Maternal respiratory failure (for
example, from pneumonia) will also reduce oxygen transport to the fetus.
Nutritional Substances
Nutrients constitute the bulk of substances transferred from the mother to the
embryo/fetus. Water is rapidly exchanged by simple diffusion and in increasing
amounts as pregnancy advances. Glucose produced by the mother and placenta
is quickly transferred to the embryo/fetus by facilitated diffusion. There is little
or no transfer of maternal cholesterol, triglycerides, or phospholipids. Although
there is transport of free fatty acids, the amount transferred appears to be
relatively small. Amino acids are actively transported across the placental
membrane and are essential for fetal growth. For most amino acids, the plasma
concentrations in the fetus are higher than in the mother. Vitamins cross the
placental membrane and are essential for normal development. Water-soluble
vitamins cross the placental membrane more quickly than fat-soluble ones.

Hormones
Protein hormones do not reach the embryo or fetus in significant amounts,
except for a slow transfer of thyroxine and triiodothyronine. Unconjugated
steroid hormones cross the placental membrane rather freely. Testosterone and
certain synthetic progestins cross the placental membrane and may cause
masculinization of female fetuses (see Chapter 20).
Electrolytes
These compounds are freely exchanged across the placental membrane in
significant quantities, each at its own rate. When a mother receives intravenous
fluids with electrolytes, they also pass to the fetus and affect its water and
electrolyte status.
Maternal Antibodies and Proteins
The fetus produces only small amounts of antibodies because of its immature
immune system. Some passive immunity is conferred on the fetus by the
placental transfer of maternal antibodies. IgG gamma globulins are readily
transported to the fetus by transcytosis. Maternal antibodies confer fetal
immunity to some diseases such as diphtheria, smallpox, and measles; however,
no immunity is acquired to pertussis (whooping cough) or varicella
(chickenpox). A maternal protein, transferrin, crosses the placental membrane
and carries iron to the embryo or fetus. The placental surface contains special
receptors for this protein.
Hemolytic Disease of the Newborn
Small amounts of fetal blood may pass to the maternal blood through
microscopic breaks in the placental membrane. If the fetus is Rh-positive and the
mother Rh-negative, the fetal blood cells may stimulate the formation of anti-Rh
antibodies by the immune system of the mother. These antibodies pass to the
fetal blood and cause hemolysis of the fetal Rh-positive blood cells, jaundice,
and anemia in the fetus. Some fetuses with hemolytic disease of the newborn, or
fetal erythroblastosis, fail to make a satisfactory intrauterine adjustment. They
may die unless delivered early or given intrauterine, intraperitoneal, or
intravenous transfusions of packed Rh-negative blood cells until after birth (see

Chapter 6). Hemolytic disease of the newborn is relatively uncommon now
because Rh (D) immunoglobulin given to the mother usually prevents
development of this disease in the fetus.
Waste Products
Urea and uric acid pass through the placental membrane by simple diffusion.
Conjugated bilirubin (which is fat soluble) is easily transported by the placenta
for rapid clearance.
Drugs and Drug Metabolites
Drugs taken by the mother can affect the embryo/fetus directly or indirectly by
interfering with maternal or placental metabolism. The amount of drug or
metabolite reaching the placenta is controlled by the maternal blood level and
blood flow through the placenta. Most drugs and drug metabolites cross the
placenta by simple diffusion, the exception being those with a structural
similarity to amino acids, such as methyldopa and some antimetabolites.
Some drugs cause major birth defects (see Chapter 20). Fetal drug addiction may
occur after maternal use of drugs such as heroin and 50% to 75% of these
newborns experience withdrawal symptoms. Because psychic dependence on
these drugs is not developed during the fetal period, no liability to subsequent
narcotic addiction exists in the infant after withdrawal is complete.
Most drugs used for the management of labor readily cross the placental
membrane. Depending on the dose and its timing in relation to delivery, these
drugs may cause respiratory depression of the newborn infant. All sedatives and
analgesics affect the fetus to some degree. Neuromuscular blocking agents that
may be used during operative obstetrics cross the placenta in only small
amounts. Inhaled anesthetics can also cross the placental membrane and affect
fetal breathing if used during parturition.
Infectious Agents
Cytomegalovirus, rubella, coxsackie viruses, and viruses associated with variola,
varicella, measles, herpes virus, and poliomyelitis may pass through the
placental membrane and cause fetal infection. In some cases, such as the rubella

virus, birth defects, such as cataracts, may be produced (see Chapter 20).
Microorganisms such as Treponema pallidum, which causes syphilis, and
Toxoplasma gondii, which produces destructive changes in the brain and eyes,
also cross the placental membrane, often causing severe birth defects and/or
death of the embryo or fetus.

Placental Endocrine Synthesis and Secretion
Using precursors derived from the fetus and/or the mother, the
syncytiotrophoblast of the placenta synthesizes protein and steroid hormones.
The protein hormones synthesized by the placenta follow:
• hCG
• Human chorionic somatomammotropin (human placental lactogen)
• Human chorionic thyrotropin
• Human chorionic corticotropin
The glycoprotein hCG, similar to luteinizing hormone, is first secreted by the
syncytiotrophoblast during the second week; hCG maintains the corpus luteum,
preventing the onset of menstrual periods. The concentration of hCG in the
maternal blood and urine increases to a maximum by the eighth week and then
declines. The steroid hormones synthesized by the placenta are progesterone and
estrogens. Progesterone can be found in the placenta at all stages of gestation,
indicating that it is essential for the maintenance of pregnancy. The placenta
forms progesterone from maternal cholesterol or pregnenolone. The ovaries of a
pregnant woman can be removed after the first trimester without causing an
abortion because the placenta takes over the production of progesterone from the
corpus luteum. Estrogens are also produced in large quantities by the
syncytiotrophoblast.
The Placenta as an Allograft*
The placenta can be regarded as an allograft with respect to the mother. The
fetal part of the placenta is a derivative of the conceptus, which inherits both
paternal and maternal genes. What protects the placenta from rejection by the
mother’s immune system? This question remains a major biologic enigma in
nature. The syncytiotrophoblast of the chorionic villi, although exposed to
maternal immune cells within the blood sinusoids, lacks major
histocompatibility (MHC) antigens and thus does not evoke rejection responses.
However, extravillous trophoblast (EVT) cells, which invade the uterine decidua
and its vasculature (spiral arteries), express class I MHC antigens. These
antigens include HLA-G, which, being nonpolymorphic (class Ib), is poorly
recognizable by T lymphocytes as an alloantigen, as well as HLA-C, which,

being polymorphic (class Ia), is recognizable by T cells. In addition to averting T
cells, EVT cells must also shield themselves from potential attack by natural
killer (NK) lymphocytes and injury inflicted by activation of complement.
Multiple mechanisms appear to be in place to guard the placenta:
• Expression of HLA-G is restricted to a few tissues including placental EVT
cells. Its strategic location in the placenta is believed to provide a dual
immunoprotective role: evasion of T-cell recognition owing to its
nonpolymorphic nature, and recognition by the “killer-inhibitory receptors” on
NK cells, thus turning off their killer function. Inadequacy of this hypothesis is
suggested by several observations: (a) healthy individuals showing biallelic loss
of HLA-G1 have been identified, indicating that HLA-G is not essential for
fetoplacental survival; (b) human EVT cells were found to be vulnerable to NK
cell-mediated killing; and (c) it does not explain why HLA-C, a polymorphic
antigen, also expressed by EVT cells, does not evoke a rejection response in situ.
Because both HLA-G and HLA-C were shown to have the unique ability to
resist human cytomegalovirus-mediated MHC class I degradation, it is
speculated that a selective location of these two antigens at the fetomaternal
interface may help to withstand viral assault.
• Immunoprotection is provided locally by certain immunosuppressor molecules,
such as prostaglandin E2, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and interleukin-
10. Decidua-derived prostaglandin E2 was shown to block activation of maternal
T cells as well as NK cells in situ. Indeed, immunoregulatory function of
decidual cells is consistent with their genealogy. It was shown that uterine
endometrial stromal cells, which differentiate into decidual cells during
pregnancy, are derived from progenitor (stem) cells that migrate from
hemopoietic organs such as the fetal liver and the bone marrow during ontogeny.
• Transient tolerance of maternal T-cell repertoire to fetal MHC antigens may
serve as a backup mechanism for placental immunoprotection. A similar B-cell
tolerance has also been reported.
• A trafficking of activated maternal leukocytes into the placenta or the fetus is
prevented by deletion of these cells triggered by apoptosis-inducing ligands
present on the trophoblast.
• Based on genetic manipulation in mice, it was shown that the presence of
complement regulatory proteins (Crry in the mouse, membrane cofactor protein
or CD46 in the human), which can block activation of the third component of
complement (C3) in the complement cascade, protects the placenta from
complement-mediated destruction, which may happen otherwise because of

residual C3 activation remaining after defending against pathogens. Crry gene
knockout mice died in utero because of complement-mediated placental damage,
which could be averted by additional knockout of the C3 gene.
• Experiments in mice revealed that the presence of the enzyme indoleamine 2,3-
deoxygenase in trophoblastic cells was critical for immunoprotection of the
allogeneic conceptus by suppressing T cell-driven local inflammatory responses
including complement activation. Treatment of pregnant mice with an
indoleamine 2,3-deoxygenase inhibitor, 1-methyl tryptophan, caused selective
death of allogeneic (but not syngeneic) conceptuses due to massive deposition of
complement and hemorrhagic necrosis at the placental sites.

Placenta as an Invasive Tumor-like Structure
The placenta in many species, including humans, is a highly invasive tumor-like
structure that invades the uterus to tap in on its blood supply to establish an
adequate exchange of key molecules between the mother and the fetus. What
protects the uterus from placental overinvasion? Following the development of
chorionic villi, the invasive function of the placenta is provided by the subset of
cytotrophoblastic cells (EVT cells), which are produced by proliferation and
differentiation of stem cells located in the cytotrophoblast layer of certain
chorionic villi (anchoring villi). They break out of the villous confines and
migrate as cell columns to invade the decidua where they reorganize as distinct
subsets: a nearly continuous cell layer (cytotrophoblastic shell) separating the
decidua from maternal blood sinusoids; cells dispersed within the decidua
(interstitial trophoblast); multinucleate placental-bed giant cells produced by
EVT cell fusion; and endovascular trophoblast, which invade and remodel the
uteroplacental (spiral) arteries within the endometrium and a part of the
myometrium. Optimal arterial remodeling (loss of tunica media and replacement
of the endothelium by the EVT cells) allows steady placental perfusion with
maternal blood unhindered by the presence of vasoactive molecules. Inadequate
EVT cell invasion leading to poor placental perfusion underlies the pathogenesis
of preeclampsia (a major pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorder in the
mother) and certain forms of IUGR of the fetus, whereas excessive invasion is a
hallmark of gestational trophoblastic neoplasias and choriocarcinomas.
Trophoblastic stem cells have been successfully propagated from the murine
(mice) but not from the human placenta. However, normal human EVT cells
have been successfully propagated from first-trimester human placentas. Using
these cells for functional assays in vitro, it was shown that molecular
mechanisms responsible for their invasiveness are identical to those of cancer
cells, whereas their proliferation, migration, and invasiveness are stringently
regulated in situ by a variety of locally produced molecules: growth factors,
growth factor binding proteins, proteoglycans, and components of the
extracellular matrix. Numerous growth factors, such as epidermal growth factor,
TGF-a, amphiregulin, colony-stimulating factor 1, vascular endothelial growth
factor, and placental growth factor were shown to stimulate EVT cell
proliferation without affecting migration or invasiveness, whereas insulin-like
growth factor II and an insulin-like, growth factor-binding protein, IGFBP-1,

were shown to stimulate EVT cell migration and invasiveness without affecting
proliferation. TGF-β, primarily produced by the decidua, was shown to provide
the key control of EVT cell proliferation, migration, and invasiveness, whereas
trophoblastic cancer (choriocarcinoma) cells were shown to be resistant to the
inhibitory signals of TGF-β. Thus, it appears that the decidua plays a dual role in
uteroplacental homeostasis by immunoprotection of the placenta and protection
of the uterus from placental overinvasion.
Preeclampsia Preeclampsia is a serious disorder that occurs during pregnancy,
usually after the 20th week of gestation. Maternal hypertension, proteinuria, and
edema are essential features of this condition. Preeclampsia can lead to
eclampsia resulting in miscarriage and maternal death. The cause of
preeclampsia is uncertain but recent studies have implicated the rennin-
angiotensin system in the development of the high blood pressure and edema. In
eclampsia, extensive infarcts are present that reduce uteroplacental circulation.
This can lead to fetal malnutrition, fetal growth restriction, miscarriage, or fetal
death.

Uterine Growth during Pregnancy
The uterus of a nonpregnant woman lies in the pelvis. To accommodate the
growing conceptus, the uterus increases in size (Fig. 7-8A). It also increases in
weight and its walls become thinner (Fig. 7-8B and C). During the first trimester,
the uterus moves out of the pelvis and by 20 weeks reaches the level of the
umbilicus. By 28 to 30 weeks, the uterus reaches the epigastric region, the area
between the xiphoid process of the sternum and the umbilicus. The increase in
size of the uterus largely results from hypertrophy of preexisting smooth
muscular fibers and partly from the development of new fibers.
FIGURE 7–8 Drawings of median sections of a woman’s body. A, Not pregnant.
B, Twenty weeks pregnant. C, Thirty weeks pregnant. Note that as the conceptus
enlarges, the uterus increases in size to accommodate the rapidly growing fetus.
By 20 weeks, the uterus and fetus reach the level of the umbilicus, and by 30
weeks, they reach the epigastric region. The mother’s abdominal viscera are
displaced and compressed, and the skin and muscles of her anterior abdominal
wall are stretched.

Parturition
Parturition (childbirth) is the process during which the fetus, placenta, and fetal
membranes are expelled from the mother’s reproductive tract (Fig. 7-9). Labor
is the sequence of involuntary uterine contractions that result in dilation of the
uterine cervix and expulsion of the fetus and placenta from the uterus. The
factors that trigger labor are not completely understood, but several hormones
are related to the initiation of contractions. The fetal hypothalamus secretes
corticotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the anterior hypophysis
(pituitary) to produce adrenocorticotropin. This hormone causes the secretion
of cortisol from the suprarenal (adrenal) cortex. Cortisol is involved in the
synthesis of estrogens. Many steroids are involved in uterine contraction.

FIGURE 7–9 Drawings illustrating parturition (childbirth). A and B, The cervix
is dilating during the first stage of labor. C to E, The fetus is passing through the
cervix and vagina during the second stage of labor. F and G, As the uterus
contracts during the third stage of labor, the placenta folds and pulls away from
the uterine wall. Separation of the placenta results in bleeding and formation of a

large hematoma (mass of blood). Pressure on the abdomen facilitates placental
separation. H, The placenta is expelled and the uterus contracts.
Peristaltic contractions of uterine smooth muscle are elicited by oxytocin, which
is released by the neurohypophysis of the pituitary gland. This hormone is
administered clinically when it is necessary to induce labor. Oxytocin also
stimulates release of prostaglandins from the decidua increasing myometrial
contractility by sensitizing the myometrial cells to oxytocin.
Estrogens also increase myometrial contractile activity and stimulate the release
of oxytocin and prostaglandins. From studies carried out in sheep and nonhuman
primates, it seems that the duration of pregnancy and the process of birth are
under the direct control of the fetus.
Labor is a continuous process; however, for clinical purposes, it is usually
divided into three stages:
• Dilation begins with progressive dilation of the cervix (Fig. 7-9A and B) and
ends when the cervix is completely dilated. During this phase, regular painful
contractions of the uterus occur less than 10 minutes apart. The average duration
of the first stage is approximately 12 hours for first pregnancies (primigravidas)
and approximately 7 hours for women who have had a child previously
(multigravidas).
• Expulsion begins when the cervix is fully dilated and ends with delivery of the
baby (Figs. 7-9C to E and 7-10). During the second stage of labor, the fetus
descends through the cervix and vagina. As soon as the fetus is outside the
mother, it is called a neonate. The average duration of the second stage is 50
minutes for primigravidas and 20 minutes for multigravidas.
• The placental stage begins as soon as the baby is born and ends with the
expulsion of the placenta and membranes. The duration of the third stage of
labor is 15 minutes in approximately 90% of pregnancies. A retained placenta
is one that has not been expelled within 60 minutes of delivery of the baby.

FIGURE 7–10 Delivery of the baby’s head during the second stage of labor is
shown. A, The crown of the head distends the mother’s perineum. B, The
perineum slips over the head and face. C, The head is delivered: subsequently,
the body of the fetus is expelled.
(From Greenhill JB, Friedman EA: Biological Principles and Modern Practice
of Obstetrics. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1974.)
Retraction of the uterus reduces the area of placental attachment (Fig. 7-9G). A
hematoma, a localized mass of extravasated blood, soon forms deep to the
placenta and separates it from the uterine wall. The placenta and fetal
membranes are expelled through the vaginal canal. The placenta separates
through the spongy layer of the decidua basalis (see Chapter 2). After delivery of
the baby, the uterus continues to contract (Fig. 7-9H). The myometrial
contractions constrict the spiral arteries that supplied blood to the intervillous
space. These contractions prevent excessive uterine bleeding.

Placenta and Fetal Membranes after Birth
The placenta commonly has a discoid shape, with a diameter of 15 to 20 cm and
a thickness of 2 to 3 cm (Fig. 7-11). It weighs 500 to 600 g, which is
approximately one sixth the weight of the average fetus. The margins of the
placenta are continuous with the ruptured amniotic and chorionic sacs (Fig 7-11).

 

FIGURE 7–11 Placentas and fetal membranes after birth, approximately one
third actual size. A, Maternal surface showing cotyledons and the grooves
around them. Each cotyledon consists of a number of main stem villi with their
many branch villi. The grooves were occupied by the placental septa when the
maternal and fetal parts of the placenta were together (see Fig. 7–5). B, Fetal

surface showing blood vessels running in the chorionic plate deep to the amnion
and converging to form the umbilical vessels at the attachment of the umbilical
cord. Placentas and fetal membranes after birth, approximately one third of
actual size. C, The amnion and smooth chorion are arranged to show that they
are fused and continuous with the margins of the placenta. D, Placenta with a
marginal attachment of the cord, often called a battledore placenta because of its
resemblance to the bat used in the medieval game of battledore and shuttlecock.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
When chorionic villi persist on the entire surface of the chorionic sac (an
uncommon occurrence), a thin layer of placenta attaches to a large area of the
uterus. This type of placenta is a membranous placenta (placenta
membranacea). When villi persist elsewhere, several variations in placental
shape occur: accessory placenta (Fig. 7-12), bidiscoid placenta, and horseshoe
placenta. Although there are variations in the size and shape of the placenta,
most of them are of little physiologic or clinical significance.


FIGURE 7–12 A full-term placenta and an accessory placenta (arrow). The
accessory placenta developed from a patch of chorionic villi that persisted a
short distance from the main placenta.
Gestational Choriocarcinoma
Abnormal proliferation of the trophoblast results in gestational trophoblastic
disease, a spectrum of lesions including highly malignant tumors. The cells
invade the decidua basalis, penetrate its blood vessels and lymphatics, and may
metastasize to the maternal lungs, bone marrow, liver, and other organs.
Gestational choriocarcinomas are highly sensitive to chemotherapy and cures are
usually achieved.

Maternal Surface of Placenta
The characteristic cobblestone appearance of the maternal surface is produced by
slightly bulging villous areas—cotyledons—which are separated by grooves that
were formerly occupied by placental septa (Figs. 7-5 and 7-11A). The surface of
the cotyledons is covered by thin grayish shreds of the decidua basalis that
separated from the uterine wall when the placenta was extruded. Most of the
decidua is temporarily retained in the uterus and is shed with the uterine
bleeding after delivery of the fetus.
Examination of the placenta prenatally by ultrasonography or magnetic
resonance imaging (Fig. 7-13) or postnatally by gross and microscopic study
may provide clinical information about the causes of IUGR, placental
dysfunction, fetal distress and death, and neonatal illness. Placental studies can
also determine whether the expelled placenta is complete. Retention of a
cotyledon or accessory placenta (Fig. 7-12) in the uterus may cause severe
uterine hemorrhage.

FIGURE 7–13 Sagittal magnetic resonance image of the pelvis of a pregnant
woman. The vertebral column and pelvis of the mother are visible, as are the
fetal brain, limbs and placenta (P).
(Courtesy of Stuart C. Morrison, Section of Pediatric Radiology, The Children’s
Hospital, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.)

Fetal Surface of Placenta
The umbilical cord usually attaches to the fetal surface of the placenta, and its
epithelium is continuous with the amnion adhering to the fetal surface (Figs. 7-5
and 7-11B).The fetal surface of a freshly delivered placenta is smooth and shiny
because it is covered by the amnion. The chorionic vessels radiating to and from
the umbilical cord are clearly visible through the transparent amnion. The
umbilical vessels branch on the fetal surface to form chorionic vessels, which
enter the chorionic villi and form the arteriocapillary-venous system (Fig. 7-6A).
Placental Abnormalities
Abnormal adherence of chorionic villi to the myometrium is called placenta
accreta (Fig. 7-14). When chorionic villi penetrate the full thickness of the
myometrium to or through the perimetrium (peritoneal covering), the
abnormality is called placenta percreta. Third-trimester bleeding is the common
presenting sign of these placental abnormalities. Most patients with placenta
accreta have normal pregnancies and labors. After birth, the placenta fails to
separate from the uterine wall and attempts to remove it may cause hemorrhage
that is difficult to control.

FIGURE 7–14 Placental abnormalities. In placenta accreta, there is abnormal
adherence of the placenta to the myometrium. In placenta percreta, the placenta
has penetrated the full thickness of the myometrium. In this example of placenta
previa, the placenta overlies the internal os of the uterus and blocks the cervical
canal.
When the blastocyst implants close to or overlying the internal os of the uterus,
the abnormality is called placenta previa. Late pregnancy bleeding may result
from this placental abnormality. The fetus has to be delivered by cesarean
section when the placenta completely obstructs the internal uterine os.
Ultrasound scanning of the placenta is invaluable for clinical diagnosis of
placental abnormalities.

Umbilical Cord
The attachment of the umbilical cord to the placenta is usually near the center of
the fetal surface of this organ (Fig. 7-11B), but it may attach at any point. For
example, insertion of the cord near the placental margin produces a battledore
placenta (see Fig. 7-11D). The attachment of the cord to the fetal membranes is
termed a velamentous insertion of the cord (Fig. 7-15).
FIGURE 7–15 A placenta with a velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord.
The cord is attached to the membranes (amnion and chorion), not to the placenta.
The umbilical vessels leave the cord and run between the amnion and chorion
before spreading over the placenta. The vessels are easily torn in this location,
especially when they cross over the inferior uterine segment; the latter condition

is known as vasa previa. If the vessels rupture before birth, the fetus loses blood
and could be near exsanguination when born.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Color flow Doppler ultrasonography may be used for the prenatal diagnosis of
the position and structural abnormalities of the umbilical cord and its vessels.
The umbilical cord is usually 1 to 2 cm in diameter and 30 to 90 cm in length
(average, 55 cm). Excessively long or short cords are uncommon. Long cords
have a tendency to prolapse and/or to coil around the fetus (see Fig. 7-19).
Prompt recognition of prolapse of the umbilical cord is important because the
cord may be compressed between the presenting body part of the fetus and the
mother’s bony pelvis, causing fetal hypoxia or anoxia. If the deficiency of
oxygen persists for more than 5 minutes, the baby’s brain may be damaged. A
very short cord may cause premature separation of the placenta from the wall of
the uterus during delivery.
The umbilical cord usually has two arteries and one vein that are surrounded by
mucoid connective tissue (Wharton jelly). Because the umbilical vessels are
longer than the cord, twisting and bending of the vessels are common. They
frequently form loops, producing false knots that are of no significance;
however, in approximately 1% of pregnancies, true knots form in the cord,
which may tighten and cause fetal death resulting from fetal anoxia (Fig. 7-16).
In most cases, the knots form during labor as a result of the fetus passing through
a loop of the cord. Simple looping of the cord around the fetus occasionally
occurs (see Fig. 7-19B). In approximately one fifth of deliveries, the cord is
loosely looped around the neck without increased fetal risk.

FIGURE 7–16 Photograph of an umbilical cord showing a true knot. Such a knot
will cause severe anoxia (decreased oxygen in the fetal tissues and organs).
(Courtesy of Dr. E.C. Klatt, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer
University School of Medicine, Savannah, GA.)
Umbilical Artery Doppler Velocimetry

As gestation and trophoblastic invasion of the decidua basalis progress, there is a
progressive increase in the diastolic flow velocity in the umbilical arteries.
Doppler velocimetry of the uteroplacental and fetoplacental circulation is used to
investigate complications of pregnancy such as IUGR and fetal distress resulting
from fetal hypoxia and asphyxia (Fig. 7-17). For example, there is a statistically
significant association between IUGR and abnormally increased resistance in an
umbilical artery.

FIGURE 7–17 Doppler velocimetry of the umbilical cord. The arterial waveform
(top) illustrates pulsatile forward flow, with high peaks and low velocities during
diastole. This combination suggests high resistance in the placenta to placental
blood flow. Because this index changes over gestation, it is important to know
that the pregnancy was 18 weeks’ gestation. For this period, the flow pattern is

normal. The nonpulsatile flow in the opposite, negative direction represents
venous return from the placenta. Both waveforms are normal for this gestational
age.
(Courtesy of Dr. C.R. Harman, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD.)
Absence of an Umbilical Artery
In approximately 1 in 100 neonates, only one umbilical artery is present (Fig. 7-
18), a condition that may be associated with chromosomal and fetal
abnormalities. Absence of an umbilical artery is accompanied by a 15% to 20%
incidence of cardiovascular defects in the fetus. Absence of an artery results
from either agenesis or degeneration of one of the two umbilical arteries. A
single umbilical artery and the anatomic defects associated with it can be
detected before birth by ultrasonography.
FIGURE 7–18 Transverse section of an umbilical cord. Observe that the cord is
covered by epithelium derived from the enveloping amnion. It has a core of
mucous connective tissue (Wharton jelly). Observe also that the cord has one
umbilical artery and one vein; usually there are two umbilical arteries.
(Courtesy of Professor V. Becker, Pathologisches Institut der Universität,
Erlangen, Germany.)

Amnion and Amniotic Fluid
The thin but tough amnion forms a fluid-filled, membranous sac that surrounds
the embryo and later the fetus. The sac contains amniotic fluid (Figs. 7-19 and 7-
20). As the amnion enlarges, it gradually obliterates the chorionic cavity and
forms the epithelial covering of the umbilical cord (Figs. 7-18 and 7-20C and D).
FIGURE 7–19 A, 12-week fetus within its amniotic sac. The fetus and its
membranes aborted spontaneously. It was removed from its chorionic sac with
its amniotic sac intact. Actual size. B, Note that the umbilical cord is looped
around the left ankle of the fetus. Coiling of the cord around parts of the fetus
affects development when the coils are so tight that the circulation to the parts is
affected.

FIGURE 7–20 Illustrations showing how the amnion enlarges, obliterates the
chorionic cavity, and envelops the umbilical cord. Observe that part of the
umbilical vesicle is incorporated into the embryo as the primordial gut.
Formation of the fetal part of the placenta and degeneration of chorionic villi are
also shown. A, At 3 weeks. B, At 4 weeks. C, At 10 weeks. D, At 20 weeks.

Amniotic Fluid
Amniotic fluid plays a major role in fetal growth and development. Initially,
some amniotic fluid is secreted by cells of the amnion.
Most fluid is derived from maternal tissue and interstitial fluid by diffusion
across the amniochorionic membrane from the decidua parietalis (Fig. 7-5).
Later there is diffusion of fluid through the chorionic plate from blood in the
intervillous space of the placenta.
Before keratinization of the skin occurs, a major pathway for passage of water
and solutes in tissue fluid from the fetus to the amniotic cavity is through the
skin; thus, amniotic fluid is similar to fetal tissue fluid. Fluid is also secreted by
the fetal respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts and enters the amniotic cavity.
The daily rate of contribution of fluid to the amniotic cavity from the respiratory
tract is 300 to 400 ml. Beginning in the 11th week, the fetus contributes to the
amniotic fluid by excreting urine into the amniotic cavity. By late pregnancy,
approximately 500 ml of urine is added daily. The volume of amniotic fluid
normally increases slowly, reaching approximately 30 ml at 10 weeks, 350 ml at
20 weeks, and 700 to 1000 ml by 37 weeks.
Circulation of Amniotic Fluid
The water content of amniotic fluid changes every 3 hours. Large amounts of
water pass through the amniochorionic membrane into the maternal tissue fluid
and enter the uterine capillaries. An exchange of fluid with fetal blood also
occurs through the umbilical cord and where the amnion adheres to the chorionic
plate on the fetal surface of the placenta (Figs. 7-5 and 7-11B); thus, amniotic
fluid is in balance with the fetal circulation.
Amniotic fluid is swallowed by the fetus and absorbed by the fetus’s respiratory
and digestive tracts. It has been estimated that during the final stages of
pregnancy, the fetus swallows up to 400 ml of amniotic fluid per day. The fluid
passes into the fetal bloodstream and the waste products in it cross the placental
membrane and enter the maternal blood in the intervillous space. Excess water in
the fetal blood is excreted by the fetal kidneys and returned to the amniotic sac
through the fetal urinary tract.

Disorders of Amniotic Fluid Volume
Low volumes of amniotic fluid—oligohydramnios—result in many cases from
placental insufficiency with diminished placental blood flow. Preterm rupture of
the amniochorionic membrane occurs in approximately 10% of pregnancies and
is the most common cause of oligohydramnios. When there is renal agenesis
(failure of kidney formation), the absence of fetal urine contribution to the
amniotic fluid is the main cause of oligohydramnios. A similar decrease in fluid
occurs when there is obstructive uropathy (urinary tract obstruction).
Complications of oligohydramnios include fetal birth defects (pulmonary
hypoplasia, facial defects, and limb defects) that are caused by fetal compression
by the uterine wall. Compression of the umbilical cord is also a potential
complication of severe oligohydramnios.
High volumes of amniotic fluid—polyhydramnios—result when the fetus does
not swallow the usual amount of amniotic fluid. Most cases of polyhydramnios
(60%) are idiopathic (unknown cause), 20% are caused by maternal factors, and
20% are fetal in origin. Polyhydramnios may be associated with severe defects
of the central nervous system, such as meroencephaly (anencephaly). When
there are other anomalies, such as esophageal atresia (blockage), amniotic fluid
accumulates because it is unable to pass to the fetal stomach and intestines for
absorption. Ultrasonography has become the technique of choice for diagnosing
oligo-and polyhydramnios.
Composition of Amniotic Fluid
Amniotic fluid is an aqueous solution in which undissolved material
(desquamated fetal epithelial cells) is suspended. Amniotic fluid contains
approximately equal portions of organic compounds and inorganic salts. Half of
the organic constituents are protein; the other half consists of carbohydrates, fats,
enzymes, hormones, and pigments. As pregnancy advances, the composition of
the amniotic fluid changes as fetal excreta (meconium [fetal feces] and urine) are
added. Because fetal urine enters the amniotic fluid, studies of fetal enzyme
systems, amino acids, hormones, and other substances can be conducted on fluid
removed by amniocentesis (see Fig. 6-13). Studies of cells in the amniotic fluid
permit diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 21 (Down
syndrome). High levels of alpha fetoprotein usually indicate the presence of a

severe neural tube defect. Low levels of alpha fetoprotein may indicate
chromosomal aberrations such as trisomy 21 (see Chapter 20).
Significance of Amniotic Fluid
The embryo, suspended in amniotic fluid by the umbilical cord, floats freely.
Amniotic fluid has critical functions in the normal development of the fetus:
• Permits symmetric external growth of the embryo and fetus
• Acts as a barrier to infection
• Permits normal fetal lung development
• Prevents adherence of the amnion to the embryo and fetus
• Cushions the embryo and fetus against injuries by distributing impacts the
mother receives
• Helps control the embryo’s body temperature by maintaining a relatively
constant temperature
• Enables the fetus to move freely, thereby aiding muscular development by
movements of the limbs, for example
• Assists in maintaining homeostasis of fluid and electrolytes
Premature Rupture of Fetal Membranes
Rupture of the amniochorionic membrane is the most common event leading to
premature labor and delivery, and the most common complication resulting in
oligohydramnios. Loss of amniotic fluid removes the major protection that the
fetus has against infection. Rupture of the amnion may cause various fetal
defects that constitute the amniotic band syndrome (ABS), or the amniotic
band disruption complex (Fig. 7-21). The incidence of the ABS is
approximately 1 in every 1200 live births. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of ABS
is now possible. The defects caused by ABS vary from digital constriction to
major scalp, craniofacial, and visceral defects. The cause of these anomalies is
probably related to constriction by encircling amniotic bands (Figs. 7-19 and 7-
21).

FIGURE 7–21 A fetus with the amniotic band syndrome showing amniotic
bands constricting the left arm.
(Courtesy of Professor V. Becker, Pathologisches Institut der Universität,
Erlangen, Germany.)

 Umbilical Vesicle
The umbilical vesicle (yolk sac) can be observed sonographically early in the
fifth week. Early development of the umbilical vesicle was described in Chapters
3 and 5. At 32 days, the umbilical vesicle is large (Figs. 7-1C and 7-2). By 10
weeks, the umbilical vesicle has shrunk to a pear-shaped remnant approximately
5 mm in diameter (Fig. 7-20) and is connected to the midgut by a narrow
omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk). By 20 weeks, the umbilical vesicle is very
small (Fig. 7-20C); thereafter, it is usually not visible. The presence of the
amniotic sac and umbilical vesicle enables early recognition and measurement of
the embryo. The umbilical vesicle is recognizable in ultrasound examinations
until the end of the first trimester.

Significance of Umbilical Vesicle
Although the umbilical vesicle is nonfunctional as far as yolk storage is
concerned (hence the name change), its presence is essential for several reasons:
• It has a role in the transfer of nutrients to the embryo during the second and
third weeks when the uteroplacental circulation is being established.
• Blood development first occurs in the well-vascularized extraembryonic
mesoderm covering the wall of the umbilical vesicle beginning in the third week
(see Chapter 4) and continues to form there until hemopoietic activity begins in
the liver during the sixth week.
• During the fourth week, the endoderm of the umbilical vesicle is incorporated
into the embryo as the primordial gut (see Fig. 5-1). Its endoderm, derived from
epiblast, gives rise to the epithelium of the trachea, bronchi, lungs, and
alimentary canal.
• Primordial germ cells appear in the endodermal lining of the wall of the
umbilical vesicle in the third week and subsequently migrate to the developing
gonads (see Chapter 12). They differentiate into spermatogonia in males and
oogonia in females.

Fate of Umbilical Vesicle
At 10 weeks, the small umbilical vesicle lies in the chorionic cavity between the
amniotic and chorionic sacs (Fig. 7-20C). It atrophies as pregnancy advances,
eventually becoming very small (Fig. 7-20D). In very unusual cases, the
umbilical vesicle persists throughout pregnancy and appears under the amnion as
a small structure on the fetal surface of the placenta near the attachment of the
umbilical cord. Persistence of the umbilical vesicle is of no significance. The
omphaloenteric duct usually detaches from the midgut loop by the end of the
sixth week. In approximately 2% of adults, the proximal intra-abdominal part of
the omphaloenteric duct persists as an ileal diverticulum (Meckel diverticulum
[see Chapter 11]).

 Allantois
Early development of the allantois is described in Chapter 4. In the third week, it
appears as a sausage-like diverticulum from the caudal wall of the umbilical
vesicle that extends into the connecting stalk (Fig. 7-22A). During the second
month, the extraembryonic part of the allantois degenerates (Fig. 7-22B).
Although the allantois is not functional in human embryos, it is important for
three reasons:
• Blood formation occurs in its wall during the third to fifth weeks.
• Its blood vessels persist as the umbilical vein and arteries.
• The intraembryonic part of the allantois passes from the umbilicus to the
urinary bladder, with which it is continuous. As the bladder enlarges, the
allantois involutes to form a thick tube, the urachus. After birth, the urachus
becomes a fibrous cord, the median umbilical ligament, that extends from the
apex of the urinary bladder to the umbilicus.

FIGURE 7–22 Illustrations of the development and usual fate of the allantois. A,
A 3-week embryo. B, A 9-week fetus. C, A 3-month male fetus. D, Adult
female. The nonfunctional allantois forms the urachus in the fetus and the
median umbilical ligament in the adult.
Allantoic Cysts
A cystic mass in the umbilical cord may represent the remains of the
extraembryonic part of the allantois (Fig. 7-23). These cysts usually resolve but
may be associated with an omphalocele—congenital herniation of viscera into
the proximal part of the umbilical cord (see Chapter 11).

FIGURE 7–23 Sonogram of the umbilical cord of a 7-week fetus exhibiting an
allantoic cyst (at calipers).
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)

Multiple Pregnancies
The risks of chromosomal anomalies and fetal morbidity and mortality are
higher in multiple gestations than in single pregnancies. As the number of
fetuses increases, the risks are progressively greater. In most countries, multiple
births are more common now because of greater access to fertility therapies,
including induction of ovulation that occurs when exogenous gonadotropins are
administered to women with ovulatory failure, and to those being treated for
infertility by assisted reproductive technologies. In North America, twins
normally occur approximately once in every 85 pregnancies, triplets
approximately once in 902 pregnancies, quadruplets once in 903 pregnancies,
and quintuplets approximately once in every 904 pregnancies.

Twins and Fetal Membranes
Twins that originate from two zygotes are dizygotic (DZ) twins or fraternal twins
(Fig. 7-24), whereas twins that originate from one zygote are monozygotic (MZ)
twins or identical twins (Fig. 7-25). The fetal membranes and placentas vary
according to the origin of the twins (Table 7-1). In the case of MZ twins, the type
of placenta and membranes formed depends on when the twinning process
occurs. Approximately two thirds of twins are DZ. The frequency of DZ
twinning shows marked racial differences, but the incidence of MZ twinning is
approximately the same in all populations. In addition, the rate of MZ twinning
shows little variation with the mother’s age, whereas the rate of DZ twinning
increases with maternal age.

FIGURE 7–24 Diagrams illustrating how dizygotic twins develop from two
zygotes. The relationships of the fetal membranes and placentas are shown for
instances in which the blastocysts implant separately (A) and the blastocysts
implant close together (B). In both cases, there are two amnions and two
chorions. The placentas are usually fused when they implant close together.

FIGURE 7–25 Diagrams illustrating how approximately 65% of monozygotic
twins develop from one zygote by division of the embryoblast of the blastocyst.
These twins always have separate amnions, a single chorionic sac, and a
common placenta. If there is anastomosis of the placental vessels, one twin may
receive most of the nutrition from the placenta. Inset, monozygotic twins, 17
weeks’ gestation.
(Courtesy of Dr. Robert Jordan, St. Georges University Medical School,
Grenada.)
Table 7–1 Frequency of Types of Placentas and Fetal Membranes in
Monozygotic (MZ) and Dizygotic (DZ) Twins

The study of twins is important in human genetics because it is useful for
comparing the effects of genes and environment on development. If an abnormal
condition does not show a simple genetic pattern, comparison of its incidence in
MZ and DZ twins may reveal that heredity is involved. The tendency for DZ, but
not MZ, twins to repeat in families is evidence of hereditary influence. Studies in
a Mormon population showed that the genotype of the mother affects the
frequency of DZ twins, but the genotype of the father has no effect. It has also
been observed that if the firstborn are twins, a repetition of twinning or some
other form of multiple birth is approximately five times more likely to occur
with the next pregnancy than in the general population.

Dizygotic Twins
Because they result from fertilization of two oocytes, DZ twins develop from
two zygotes and may be of the same sex or different sexes (Fig. 7-24). For the
same reason, they are no more alike genetically than brothers or sisters born at
different times. The only thing they have in common is that they were in their
mother’s uterus at the same time. DZ twins always have two amnions and two
chorions, but the chorions and placentas may be fused. DZ twinning shows a
hereditary tendency. Recurrence in families is approximately three times that of
the general population. The incidence of DZ twinning shows considerable racial
variation, being approximately 1 in 500 in Asians, 1 in 125 in whites, and as
high as 1 in 20 in some African populations.
Anastomosis of Placental Blood Vessels Anastomoses between blood vessels of
fused placentas of DZ twins may result in erythrocyte mosaicism. The members
of these DZ twins have red blood cells of two different blood groups because red
cells were exchanged between the circulations of the twins. In cases in which
one fetus is a male and the other is female, masculinization of the female fetus
does not occur.

Monozygotic Twins
Because they result from the fertilization of one oocyte and develop from one
zygote (see Fig. 7-25), MZ twins are of the same sex, genetically identical, and
very similar in physical appearance. Physical differences between MZ twins are
environmentally induced, such as anastomosis of placental vessels (Fig. 7-26).
MZ twinning usually begins in the blastocyst stage, approximately at the end of
the first week, and results from division of the embryoblast into two embryonic
primordia. Subsequently, two embryos, each in its own amniotic sac, develop
within the same chorionic sac and share a common placenta—a monochorionic
—diamniotic twin placenta. Uncommonly, early separation of embryonic
blastomeres (e.g., during the two-to eight-cell stages) results in MZ twins with
two amnions, two chorions, and two placentas that may or may not be fused
(Fig. 7-27). In such cases, it is impossible to determine from the membranes
alone whether the twins are MZ or DZ.
FIGURE 7–26 A, Three-dimensional ultrasound scan of a 6-week
monochorionic diamniotic discordant twins. The normal twin (right) is seen
surrounded by the amniotic membrane and adjacent to the umbilical vesicle. The
arms and legs can also be seen. The smaller fetus is also visible (above left). B,
Monozygotic, monochorionic, diamniotic twins showing a wide discrepancy in
size resulting from an uncompensated arteriovenous anastomosis of placental

vessels. Blood was shunted from the smaller twin to the larger one, producing
the twin transfusion syndrome.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and
Gynecology, and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
FIGURE 7–27 Diagrams illustrating how approximately 35% of monozygotic
twins develop from one zygote. Separation of the blastomeres may occur
anywhere from the two-cell stage to the morula stage, producing two identical
blastocysts. Each embryo subsequently develops its own amniotic and chorionic
sacs. The placentas may be separate or fused. In 25% of cases, there is a single
placenta resulting from secondary fusion, and in 10% of cases, there are two
placentas. In the latter cases, examination of the placenta would suggest that they
were dizygotic twins. This explains why some monozygotic twins are wrongly
stated to be dizygotic twins at birth.

Twin Transfusion Syndrome
This syndrome occurs in as many as 30% of monochorionic-diamniotic MZ
twins. There is shunting of arterial blood from one twin through arteriovenous
anastomoses into the venous circulation of the other twin. The donor twin is
small, pale, and anemic (Fig. 7-26), whereas the recipient twin is large and has
polycythemia, an increase above the normal in the number of red blood cells.
The placenta shows similar abnormalities; the part of the placenta supplying the
anemic twin is pale, whereas the part supplying the polycythemic twin is dark
red. In lethal cases, death results from anemia in the donor twin and congestive
heart failure in the recipient twin. Treatment by laser ablation of the shunt can be
performed in some cases.
Establishing the Zygosity of Twins
Establishing the zygosity of twins is important in tissue and organ
transplantation (e.g., bone marrow transplantations). The determination of twin
zygosity is now done by molecular diagnosis because any two people who are
not MZ twins are virtually certain to show differences in some of the large
number of DNA markers that can be studied.
Late division of early embryonic cells, such as division of the embryonic disc
during the second week, results in MZ twins that are in one amniotic sac and one
chorionic sac (Fig. 7-28A). A monochorionic-monoamniotic twin placenta is
associated with a fetal mortality rate approaching 50%. These MZ twins are
rarely delivered alive because the umbilical cords are frequently so entangled
that circulation of blood through their vessels ceases and one or both fetuses die.
Sonography plays an important role in the diagnosis and management of twin
pregnancies (Figs. 7-26A and 7-29). Ultrasound evaluation is necessary to
identify various conditions that may complicate MZ twinning such as IUGR,
fetal distress, and premature labor.

FIGURE 7–28 Diagrams illustrating how some monozygotic twins develop. This
method of development is very uncommon. Division of the embryonic disc
results in two embryos within one amniotic sac. A, Complete division of the
embryonic disc gives rise to twins. Such twins rarely survive because their
umbilical cords are often so entangled that interruption of the blood supply to the
fetuses occurs. B and C, Incomplete division of the disc results in various types
of conjoined twins.

FIGURE 7–29 Serial ultrasound scans of a dichorionic pregnancy. A, At 3 weeks
gestation. B, At 7 weeks gestation.
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)
MZ twins may be discordant for a variety of birth defects and genetic disorders,
despite their origin from the same zygote. In addition to environmental
differences and chance variation, the following have been implicated:
•Mechanisms of embryologic development, such as vascular abnormalities, that
can lead to discordance for anomalies
•Postzygotic changes, such as somatic mutation leading to discordance for
cancer, or somatic rearrangement of immunoglobulin or T cell–receptor genes

•Chromosome aberrations originating in one blastocyst after the twinning event
•Uneven X chromosome inactivation between female MZ twins, with the result
that one twin preferentially expresses the paternal X and the other the maternal
X
Early Death of a Twin
Because ultrasonographic studies are a common part of prenatal care, it is known
that early death and resorption of one member of a twin pair is fairly common.
Awareness of this possibility must be considered when discrepancies occur
between prenatal cytogenetic findings and the karyotype of an infant. Errors in
prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis may arise if extraembryonic tissues (e.g., part of a
chorionic villus) from the resorbed twin are examined.
Conjoined Monozygotic Twins
If the embryonic disc does not divide completely, or adjacent embryonic discs
fuse, various types of conjoined MZ twins may form (Figs. 7-28B and C, 7-30,
7-31, and 7-32). These attached twins are named according to the regions that
are attached; for instance, thoracopagus indicates that there is anterior union of
the thoracic regions. It has been estimated that the incidence of conjoined twins
is 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 births. In some cases, the twins are connected to each
other by skin only or by cutaneous and other tissues, such as fused livers (Fig 7-
31). Some conjoined twins can be successfully separated by surgical procedures
(see Fig. 7-30B); however, the anatomic relations in many conjoined twins do
not permit surgical separation with sustained viability (see Fig. 7-32).

 
FIGURE 7–30 A, Newborn monozygotic conjoined twins showing union in the
thoracic regions (thoracopagus). B, The twins approximately 4 years after
separation.
(From deVries PA: Case history—The San Francisco twins. In Bergsma D [ed]:
Conjoined Twins. New York, Alan R. Liss for the National Foundation-March of
Dimes, DBOAS III, [1], 141–142, 1967, with permission of the copyright
holder.)

FIGURE 7–31 Parasitic twins, anterior view. Note normal tone and posture of
fully developed host twin with meconium staining, exstrophy of the bladder in
both host and parasitic twins, exposed small bowel in parasitic twin, and fully
formed right lower limb with normal tone and flexion in the parasitic twin.
(Courtesy of Dr. Linda J. Juretschke, The Ronald McDonald Children’s Hospital
of Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL.)


FIGURE 7–32 Dicephalic (two heads) conjoined twins, alizarin stained, showing
bone (red) and cartilage (blue). Note the two clavicles supporting the midline
upper limb, fused thoracic cage, and parallel vertebral columns.
(Courtesy of Dr. Joseph R. Siebert, Children’s Hospital and Regional Center,
Seattle, WA.)
Superfecundation
Superfecundation is the fertilization of two or more oocytes at different times. In
humans, the presence of two fetuses in the uterus caused by fertilization at
different times (superfetation) is rare. DZ human twins with different fathers
have been confirmed by genetic markers.

Other Types of Multiple Births
Triplets may be derived from:
• One zygote and be identical
• Two zygotes and consist of identical twins and a singleton
• Three zygotes and be of the same sex or of different sexes
In the last case, the infants are no more similar than infants from three separate
pregnancies. Similar combinations occur in quadruplets, quintuplets, sextuplets,
and septuplets.

Summary of Placenta and Fetal
Membranes
• The placenta consists of two parts: a larger fetal part derived from the villous
chorion and a smaller maternal part developed from the decidua basalis. The two
parts are held together by stem chorionic villi that attach to the cytotrophoblastic
shell surrounding the chorionic sac, which attaches the sac to the decidua basalis.
• The principal activities of the placenta are metabolism (synthesis of glycogen,
cholesterol, and fatty acids), respiratory gas exchange (oxygen, carbon dioxide,
and carbon monoxide), transfer of nutrients (vitamins, hormones, and
antibodies); elimination of waste products, and endocrine secretion (e.g., hCG)
for maintenance of pregnancy.
• The fetal circulation is separated from the maternal circulation by a thin layer
of extrafetal tissues—the placental membrane. It is a permeable membrane that
allows water, oxygen, nutritive substances, hormones, and noxious agents to
pass from the mother to the embryo or fetus. Excretory products pass through the
placental membrane from the fetus to the mother.
• The fetal membranes and placentas in multiple pregnancies vary considerably,
depending on the derivation of the embryos and the time when division of
embryonic cells occurs. The common type of twins is DZ twins, with two
amnions, two chorions, and two placentas that may or may not be fused.
• MZ twins, the less common type, represent approximately one third of all
twins; they are derived from one zygote. MZ twins commonly have one chorion,
two amnions, and one placenta. Twins with one amnion, one chorion, and one
placenta are always monozygotic, and their umbilical cords are often entangled.
Other types of multiple birth (triplets, etc.) may be derived from one or more
zygotes.
• The umbilical vesicle and allantois are vestigial structures; however, their
presence is essential to normal embryonic development. Both are early sites of
blood formation and both are partly incorporated into the embryo. Primordial
germ cells also originate in the wall of the umbilical vesicle.
• The amnion forms an amniotic sac for amniotic fluid and provides a covering
for the umbilical cord. The amniotic fluid has three main functions: to provide a
protective buffer for the embryo or fetus, to allow room for fetal movements, and
to assist in the regulation of fetal body temperature.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 7–1
A physician is concerned about the effects of a drug on the embryo of one of his
patients.
• How is the estimated date of confinement or estimated delivery date of a baby
determined?
• How could the estimated delivery date be confirmed in a high-risk obstetric
patient?

Case 7–2
A physician told a pregnant woman that she had polyhydramnios.
• If you were asked to explain the meaning of this clinical condition, what would
be your answer?
• What conditions are often associated with polyhydramnios?
• Explain why polyhydramnios occurs.

Case 7–3
A physician was asked, “Does twinning run in families?”
• Is maternal age a factor?
• If uncertainty exists about the origin of twins, how would you determine
whether they were MZ or DZ?

Case 7–4
A pathologist asked you to examine a section of an umbilical cord. You observed
that there was only one umbilical artery.
• How often does this anomaly occur?
• What kind of birth defects might be associated with this condition?

Case 7–5
An ultrasound examination revealed a twin pregnancy with a single placenta.
Chorionic villus sampling and chromosome analysis revealed that the twins were
likely female. At birth, the twins were of different sexes.
• How could this error have occurred?

Case 7–6
An ultrasound examination of a pregnant woman during the second trimester
revealed multiple amniotic bands associated with the fetus.
• What produces these bands?
• What congenital defects may result from them?
• What is the syndrome called?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Abuhamad AZ. Doppler ultrasound in obstetrics. In Callen PW, editor:
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2008.
Alexander GR, Wingate MS, Salihu H, et al. Fetal and neonatal mortality risks
of multiple births. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2005;32:1.
Baschatt AA. Fetal growth restriction: from observation to intervention. J
Perinat Med. 2010;38:239.
Benirschke K, Kaufmann P. Pathology of the Human Placenta, ed 4. New York:
Springer-Verlag; 2000.
Bronsan PG. The hypothalamic pituitary axis in the fetus and newborn. Semin
Perinatol. 2001;25:371.
Callen PW. The role of amniotic fluid volume in fetal health and disease. In
Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Chauhan SP, Scardo JA, Hayes E, et al. Twins: Prevalence, problems, and
preterm births. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010;203:305.
Collins JH. Umbilical cord accidents: Human studies. Semin Perinatol.
2002;26:79.

Cross JC. Formation of the placenta and extraembryonic membranes. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 1998;857:23.
Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, Bloom SL, et al. Williams’ Obstetrics, ed 23. New
York: McGraw-Hill; 2009.
Egan JFX, Borgida AF. Ultrasound evaluation of multiple pregnancies. In Callen
PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2008.
Feldstein VA, Harris RD, Machin GA. Ultrasound evaluation of the placenta and
umbilical cord. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
James JL, Whitley GS, Cartwright JE. Preeclampsia: fitting together the
placental, immune and cardiovascular pieces. J Pathol. 2010;221:363.
Jirasel JE. An Atlas of Human Prenatal Developmental Mechanics: Anatomy and
Staging. London and New York: Taylor & Francis; 2004.
Kazandi M. Conservative and surgical treatment of abnormal placentation:
report of five cases and review of the literature. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol.
2010;37:310.
Laing FC, Frates MC, Benson CB. Ultrasound evaluation during the first
trimester. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology,
ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Kodaman PH, Taylor HS. Hormonal regulation of implantation. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am. 2004;31:745.
Liao JB, Buhimschi CS, Norwitz ER. Normal labor: Mechanism and duration.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2005;32:145.
Lurain JR. Gestational trophoblastic disease I: epidemiology, pathology, clinical
presentation and diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease, and management
of hydatidiform mole. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010;203:531.
Moore KL, Dalley AD, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.

Mundy CA. Intravenous immunoglobulin in the management of hemolytic
disease of the newborn. Neonat Netwk. 2005;24:17.
Redline RW. Placental pathology. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC,
editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the
Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Robertson SA. Immune regulation of embryo implantation—All about quality
control. J Reprod Immun. 2009;81:113.
Spencer R. Theoretical and analytical embryology of conjoined twins. Part I:
Embryogenesis. Clin Anat. 2000;13:36.
Spencer R. Theoretical and analytical embryology of conjoined twins. Part II:
Adjustments to union. Clin Anat. 2000;13:97.
Silasi M, Cohen B, Karumanchi SA, et al. Abnormal placentation, angiogenic
factors, and the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Obstet Gynec Clinic NA.
2010;37:239.
Williams PJ, Mistry HD, Innes BA, et al. Expression of AT1R, AT2R and AT4R
and their roles in extravillous trophoblast invasion in the human. Placenta.
2010;31:448.
Yagel S. The developmental role of natural killer cells at the fetal-maternal
interface. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009;201:344.
* The authors are grateful to Dr. Peeyush Lala, Professor Emeritus, Department
of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, for preparing these sections: “The Placenta as
an Allograft” and “The Placenta as an Invasive Tumor-like Structure.”

Chapter 8 Body Cavities and Diaphragm
Embryonic Body Cavity 145
   Mesenteries 148
   Division of Embryonic Body Cavity 149
Development of the Diaphragm 151
   Septum Transversum 151
   Pleuroperitoneal Membranes 151
   Dorsal Mesentery of the Esophagus 152
   Muscular Ingrowth from the Lateral Body Walls 152
   Positional Changes and Innervation of the Diaphragm 152
Summary of Development of the Body Cavities and Diaphragm 157
Clinically Oriented Problems 157
Early in the fourth week, the intraembryonic coelom appears as a horseshoe-
shaped cavity (Fig. 8-1A). The bend in this cavity at the cranial end of the
embryo represents the future pericardial cavity, and its limbs (lateral extensions)
indicate the future pleural and peritoneal cavities. The distal part of each limb of
the intraembryonic coelom is continuous with the extraembryonic coelom at
the lateral edges of the embryonic disc (Fig. 8-1B). This communication is
important because most of the midgut herniates through this communication into
the umbilical cord (Fig. 8-2E) (Chapter 11). The intraembryonic coelom
provides room for the organs to develop and move. During embryonic folding in
the horizontal plane, the limbs of the coelom are brought together on the ventral
aspect of the embryo (Fig. 8-2C). The ventral mesentery degenerates in the
region of the future peritoneal cavity (Fig. 8-2F), resulting in a large embryonic
peritoneal cavity extending from the heart to the pelvic region.

FIGURE 8–1 A, Drawing of a dorsal view of a 22-day embryo showing the
outline of the horseshoe-shaped intraembryonic coelom. The amnion has been
removed and the coelom is shown as if the embryo were translucent. The
continuity of the intraembryonic coelom, as well as the communication of its
right and left limbs with the extraembryonic coelom, is indicated by arrows. B,
Transverse section through the embryo at the level shown in A.

FIGURE 8–2 Illustrations of embryonic folding and its effects on the
intraembryonic coelom and other structures. A, Lateral view of an embryo
(approximately 26 days). B, Schematic sagittal section of this embryo showing
the head and tail folds. C, Transverse section at the level shown in A, indicating
how fusion of the lateral folds gives the embryo a cylindrical form. D, Lateral
view of an embryo (approximately 28 days). E, Schematic sagittal section of this
embryo showing the reduced communication between the intraembryonic and
extraembryonic coeloms (double-headed arrow). F, Transverse section as
indicated in D, illustrating formation of the ventral body wall and disappearance
of the ventral mesentery. The arrows indicate the junction of the somatic and
splanchnic layers of mesoderm. The somatic mesoderm will become the parietal
peritoneum lining the abdominal wall, and the splanchnic mesoderm will
become the visceral peritoneum covering the organs (e.g., the stomach).

 Embryonic Body Cavity
The intraembryonic coelom becomes the embryonic body cavity, which is
divided into three well-defined cavities during the fourth week (Figs. 8-2 and 8-
3):
• The pericardial cavity
• Two pericardioperitoneal canals
• A peritoneal cavity

FIGURE 8–3 Illustrations of the mesenteries and body cavities at the beginning
of the fifth week. A, Schematic sagittal section. Note that the dorsal mesentery
serves as a pathway for the arteries supplying the developing gut. Nerves and
lymphatics also pass between the layers of this mesentery. B to E, Transverse
sections through the embryo at the levels indicated in A. The ventral mesentery

disappears, except in the region of the terminal esophagus, stomach, and first
part of the duodenum. Note that the right and left parts of the peritoneal cavity,
separate in C, are continuous in E.
These body cavities have a parietal wall lined by mesothelium (future parietal
layer of peritoneum) derived from somatic mesoderm and a visceral wall
covered by mesothelium (future visceral layer of peritoneum) derived from
splanchnic mesoderm (Fig. 8-3E). The peritoneal cavity (the major part of
intraembryonic coelom) is connected with the extraembryonic coelom at the
umbilicus (Fig. 8-4A and D). The peritoneal cavity loses its connection with the
extraembryonic coelom during the 10th week as the intestines return to the
abdomen from the umbilical cord (Chapter 11).
FIGURE 8–4 Schematic drawings of an embryo (approximately 24 days). A,
The lateral wall of the pericardial cavity has been removed to show the
primordial heart. B, Transverse section of the embryo illustrating the relationship
of the pericardioperitoneal canals to the septum transversum (primordium of
central tendon of diaphragm) and the foregut. C, Lateral view of the embryo

with the heart removed. The embryo has also been sectioned transversely to
show the continuity of the intraembryonic and extraembryonic coeloms (arrow).
D, Sketch showing the pericardioperitoneal canals arising from the dorsal wall of
the pericardial cavity and passing on each side of the foregut to join the
peritoneal cavity. The arrow shows the communication of the extraembryonic
coelom with the intraembryonic coelom and the continuity of the intraembryonic
coelom at this stage.
During formation of the head fold, the heart and pericardial cavity are relocated
ventrally, anterior to the foregut (Fig. 8-2B). As a result, the pericardial cavity
opens into pericardioperitoneal canals, which pass dorsal to the foregut (Fig. 8-
4B and D). After embryonic folding, the caudal part of the foregut, the midgut,
and the hindgut are suspended in the peritoneal cavity from the dorsal abdominal
wall by the dorsal mesentery (Figs. 8-2F and 8-3B, D, and E).

 Mesenteries
A mesentery is a double layer of peritoneum that begins as an extension of the
visceral peritoneum covering an organ. The mesentery connects the organ to the
body wall and conveys vessels and nerves to it. Transiently, the dorsal and
ventral mesenteries divide the peritoneal cavity into right and left halves (Fig. 8-
3C). The ventral mesentery soon disappears (Fig. 8-3E), except where it is
attached to the caudal part of the foregut (primordium of stomach and proximal
part of duodenum). The peritoneal cavity then becomes a continuous space (Fig.
8-4D). The arteries supplying the primordial gut—celiac arterial trunk (foregut),
superior mesenteric artery (midgut), and inferior mesenteric artery (hindgut)—
pass between the layers of the dorsal mesentery (Fig. 8-3C).

Division of Embryonic Body Cavity
Each pericardioperitoneal canal lies lateral to the proximal part of the foregut
(future esophagus) and dorsal to the septum transversum—a plate of
mesodermal tissue that occupies the space between the thoracic cavity and
omphaloenteric duct (Fig. 8-4A and B).
The septum transversum is the primordium of the central tendon of the
diaphragm. Partitions form in each pericardioperitoneal canal that separate the
pericardial cavity from the pleural cavities, and the pleural cavities from the
peritoneal cavity. Because of the growth of the bronchial buds (primordia of
bronchi and lungs) into the pericardioperitoneal canals (Fig. 8-5A), a pair of
membranous ridges is produced in the lateral wall of each canal:
• The cranial ridges—pleuropericardial folds—are located superior to the
developing lungs.
• The caudal ridges—pleuroperitoneal folds—are located inferior to the lungs.

FIGURE 8–5 Drawings of transverse sections through embryos cranial to the
septum transversum, illustrating successive stages in the separation of the pleural
cavities from the pericardial cavity. Growth and development of the lungs,
expansion of the pleural cavities, and formation of the fibrous pericardium are
also shown. A, At 5 weeks. The arrows indicate the communications between
the pericardioperitoneal canals and the pericardial cavity. B, At 6 weeks. The
arrows indicate development of the pleural cavities as they expand into the body
wall. C, At 7 weeks. Expansion of the pleural cavities ventrally around the heart
is shown. The pleuropericardial membranes are now fused in the median plane
with each other and with the mesoderm ventral to the esophagus. D, At 8 weeks.
Continued expansion of the lungs and pleural cavities and formation of the
fibrous pericardium and thoracic wall are illustrated.
Congenital Pericardial Defects
Defective formation and/or fusion of the pleuropericardial membranes separating
the pericardial and pleural cavities is uncommon. This anomaly results in a
congenital defect of the pericardium, usually on the left side. Consequently, the
pericardial cavity communicates with the pleural cavity. In very unusual cases,
part of the left atrium of the heart herniates into the pleural cavity at each
heartbeat.
Pleuropericardial Membranes
As the pleuropericardial folds enlarge, they form partitions that separate the
pericardial cavity from the pleural cavities. These partitions—pleuropericardial
membranes—contain the common cardinal veins (Figs. 8-4C and 8-5A), which
drain the venous system into the sinus venosus of the heart (see Chapter 13).
Initially the bronchial buds are small relative to the heart and pericardial cavity
(Fig. 8-5A). They soon grow laterally from the caudal end of the trachea into the
pericardioperitoneal canals (future pleural canals). As the primordial pleural
cavities expand ventrally around the heart, they extend into the body wall,
splitting the mesenchyme into:
• An outer layer that becomes the thoracic wall
• An inner layer (pleuropericardial membrane) that becomes the fibrous
pericardium, the outer layer of the pericardial sac enclosing the heart (Fig. 8-5C

and D)
The pleuropericardial membranes project into the cranial ends of the
pericardioperitoneal canals (Fig. 8-5B). With subsequent growth of the common
cardinal veins, positional displacement of the heart, and expansion of the pleural
cavities, the pleuropericardial membranes become mesentery-like folds
extending from the lateral thoracic wall. By the seventh week, the
pleuropericardial membranes fuse with the mesenchyme ventral to the
esophagus, separating the pericardial cavity from the pleural cavities (Fig. 8-5C).
This primordial mediastinum consists of a mass of mesenchyme that extends
from the sternum to the vertebral column, separating the developing lungs (Fig.
8-5D). The right pleuropericardial opening closes slightly earlier than the left
one and produces a larger pleuropericardial membrane.
Pleuroperitoneal Membranes
As the pleuroperitoneal folds enlarge, they project into the pericardioperitoneal
canals. Gradually the folds become membranous, forming the pleuroperitoneal
membranes (Figs. 8-6 and 8-7). Eventually these membranes separate the
pleural cavities from the peritoneal cavity. The pleuroperitoneal membranes are
produced as the developing lungs and pleural cavities expand and invade the
body wall. They are attached dorsolaterally to the abdominal wall and initially
their crescentic free edges project into the caudal ends of the
pericardioperitoneal canals.

FIGURE 8–6 A, The primordial body cavities are viewed from the left side after
removal of the lateral body wall. B, Photograph of a 5-week-old embryo
showing the developing septum transversum (arrow), heart tube (H), and liver
(L). C, Transverse section through the embryo at the level shown in A.

(B, Courtesy of Dr. Bradley R. Smith, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.)
FIGURE 8–7 Illustrations of the development of the diaphragm. A, Lateral view
of an embryo at the end of the fifth week (actual size) indicating the level of
sections in B to D. B, Transverse section showing the unfused pleuroperitoneal
membranes. C, Similar section at the end of the sixth week after fusion of the
pleuroperitoneal membranes with the other two diaphragmatic components. D,
Transverse section of a 12-week fetus after ingrowth of the fourth diaphragmatic
component from the body wall. E, Inferior view of the diaphragm of a neonate
indicating the embryologic origin of its components.
During the sixth week, the pleuroperitoneal membranes extend ventromedially
until their free edges fuse with the dorsal mesentery of the esophagus and
septum transversum (Fig. 8-7C). This separates the pleural cavities from the

peritoneal cavity. Closure of the pleuroperitoneal openings is assisted by the
migration of myoblasts (primordial muscle cells) into the pleuroperitoneal
membranes (Fig. 8-7E). The pleuroperitoneal opening on the right side closes
slightly before the left one. The reason for this is uncertain, but it may be related
to the relatively large size of the right lobe of the liver at this stage of
development.

 Development of the Diaphragm
The diaphragm is a dome-shaped, musculotendinous partition that separates the
thoracic and abdominal cavities. It is a composite structure that develops from
four embryonic components (Fig. 8-7): • Septum transversum
• Pleuroperitoneal membranes
• Dorsal mesentery of esophagus
• Muscular ingrowth from lateral body walls
Several candidate genes on the long arm of chromosome 15 (15q) play a critical
role in the development of the diaphragm.

Septum Transversum
The septum transversum grows dorsally from the ventrolateral body wall and
forms a semicircular shelf, which separates the heart from the liver (Fig. 8-6).
This transverse septum, composed of mesodermal tissue, forms the central
tendon of the diaphragm (Fig. 8-7D and E). After the head folds ventrally
during the fourth week, the septum transversum forms a thick incomplete
partition between the pericardial and abdominal cavities (Fig. 8-4). The septum
transversum does not separate the thoracic and abdominal cavities completely.
During its early development, a large part of the liver is embedded in the septum
transversum. There are large openings, the pericardioperitoneal canals, along
the sides of the esophagus (Fig. 8-7B). The septum transversum expands and
fuses with the dorsal mesentery of the esophagus and the pleuroperitoneal
membranes (Fig. 8-7C).

Pleuroperitoneal Membranes
These membranes fuse with the dorsal mesentery of the esophagus and the
septum transversum (Fig. 8-7C). This completes the partition between the
thoracic and abdominal cavities and forms the primordial diaphragm.
Although the pleuroperitoneal membranes form large portions of the early fetal
diaphragm, they represent relatively small portions of the newborn’s diaphragm
(Fig. 8-7E).

Dorsal Mesentery of the Esophagus
As previously described, the septum transversum and pleuroperitoneal
membranes fuse with the dorsal mesentery of the esophagus. This mesentery
constitutes the median portion of the diaphragm. The crura of the diaphragm, a
leg-like pair of diverging muscle bundles that cross in the median plane anterior
to the aorta (Fig. 8-7E), develop from myoblasts that grow into the dorsal
mesentery of the esophagus.

Muscular Ingrowth from the Lateral Body Walls
During the 9th to 12th weeks, the lungs and pleural cavities enlarge,
“burrowing” into the lateral body walls (Fig. 8-5). During this process, the body-
wall tissue is split into two layers: • An external layer that becomes part of the
definitive abdominal wall
• An internal layer that contributes to peripheral parts of the diaphragm, external
to the parts derived from the pleuroperitoneal membranes (Fig. 8-7D and E)
Further extension of the developing pleural cavities into the lateral body walls
forms the costodiaphragmatic recesses (Fig. 8-8), establishing the
characteristic dome-shaped configuration of the diaphragm. After birth, the
costodiaphragmatic recesses become alternately smaller and larger as the lungs
move in and out of them during inspiration and expiration.
FIGURE 8–8 Illustrations of extension of the pleural cavities into the body walls
to form peripheral parts of the diaphragm, the costodiaphragmatic recesses, and
the establishment of the characteristic dome-shaped configuration of the
diaphragm. Note that body wall tissue is added peripherally to the diaphragm as
the lungs and pleural cavities enlarge.

Positional Changes and Innervation of the Diaphragm
During the fourth week, the septum transversum, before relocation of the heart,
lies opposite the third to fifth cervical somites. During the fifth week, myoblasts
from these somites migrate into the developing diaphragm, bringing their nerve
fibers with them. Consequently, the phrenic nerves that supply motor
innervation to the diaphragm arise from the ventral primary rami of the third,
fourth, and fifth cervical spinal nerves. The three twigs on each side join
together to form a phrenic nerve. The phrenic nerves also supply sensory fibers
to the superior and inferior surfaces of the right and left domes of the diaphragm.
Rapid growth of the dorsal part of the embryo’s body results in an apparent
descent of the diaphragm. By the sixth week, the developing diaphragm is at the
level of the thoracic somites. The phrenic nerves now have a descending course.
As the diaphragm appears relatively farther caudally in the body, the nerves are
correspondingly lengthened. By the beginning of the eighth week, the dorsal part
of the diaphragm lies at the level of the first lumbar vertebra. Because of the
cervical origin of the phrenic nerves, they are approximately 30 cm long in
adults.
The phrenic nerves in the embryo enter the diaphragm by passing through the
pleuropericardial membranes. This explains why the phrenic nerves
subsequently lie on the fibrous pericardium, the adult derivative of the
pleuropericardial membranes (Fig. 8-5C and D).
As the four parts of the diaphragm fuse (Fig. 8-7), mesenchyme in the septum
transversum extends into the other three parts. It forms myoblasts that
differentiate into the skeletal muscle of the diaphragm. The costal border
receives sensory fibers from the lower intercostal nerves because of the origin of
the peripheral part of the diaphragm from the lateral body walls (Fig. 8-7D and
E).
Posterolateral Defect of Diaphragm
Posterolateral defect of the diaphragm is the only relatively common birth defect
of the diaphragm (Figs. 8-9A and B and 8-10). This diaphragmatic defect occurs
about once in 2,200 newborn infants and is associated with congenital

diaphragmatic hernia (CDH); herniation of abdominal contents into the
thoracic cavity.
FIGURE 8–9 A, A “window” has been drawn on the thorax and abdomen to
show the herniation of the intestine into the thorax through a posterolateral
defect in the left side of the diaphragm. Note that the left lung is compressed and
hypoplastic. B, Drawing of a diaphragm with a large posterolateral defect on the
left side due to abnormal formation and/or fusion of the pleuroperitoneal
membrane on the left side with the mesoesophagus and septum transversum. C
and D, Eventration of the diaphragm resulting from defective muscular
development of the diaphragm. The abdominal viscera are displaced into the
thorax within a pouch of diaphragmatic tissue.


FIGURE 8–10 Coronal magnetic resonance image of a fetus with right-sided
congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Note the liver (L) and loops of small intestine
(arrowheads) in the thoracic cavity. There are ascites (*)—accumulation of
serous fluid in the peritoneal cavity—extending into the thoracic cavity, and skin
thickening (arrows).
(Courtesy of Deborah Levine, M.D., Director of Obstetric and Gynecologic
Ultrasound, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.)
Life-threatening breathing difficulties may be associated with CDH because of
inhibition of development and inflation of the lungs (Fig. 8-11). Moreover, fetal
lung maturation may be delayed. Polyhydramnios (excess amniotic fluid) may
also be present. CDH is the most common cause of pulmonary hypoplasia. The
candidate region for CDH has been reported to be chromosome 15q26.
 
 

FIGURE 8–11 Diaphragmatic hernia on the left side of a fetus, showing
herniation of liver (A), stomach, and bowel (B), underneath the liver into left
thoracic cavity. Note the pulmonary hypoplasia visible after liver removal
(female fetus at 19 to 20 weeks). C, Diaphragmatic hernia (posterolateral
defect). Chest radiograph of a neonate showing herniation of intestinal loops (I)
into the left side of the thorax. Note that the heart (H) is displaced to the right
side and that the stomach (S) is on the left side of the upper abdominal cavity.
(A and B, Courtesy of Dr. D.K. Kalousek, Department of Pathology, University
of British Columbia, Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
C, Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
CDH, usually unilateral, results from defective formation and/or fusion of the
pleuroperitoneal membranes with the other three parts of the diaphragm (Fig. 8-
7). This results in a large opening in the posterolateral region of the diaphragm.
As a result, the peritoneal and pleural cavities are continuous with one another
along the posterior body wall. This birth defect, sometimes referred to as the

foramen of Bochdalek, occurs on the left side in 85% to 90% of cases.
The preponderance of left-sided defects may be related to the earlier closure of
the right pleuroperitoneal opening. Prenatal diagnosis of CDH depends on
ultrasound examination and magnetic resonance imaging of abdominal organs in
the thorax.
The pleuroperitoneal membranes normally fuse with the other three
diaphragmatic components by the end of the sixth week (Fig. 8-7C). If a
pleuroperitoneal canal is still open when the intestines return to the abdomen
from the physiological hernia of the umbilical cord in the 10th week (see
Chapter 11), some intestine and other viscera may pass into the thorax. The
presence of abdominal viscera in the thorax pushes the lungs and heart anteriorly
and compression of the lungs occurs. Often the stomach, spleen, and most of the
intestines herniate (Fig. 8-11). Most babies born with CDH die not because there
is a defect in the diaphragm or abdominal viscera in the chest, but because the
lungs are hypoplastic due to compression during development.
The severity of pulmonary developmental abnormalities depends on when and to
what extent the abdominal viscera herniate into the thorax, that is, on the timing
and degree of compression of the fetal lungs. The effect on the ipsilateral (same
side) lung is greater, but the contralateral lung also shows morphologic changes.
If the abdominal viscera are in the thoracic cavity at birth, the initiation of
respiration is likely to be impaired. The intestines dilate with swallowed, which
compromises the functioning of the heart and lungs. Because the abdominal
organs are most often in the left side of the thorax, the heart and mediastinum are
usually displaced to the right.
The lungs in infants with CDH are often hypoplastic. The growth retardation of
the lungs results from the lack of room for them to develop normally. The lungs
are often aerated and achieve their normal size after reduction (repositioning) of
the herniated viscera and repair of the defect in the diaphragm. Prenatal
detection of CDH occurs in about 50% of cases. Most infants with CDH now
survive because of improvements in ventilator care.
Eventration of Diaphragm
In this uncommon condition, half the diaphragm has defective musculature and

balloons into the thoracic cavity as an aponeurotic (membranous) sheet, forming
a diaphragmatic pouch (Fig. 8-9C and D). Consequently, there is superior
displacement of abdominal viscera into the pocket-like outpouching of the
diaphragm. This birth defect results mainly from failure of muscular tissue from
the body wall to extend into the pleuroperitoneal membrane on the affected side.
Eventration of the diaphragm is not a true diaphragmatic herniation; it is a
superior displacement of viscera into a sac-like part of the diaphragm. However,
the clinical manifestations of diaphragmatic eventration may simulate CDH.
Gastroschisis and Congenital Epigastric Hernia
Gastroschisis is a congenital fissure in the anterior abdominal wall: usually there
is protrusion of viscera. This uncommon hernia occurs in the median plane
between the xiphoid process and umbilicus. The defect is similar to an umbilical
hernia (see Chapter 11), except for its location.
Gastroschisis and epigastric hernias result from failure of the lateral body folds
to fuse completely when forming the anterior abdominal wall during folding in
the fourth week (Fig. 8-2C and F). The small intestine herniates into the
amniotic cavity, which can be detected prenatally by ultrasonography.
Congenital Hiatal Hernia
Herniation of part of the fetal stomach may occur through an excessively large
esophageal hiatus—the opening in the diaphragm through which the esophagus
and vagus nerves pass. A hiatal hernia is usually an acquired lesion occurring
during adult life; a congenitally enlarged esophageal hiatus may be the
predisposing factor in some cases.
Retrosternal (Parasternal) Hernia
Herniations through the sternocostal hiatus (foramen of Morgagni)—the opening
for the superior epigastric vessels in the retrosternal area—may occur; however,

they are uncommon. This hiatus is located between the sternal and costal parts of
the diaphragm.
Herniation of intestine into the pericardial sac may occur, or conversely, part of
the heart may descend into the peritoneal cavity in the epigastric region. Large
defects are commonly associated with body wall defects in the umbilical region
(e.g., omphalocele; see Chapter 11). Radiologists and pathologists often observe
fatty herniations through the sternocostal hiatus; however, they are usually of no
clinical significance.
Accessory Diaphragm
More than 30 cases of this rare anomaly have been reported. It is most often on
the right side and associated with lung hypoplasia and other respiratory
complications. An accessory diaphragm can be diagnosed by magnetic
resonance imaging and computed tomography. It is treated by surgical excision.

 Summary of Development of the
Body Cavities and Diaphragm
• The intraembryonic coelom begins to develop near the end of the third week.
By the fourth week, it is a horseshoe-shaped cavity in the cardiogenic and lateral
mesoderm. The bend in the cavity represents the future pericardial cavity and its
lateral extensions represent the future pleural and peritoneal cavities.
• During folding of the embryonic disc in the fourth week (see Fig. 5-1B), lateral
parts of the intraembryonic coelom move together on the ventral aspect of the
embryo. When the caudal part of the ventral mesentery disappears, the right and
left parts of the intraembryonic coelom merge to form the peritoneal cavity.
• As peritoneal parts of the intraembryonic coelom come together, the splanchnic
layer of mesoderm encloses the primordial gut and suspends it from the dorsal
body wall by a double-layered peritoneal membrane, the dorsal mesentery.
• The parietal layer of mesoderm lining the peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial
cavities becomes the parietal peritoneum, parietal pleura, and serous
pericardium, respectively.
• By the seventh week, the embryonic pericardial cavity communicates with the
peritoneal cavity through paired pericardioperitoneal canals. During the fifth
and sixth weeks, folds (later membranes) form near the cranial and caudal ends
of these canals.
• Fusion of the cranial pleuropericardial membranes with mesoderm ventral to
the esophagus separates the pericardial cavity from the pleural cavities. Fusion
of the caudal pleuroperitoneal membranes during formation of the diaphragm
separates the pleural cavities from the peritoneal cavity.
• The diaphragm develops from the septum transversum, mesentery of the
esophagus, pleuroperitoneal folds and membranes, and muscular outgrowth from
the body wall.
• The diaphragm divides the body cavity into thoracic and peritoneal cavities.
• A birth defect (opening) in the pleuroperitoneal membrane on the left side
causes a congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 8–1
A neonate has severe respiratory distress. The abdomen is unusually flat and
intestinal peristaltic movements are heard over the left side of the thorax.
• What birth defect would you suspect?
• Explain the basis of the signs described above.
• How would the diagnosis likely be established?

Case 8–2
An ultrasound scan of an infant’s thorax revealed intestine in the pericardial sac.
• What birth defect could result in herniation of intestine into the pericardial
cavity?
• What is the embryologic basis of this defect?

Case 8–3
CDH (congenital diaphragmatic hernia) was diagnosed prenatally during an
ultrasound examination.
• How common is a posterolateral defect of the diaphragm?
• How do you think a neonate in whom this diagnosis is suspected should be
positioned?
• Why would this positional treatment be given?
• Briefly describe surgical repair of a CDH.
• Why do most neonates with CDH die?

Case 8–4
A baby was born with a hernia in the median plane, between the xiphoid process
and umbilicus.
• Name this type of hernia.
• Is it common?
• What is the embryologic basis of this birth defect?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Clugston RD, Greer JJ. Diaphragmatic development and congenital
diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2007;16:94.
Clugston RD, Zhang W, Alvarez S, et al. Understanding abnormal retinoid
signaling as a causative mechanism in congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Am J
Res Cell Mol Biol. 2010;42:276.
Cass DL. Fetal surgery for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: The North
American Experience. Semin Perinatol. 2005;29:104.
Deprest J, Jani J, Gratacos E, et al. Fetal intervention for congenital
diaphragmatic hernia: The European experience. Semin Perinatol. 2005;29:94.
Groth SS, Andrade RS. Diaphragmatic eventration. Thorac Surg Clin.
2009;19:511.
Wladimiroff JW, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Laudy JAM. Ultrasound evaluation of the
fetal thorax. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Graham G, Devine PC. Antenatal diagnosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Semin Perinatol. 2005;29:69.
Kays DW. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and neonatal lung lesions. Surg Clin
North Am. 2006;86:329.

Mayer S, Metzger R, Kluth D. The embryology of the diaphragm. Semin Pediatr
Surg. 2011;20:161.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Moya FR, Lally KP. Evidence-based management of infants with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Perinatol. 2005;29:112.
Rottier R, Tibboel D. Fetal lung and diaphragm development in congenital
diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Perinatol. 2005;29:86.
Slavotinek AM. The genetics of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Semin
Perinatol. 2005;29:77.
Turell DC. Advances with surfactant. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2008;26:921.
Wells LJ. Development of the human diaphragm and pleural sacs. Contr
Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1954;35:107.

Chapter 9 Pharyngeal Apparatus, Face, and Neck
Pharyngeal Arches 159
   Pharyngeal Arch Components 161
Pharyngeal Pouches 162
   Derivatives of Pharyngeal Pouches 166
Pharyngeal Grooves 169
Pharyngeal Membranes 169
Development of Thyroid Gland 173
   Histogenesis of Thyroid Gland 174
Development of Tongue 176
   Lingual Papillae and Taste Buds 177
   Nerve Supply of Tongue 177
Development of Salivary Glands 179
Development of Face 179
Summary of Facial Development 186
Development of Nasal Cavities 186
   Paranasal Sinuses 187
Development of Palate 188
   Primary Palate 188
   Secondary Palate 188
Summary of Pharyngeal Apparatus, Face, and Neck 196
Clinically Oriented Problems 197
The pharyngeal apparatus consists of pharyngeal arches, pouches, grooves,
and membranes (Fig. 9-1). These early embryonic structures contribute to the
formation of the face and neck.

FIGURE 9–1 Illustrations of the human pharyngeal apparatus. A, Dorsal view of
the upper part of a 23-day embryo. B to D, Lateral views showing later
development of the pharyngeal arches. E to G, Ventral or facial views
illustrating the relationship of the first pharyngeal arch to the stomodeum. H,
Horizontal section through the cranial region of an embryo. I, Similar section
illustrating the pharyngeal arch components and the floor of the primordial

pharynx. J, Sagittal section of the cranial region of an embryo, illustrating the
openings of the pharyngeal pouches in the lateral wall of the primordial pharynx.

 Pharyngeal Arches
The pharyngeal arches begin to develop early in the fourth week as neural crest
cells migrate into the future head and neck regions (see Fig. 5-5, Chapter 5).
Sonic hedgehog signaling plays an important role in the formation of the first
pharyngeal arches. The first pair of pharyngeal arches, the primordium of the
jaws, appears as surface elevations lateral to the developing pharynx (Fig. 9-1A
and B). Soon other arches appear as obliquely disposed, rounded ridges on each
side of the future head and neck regions (Fig. 9-1C and D). By the end of the
fourth week, four pairs of pharyngeal arches are visible externally (Fig. 9-1D).
The fifth and sixth arches are rudimentary and are not visible on the surface of
the embryo. The pharyngeal arches are separated from each other by the
pharyngeal grooves (clefts). Like the pharyngeal arches, the grooves are
numbered in a craniocaudal sequence.
The first pharyngeal arch separates into two prominences, the maxillary and
mandibular prominences (Figs. 9-1E and 9-2):
• The maxillary prominence gives rise to the maxilla, zygomatic bone, and a
portion of the vomer bone.
• The mandibular prominence forms the mandible and the squamous temporal
bone.

FIGURE 9–2 Photograph of a stage 13, 4-1/2-week human embryo.
(Courtesy of the late Professor Emeritus Dr. K.V. Hinrichsen, Medizinische
Fakultät, Institut für Anatomie, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.)
The second pharyngeal arch (hyoid arch) contributes, along with parts of the
third and fourth arches, to the formation of the hyoid bone.
The pharyngeal arches support the lateral walls of the primordial pharynx, which
is derived from the cranial part of the foregut. The stomodeum (primordial
mouth) initially appears as a slight depression of the surface ectoderm (Fig. 9-1D
and E). It is separated from the cavity of the primordial pharynx by a bilaminar
membrane—the oropharyngeal membrane, which is composed of ectoderm
externally and endoderm internally. The oropharyngeal membrane ruptures at
approximately 26 days, bringing the pharynx and foregut into communication
with the amniotic cavity (Fig. 9-1F and G). The ectodermal lining of the first
arch gives rise to the oral epithelium.

Pharyngeal Arch Components
Each pharyngeal arch consists of a core of mesenchyme (embryonic connective
tissue) and is covered externally by ectoderm and internally by endoderm (Fig.
9-1H and I). Originally, this mesenchyme is derived during the third week from
mesoderm. During the fourth week, most of the mesenchyme is derived from
neural crest cells that migrate into the pharyngeal arches. It is the migration of
neural crest cells into the arches and their differentiation into mesenchyme that
produces the maxillary and mandibular prominences (Fig. 9-2), in addition to all
connective tissue including the dermis and smooth muscle.
Coincident with immigration of neural crest cells, myogenic mesoderm from
paraxial regions moves into each pharyngeal arch, forming a central core of
muscle primordium. Endothelial cells in the arches are derived from both the
lateral mesoderm and the invasive angioblasts (cells taking part in blood vessel
formation) that move into the arches. The pharyngeal endoderm plays an
essential role in regulating the development of the pharyngeal arches.
A typical pharyngeal arch contains:
• An artery that arises from the truncus arteriosus of the primordial heart (Fig. 9-
3B) and passes around the primordial pharynx to enter the dorsal aorta
• A cartilaginous rod that forms the skeleton of the arch
• A muscular component that differentiates into muscles in the head and neck
• Sensory and motor nerves that supply the mucosa and muscles derived from
each arch

FIGURE 9–3 A, Drawing of the head, neck, and thoracic regions of a human
embryo (approximately 28 days), illustrating the pharyngeal apparatus. Inset,
Photograph of a human embryo approximately the same age as A. B, Schematic
drawing showing the pharyngeal pouches and pharyngeal arch arteries. C,
Horizontal section through the embryo showing the floor of the primordial

pharynx and illustrating the germ layer of origin of the pharyngeal arch
components.
( Inset, Courtesy of Dr. Bradley R. Smith, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI.)
The nerves that grow into the arches are derived from neuroectoderm of the
primordial brain.
Fate of Pharyngeal Arches
The pharyngeal arches contribute extensively to the formation of the face, nasal
cavities, mouth, larynx, pharynx, and neck (Figs. 9-3 and 9-4). During the fifth
week, the second pharyngeal arch enlarges and overgrows the third and fourth
arches, forming an ectodermal depression—the cervical sinus (Figs. 9-2 and 9-
4A to D). By the end of the seventh week, the second to fourth pharyngeal
grooves and the cervical sinus have disappeared, giving the neck a smooth
contour.

FIGURE 9–4 A, Lateral view of the head, neck, and thoracic regions of an
embryo (approximately 32 days), showing the pharyngeal arches and cervical
sinus. B, Diagrammatic section through the embryo at the level shown in A,
illustrating the growth of the second arch over the third and fourth arches. C, An
embryo of approximately 33 days. D, Section of the embryo at the level shown

in C, illustrating the early closure of the cervical sinus. E, An embryo of
approximately 41 days. F, Section of the embryo at the level indicated in E,
showing the transitory cystic remnant of the cervical sinus. G, Drawing of a 20-
week fetus illustrating the area of the face derived from the first pair of
pharyngeal arches.
Derivatives of Pharyngeal Arch Cartilages
The dorsal end of the first pharyngeal arch cartilage (Meckel cartilage) is
closely related to the developing ear. Early in development, small nodules break
away from the proximal part of this cartilage and form two of the middle ear
bones, the malleus and incus (Fig. 9-5, Table 9-1). The middle part of the
cartilage regresses, but its perichondrium forms the anterior ligament of malleus
and the sphenomandibular ligament.
FIGURE 9–5 A, Schematic lateral view of the head, neck, and thoracic regions
of a 4-week embryo, illustrating the location of the cartilages in the pharyngeal
arches. B, Similar view of a 24-week fetus illustrating the derivatives of the
pharyngeal arch cartilages. The mandible is formed by intramembranous
ossification of mesenchymal tissue surrounding the first arch cartilage. This
cartilage acts as a template for development of the mandible, but does not
contribute directly to its formation. Occasionally ossification of the second
pharyngeal arch cartilage may extend from the styloid process along the

stylohyoid ligament. When this occurs, it may cause pain in the region of the
palatine tonsil.
Table 9–1 Structures Derived from Pharyngeal Arch Components*
Ventral parts of the first arch cartilages form the horseshoe-shaped primordium
of the mandible and, by keeping pace with its growth, guide its early
morphogenesis. Each half of the mandible forms lateral to and in close
association with its cartilage. The cartilage disappears as the mandible develops
around it by intramembranous ossification (Fig. 9-5B). Multiple signaling
involving expression of homeobox genes (BMPs, Prxl and Prx2) and fibroblast
growth factors (FGFs) regulate the morphogenesis of the mandible.
An independent cartilage anlage (primordium), near the dorsal end of the second
pharyngeal arch cartilage (Reichert cartilage), is closely related to the
developing ear. It ossifies to form the stapes of the middle ear and the styloid
process of the temporal bone (Fig. 9-5B). The part of cartilage between the
styloid process and hyoid bone regresses; its perichondrium (connective tissue
membrane) forms the stylohyoid ligament. The ventral end of the second arch
cartilage ossifies to form the lesser cornu (Latin, horn) and the superior part of

the body of the hyoid bone (Fig. 9-5B).
The third pharyngeal arch cartilage, located in the ventral part of the arch,
ossifies to form the greater cornu and the inferior part of the body of the hyoid
bone.
The fourth and sixth pharyngeal arch cartilages fuse to form the laryngeal
cartilages (Fig. 9-5B, Table 9-1), except for the epiglottis. The cartilage of the
epiglottis develops from mesenchyme in the hypopharyngeal eminence (see Fig.
9-24A), a prominence in the floor of the embryonic pharynx that is derived from
the third and fourth pharyngeal arches.
The fifth pharyngeal arch is rudimentary (if present) and has no derivatives.
Derivatives of Pharyngeal Arch Muscles
The muscular components of the arches derived from unsegmented paraxial
mesoderm and the prechordal plate form various muscles in the head and neck.
The musculature of the first pharyngeal arch forms the muscles of mastication
and other muscles (Fig. 9-6, Table 9-1). The musculature of the second
pharyngeal arch forms the stapedius, stylohyoid, posterior belly of digastric,
auricular, and muscles of facial expression. The musculature of the third
pharyngeal arch forms the stylopharyngeus. The musculature of the fourth
pharyngeal arch forms the cricothyroid, levator veli palatini, and constrictors of
the pharynx. The musculature of the sixth pharyngeal arch forms the intrinsic
muscles of the larynx.

FIGURE 9–6 A, Lateral view of the head, neck, and thoracic regions of a 4-
week embryo showing the muscles derived from the pharyngeal arches. The
arrow shows the pathway taken by myoblasts from the occipital myotomes to
form the tongue musculature. B, Sketch of the head and neck regions of a 20-
week fetus, dissected to show the muscles derived from the pharyngeal arches.
Parts of the platysma and sternocleidomastoid muscles have been removed to
show the deeper muscles. The myoblasts from the second pharyngeal arch
migrate from the neck to the head, where they give rise to the muscles of facial
expression. These muscles are supplied by the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII),
the nerve of the second pharyngeal arch.
Derivatives of Pharyngeal Arch Nerves
Each arch is supplied by its own cranial nerve (CN). The special visceral efferent
(branchial) components of the CNs supply muscles derived from the pharyngeal
arches (Fig. 9-7, Table 9-1). Because mesenchyme from the pharyngeal arches
contributes to the dermis and mucous membranes of the head and neck, these
areas are supplied with special visceral afferent nerves.

FIGURE 9–7 A, Lateral view of the head, neck, and thoracic regions of a 4-
week embryo showing the cranial nerves supplying the pharyngeal arches. B,
Sketch of the head and neck regions of a 20-week fetus showing the superficial
distribution of the two caudal branches of the first pharyngeal arch nerve (cranial
nerve V). C, Sagittal section of the fetal head and neck showing the deep

distribution of sensory fibers of the nerves to the teeth and mucosa of the tongue,
pharynx, nasal cavity, palate, and larynx.
The facial skin is supplied by the CN V—the trigeminal nerve. However, only
its caudal two branches (maxillary and mandibular) supply derivatives of the
first pharyngeal arch (Fig. 9-7B). CN V is the principal sensory nerve of the head
and neck and is the motor nerve for the muscles of mastication (see Table 9-1).
Its sensory branches innervate the face, teeth, and mucous membranes of the
nasal cavities, palate, mouth, and tongue (Fig. 9-7C).
CN VII—the facial nerve, CN IX—the glossopharyngeal nerve, and CN X—
the vagus nerve—supply the second, third, and caudal (fourth to sixth) arches,
respectively. The fourth arch is supplied by the superior laryngeal branch of the
vagus (CN X) and by its recurrent laryngeal branch. The nerves of the second to
sixth pharyngeal arches have little cutaneous distribution (Fig. 9-7C); however,
they innervate the mucous membranes of the tongue, pharynx, and larynx.

 Pharyngeal Pouches
The primordial pharynx, derived from the foregut, widens cranially where it
joins the stomodeum (Figs. 9-3A and B and 9-4B), and narrows as it joins the
esophagus. The endoderm of the pharynx lines the internal aspects of the
pharyngeal arches and passes into the pharyngeal pouches (Figs. 9-1H to J and
9-3B and C). The pouches develop in a craniocaudal sequence between the
arches. The first pair of pouches, for example, lies between the first and second
pharyngeal arches. There are four well-defined pairs of pharyngeal pouches; the
fifth pair is rudimentary or absent. The endoderm of the pouches contacts the
ectoderm of the pharyngeal grooves and together they form the double-layered
pharyngeal membranes that separate the pharyngeal pouches from the
pharyngeal grooves (Figs. 9-1H and 9-3C).

 Derivatives of Pharyngeal Pouches
The endodermal epithelial lining of the pharyngeal pouches gives rise to
important organs in the head and neck.
First Pharyngeal Pouch
The first pharyngeal pouch expands into an elongate tubotympanic recess (Fig.
9-8B). The expanded distal part of this recess contacts the first pharyngeal
groove, where it later contributes to the formation of the tympanic membrane
(eardrum). The cavity of the tubotympanic recess becomes the tympanic cavity
and mastoid antrum. The connection of the tubotympanic recess with the
pharynx gradually elongates to form the pharyngotympanic tube (auditory
tube).

FIGURE 9–8 Schematic horizontal sections at the level shown in Figure 9-4A,
illustrating the adult derivatives of the pharyngeal pouches. A, At 5 weeks. Note
that the second pharyngeal arch grows over the third and fourth arches, burying
the second to fourth pharyngeal grooves in the cervical sinus. B, At 6 weeks. C,
At 7 weeks. Note the migration of the developing thymus, parathyroid, and

thyroid glands into the neck.
Second Pharyngeal Pouch
Although the second pharyngeal pouch is largely obliterated as the palatine
tonsil develops, part of the cavity of this pouch remains as the tonsillar sinus
(fossa), the depression between the palatoglossal and palatopharyngeal arches
(Figs. 9-8C and 9-9). The endoderm of the second pouch proliferates and grows
into the underlying mesenchyme. The central parts of these buds break down,
forming tonsillar crypts (pit-like depressions). The pouch endoderm forms the
surface epithelium and the lining of the tonsillar crypts. At approximately 20
weeks, the mesenchyme around the crypts differentiates into lymphoid tissue,
which soon organizes into the lymphatic nodules of the palatine tonsil.
FIGURE 9–9 Schematic sagittal section of the head, neck, and upper thoracic
regions of a 20-week fetus showing the adult derivatives of the pharyngeal
pouches and the descent of the thyroid gland into the neck.
Third Pharyngeal Pouch
The third pharyngeal pouch expands and develops a solid, dorsal bulbar part and
a hollow, elongate ventral part (Fig. 9-8B). Its connection with the pharynx is
reduced to a narrow duct that soon degenerates. By the sixth week, the
epithelium of each dorsal bulbar part of the pouch begins to differentiate into an

inferior parathyroid gland. The epithelium of the elongate ventral parts of the
pouch proliferates, obliterating their cavities. These come together in the median
plane to form the thymus. The bilobed structure of this lymphatic organ remains
throughout life, discretely encapsulated; each lobe has its own blood supply,
lymphatic drainage, and nerve supply. The developing thymus and inferior
parathyroid glands lose their connections with the pharynx when the brain and
associated structures expand rostrally while the pharynx and cardiac structures
generally expand caudally. The derivatives of pharyngeal pouches two to four
become displaced caudally. Later, the parathyroid glands separate from the
thymus and lie on the dorsal surface of the thyroid gland (Figs. 9-8C and 9-9).
The FGF signaling pathways, acting through FRS2-α, are involved in the
development of the thymus and parathyroid glands.
Histogenesis of Thymus
This primary lymphoid organ develops from epithelial cells derived from
endoderm of the third pair of pharyngeal pouches and from mesenchyme into
which epithelial tubes grow. The tubes soon become solid cords that proliferate
and give rise to side branches. Each side branch becomes the core of a lobule of
the thymus. Some cells of the epithelial cords become arranged around a central
point, forming small groups of cells—the thymic corpuscles (Hassall
corpuscles). Other cells of the epithelial cords spread apart but retain
connections with each other to form an epithelial reticulum. The mesenchyme
between the epithelial cords forms thin incomplete septa between the lobules.
Lymphocytes soon appear and fill the interstices between the epithelial cells.
The lymphocytes are derived from hematopoietic stem cells. The thymic
primordium is surrounded by a thin layer of mesenchyme that is essential for its
development. Neural crest cells also contribute to thymic organogenesis.
Growth and development of the thymus are not complete at birth. It is a
relatively large organ during the perinatal period and may extend through the
superior thoracic aperture at the root of the neck. As puberty is reached, the
thymus begins to diminish in relative size (i.e., undergoes involution). By
adulthood, it is often scarcely recognizable because of fat infiltrating the cortex
of the gland; however, it is still functional and important for the maintenance of
health. In addition to secreting thymic hormones, the thymus primes thymocytes
(T-cell precursors) before releasing them to the periphery.

Fourth Pharyngeal Pouch
The fourth pharyngeal pouch expands into dorsal bulbar and elongate ventral
parts (Figs. 9-8 and 9-9). Its connection with the pharynx is reduced to a narrow
duct that soon degenerates. By the sixth week, each dorsal part develops into a
superior parathyroid gland, which lies on the dorsal surface of the thyroid
gland. Because the parathyroid glands derived from the third pouches
accompany the thymus, they are in a more inferior position than the parathyroid
glands derived from the fourth pouches (Fig. 9-9).
Histogenesis of Parathyroid and Thyroid Glands
The epithelium of the dorsal parts of the third and fourth pouches proliferates
during the fifth week and forms small nodules on the dorsal aspect of each
pouch. Vascular mesenchyme soon grows into these nodules, forming a capillary
network. The chief or principal cells differentiate during the embryonic period
and are believed to become functionally active in regulating fetal calcium
metabolism. The oxyphil cells differentiate 5 to 7 years after birth.
The elongated ventral part of each fourth pouch develops into an
ultimopharyngeal body, which fuses with the thyroid gland. Its cells
disseminate within the thyroid, giving rise to the parafollicular cells. These
cells are also called C cells to indicate that they produce calcitonin, a hormone
involved in the regulation of calcium levels. C cells differentiate from neural
crest cells that migrate from the pharyngeal arches into the fourth pair of
pharyngeal pouches. Recent findings suggest that the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor Mash1 regulates the differentiation of C cells.

 Pharyngeal Grooves
The head and neck regions of the human embryo exhibit four pharyngeal
grooves (clefts) on each side during the fourth and fifth weeks (Figs. 9-1B to D
and 9-2). These grooves separate the pharyngeal arches externally. Only one pair
of grooves contributes to postnatal structures; the first pair persists as the
external acoustic meatus or ear canals (Fig. 9-8C). The other grooves lie in a
slit-like depression—the cervical sinus—and are normally obliterated along
with the sinus as the neck develops (Fig. 9-4B, D, and F).

 Pharyngeal Membranes
The pharyngeal membranes appear in the floors of the pharyngeal grooves (Figs.
9-1H and 9-3C). These membranes form where the epithelia of the grooves and
pouches approach each other. The endoderm of the pouches and the ectoderm of
the grooves are soon infiltrated and separated by mesenchyme. Only one pair of
membranes contributes to the formation of adult structures; the first pharyngeal
membrane, along with the intervening layer of mesenchyme, becomes the
tympanic membrane (Fig. 9-8C).
Cervical (Branchial) Sinuses
External cervical (branchial) sinuses are uncommon and almost all result from
failure of the second pharyngeal groove and the cervical sinus to obliterate (Figs.
9-10D and 9-11A and B). The sinus typically opens along the anterior border of
the sternocleidomastoid muscle in the inferior third of the neck. Anomalies of
the other pharyngeal grooves occur in approximately 5% of neonates. External
branchial sinuses are commonly detected during infancy because of the
discharge of mucous material from them (Fig. 9-11A). These external cervical
sinuses are bilateral in approximately 10% of affected neonates and are
commonly associated with auricular sinuses.

FIGURE 9–10 A, Lateral view of the head, neck, and thoracic regions of a 5-
week embryo showing the cervical sinus that is normally present at this stage. B,
Horizontal section of the embryo, at the level shown in A, illustrating the
relationship of the cervical sinus to the pharyngeal arches and pouches. C,
Diagrammatic sketch of the adult pharyngeal and neck regions indicating the

former sites of openings of the cervical sinus and pharyngeal pouches. The
broken lines indicate possible courses of cervical fistulas. D, Similar sketch
showing the embryologic basis of various types of cervical sinus. E, Drawing of
a cervical fistula resulting from persistence of parts of the second pharyngeal
groove and second pharyngeal pouch. F, Sketch showing possible sites of
cervical cysts and the openings of cervical sinuses and fistulas. A branchial
vestige is also illustrated (also Fig. 9-14).
 
FIGURE 9–11 A, A child’s neck showing a catheter inserted into the external
opening of a cervical (branchial) sinus. The catheter allows definition of the
length of the tract, which facilitates surgical excision. B, A fistulogram of a
complete cervical (branchial) fistula. The radiograph was taken after injection of
a contrast medium showing the course of the fistula through the neck.

(Courtesy of Dr. Pierre Soucy, Division of Paediatric Surgery, Children’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.)
Internal cervical (branchial) sinuses open into the tonsillar sinus or near the
palatopharyngeal arch (Fig. 9-10D and F ). These sinuses are rare. Almost all
these sinuses result from persistence of the proximal part of the second
pharyngeal pouch. Normally this pouch disappears as the palatine tonsil
develops; its normal remnant is the tonsillar sinus.
Cervical (Branchial) Fistula
An abnormal canal that opens internally into the tonsillar sinus and externally in
the side of the neck is a cervical fistula. This canal results from persistence of
parts of the second pharyngeal groove and second pharyngeal pouch (see Figs.
9-10E and F and 9-11B). The fistula ascends from its opening in the neck
through the subcutaneous tissue and platysma muscle to reach the carotid sheath.
The fistula then passes between the internal and external carotid arteries and
opens into the tonsillar sinus.
Piriform Sinus Fistula
A piriform sinus fistula is thought to result from the persistence of remnants of
the ultimopharyngeal body along its path to the thyroid gland (Fig. 9-8C ).
Cervical (Branchial) Cysts
Remnants of parts of the cervical sinus and/or the second pharyngeal groove
may persist and form a spherical or elongate cyst (Fig. 9-10F ). Although they
may be associated with cervical sinuses and drain through them, cervical cysts
often lie free in the neck just inferior to the angle of the mandible. However, they
can develop anywhere along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle. Cervical cysts do not usually become apparent until late childhood or
early adulthood, when they produce a slowly enlarging, painless swelling in the
neck (Fig. 9-12). The cysts enlarge because of the accumulation of fluid and

cellular debris derived from desquamation of their epithelial linings (Fig. 9-13).
Cervical cysts have also been observed in the parathyroid glands.


FIGURE 9–12 A swelling in a boy’s neck produced by a cervical cyst. These
large cysts often lie free in the neck just inferior to the angle of the mandible, but
they may develop anywhere along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle as in this case.
(Courtesy of Dr. Pierre Soucy, Division of Paediatric Surgery, Children’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.)
FIGURE 9–13 This is a computed tomography (CT) image of the neck region of
a 24-year-old woman who presented with a 2-month history of a “lump” in the
neck. The low-density cervical cyst, (C) is anterior to the sternocleidomastoid
muscle (S). Note the external carotid artery (arrow) and the external jugular vein
(dotted arrow).
(Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, ND.)
Branchial Vestiges
Normally the pharyngeal cartilages disappear, except for parts that form
ligaments or bones; however, in unusual cases, cartilaginous or bony remnants of
pharyngeal arch cartilages appear under the skin in the side of the neck (Fig. 9-
14). These are usually found anterior to the inferior third of the

sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 9-10F ).
FIGURE 9–14 A cartilaginous branchial vestige under the skin of a child’s neck.
(From Raffensperger JG: Swenson’s Pediatric Surgery, 5th ed. New York,
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1990. Courtesy of Appleton-Century-Crofts.)
First Pharyngeal Arch Syndrome

Abnormal development of the components of the first pharyngeal arch results in
various congenital anomalies of the eyes, ears, mandible, and palate that together
constitute the first pharyngeal arch syndrome (Fig. 9-15). This syndrome is
believed to result from insufficient migration of neural crest cells into the first
arch during the fourth week. There are two main manifestations of the first
pharnygeal arch syndrome: • In Treacher Collins syndrome (mandibulofacial
dysostosis), caused by an autosomal dominant gene, there is malar hypoplasia
(underdevelopment of the zygomatic bones of the face) with down-slanting
palpebral fissures, defects of the lower eyelids, deformed external ears, and
sometimes abnormalities of the middle and internal ears. The TCOF1 gene
(Treacher Collins-Franceschetti 1) is responsible for the production of a protein
called treacle. Treacle is involved in the biogenesis of ribosomal RNA that
contributes to the development of bones and cartilage of the face. Mutation in
the TCOF1 gene is associated with the Treacher Collins syndrome.
• Pierre Robin sequence, an autosomal recessive disorder, is associated with
hypoplasia of the mandible, cleft palate, and defects of the eye and ear. Many
cases of this syndrome are sporadic. In the Robin morphogenetic complex, the
initiating defect is a small mandible (micrognathia), which results in posterior
displacement of the tongue and obstruction to full closure of the palatal
processes, resulting in a bilateral cleft palate (see Figs. 9-40 and 9-41).


FIGURE 9–15 An infant with first arch syndrome, a pattern of anomalies
resulting from insufficient migration of neural crest cells into the first pharyngeal
arch. Note the deformed auricle, the preauricular appendage, the defect in the
cheek between the auricle and the mouth, hypoplasia of the mandible, and
macrostomia (large mouth).
DiGeorge Syndrome
Infants with DiGeorge syndrome are born without a thymus and parathyroid
glands and have defects in their cardiac outflow tracts. In some cases, ectopic
glandular tissue has been found (Fig. 9-16). Clinically, the disease is
characterized by congenital hypoparathyroidism, increased susceptibility to
infections (from immune deficiency, specifically defective T-cell function),
anomalies of the mouth (shortened philtrum of upper lip [fish-mouth
deformity]), low-set notched ears, nasal clefts, thyroid hypoplasia, and cardiac
abnormalities (defects of the arch of the aorta and heart).
FIGURE 9–16 Anterior view of the thyroid gland, thymus, and parathyroid
glands, illustrating various congenital anomalies that may occur.

DiGeorge syndrome occurs because the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches fail
to differentiate into the thymus and parathyroid glands. This is the result of a
breakdown in signaling between pharyngeal endoderm and adjacent neural crest
cells. The facial abnormalities result primarily from abnormal development of
the first arch components because neural crest cells are disrupted, and the
cardiac anomalies arise in those sites normally occupied by neural crest cells. In
most cases of DiGeorge syndrome, there is a microdeletion in the q11.2 region of
chromosome 22, HIRA and UFDIL gene mutation, and neural crest cell defects.
Accessory Thymic Tissue
An isolated mass of thymic tissue may persist in the neck, often close to an
inferior parathyroid gland (Fig. 9-16). This tissue breaks free from the
developing thymus as it shifts caudally in the neck.
Ectopic Parathyroid Glands
The location of the parathyroid glands is highly variable. They may be found
anywhere near or within the thyroid gland or thymus. The superior glands are
more constant in position than the inferior ones. Occasionally, an inferior
parathyroid gland remains near the bifurcation of the common carotid artery. In
other cases, it may be in the thorax.
Abnormal Number of Parathyroid Glands
Uncommonly there are more than four parathyroid glands. Supernumerary
parathyroid glands probably result from division of the primordia of the original
glands. Absence of a parathyroid gland results from failure of one of the
primordia to differentiate or from atrophy of a gland early in development.

 Development of Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is the first endocrine gland to develop in the embryo. It
begins to form, under the influence of FGF signaling pathways, approximately
24 days after fertilization from a median endodermal thickening in the floor of
the primordial pharynx. This thickening soon forms a small outpouching—the
thyroid primordium (Fig. 9-17A). As the embryo and tongue grow, the
developing thyroid gland descends in the neck, passing ventral to the developing
hyoid bone and laryngeal cartilages. For a short time, the thyroid gland is
connected to the tongue by a narrow tube, the thyroglossal duct (see Fig. 9-17B
and C). At first the thyroid primordium is hollow, but it soon becomes a solid
mass of cells and divides into right and left lobes that are connected by the
isthmus of the thyroid gland (Fig. 9-18), which lies anterior to the developing
second and third tracheal rings.

FIGURE 9–17 Development of the thyroid gland. A to C, Schematic sagittal
sections of the head and neck regions of embryos at 4, 5, and 6 weeks illustrating
successive stages in the development of the thyroid gland. D, Similar section of
an adult head and neck showing the path taken by the thyroid gland during its
embryonic descent (indicated by the former tract of the thyroglossal duct).

FIGURE 9–18 The anterior surface of a dissected adult thyroid gland showing
persistence of the thyroglossal duct. Observe the pyramidal lobe ascending from
the superior border of the isthmus. It represents a persistent portion of the
inferior end of the thyroglossal duct that has formed thyroid tissue.
By 7 weeks, the thyroid gland has assumed its definitive shape and is usually
located in its final site in the neck (Fig. 9-1D). By this time, the thyroglossal
duct has normally degenerated and disappeared. The proximal opening of the
thyroglossal duct persists as a small pit in the dorsum (posterosuperior surface)
of the tongue—the foramen cecum. A pyramidal lobe of the thyroid gland
extends superiorly from the isthmus in approximately 50% of people.

Histogenesis of Thyroid Gland
The thyroid primordium consists of a solid mass of endodermal cells. This
cellular aggregation later breaks up into a network of epithelial cords as it is
invaded by the surrounding vascular mesenchyme. By the 10th week, the cords
have divided into small cellular groups. A lumen soon forms in each cell cluster
and the cells become arranged in a single layer around thyroid follicles. During
the 11th week, colloid begins to appear in these follicles; thereafter, iodine
concentration and the synthesis of thyroid hormones can be demonstrated. By 20
weeks, the levels of fetal thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroxine begin to
increase, reaching adult levels by 35 weeks.
Congenital Hypothyroidism
Congenital hypothyroidism is the most common metabolic disorder in neonates.
It is a heterogeneous disorder for which several candidate genes, including TSH
receptor and thyroid transcription factors (TTF-1, TF-2, and Pax8) have been
identified. Congenital hypothyroidism may result in neurodevelopmental
disorders and infertility if untreated. An increased incidence of renal and urinary
tract anomalies in infants has been reported in association with congenital
hypothyroidism.
Thyroglossal Duct Cysts and Sinuses
Cysts may form anywhere along the course of the thyroglossal duct (Fig. 9-19).
Usually, the thyroglossal duct atrophies and disappears, but a remnant of it may
persist and form a cyst in the tongue or in the anterior part of the neck, usually
just inferior to the hyoid bone (Fig. 9-20). Most thyroglossal duct cysts are
observed by the age of 5 years. Unless the lesions become infected, most of them
are asymptomatic. The swelling produced by a thyroglossal duct cyst usually
develops as a painless, progressively enlarging, movable mass (Fig. 9-21). The
cyst may contain some thyroid tissue. If infection of a cyst occurs, a perforation
of the skin may develop, forming a thyroglossal duct sinus that usually opens in
the median plane of the neck, anterior to the laryngeal cartilages (Fig. 9-19A).

FIGURE 9–19 A, Sketch of the head and neck showing the possible locations of
thyroglossal duct cysts. A thyroglossal duct sinus is also illustrated. The broken
line indicates the course taken by the thyroglossal duct during descent of the
developing thyroid gland from the foramen cecum to its final position in the
anterior part of the neck. B, Similar sketch illustrating lingual and cervical
thyroglossal duct cysts. Most thyroglossal duct cysts are located just inferior to
the hyoid bone.

FIGURE 9–20 Large thyroglossal duct cyst (arrow) in a male patient.
(Courtesy of Dr. Srinivasa Ramachandra.)

FIGURE 9–21 Computed tomography images. A, Level of the thyrohyoid
membrane and base of the epiglottis. B, Level of thyroid cartilage, which is
calcified. The thyroglossal duct cyst extends cranially to the margin of the hyoid
bone.
(Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, ND.)
Ectopic Thyroid Gland
An ectopic thyroid gland is an infrequent congenital anomaly and is usually
located along the course of the thyroglossal duct (Fig. 9-17D). Lingual thyroid
tissue is the most common of ectopic thyroid tissues; intralingual thyroid masses
are found in as many as 10% of autopsies, although they are clinically relevant
in only one in 4000 persons with thyroid disease. Incomplete movement of the
thyroid gland results in the ectopic thyroid gland appearing high in the neck
(sublingual), at or just inferior to the hyoid bone (Figs. 9-22 and 9-23). Usually,
an ectopic sublingual thyroid gland is the only thyroid tissue present. It is
clinically important to differentiate an ectopic thyroid gland from a thyroglossal
duct cyst or accessory thyroid tissue to prevent inadvertent surgical removal of
the thyroid gland. Failure to do so may leave the person permanently dependent
on thyroid medication.

FIGURE 9–22 Sketch of the head and neck showing the usual sites of ectopic
thyroid tissue. The broken line indicates the path followed by the thyroid gland
during its descent and the former tract of the thyroglossal duct.
FIGURE 9–23 A, A sublingual thyroid mass in a 5-year-old girl. B, Technetium-
99m pertechnetate scan (scintigraphy) showing a sublingual thyroid gland (*)
without evidence of functioning thyroid tissue in the anterior part of the neck.

(From Leung AKC, Wong AL, Robson WLLM: Ectopic thyroid gland simulating
a thyroglossal duct cyst. Can J Surg 38:87, 1995.)
Agenesis of Thyroid Gland
Absence of the thyroid gland, or one of its lobes, is a rare anomaly. In thyroid
hemiagenesis (unilateral failure of formation), the left lobe is more commonly
absent. Mutations in the receptor for thyroid-stimulating hormone are probably
involved in some cases.

 Development of Tongue
Near the end of the fourth week, a median triangular elevation appears in the
floor of the primordial pharynx, just rostral to the foramen cecum (Fig. 9-24A).
This median lingual swelling (tongue bud) is the first indication of tongue
development. Soon, two oval lateral lingual swellings (distal tongue buds)
develop on each side of the median tongue bud. The three lingual swellings
result from the proliferation of mesenchyme in ventromedial parts of the first
pair of pharyngeal arches. The lateral lingual swellings rapidly increase in size,
merge with each other, and overgrow the median lingual swelling. The merged
lateral lingual swellings form the anterior two thirds (oral part) of the tongue
(Fig. 9-24C). The fusion site of the lateral lingual swellings is indicated by the
midline groove of the tongue and internally by the fibrous lingual septum. The
median lingual swelling does not form a recognizable part of the adult tongue.

FIGURE 9–24 A and B, Schematic horizontal sections through the pharynx at
the level shown in Figure 9-4A showing successive stages in the development of
the tongue during the fourth and fifth weeks. C, Drawing of the adult tongue
showing the pharyngeal arch derivation of the nerve supply of its mucosa.

Formation of the posterior third (pharyngeal part) of the tongue is indicated in
the fetus by two elevations that develop caudal to the foramen cecum (Fig. 9-
24A):
• The copula forms by fusion of the ventromedial parts of the second pair of
pharyngeal arches.
• The hypopharyngeal eminence develops caudal to the copula from
mesenchyme in the ventromedial parts of the third and fourth pairs of arches.
As the tongue develops, the copula is gradually overgrown by the
hypopharyngeal eminence and disappears (see Fig. 9-24B and C). As a result,
the posterior third of the tongue develops from the rostral part of the
hypopharyngeal eminence.
The line of fusion of the anterior and posterior parts of the tongue is roughly
indicated by a V-shaped groove—the terminal sulcus (see Fig. 9-24C).
Pharyngeal arch mesenchyme forms the connective tissue and vasculature of the
tongue. Most of the tongue muscles are derived from myoblasts that migrate
from the occipital myotomes (Fig. 9-6A). The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII)
accompanies the myoblasts during their migration and innervates the tongue
muscles as they develop. Both anterior and posterior parts of the tongue are
located within the oral cavity at birth; the posterior third of the tongue descends
into the oropharynx by 4 years of age.

Lingual Papillae and Taste Buds
Lingual papillae appear toward the end of the eighth week. The vallate and
foliate papillae appear first, close to terminal branches of the glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN IX). The fungiform papillae appear later near terminations of the
chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve (CN VII). The long and numerous
lingual papillae are called filiform papillae because of their thread-like shape.
They develop during the early fetal period (10–11 weeks). They contain afferent
nerve endings that are sensitive to touch.
Taste buds develop during weeks 11 to 13 by inductive interaction between the
epithelial cells of the tongue and invading gustatory nerve cells from the chorda
tympani, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves. Most taste buds form on the
dorsal surface of the tongue, and some develop on the palatoglossal arches,
palate, posterior surface of the epiglottis, and the posterior wall of the
oropharynx. Fetal facial responses can be induced by bitter-tasting substances at
26 to 28 weeks, indicating that reflex pathways between taste buds and facial
muscles are established by this stage.

Nerve Supply of Tongue
The development of the tongue explains its nerve supply. The sensory supply to
the mucosa of almost the entire anterior two thirds of the tongue is from the
lingual branch of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V), the
nerve of the first pharyngeal arch. This arch forms the median and lateral lingual
swellings (Fig. 9-24). Although the facial nerve is the nerve of the second
pharyngeal arch, its chorda tympani branch supplies the taste buds in the anterior
two thirds of the tongue, except for the vallate papillae. Because the second arch
component, the copula, is overgrown by the third arch, the facial nerve (CN VII)
does not supply any of the tongue mucosa, except for the taste buds in the
anterior part of the tongue. The vallate papillae in the anterior part of the tongue
are innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) of the third pharyngeal
arch (see Fig. 9-24C). The reason usually given for this is that the mucosa of the
posterior third of the tongue is pulled slightly anteriorly as the tongue develops.
The posterior third of the tongue is innervated mainly by the glossopharyngeal
nerve of the third pharyngeal arch. The superior laryngeal branch of the vagus
nerve (CN X) of the fourth arch supplies a small area of the tongue anterior to
the epiglottis (Fig. 9-24C). All muscles of the tongue are supplied by the
hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), except for the palatoglossus, which is supplied
from the pharyngeal plexus by fibers arising from the vagus nerve (CN X).
Congenital Anomalies of Tongue
Abnormalities of the tongue are uncommon, except for fissuring of the tongue
and hypertrophy of the lingual papillae, which are characteristics of infants with
Down syndrome (see Chapter 20).
Congenital Lingual Cysts and Fistulas
Cysts in the tongue may be derived from remnants of the thyroglossal duct (Fig.
9-19). They may enlarge and produce symptoms of pharyngeal discomfort
and/or dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing). Fistulas are also derived from
persistence of lingual parts of the thyroglossal duct; they open through the

foramen cecum into the oral cavity.
Ankyloglossia
The lingual frenulum normally connects the inferior surface of the tongue to the
floor of the mouth. Sometimes the frenulum is short and extends to the tip of the
tongue (Fig. 9-25). This interferes with its free protrusion and may make breast-
feeding difficult. Ankyloglossia (tongue-tie) occurs in approximately 1 in 300
North American infants, but is usually of no permanent functional significance.
A short frenulum usually stretches with time, making surgical correction of the
anomaly unnecessary.


FIGURE 9–25 An infant with ankyloglossia (tongue-tie). Note the short
frenulum, which extends to the tip of the tongue. Ankyloglossia interferes with
protrusion of the tongue and may make breast-feeding difficult.
(Courtesy of Dr. Evelyn Jain, Lakeview Breastfeeding Clinic, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.)
Macroglossia
An excessively large tongue is not common. It results from generalized
hypertrophy of the developing tongue, usually resulting from lymphangioma (a
lymph tumor) or muscular hypertrophy. Macroglossia is often seen in individuals
with Down syndrome.
Microglossia
An abnormally small tongue is extremely rare and is usually associated with
micrognathia (underdeveloped mandible and recession of the chin) and limb
defects (Hanhart syndrome).
Bifid or Cleft Tongue (Glossoschisis)
Incomplete fusion of the lateral lingual swellings results in a deep midline
groove in the tongue; usually this cleft does not extend to the tip of the tongue.
This is a very uncommon anomaly.

Development of Salivary Glands
During the sixth and seventh weeks, the salivary glands, under the influence of
the Notch signaling pathway, begin as solid epithelial buds from the primordial
oral cavity (Fig. 9-7C). The club-shaped ends of these epithelial buds grow into
the underlying mesenchyme. The connective tissue in the glands is derived from
neural crest cells. All parenchymal (secretory) tissue arises by proliferation of
the oral epithelium.
The parotid glands are the first to appear (early in the sixth week). They
develop from buds that arise from the oral ectodermal lining near the angles of
the stomodeum. Elongation of the jaws causes lengthening of the parotid duct,
with the gland remaining close to its site of origin. Later the elongated buds
canalize—develop lumina (canals)—and become ducts by approximately 10
weeks. The rounded ends of the cords differentiate into acini (grape-shaped
structures). Secretions commence at 18 weeks. The capsule and connective
tissue develop from the surrounding mesenchyme.
The submandibular glands appear late in the sixth week. They develop from
endodermal buds in the floor of the stomodeum. Solid cellular processes grow
posteriorly, lateral to the developing tongue. Later they branch and differentiate.
Acini begin to form at 12 weeks and secretory activity begins at 16 weeks.
Growth of the submandibular glands continues after birth with the formation of
mucous acini. Lateral to the tongue, a linear groove forms that soon closes over
to form the submandibular duct.
The sublingual glands appear in the eighth week, approximately 2 weeks later
than the other salivary glands (Fig. 9-7C). They develop from multiple
endodermal epithelial buds in the paralingual sulcus. These buds branch and
canalize to form 10 to 12 ducts that open independently into the floor of the
mouth.

 Development of Face
The facial primordia appear early in the fourth week around the stomodeum—
the primordium of the mouth (Fig. 9-26A and B). Facial development depends on
the inductive influence of the prosencephalic and rhombencephalic organizing
centers. The prosencephalic organizing center includes prechordal mesoderm
located in the midline rostral to the notochord and overlying the presumptive
prosencephalic neural plate (see Chapter 17). The midbrain-hindbrain
(rhombencephalon) boundary is a signaling center that directs the spatial
organization of the caudal midbrain and the rostral hindbrain structures.

 

FIGURE 9–26 Diagrams illustrating progressive stages in the development of
the human face.
The five facial primordia that appear as prominences around the stomodeum
(Fig. 9-26A) follow:

• A frontonasal prominence
• Paired maxillary prominences
• Paired mandibular prominences
The maxillary and mandibular prominences are derivatives of the first pair of
pharyngeal arches. The prominences are produced mainly by the expansion of
neural crest populations that originate from the mesencephalic and rostral
rhombencephalic neural folds during the fourth week. These cells are the major
source of connective tissue components, including cartilage, bone, and ligaments
in the facial and oral regions. The frontonasal prominence (FNP) surrounds the
ventrolateral part of the forebrain, which gives rise to the optic vesicles that
form the eyes (Fig. 9-26C). The frontal part of the FNP forms the forehead; the
nasal part forms the rostral boundary of the stomodeum and nose. The maxillary
prominences form the lateral boundaries of the stomodeum and the
mandibular prominences constitute the caudal boundary of the stomodeum
(Fig. 9-27).
FIGURE 9–27 Scanning electron micrograph of a ventral view of a Carnegie
stage 14 embryo (30–32 days).

(Courtesy of the late Professor Emeritus Dr. K.V. Hinrichsen, Medizinische
Fakultät, Institut für Anatomie, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.)
The facial prominences are active centers of growth in the underlying
mesenchyme. This embryonic connective tissue is continuous from one
prominence to the other. Facial development occurs mainly between the fourth
and eighth weeks (Fig. 9-26A to G). By the end of the embryonic period, the face
has an unquestionably human appearance. Facial proportions develop during the
fetal period (Fig. 9-26H and I). The lower jaw and lower lip are the first parts of
the face to form. They result from merging of the medial ends of the mandibular
prominences in the median plane.
By the end of the fourth week, bilateral oval thickenings of the surface ectoderm
—nasal placodes—the primordia of the nasal epithelium, have developed on the
inferolateral parts of the FNP (Figs. 9-28 and 9-29A and B). Initially these
placodes are convex, but later they are stretched to produce a flat depression in
each placode. Mesenchyme in the margins of the placodes proliferates,
producing horseshoe-shaped elevations—the medial and lateral nasal
prominences. As a result, the nasal placodes lie in depressions—nasal pits (Fig.
9-29C and D). These pits are the primordia of the anterior nares (nostrils) and
nasal cavities (Fig. 9-29E) while lateral nasal prominences form the alae (sides)
of the nose.


FIGURE 9–28 Scanning electron micrograph of a ventral view of a human
embryo of approximately 33 days (Carnegie stage 15, crown–rump length
8 mm). Observe the prominent frontonasal process (FNP) surrounding the
telencephalon (forebrain). Also observe the nasal pits (NP) located in the
ventrolateral regions of the frontonasal prominence. Medial and lateral nasal
prominences surround these pits. The maxillary prominences (MXP) form the
lateral boundaries of the stomodeum. The fusing mandibular prominences
(MDP) are located just caudal to the stomodeum. The second pharyngeal arch
(BA2) is clearly visible and shows overhanging margins (opercula). The third
pharyngeal arch (BA3) is also clearly visible.
(From Hinrichsen K: The early development of morphology and patterns of the
face in the human embryo. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 98:1, 1985.)

FIGURE 9–29 Progressive stages in the development of a human nasal sac
(primordial nasal cavity). A, Ventral view of embryo of approximately 28 days.
B to E, Transverse sections through the left side of the developing nasal sac.
Proliferation of mesenchyme in the maxillary prominences causes them to

enlarge and grow medially toward each other and the nasal prominences (Figs.
9-26D to G, 9-27, and 9-28). This proliferation-driven expansion results in
movement of the medial nasal prominences toward the median plane and each
other. Each lateral nasal prominence is separated from the maxillary prominence
by a cleft called the nasolacrimal groove (Figs. 9-26C and D).
By the end of the fifth week, the primordia of the auricles (external part of the
ears) have begun to develop (Figs. 9-26E and 9-30). Six auricular hillocks
(three mesenchymal swellings on each side) form around the first pharyngeal
groove, the primordia of the auricle, and the external acoustic meatus,
respectively. Initially the external ears are located in the neck region (Fig. 9-31);
however, as the mandible develops, they are located on the side of the head at
the level of the eyes (Fig. 9-26H).


FIGURE 9–30 Scanning electron micrograph of the craniofacial region of a
human embryo of approximately 41 days (Carnegie stage 16, crown–rump
length 10.8 mm) viewed obliquely. The maxillary prominence (MXP) appears
puffed up laterally and wedged between the lateral (LNP) and medial (MNP)
nasal prominences surrounding the nasal pit (NP). The auricular hillocks (AH)
can be seen on both sides of the pharyngeal groove between the first and second
arches, which will form the external acoustic meatus (EAM). MDP, Mandibular
prominence; ST, stomodeum.
(From Hinrichsen K: The early development of morphology and patterns of the
face in the human embryo. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 98:1, 1985.)
FIGURE 9–31 Ventral view of the face of an embryo at Carnegie stage 22,
approximately 54 days. Observe that the eyes are widely separated and the ears
are low-set at this stage.
(From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development of
the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas.
Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, National

Institutes of Health, 1977.)
By the end of the sixth week, each maxillary prominence has begun to merge
with the lateral nasal prominence along the line of the nasolacrimal groove (Figs.
9-32 and 9-33). This establishes continuity between the side of the nose, formed
by the lateral nasal prominence, and the cheek region formed by the maxillary
prominence.


FIGURE 9–32 Scanning electron micrograph of the right nasal region of a
human embryo of approximately 41 days (Carnegie stage 17, crown–rump
length 10.8 mm) showing the maxillary prominence (MXP) fusing with the
medial nasal prominence (MNP). Observe the large nasal pit (NP). Epithelial
bridges can be seen between these prominences. Observe the furrow
representing the nasolacrimal groove between the MXP and the lateral nasal
prominence (LNP).
(From Hinrichsen K: The early development of morphology and patterns of the
face in the human embryo. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 98:1, 1985.)

FIGURE 9–33 Early development of the maxilla, palate, and upper lip. A, Facial
view of a 5-week embryo. B and C, Sketches of horizontal sections at the levels
shown in A. The arrows in C indicate subsequent growth of the maxillary and
medial nasal prominences toward the median plane and merging of the
prominences with each other. D to F, Similar sections of older embryos
illustrating merging of the medial nasal prominences with each other and the

maxillary prominences to form the upper lip. Recent studies suggest that the
upper lip is formed entirely from the maxillary prominences.
The nasolacrimal duct develops from a rod-like thickening of ectoderm in the
floor of the nasolacrimal groove. This thickening gives rise to a solid epithelial
cord that separates from the ectoderm and sinks into the mesenchyme. Later, as a
result of apoptosis (programmed cell death), this epithelial cord canalizes to
form a duct. The superior end of this duct expands to form the lacrimal sac (see
Chapter 18). By the late fetal period, the nasolacrimal duct drains into the
inferior meatus in the lateral wall of the nasal cavity. The duct becomes
completely patent after birth.
Between the seventh and 10th weeks, the medial nasal prominences merge with
each other and with the maxillary and lateral nasal prominences (Fig. 9-26G and
H). Merging of these prominences requires disintegration of their contacting
surface epithelia. This results in intermingling of the underlying mesenchymal
cells. Merging of the medial nasal and maxillary prominences results in
continuity of the upper jaw and lip and separation of the nasal pits from the
stomodeum.
As the medial nasal prominences merge, they form an intermaxillary segment
(Figs. 9-26H and 9-33E and F). This segment gives rise to the:
• Middle part (philtrum) of the upper lip
• Premaxillary part of the maxilla and its associated gingiva (gum)
• Primary palate
Clinical and embryologic studies indicate that the upper lip is formed entirely
from the maxillary prominences. The lower parts of the medial nasal
prominences appear to have become deeply positioned and covered by medial
extensions of the maxillary prominences to form the philtrum.
In addition to connective tissue and muscular derivatives, various bones are
derived from mesenchyme in the facial prominences. Until the end of the sixth
week, the primordial jaws are composed of masses of mesenchymal tissue. The
lips and gingivae begin to develop when a linear thickening of the ectoderm, the
labiogingival lamina, grows into the underlying mesenchyme (see Fig. 9-37B).
Gradually, most of the lamina degenerates, leaving a labiogingival groove
between the lips and the gingivae (see Fig. 9-37H). A small area of the

labiogingival lamina persists in the median plane to form the frenulum of the
upper lip, which attaches the lip to the gingiva.
Further development of the face occurs slowly during the fetal period and results
mainly from changes in the proportion and relative positions of the facial
components. During the early fetal period, the nose is flat and the mandible is
underdeveloped (Fig. 9-26H); they obtain their characteristic form as facial
development is completed (Fig. 9-26I). As the brain enlarges, the cranial cavity
expands bilaterally. This causes the orbits, which were oriented laterally, to
assume their forward-facing orientation. The opening of the external acoustic
meatus (auditory canal) appears to elevate, but in reality remains stationary.
Rather, it is the elongation of the lower jaw that creates this impression.
The smallness of the face prenatally results from the:
• Rudimentary upper and lower jaws
• Unerupted deciduous teeth
• Small size of the nasal cavities and maxillary sinuses

Summary of Facial Development
• The frontal nasal prominence forms the forehead and dorsum and apex of the
nose (Fig. 9-26).
• The lateral nasal prominences form the alae (sides) of the nose.
• The medial nasal prominences form the nasal septum, ethmoid bone, and
cribriform plate.
• The maxillary prominences form the upper cheek regions and the upper lip.
• The mandibular prominences give rise to the chin, lower lip, and lower cheek
regions.
Atresia of Nasolacrimal Duct Part of the nasolacrimal duct occasionally fails to
canalize, resulting in congenital atresia of the nasolacrimal duct. Obstruction of
this duct with clinical symptoms occurs in approximately 6% of neonates.
Congenital Auricular Sinuses and Cysts Small auricular sinuses and cysts are
usually located in a triangular area of skin anterior to the auricle of the external
ear (Fig. 9-10F ); however, they may occur in other sites around the auricle or in
the lobule (earlobe). Although some sinuses and cysts are remnants of the first
pharyngeal groove, others represent ectodermal folds sequestered during
formation of the auricle from six auricular hillocks (nodular masses of
mesenchyme from the first and second pharyngeal arches that coalesce to form
the auricle). These sinuses and cysts are classified as minor anomalies that are of
no serious medical consequence.

 Development of Nasal Cavities
As the face develops, the nasal placodes become depressed, forming nasal pits
(Figs. 9-28, 9-29, and 9-32). Proliferation of the surrounding mesenchyme forms
the medial and lateral nasal prominences, which results in deepening of the nasal
pits and formation of primordial nasal sacs. Each nasal sac grows dorsally,
ventral to the developing forebrain (Fig. 9-34A). At first, the sacs are separated
from the oral cavity by the oronasal membrane. This membrane ruptures by the
end of the sixth week, bringing the nasal and oral cavities into communication
(Fig. 9-34C). Temporary epithelial plugs are formed in the nasal cavities from
proliferation of the cells lining them. Between 13 to 15 weeks, the nasal plugs
disappear.
FIGURE 9–34 Sagittal sections of the head showing development of the nasal
cavities. The nasal septum has been removed. A, 5 weeks. B, 6 weeks, showing
breakdown of the oronasal membrane. C, 7 weeks, showing the nasal cavity
communicating with the oral cavity and development of the olfactory
epithelium. D, 12 weeks, showing the palate and the lateral wall of the nasal
cavity.

The regions of continuity between the nasal and oral cavities are the primordial
choanae (the right or left openings from the nasal cavity into the nasal pharynx).
After the secondary palate develops, the choanae are located at the junction of
the nasal cavity and pharynx (Figs. 9-34D and Fig. 9-37). While these changes
are occurring, the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae develop as
elevations of the lateral walls of the nasal cavities (Fig. 9-34D). Concurrently,
the ectodermal epithelium in the roof of each nasal cavity becomes specialized to
form the olfactory epithelium. Some epithelial cells differentiate into olfactory
receptor cells (neurons). The axons of these cells constitute the olfactory
nerves, which grow into the olfactory bulbs of the brain (Fig. 9-34C and D).
Most of the upper lip, maxilla, and secondary palate form from the maxillary
prominences (Fig. 9-26H). These prominences merge laterally with the
mandibular prominences. The primordial lips and cheeks are invaded by
mesenchyme from the second pair of pharyngeal arches, which differentiates
into the facial muscles (Fig. 9-6, Table 9-1). These muscles of facial expression
are supplied by the facial nerve (CN VII), the nerve of the second pharyngeal
arch. The mesenchyme in the first pair of arches differentiates into the muscles
of mastication (chewing) and a few others, all of which are innervated by the
trigeminal nerves (CN V), which supply the first pair of pharyngeal arches.

Paranasal Sinuses
Some paranasal sinuses, such as the maxillary sinuses, begin to develop during
late fetal life; the remainder of them develop after birth. They form from
diverticula (outgrowths) of the walls of the nasal cavities and become pneumatic
(air-filled) extensions of the nasal cavities in the adjacent bones, such as the
maxillary sinuses in the maxillae and the frontal sinuses in the frontal bones.
The original openings of the diverticula persist as the orifices of the adult
sinuses.
The first appearance of the vomeronasal primordia is in the form of bilateral
epithelial thickenings on the nasal septum. Further invagination of the primordia
and their breaking away from the nasal septal epithelium gives rise to a tubular
vomeronasal organ (VNO) between days 37 and 43. This chemosensory
structure, which ends blindly posteriorly, reaches its greatest development
between 12 and 14 weeks. Later, a gradual replacement of the receptor
population with patchy ciliated cells occurs. The VNO is consistently present in
the form of a bilateral duct-like structure on the nasal septum, superior to the
paraseptal cartilage (Fig. 9-35). The tubular human VNO with its minute anterior
opening are true homologs of the VNO in other mammals, reptiles, and
amphibians.

FIGURE 9–35 Photomicrograph of a frontal section through the developing oral
cavity and nasal regions of a 22-mm human embryo of approximately 54 days.
Observe the bilateral, tubular vomeronasal organ.
(Courtesy of Dr. Kunwar Bhatnagar, Department of Anatomical Sciences and
Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY.)
Postnatal Development of Paranasal Sinuses
Most of the paranasal sinuses are rudimentary or absent in neonates. The
maxillary sinuses are small at birth. These sinuses grow slowly until puberty
and are not fully developed until all the permanent teeth have erupted in early
adulthood.
No frontal or sphenoidal sinuses are present at birth. The ethmoidal cells are
small before the age of 2 years and do not begin to grow rapidly until 6 to 8
years of age. At approximately 2 years of age, the two most anterior ethmoidal
cells grow into the frontal bone, forming a frontal sinus on each side. Usually the
frontal sinuses are visible in radiographs by the seventh year.
The two most posterior ethmoidal cells grow into the sphenoid bone at
approximately 2 years of age, forming two sphenoidal sinuses. Growth of the
paranasal sinuses is important in altering the size and shape of the face during
infancy and childhood and in adding resonance to the voice during adolescence.

 Development of Palate
Palatogenesis begins in the sixth week; however, development of the palate is
not completed until the 12th week. The critical period of palate development is
from the end of the sixth week until the beginning of the ninth week. The palate
develops in two stages: development of a primary palate and development of a
secondary palate.

Primary Palate
Early in the sixth week, the primary palate—median process—begins to
develop (Figs. 9-33F and 9-34). Initially this segment, formed by merging of the
medial nasal prominences, is a wedge-shaped mass of mesenchyme between the
internal surfaces of the maxillary prominences of the developing maxillae. The
primary palate forms the anterior/midline aspect of the maxilla, the premaxillary
part of the maxilla (Fig. 9-36). It represents only a small part of the adult hard
palate (i.e., anterior to the incisive fossa).
FIGURE 9–36 A, Sagittal section of the head of a 20-week fetus illustrating the
location of the palate. B, The bony palate and alveolar arch of a young adult. The
suture between the premaxillary part of the maxilla and the fused palatal
processes of the maxillae is usually visible in crania (skulls) of young persons. It
is not visible in the hard palates of most dried crania because they are usually
from old adults.

Secondary Palate
The secondary palate (definitive palate) is the primordium of the hard and soft
parts of the palate (Fig. 9-36). It begins to develop early in the sixth week from
two mesenchymal projections that extend from the internal aspects of the
maxillary prominences. Initially these structures—the lateral palatine processes
(palatal shelves)—project inferomedially on each side of the tongue (Figs. 9-37B
and 9-38A and B). As the jaws elongate, they pull the tongue away from its root,
and, as a result, it is brought lower in the mouth.

FIGURE 9–37 A, Sagittal section of the embryonic head at the end of the sixth
week showing the median palatal process. B, D, F, and H, Roof of the mouth
from the sixth to 12th weeks illustrating the development of the palate. The
broken lines in D and F indicate sites of fusion of the palatine processes. The
arrows indicate medial and posterior growth of the lateral palatine processes. C,

E, and G, Frontal sections of the head illustrating fusion of the lateral palatine
processes with each other and the nasal septum and separation of the nasal and
oral cavities.
FIGURE 9–38 Frontal sections of human embryonic heads showing

development of the lateral palatal processes (P), nasal septum (NS), and tongue
(T) during the eighth week. A, Embryo with a crown–rump length (CRL) of
24 mm. This section shows early development of the palatine processes. B,
Embryo with a CRL of 27 mm. This section shows the palate just before palatine
process elevation. C, Embryo with a CRL of 29 mm (near the end of the eighth
week). The palatine processes are elevated and fused.
(From Sandham A: Embryonic facial vertical dimension and its relationship to
palatal shelf elevation. Early Hum Dev 12:241, 1985.)
During the seventh and eighth weeks, the lateral palatine processes assume a
horizontal position above the tongue (Figs. 9-37E to H and 9-38C). This change
in orientation occurs by a flowing process facilitated in part by the release of
hyaluronic acid by the mesenchyme of the palatine processes.
Bone gradually develops in the primary palate, forming the premaxillary part of
the maxilla, which lodges the incisor teeth (Fig. 9-36B). Concurrently, bone
extends from the maxillae and palatine bones into the lateral palatine processes
to form the hard palate (Fig. 9-37E and G). The posterior parts of these
processes do not become ossified. They extend posteriorly beyond the nasal
septum and fuse to form the soft palate, including its soft conical projection—
the uvula (Fig. 9-37D, F, and H). The median palatine raphe indicates the line of
fusion of the palatine processes.
A small nasopalatine canal persists in the median plane of the palate between
the anterior part of the maxilla and the palatine processes of the maxillae. This
canal is represented in the adult hard palate by the incisive fossa (Fig. 9-36B),
which is the common opening for the small right and left incisive canals. An
irregular suture runs on each side from the incisive fossa to the alveolar process
of the maxilla, between the lateral incisor and canine teeth on each side (Fig. 9-
36B). It is visible in the anterior region of the palates of young persons. This
suture indicates where the embryonic primary and secondary palates fused.
The nasal septum develops as a downgrowth from internal parts of the merged
medial nasal prominences (Figs. 9-37 and 9-38). The fusion between the nasal
septum and the palatine processes begins anteriorly during the ninth week and is
completed posteriorly by the 12th week, superior to the primordium of the hard
palate.

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
Clefts of the lip and palate are common craniofacial anomalies. The defects are
usually classified according to developmental criteria, with the incisive fossa as
a reference landmark. These clefts are especially conspicuous because they
result in an abnormal facial appearance and defective speech. There are two
major groups of cleft lip and cleft palate (Figs. 9-39 to 9-41):
• Anterior cleft anomalies include cleft lip, with or without cleft of the alveolar
part of the maxilla. A complete anterior cleft anomaly is one in which the cleft
extends through the lip and alveolar part of the maxilla to the incisive fossa,
separating the anterior and posterior parts of the palate (Fig. 9-40E and F ).
Anterior cleft anomalies result from a deficiency of mesenchyme in the
maxillary prominence(s) and the median palatine process (Fig. 9-33E ).
• Posterior cleft anomalies include clefts of the secondary palate that extend
through the soft and hard regions of the palate to the incisive fossa, separating
the anterior and posterior parts of the palate (Fig. 9-40G and H ). Posterior cleft
anomalies result from defective development of the secondary palate and growth
distortions of the lateral palatine processes, which prevent their fusion. Other
factors such as the width of the stomodeum, mobility of the lateral palatine
processes (palatal shelves), and altered focal degeneration sites of the palatal
epithelium may also contribute to these birth defects.


FIGURE 9–39 Infant with unilateral cleft lip and cleft palate. Clefts of the lip,
with or without cleft palate, occur approximately once in 1000 births; most
affected infants are males.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of
Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)

FIGURE 9–40 Various types of cleft lip and palate. A, Normal lip and palate. B,
Cleft uvula. C, Unilateral cleft of the secondary (posterior) palate. D, Bilateral
cleft of the posterior part of the palate. E, Complete unilateral cleft of the lip and
alveolar process of the maxilla with a unilateral cleft of the primary (anterior)
palate. F, Complete bilateral cleft of the lip and alveolar processes of the

maxillae with bilateral cleft of the anterior part of the palate. G, Complete
bilateral cleft of the lip and alveolar processes of the maxillae with bilateral cleft
of the anterior part of the palate and unilateral cleft of the posterior part of the
palate. H, Complete bilateral cleft of the lip and alveolar processes of the
maxillae with complete bilateral cleft of the anterior and posterior palate.
 
FIGURE 9–41 Congenital anomalies of the lip and palate. A, Infant with a left
unilateral cleft lip and cleft palate. B, Infant with bilateral cleft lip and cleft
palate.
(Courtesy of Dr. Barry H. Grayson and Dr. Bruno L. Vendittelli, New York
University Medical Center, Institute of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery, New York,
NY.)
A cleft lip, with or without a cleft palate, occurs approximately once in 1000
births; however, the frequency varies widely among ethnic groups; 60% to 80%

of affected infants are males. The clefts vary from incomplete cleft lip to ones
that extend into nose and through the alveolar part of the maxilla (Figs. 9-39 and
9-41A and B). Cleft lip may be unilateral or bilateral.
A unilateral cleft lip (Figs. 9-39, 9-40E and F, and 9-41A) results from failure
of the maxillary prominence on the affected side to unite with the merged medial
nasal prominences. This is the consequence of failure of the mesenchymal
masses to merge and the mesenchyme to proliferate and smooth out the
overlying epithelium. This results in a persistent labial groove (Fig. 9-42D). In
addition, the epithelium in the labial groove becomes stretched and the tissues in
the floor of the groove break down. As a result, the lip is divided into medial and
lateral parts (see Fig. 9-42G and H ). Sometimes a bridge of tissue, called a
Simonart band, joins the parts of the incomplete unilateral cleft lip.

FIGURE 9–42 Drawings illustrating the embryologic basis of complete
unilateral cleft lip. A, A 5-week embryo. B, Horizontal section through the head
illustrating the grooves between the maxillary prominences and the merging
medial nasal prominences. C, A 6-week embryo showing a persistent labial
groove on the left side. D, Horizontal section through the head showing the

groove gradually filling in on the right side after proliferation of mesenchyme
(arrows). E, A 7-week embryo. F, Horizontal section through the head showing
that the epithelium on the right has almost been pushed out of the groove
between the maxillary and medial nasal prominences. G, A 10-week fetus with a
complete unilateral cleft lip. H, Horizontal section through the head after
stretching of the epithelium and breakdown of the tissues in the floor of the
persistent labial groove on the left side, forming a complete unilateral cleft lip.
A bilateral cleft lip (Figs. 9-41B and 9-43C and D) results from failure of the
mesenchymal masses in both maxillary prominences to meet and unite with the
merged medial nasal prominences. The epithelium in both labial grooves
becomes stretched and breaks down (Fig. 9-42H ). In bilateral cases, the defects
may be dissimilar, with varying degrees of defect on each side. When there is a
complete bilateral cleft of the lip and alveolar part of the maxilla, the median
palatal process hangs free and projects anteriorly (Fig. 9-41B). These defects are
especially deforming because of the loss of continuity of the orbicularis oris
muscle (Fig. 9-6B), which closes the mouth and purses the lips.

FIGURE 9–43 Congenital anomalies of the lip and palate. A, Newborn male
infant with unilateral complete cleft lip and cleft palate. B, Intraoral photograph
(taken with mirror) showing left unilateral complete cleft of the primary and
secondary parts of palate. C, Newborn female infant with bilateral complete cleft
lip and cleft palate. D, Intraoral photograph showing bilateral complete cleft
palate. Note maxillary protrusion and natal tooth at gingival apex in each lesser
segment.
(Courtesy of Dr. John B. Mulliken, Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.)
A median cleft lip is a rare defect that results from a mesenchymal deficiency.
This defect causes partial or complete failure of the medial nasal prominences to
merge and form the median palatal process. A median cleft lip is a characteristic
feature of the Mohr syndrome, which is transmitted as an autosomal recessive
trait.

A median cleft of the lower lip is also very rare and results from failure of the
mesenchymal masses in the mandibular prominences to merge completely and
smooth out the embryonic cleft between them (Fig. 9-26A).
A cleft palate, with or without a cleft lip, occurs approximately once in 2500
births and is more common in females than in males. The cleft may involve only
the uvula; a cleft uvula has a fishtail appearance (Fig. 9-40B), or the cleft may
extend through the soft and hard regions of the palate (Figs. 9-40C and D and 9-
43). In severe cases associated with a cleft lip, the cleft in the palate extends
through the alveolar part of the maxilla and lips on both sides (Figs. 9-40G and
H and 9-41B).
A complete cleft palate indicates the maximum degree of clefting of any
particular type; for example, a complete cleft of the posterior palate is a defect in
which the cleft extends through the soft palate and anteriorly to the incisive
fossa. The landmark for distinguishing anterior from posterior cleft anomalies is
the incisive fossa.
Unilateral and bilateral clefts of the palate are classified into three groups:
• Clefts of the primary or anterior palate (i.e., clefts anterior to the incisive
fossa) result from failure of mesenchymal masses in the lateral palatal processes
to meet and fuse with the mesenchyme in the primary palate (Fig. 9-40E and F ).
• Clefts of the secondary or posterior palate (i.e., clefts posterior to the incisive
fossa) result from failure of mesenchymal masses in the lateral palatine
processes to meet and fuse with each other and the nasal septum (Fig. 9-40C and
D ).
• Clefts of the primary and secondary parts of the palate (i.e., clefts of the
anterior and posterior palates) result from failure of the mesenchymal masses in
the lateral palatine processes to meet and fuse with mesenchyme in the primary
palate, with each other, and the nasal septum (Fig. 9-40G and H ).
Most clefts of the lip and palate result from multiple factors (multifactorial
inheritance; see Chapter 20), including genetic and nongenetic, each causing a
minor developmental disturbance. Several studies show that the interferon
regulatory factor-6 (IRF-6) gene is involved in the formation of isolated clefts.
Some clefts of the lip and/or palate appear as part of syndromes determined by
single mutant genes. Other clefts are parts of chromosomal syndromes,

especially trisomy 13 (see Chapter 20). A few cases of cleft lip and/or palate
appear to have been caused by teratogenic agents (e.g., anticonvulsant drugs).
Studies of twins indicate that genetic factors are of more importance in a cleft
lip, with or without a cleft palate, than in a cleft palate alone.
A sibling of a child with a cleft palate has an elevated risk of having a cleft
palate, but no increased risk of having a cleft lip. A cleft of the lip and alveolar
process of the maxilla that continues through the palate is usually transmitted
through a male sex-linked gene. When neither parent is affected, the recurrence
risk in subsequent siblings (brother or sister) is approximately 4%.
Other Facial Defects
Congenital microstomia (small mouth) results from excessive merging of the
mesenchymal masses in the maxillary and mandibular prominences of the first
pharyngeal arch. In severe cases, the defect may be associated with
underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the mandible. A single nostril results when
only one nasal placode forms. A bifid nose results when the medial nasal
prominences do not merge completely; the nostrils are widely separated, and the
nasal bridge is bifid. In mild forms of bifid nose, there is a groove in the tip of
the nose.
By the beginning of the second trimester (Fig. 9-26), features of the fetal face
can be identified sonographically. Using this imaging technique (Fig. 9-44),
facial defects such as a cleft lip are readily recognizable.
FIGURE 9–44 A, Three-dimensional ultrasound surface rendering of a fetus
with unilateral cleft lip. B, Coronal sonogram of a fetal mouth with a cleft lip
extending into the left nostril (+). Coronal plane. C, Coronal sonogram of a fetus
showing a bilateral cleft lip (arrows), lower lip (L), and chin (C). D, Sagittal

magnetic resonance image of a fetus showing the absence of the middle part of
the hard palate. Note the fluid above the tongue (t) without the intervening
palate.
(A and B, Courtesy of Dr. G.J. Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Women’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada; C and D, Courtesy of Deborah Levine, M.D., Director of
Obstetric and Gynecologic Ultrasound, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA.)
Facial Clefts
Various types of facial clefts occur, but all are rare. Severe clefts are usually
associated with gross defects of the head. Oblique facial clefts are often
bilateral and extend from the upper lip to the medial margin of the orbit. When
this occurs, the nasolacrimal ducts are open grooves (persistent nasolacrimal
grooves) (Fig. 9-45). Oblique facial clefts associated with a cleft lip result from
failure of the mesenchymal masses in the maxillary prominences to merge with
the lateral and medial nasal prominences. Lateral or transverse facial clefts run
from the mouth toward the ear. Bilateral clefts result in a very large mouth, a
condition called macrostomia. In severe cases, the clefts in the cheeks extend
almost to the ears.

FIGURE 9–45 Photographs of a child with an oblique facial cleft. Note the
persistent nasolacrimal cleft. A, Before surgical correction. B, After surgical
correction.
(With permission from Columbia University Medical Center. Courtesy of Dr. J.A.
Ascherman, Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY. © Pat Farrell.)

Summary of Pharyngeal Apparatus,
Face, and Neck
• The primordial pharynx is bounded laterally by pharyngeal arches. Each arch
consists of a core of mesenchyme covered externally by ectoderm and internally
by endoderm. The original mesenchyme of each arch is derived from mesoderm;
later, neural crest cells migrate into the arches and are the major source of their
connective tissue components, including cartilage, bone, and ligaments in the
oral and facial regions. Each pharyngeal arch contains an artery, a cartilage rod,
a nerve, and a muscular component.
• Externally the pharyngeal arches are separated by pharyngeal grooves.
Internally the arches are separated by evaginations of the pharynx—pharyngeal
pouches. Where the ectoderm of a groove contacts the endoderm of a pouch,
pharyngeal membranes are formed. The adult derivatives of the various
pharyngeal arch components are summarized in Table 9-1, and the derivatives of
the pouches are illustrated in Figure 9-8.
• The pharyngeal grooves disappear except for the first pair, which persists as
the external acoustic meatus. The pharyngeal membranes also disappear, except
for the first pair, which becomes the tympanic membranes. The first pharyngeal
pouch gives rise to the tympanic cavity, mastoid antrum, and pharyngotympanic
tube. The second pharyngeal pouch is associated with the development of the
palatine tonsil.
• The thymus is derived from the third pair of pharyngeal pouches, and the
parathyroid glands are formed from the third and fourth pairs of pharyngeal
pouches.
• The thyroid gland develops from a downgrowth from the floor of the
primordial pharynx in the region where the tongue develops. The parafollicular
cells (C cells) in the thyroid gland are derived from the ultimopharyngeal
bodies, which are derived mainly from the fourth pair of pharyngeal pouches.
• Cervical cysts, sinuses, and fistulas may develop from parts of the second
pharyngeal groove, the cervical sinus, or the second pharyngeal pouch that fail
to obliterate.
• An ectopic thyroid gland results when the thyroid gland fails to descend
completely from its site of origin in the tongue. The thyroglossal duct may
persist or remnants of it may give rise to thyroglossal duct cysts and ectopic

thyroid tissue masses. Infected cysts may perforate the skin and form
thyroglossal duct sinuses that open anteriorly in the median plane of the neck.
• Cleft lip is a common birth defect. Although frequently associated with cleft
palate, cleft lip and cleft palate are etiologically distinct anomalies that involve
different developmental processes occurring at different times. Cleft lip results
from failure of mesenchymal masses in the medial nasal and maxillary
prominences to merge, whereas cleft palate results from failure of mesenchymal
masses in the palatal processes to meet and fuse. Most cases of cleft lip, with or
without cleft palate, are caused by a combination of genetic and environmental
factors (multifactorial inheritance; see Chapter 20).

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 9–1
The mother of a 2-year-old boy consulted her pediatrician about an intermittent
discharge of mucoid material from a small opening in the side of the boy’s neck.
There was also extensive redness and swelling in the inferior third of the neck,
just anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
• What is the most likely diagnosis?
• What is the probable embryologic basis of this intermittent mucoid discharge?
• Discuss the etiology (cause) of this birth defect.

Case 9–2
During a subtotal thyroidectomy, a surgeon could locate only one inferior
parathyroid gland.
• Where might the other one be located?
• What is the embryologic basis for the ectopic location of this gland?

Case 9–3
A young woman consulted her physician about a swelling in the anterior part of
her neck, just inferior to the hyoid bone.
• What kind of a cyst might be present?
• Are they always in the median plane?
• Discuss the embryologic basis of these cysts.
• With what might such a swelling be confused?

Case 9–4
A male infant was born with a unilateral cleft lip extending into his nose and
through the alveolar process of his maxilla.
• What is the embryologic basis of this birth defect?
• Neither parent had a cleft lip or cleft palate. Are genetic factors likely
involved?
• Are these birth defects more common in males?
• What is the chance that the next child will have a cleft lip?

Case 9–5
A mother with epilepsy who was treated with an anticonvulsant drug during
pregnancy gave birth to a child with a cleft lip and palate.
• Is there any evidence indicating that these drugs increase the incidence of these
birth defects?
• Discuss the respective etiologies of these two birth defects.
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Abbott BD. The etiology of cleft palate: a 50-year search for mechanistic and
molecular understanding. Birth Defects Res (Part B). 2010;89:266.
Arnold JS, Werling U, Braunstein EM, et al. Inactivation of Tbx1 in the
pharyngeal endoderm results in 22q11DS malformations. Development.
2006;133:977.
Berkovitz BKB, Holland GR, Moxham B. Oral Anatomy, Histology, and
Embryology, ed 4. Edinburgh and London: Elsevier/Mosby; 2009.
Bothe I, Tenin G, Oseni A, et al. Dynamic control of head mesoderm patterning.
Development. 2011;138:2807.
Francis-West PH, Robson L, Evans DJR. Craniofacial development: The tissue
and molecular interactions that control development of the head. Adv Anat
Embryol Cell Biol. 2003;169:1-138.
Gartner LP, Hiatt JL. Color Textbook of Histology, ed 3. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2007.
Gitton Y, Heude E, Vieux-Rochas M, et al. Evolving maps in craniofacial
development. Sem Cell Develop Biol. 2010;21:301.
Gorlin RJ, Cohen MMJr, Levin LS. Syndromes of the Head and Neck, ed 3. New
York: Oxford University Press; 1990.

Greene RM, Pisano MM. Palate morphogenesis: current understanding and
future directions. Birth Defects Res C. 2010;90:133.
Gross E, Sichel J-Y. Congenital neck lesions. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86:383.
Hinrichsen K. The early development of morphology and patterns of the face in
the human embryo. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol. 1985;98:1-79.
Hong P, Lago D, Seargeant J, et al. Defining ankyloglossis: a case series of
anterior and posterior tongue ties. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2010;74:1003.
Jirásel JE. An Atlas of Human Prenatal Developmental Mechanics. Anatomy and
Staging. London and New York: Taylor & Francis; 2004.
Jones KL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, ed 6.
Philadelphia: Elsevier/WB Saunders; 2006.
Lale SM, Lele MS, Anderson VM. The thymus in infancy and childhood. Chest
Surg Clin N Am. 2001;11:233.
Minoux M, Rijii FM. Molecular mechanisms of cranial neural crest cell
migration and patterning in craniofacial development. Development.
2010;137:2605.
Moore KL, Dalley AD, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Mueller DT, Callanan VP. Congenital malformations of the oral cavity.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2007;40:141.
Nishimura Y. Embryological study of nasal cavity development in human
embryos with reference to congenital nostril atresia. Acta Anat. 1993;147:140.
Noden DM. Cell movements and control of patterned tissue assembly during
craniofacial development. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1991;11:192.
Noden DM. Vertebrate craniofacial development: novel approaches and new
dilemmas. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1992;2:576.
Noden DM, Trainor PA. Relations and interactions between cranial mesoderm

and neural crest populations. J Anat. 2005;207:575.
Noden DM, Francis-West P. The differentiation and morphogenesis of
craniofacial muscles. Dev Dyn. 2006;235:1194-1218.
Ozolek JA. Selective pathologies of the head and neck in children—a
developmental perspective. Adv Anat Pathol. 2009;16:332.
Passos-Bueno MR, Ornelas CC, Fanganiello RD. Syndromes of the first and
second pharyngeal arches: a review. Am J Med Genet (Part A). 2009;149A:1853.
Pilu G, Segata M, Perola A. Fetal craniofacial and neck anomalies. In Callen
PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2008.
Rice DPC. Craniofacial anomalies: from development to molecular
pathogenesis. Curr Mol Med. 2009;5:699.
Rodriguez-Vázquez JF. Development of the stapes and associated structures in
human embryos. J Anat. 2005;207:165.
Smith TD, Bhatnagar KP. The human vomeronasal organ. Part II: Prenatal
development. J Anat. 2000;197:421.
Sperber GH, Sperber SM, Guttmann GD. Craniofacial Embryogenetics and
Development, ed 2. Beijing: People’s Medical Publishing House/PMPH-Global;
2010.
Tovar JA. The neural crest in pediatric surgery. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42:915.
Wyszynski DF, Sarkozi A, Czeizel AE. Oral clefts with associated anomalies:
Methodological issues. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2006;43:1.
Yatzey KE. Di George syndrome, Tbx1, and retinoic acid signaling come full
circle. Circ Res. 2010;106:630.

Chapter 10 Respiratory System
Respiratory Primordium 199
Development of Larynx 200
Development of Trachea 202
Development of Bronchi and Lungs 204
   Maturation of Lungs 206
Summary of Respiratory System 210
Clinically Oriented Problems 210
The lower respiratory organs (larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs) begin to form
during the fourth week of development.

 Respiratory Primordium
The respiratory system starts as a median outgrowth—the laryngotracheal
groove—that appears in the floor of the caudal end of the primordial pharynx
(Fig. 10-1B and C; see Fig. 10-3A). This primordium of the tracheobronchial
tree develops caudal to the fourth pair of pharyngeal pouches. The endoderm
lining the laryngotracheal groove gives rise to the pulmonary epithelium and
glands of the larynx, trachea, and bronchi. The connective tissue, cartilage, and
smooth muscle in these structures develop from the splanchnic mesoderm
surrounding the foregut (see Fig. 10-4A).

FIGURE 10–1 A, Lateral view of a 4-week embryo illustrating the relationship
of the pharyngeal apparatus to the developing respiratory system. B, Sagittal
section of the cranial half of the embryo. C, Horizontal section of the embryo
illustrating the floor of the primordial pharynx and the location of the
laryngotracheal groove.

By the end of the fourth week, the laryngotracheal groove has evaginated
(protruded) to form a pouch-like laryngotracheal diverticulum (lung bud),
which is located ventral to the caudal part of the foregut (Figs. 10-1B and 10-
2A). As this diverticulum elongates, it is invested with splanchnic mesenchyme
(primordial embryonic connective tissue), and its distal end enlarges to form a
globular respiratory bud; this bud denotes the single bud from which the
respiratory tree originates (Fig. 10-2B).
FIGURE 10–2 Successive stages in the development of the tracheoesophageal
septum during the fourth and fifth weeks. A to C, Lateral views of the caudal
part of the primordial pharynx showing the laryngotracheal diverticulum and
partitioning of the foregut into the esophagus and laryngotracheal tube. D to F,
Transverse sections illustrating formation of the tracheoesophageal septum and
showing how it separates the foregut into the laryngotracheal tube and
esophagus. The arrows indicate cellular changes resulting from growth.
The laryngotracheal diverticulum soon separates from the primordial pharynx;
however, it maintains communication with it through the primordial laryngeal
inlet (Fig. 10-2C). Longitudinal tracheoesophageal folds develop in the
laryngotracheal diverticulum, approach each other, and fuse to form a partition—
the tracheoesophageal septum (Fig. 10-2D and E) by the end of the fifth week.
This septum divides the cranial portion of the foregut into a ventral part, the
laryngotracheal tube (primordium of larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs), and a

dorsal part (primordium of oropharynx and esophagus (Fig. 10-2F). The opening
of the laryngotracheal tube into the pharynx becomes the primordial laryngeal
inlet (Figs. 10-2C and 10-3B to D).
FIGURE 10–3 Successive stages in the development of the larynx. A, At 4
weeks. B, At 5 weeks. C, At 6 weeks. D, At 10 weeks. The epithelium lining of
the larynx is of endodermal origin. The cartilages and muscles of the larynx arise
from mesenchyme in the fourth and sixth pairs of pharyngeal arches. Note that
the laryngeal inlet changes in shape from a slit-like opening to a T-shaped inlet
as the mesenchyme surrounding the developing larynx proliferates.
Expression of the transcription factors NKx2.1 (ventral) and Sox2 (dorsal) are
critical for dorsal-ventral patterning and trachea-esophageal separation.

 Development of Larynx
The epithelial lining of the larynx develops from the endoderm of the cranial end
of the laryngotracheal tube. The cartilages of the larynx develop from those of
the fourth and sixth pairs of pharyngeal arches. The laryngeal cartilages
develop from mesenchyme that is derived from neural crest cells. The
mesenchyme at the cranial end of the laryngotracheal tube proliferates rapidly,
producing paired arytenoid swellings (see Fig. 10-3B). These swellings grow
toward the tongue, converting the slit-like aperture—the primordial glottis—
into a T-shaped laryngeal inlet and reducing the developing laryngeal lumen to
a narrow slit (Fig. 10-3C).
The laryngeal epithelium proliferates rapidly, resulting in temporary occlusion of
the laryngeal lumen. Recanalization of the larynx normally occurs by the 10th
week. The laryngeal ventricles form during this recanalization process. These
recesses are bounded by folds of mucous membrane that become the vocal folds
(cords) and vestibular folds.
The epiglottis develops from the caudal part of the hypopharyngeal eminence, a
prominence produced by proliferation of mesenchyme in the ventral ends of the
third and fourth pharyngeal arches (Fig. 10-3B to D). The rostral part of this
eminence forms the posterior third or pharyngeal part of the tongue (see Chapter
9).
Because the laryngeal muscles develop from myoblasts in the fourth and sixth
pairs of pharyngeal arches, they are innervated by the laryngeal branches of the
vagus nerves (cranial nerve X) that supply these arches (see Table 9-1). Growth
of the larynx and epiglottis is rapid during the first 3 years after birth. By this
time, the epiglottis has reached its adult form.
Laryngeal Atresia
Laryngeal atresia, a rare birth defect, results from failure of recanalization of
the larynx, which produces obstruction of the upper fetal airway—congenital
high airway obstruction syndrome. Distal to the region of atresia (blockage) or
stenosis (narrowing), the airways become dilated, the lungs are enlarged and

filled with fluid; the diaphragm is either flattened or inverted and there is fetal
ascites and/or hydrops (accumulation of serous fluid in the intracellular spaces
causing severe edema). Incomplete atresia (laryngeal web) results from
incomplete recanalization of the larynx during the 10th week. A membranous
web forms at the level of the vocal folds, partially obstructing the airway.
Treatment is by endoscopic dilation of the laryngeal web.

 Development of Trachea
During its separation from the foregut, the laryngotracheal diverticulum forms
the trachea and two lateral outpouchings, the primary bronchial buds (Fig. 10-
2C; see Figs. 10-7A and 10-8). The endodermal lining of the laryngotracheal
tube distal to the larynx differentiates into the epithelium and glands of the
trachea and the pulmonary epithelium. The cartilage, connective tissue, and
muscles of the trachea are derived from the splanchnic mesenchyme surrounding
the laryngotracheal tube (Fig. 10-4).
FIGURE 10–4 Transverse sections through the laryngotracheal tube illustrating
progressive stages in the development of the trachea. A, 4 weeks. B, 10 weeks.
C, 11 weeks (drawing of micrograph in D). Note that endoderm of the tube gives
rise to the epithelium and glands of the trachea and that mesenchyme
surrounding the tube forms the connective tissue, muscle, and cartilage. D,
Photomicrograph of a transverse section of the developing trachea at 12 weeks.
(D, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

Tracheoesophageal Fistula
A fistula (abnormal passage) between the trachea and esophagus occurs once in
3000 to 4500 live births (Figs. 10-5 and 10-6); most affected infants are males.
In more than 85% of cases, the tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is associated
with esophageal atresia. A TEF results from incomplete division of the cranial
part of the foregut into respiratory and esophageal parts during the fourth week.
Incomplete fusion of the tracheoesophageal folds results in a defective
tracheoesophageal septum and a TEF between the trachea and esophagus.
FIGURE 10–5 The four main varieties of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
Possible directions of the flow of the contents are indicated by arrows.
Esophageal atresia, as illustrated in A, is associated with TEF in more than 85%
of cases. B, Fistula between the trachea and esophagus. C, Air cannot enter the
distal esophagus and stomach. D, Air can enter the distal esophagus and
stomach, and the esophageal and gastric contents may enter the trachea and
lungs.

FIGURE 10–6 A, Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in a 17-week male fetus. The
upper esophageal segment ends blindly (pointer). B, Contrast radiograph of a
neonate with TEF. Note the communication (arrow) between the esophagus (E)
and trachea ( T ). C, Radiograph of esophageal atresia and trachea-esophageal
fistula. The blind proximal esophageal sac is clearly visible. Note the air present
in the distal GI tract indicating the presence of the tracheoesophageal fistula. An
umbilical venous catheter can also been seen.
(A, From Kalousek DK, Fitch N, Paradice B: Pathology of the Human Embryo
and Previable Fetus. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1990. B, Courtesy of Dr. Prem
S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. C, Courtesy of Dr. J.V. Been and Dr. M.J.
Schuurman, Department of Pediatrics, and Dr. S.G. Robben, Department of
Radiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.)
TEF is the most common anomaly of the lower respiratory tract. Four main
varieties of TEF may develop (see Fig. 10-5). The usual anomaly is for the
superior part of the esophagus to end blindly (esophageal atresia) and for the
inferior part to join the trachea near its bifurcation (see Figs. 10-5A and 10-6).
Other varieties of this anomaly are illustrated in Figure 10-5B to D. Infants with
the common type of TEF and esophageal atresia cannot swallow, so they
frequently drool saliva at rest and immediately regurgitate milk when fed.
Gastric and intestinal contents may also reflux from the stomach through the
fistula into the trachea and lungs. This refluxed acid, and in some cases bile, can
cause pneumonitis (inflammation of the lungs) leading to respiratory
compromise. Polyhydramnios (see Chapter 7) is often associated with
esophageal atresia. The excess amniotic fluid develops because fluid cannot pass
to the stomach and intestines for absorption and subsequent transfer through the
placenta to the mother’s blood for disposal.
Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft
Uncommonly, the larynx and upper trachea may fail to separate completely from
the esophagus. This results in a persistent connection of variable lengths between
these normally separated structures. Symptoms of this congenital anomaly are
similar to those of tracheoesophageal fistula because of aspiration into the lungs,
but aphonia (absence of voice) is a distinguishing feature.

Tracheal Stenosis and Atresia
Narrowing (stenosis) and obstruction (atresia) of the trachea are uncommon
anomalies that are usually associated with one of the varieties of TEF. Stenoses
and atresias probably result from unequal partitioning of the foregut into the
esophagus and trachea. Sometimes there is a web of tissue obstructing airflow
(incomplete tracheal atresia). Atresia or agenesis of the trachea is uniformly
fatal.
Tracheal Diverticulum (Tracheal Bronchus)
This anomaly consists of a blind, bronchus-like projection from the trachea. The
outgrowth may terminate in normal-appearing lung tissue, forming a tracheal
lobe of the lung. A tracheal diverticulum may cause recurrent infection and
respiratory distress in infants.

 Development of Bronchi and Lungs
The respiratory bud develops at the caudal end of the laryngotracheal
diverticulum during the fourth week (Fig. 10-2B). The bud soon divides into two
outpouchings—the primary bronchial buds (Figs. 10-2C, 10-7A, and 10-8).
These buds grow laterally into the pericardioperitoneal canals, the primordia of
the pleural cavities (Fig. 10-7B). Secondary and tertiary bronchial buds soon
develop.
FIGURE 10–7 Illustrations of the growth of the developing lungs into the
splanchnic mesenchyme adjacent to the medial walls of the pericardioperitoneal
canals (primordial pleural cavities). Development of the layers of the pleura is
also shown. A, 5 weeks. B, 6 weeks.

FIGURE 10–8 Successive stages in the development of the bronchial buds,
bronchi, and lungs.
Together with the surrounding splanchnic mesenchyme, the bronchial buds
differentiate into the bronchi and their ramifications in the lungs. Early in the
fifth week, the connection of each bronchial bud with the trachea enlarges to
form the primordia of the main bronchi (Fig. 10-8).
The embryonic right main bronchus is slightly larger than the left one and is
oriented more vertically. This relationship persists in the adult; consequently, a
foreign body is more likely to enter the right main bronchus than the left one.
The main bronchi subdivide into secondary bronchi that form lobar, segmental,
and intrasegmental branches (Fig. 10-8). On the right, the superior lobar
bronchus will supply the upper (superior) lobe of the lung, whereas the inferior
bronchus subdivides into two bronchi, one to the middle lobe of the right lung
and the other to the lower (inferior) lobe. On the left, the two secondary bronchi
supply the upper and lower lobes of the lung. Each lobar bronchus undergoes
progressive branching.
The segmental bronchi, 10 in the right lung and eight or nine in the left lung,
begin to form by the seventh week. As this occurs, the surrounding mesenchyme

also divides. The segmental bronchi, with the surrounding mass of mesenchyme,
form the primordial of the bronchopulmonary segments. By 24 weeks,
approximately 17 orders of branches have formed and respiratory bronchioles
have developed (Fig. 10-9B). An additional seven orders of airways develop
after birth.
FIGURE 10–9 Diagrammatic sketches of histologic sections illustrating the
stages of lung development. A and B, Early stages of lung development. C and
D, Note that the alveolocapillary membrane is thin and that some capillaries
bulge into the terminal sacs and alveoli.
As the bronchi develop, cartilaginous plates develop from the surrounding

splanchnic mesenchyme. The bronchial smooth muscle and connective tissue
and the pulmonary connective tissue and capillaries are also derived from this
mesenchyme. As the lungs develop, they acquire a layer of visceral pleura from
the splanchnic mesenchyme (Fig. 10-7). With expansion, the lungs and pleural
cavities grow caudally into the mesenchyme of the body wall and soon lie close
to the heart. The thoracic body wall becomes lined by a layer of parietal pleura,
derived from the somatic mesoderm (Fig. 10-7B). The space between the parietal
and visceral pleura is the pleural cavity.

Maturation of Lungs
Maturation of the lungs is divided into four stages: pseudoglandular, canalicular,
terminal sac, and alveolar.
Pseudoglandular Stage (6 to 16 Weeks)
The developing lungs histologically somewhat resemble exocrine glands during
this stage (Figs. 10-9A and 10-10A). By 16 weeks, all major elements of the lung
have formed, except those involved with gas exchange. Fetuses born during this
period are unable to survive.

FIGURE 10–10 Photomicrographs of sections of developing embryonic and
fetal lungs. A, Pseudoglandular stage, 8 weeks. Note the “glandular” appearance
of the lung. B, Canalicular stage, 16 weeks. The lumina of the bronchi and
terminal bronchioles are enlarging. C, Canalicular stage, 18 weeks. D, Terminal
sac stage, 24 weeks. Observe the thin-walled terminal sacs (primordial alveoli)

that have developed at the ends of the respiratory bronchioles. Also observe that
the number of capillaries have increased and some of them are closely associated
with the developing alveoli.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Canalicular Stage (16 to 26 Weeks)
This period overlaps the pseudoglandular stage because cranial segments of the
lungs mature faster than caudal ones. During the canalicular stage, the lumina of
the bronchi and terminal bronchioles become larger and the lung tissue
becomes highly vascular (Figs. 10-9B and 10-10B). By 24 weeks, each terminal
bronchiole has given rise to two or more respiratory bronchioles, each of
which then divides into three to six passages—primordial alveolar ducts.
Respiration is possible at the end of the canalicular stage because some thin-
walled terminal sacs (primordial alveoli) have developed at the ends of the
respiratory bronchioles, and the lung tissue is well vascularized. Although a
fetus born toward the end of this period may survive if given intensive care, it
often dies because its respiratory and other systems are still relatively immature.
Terminal Sac Stage (26 Weeks to Birth)
During this period, many more terminal sacs (saccules) develop (Figs. 10-9C
and 10-10D), and their epithelium becomes very thin. Capillaries begin to bulge
into these sacs (developing alveoli). The intimate contact between epithelial and
endothelial cells establishes the blood–air barrier, which permits adequate gas
exchange for survival of the fetus if it is born prematurely.
By 26 weeks, the terminal sacs are lined mainly by squamous epithelial cells of
endodermal origin—type I pneumocytes—across which gas exchange occurs.
The capillary network proliferates rapidly in the mesenchyme around the
developing alveoli, and there is concurrent active development of lymphatic
capillaries. Scattered among the squamous epithelial cells are rounded secretory
epithelial cells—type II pneumocytes, which secrete pulmonary surfactant, a
complex mixture of phospholipids and proteins.
Surfactant forms as a monomolecular film over the internal walls of the

alveolar sacs and counteracts surface tension forces at the air-alveolar interface.
This facilitates expansion of the sacs by preventing atelectasis (collapse of sacs
during exhalation). The maturation of type II pneumocytes and surfactant
production varies widely in fetuses of different gestational ages. The production
of surfactant increases during the terminal stages of pregnancy, particularly
during the last 2 weeks.
Surfactant production begins at 20 to 22 weeks, but it is present in only small
amounts in premature infants; it does not reach adequate levels until the late fetal
period. By 26 to 28 weeks after fertilization, the fetus usually weighs
approximately 1000 g and sufficient alveolar sacs and surfactant are present to
permit survival of a prematurely born infant. Before this, the lungs are usually
incapable of providing adequate gas exchange, partly because the alveolar
surface area is insufficient and the vascularity underdeveloped. It is not the
presence of thin terminal sacs or a primordial alveolar epithelium so much as the
development of an adequate pulmonary vasculature and sufficient surfactant that
is critical to the survival and neurodevelopmental outcome of premature infants.
Fetuses born prematurely at 24 to 26 weeks after fertilization may survive if
given intensive care; however, they may suffer from respiratory distress because
of surfactant deficiency. Survival of these infants has improved with the use of
antenatal corticosteroids, which induces surfactant production, and also with
postnatal surfactant replacement therapy.
Alveolar Stage (32 Weeks to 8 Years)
Exactly when the terminal sac stage ends and the alveolar stage begins depends
on the definition of the term alveolus. Sacs analogous to alveoli are present at 32
weeks. The epithelial lining of the terminal sacs attenuates to a thin squamous
epithelial layer. The type I pneumocytes become so thin that the adjacent
capillaries bulge into the alveolar sacs (Figs. 10-9D and 10-10D). By the late
fetal period, the lungs are capable of respiration because the alveolocapillary
membrane (pulmonary diffusion barrier or respiratory membrane) is sufficiently
thin to allow gas exchange. Although the lungs do not begin to perform this vital
function until birth, they are well developed so that they are capable of
functioning as soon as the baby is born.
At the beginning of the alveolar stage, each respiratory bronchiole terminates in
a cluster of thin-walled alveolar sacs, separated from one another by loose

connective tissue. These sacs represent future alveolar ducts (Fig. 10-9D). The
transition from dependence on the placenta for gas exchange to autonomous gas
exchange requires the following adaptive changes in the lungs:
• Production of surfactant in the alveolar sacs
• Transformation of the lungs from secretory into gas exchanging organs
• Establishment of parallel pulmonary and systemic circulations
Approximately 95% of mature alveoli develop postnatally. Before birth, the
primordial alveoli appear as small bulges on the walls of respiratory bronchioles
and alveolar sacs (Fig. 10-9D). After birth, the primordial alveoli enlarge as the
lungs expand, but the greatest increase in the size of the lungs results from an
increase in the number of respiratory bronchioles and primordial alveoli rather
than from an increase in the size of the alveoli.
Alveolar development is largely completed by 3 years of age, but new alveoli are
added until approximately 8 years of age. Unlike mature alveoli, immature
alveoli have the potential for forming additional primordial alveoli. As these
alveoli increase in size, they become mature alveoli. The major mechanism for
increasing the number of alveoli is the formation of secondary connective tissue
septa that subdivide existing primordial alveoli. Initially, the septa are relatively
thick, but they are soon transformed into mature thin septa that are capable of
gas exchange.
Lung development during the first few months after birth is characterized by an
exponential increase in the surface area of the air–blood barrier through the
multiplication of alveoli and capillaries. Approximately 150 million primordial
alveoli, one half of the adult number, are present in the lungs of a full-term
neonate. On chest radiographs, therefore, the lungs of neonates are denser than
adult lungs. Between the third and eighth years, the adult complement of 300
million alveoli is achieved.
Molecular studies indicate that lung development is controlled by a cascade of
signaling pathways that are regulated by the temporal and sequential expression
of highly conserved genes. The commitment and differentiation of endodermal
foregut cells to form respiratory-type epithelial cells are associated with
expression of several transcription factors, including thyroid transcription factor
1, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3β, and GATA-6, as well as other Zinc-finger
family members, retinoic acid receptors, and homeobox (Hox) domain-

containing genes. Hox genes specify the anteroposterior axis in the embryo.
Fibroblast growth factor 10 and other signals from splanchnic mesenchyme
probably induce the outgrowth of the respiratory bud. Branching of this bud
(branching morphogenesis) and its proliferation depend on epithelial
(endodermal foregut)–mesenchymal (mesoderm) interactions. The Wnt signaling
pathway plays an essential role in the inductive interactions between epithelium
and mesenchyme. Recent studies suggest that Wnt7b signaling from the
epithelium regulates mesenchymal proliferation and blood vessel formation in
the lung. The patterning morphogen sonic hedgehog (Shh-Gli) modulates the
expression of fibroblast growth factor 10, which controls the branching of the
bronchial buds. Also, the morphogen retinoic acid regulates Hox a5, b5, and c4,
which are expressed in the developing lung.
Fetal breathing movements (FBMs), which can be detected by real-time
ultrasonography, occur before birth, exerting sufficient force to cause aspiration
of some amniotic fluid into the lungs. FBMs occur intermittently (approximately
30% of them during rapid eye movement sleep) and are essential for normal lung
development (Fig. 10-11). The pattern of FBMs is widely used in the monitoring
of labor and as a predictor of fetal outcome in a preterm delivery. By birth, the
fetus has had the advantage of several months of breathing exercise. FBMs,
which increase as the time of delivery approaches, probably condition the
respiratory muscles. In addition, these movements stimulate lung development,
possibly by creating a pressure gradient between the lungs and the amniotic
fluid.
FIGURE 10–11 Fetal breathing movements (FBMs) seem to play a role in lung

growth through their effects on lung cell cycle kinetics by regulating the
expression of growth factors, such as platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs)
and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), and establishing the gradient of thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) expression at the last stage of lung organogenesis
(i.e., late mediators). It is also suggested that FBMs influence the expression of
other unknown growth factors (i.e., early mediators) that are responsible for
changes in cell cycle kinetics at earlier stages of lung development. FBMs
appear to also be required for the accomplishment of the morphologic
differentiation of type I and II pneumocytes.
(From Inanlou MR, Baguma-Nibasheka M, Kablar B: The role of fetal
breathing-like movements in lung organogenesis. Histol Histopathol 20:1261,
2005.)
At birth, the lungs are approximately half-filled with fluid derived from the
amniotic cavity, lungs, and tracheal glands. Aeration of the lungs at birth is not
so much the inflation of empty collapsed organs but rather the rapid replacement
of intra-alveolar fluid by air.
The fluid in the lungs is cleared at birth by three routes:
• Through the mouth and nose by pressure on the fetal thorax during vaginal
delivery
• Into the pulmonary arteries, veins, and capillaries
• Into the lymphatics
In the near-term fetus, the pulmonary lymphatic vessels are relatively larger and
more numerous than in the adult. Lymph flow is rapid during the first few hours
after birth and then diminishes. Three factors are important for normal lung
development: adequate thoracic space for lung growth, FBMs, and adequate
amniotic fluid volume (Fig. 10-12).

 
FIGURE 10–12 Congenital lung cysts. A, Chest radiograph (posteroanterior) of
an infant showing a large left-sided congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation
(arrow). The heart (asterisk) has shifted to the right. Note the chest tube on the
left side, which was placed on the initial diagnosis of a pneumothorax (air in
pleural cavity). B, Axial computed tomography image of the thorax in an infant
with a large right-sided congenital bronchogenic cyst (asterisk).
(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology.
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Oligohydramnios and Lung Development
When oligohydramnios (insufficient amount of amniotic fluid) is severe and
chronic because of amniotic fluid leakage or decreased production, lung
development is retarded and severe pulmonary hypoplasia results from

restriction of the fetal thorax.
Lungs of Neonates
Fresh healthy lungs always contain some air; consequently, pulmonary tissue
removed from them will float in water. A diseased lung, partly filled with fluid,
may not float. Of medicolegal significance is the fact that the lungs of a stillborn
infant are firm and sink when placed in water because they contain fluid, not air.
Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) affects approximately 2% of live newborn
infants; those born prematurely are most susceptible. These infants develop
rapid, labored breathing shortly after birth. RDS is also known as hyaline
membrane disease (HMD). An estimated 30% of all neonatal disease results
from RDS or its complications.
Surfactant deficiency is a major cause of RDS or HMD. The lungs are
underinflated and the alveoli contain a fluid with a high protein content that
resembles a glassy or hyaline membrane. This membrane is thought to be
derived from a combination of substances in the circulation and from the injured
pulmonary epithelium. It has been suggested that prolonged intrauterine
asphyxia may produce irreversible changes in the type II alveolar cells, making
them incapable of producing surfactant. There appears to be other causes for an
absence or deficiency of surfactant in premature and full-term infants.
All growth factors and hormones controlling surfactant production have not been
identified, but corticosteroids and thyroxine, which are involved in fetal lung
maturation, are potent stimulators of surfactant production. Maternal
glucocorticoid treatment during pregnancy accelerates fetal lung development
and surfactant production. This finding has led to the routine clinical use of
corticosteroids (betamethasone) for the prevention of RDS in preterm labor. In
addition, administration of exogenous surfactant (surfactant replacement
therapy) reduces the severity of RDS and neonatal mortality.

Lobe of Azygos Vein
This lobe appears in the right lung in approximately 1% of people. It develops
when the apical bronchus grows superiorly, medial to the arch of the azygos
vein, instead of lateral to it. As a result, the vein lies at the bottom of a fissure in
the superior (upper) lobe, which produces a linear marking on a radiograph of
the lungs.
Congenital Lung Cysts
Cysts (filled with fluid or air) are thought to be formed by the dilation of
terminal bronchi. They probably result from a disturbance in bronchial
development during late fetal life. If several cysts are present, the lungs have a
honeycomb appearance on radiographs. Congenital lung cysts (Fig. 10-12) are
usually located at the periphery of the lung.
Agenesis of Lungs
Absence of the lungs results from failure of the respiratory bud to develop.
Agenesis of one lung is more common than bilateral agenesis, but both
conditions are rare. Unilateral pulmonary agenesis is compatible with life. The
heart and other mediastinal structures are shifted to the affected side, and the
existing lung is hyperexpanded.
Lung Hypoplasia
In infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (see Chapter 8), the lung is
unable to develop normally because it is compressed by the abnormally
positioned abdominal viscera. Lung hypoplasia (under development) is
characterized by a markedly reduced lung volume and hypertrophy of the
smooth muscle in the pulmonary arteries. The pulmonary hypertension leads to
decreased blood flow through the pulmonary vascular system as the blood
continues to shunt through the ductus arteriosus.

Many infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia may die of pulmonary
insufficiency, despite optimal postnatal care, because their lungs are too
hypoplastic for air exchange and there is too much resistance for pulmonary
blood flow to support extrauterine life.
Accessory Lung
A small accessory lung (pulmonary sequestration) is uncommon. It is almost
always located at the base of the left lung and nonfunctional. It does not
communicate with the tracheobronchial tree and its blood supply is usually
systemic.

Summary of Respiratory System
• By the fourth week, a laryngotracheal diverticulum develops from the floor
of the primordial pharynx.
• The laryngotracheal diverticulum becomes separated from the foregut by
tracheoesophageal folds that fuse to form a tracheoesophageal septum. This
septum results in the formation of the esophagus and the laryngotracheal tube
(Fig. 10-2C and E).
• The endoderm of the laryngotracheal tube gives rise to the epithelium of the
lower respiratory organs and the tracheobronchial glands. The splanchnic
mesenchyme surrounding the laryngotracheal tube forms the connective tissue,
cartilage, muscle, and blood and lymphatic vessels of these organs.
• Pharyngeal arch mesenchyme contributes to formation of the epiglottis and
connective tissue of the larynx. The laryngeal muscles are derived from
mesenchyme in the caudal pharyngeal arches. The laryngeal cartilages are
derived from neural crest cells.
• The distal end of the laryngotracheal diverticulum gives rise to a respiratory
bud that divides into two bronchial buds. Each bronchial bud soon enlarges to
form a main bronchus, and then the main bronchus subdivides to form lobar,
segmental, and subsegmental branches (Figs. 10-2C and 10-8).
• Each tertiary bronchial bud (segmental bronchial bud), with its surrounding
mesenchyme, is the primordium of a bronchopulmonary segment. Branching
continues until approximately 17 orders of branches have formed. Additional
airways are formed after birth, until approximately 24 orders of branches are
present.
• Lung development is divided into four stages: pseudoglandular (6–16 weeks),
canalicular (16–26 weeks), terminal sac (26 weeks to birth), and alveolar (32
weeks to approximately 8 years of age).
• By 20 to 22 weeks, type II pneumocytes begin to secrete pulmonary
surfactant. Deficiency of surfactant results in respiratory distress syndrome
(RDS) or hyaline membrane disease (HMD).
• A tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which results from faulty partitioning of
the foregut into the esophagus and trachea, is usually associated with esophageal
atresia.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 10–1
Choking and continuous coughing were observed in a male neonate. There was
an excessive amount of mucous secretion and saliva in the infant’s mouth. He
also experienced considerable difficulty in breathing. The pediatrician was
unable to pass a catheter through the esophagus into the stomach.
• What birth defect would be suspected?
• Discuss the embryologic basis of these defects.
• What kind of an examination do you think would be used to confirm the
tentative diagnosis?

Case 10–2
A premature infant developed rapid, shallow respiration shortly after birth. A
diagnosis of RDS was made.
How do you think the infant might attempt to overcome his or her inadequate
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide?
• What usually causes RDS?
• What treatment is currently used clinically to prevent RDS?
• A deficiency of what substance is associated with RDS?

Case 10–3
The parents of a neonate were told that their son had a fistula between his
trachea and esophagus.
• What is the most common type of TEF?
• What is its embryologic basis?
• What defect of the alimentary (digestive) tract is frequently associated with this
abnormality?

Case 10–4
A neonate with esophageal atresia experienced respiratory distress with cyanosis
shortly after birth. Radiographs demonstrated air in the infant’s stomach.
• How did the air enter the stomach?
• What other problem might result in an infant with this fairly common type of
birth defect?
Discussion of these problems is given at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Abel R, Bush A, Chitty RS, et al. Congenital lung disease. In Chemick V, Boat
T, Wilmott R, Bush A, editors: Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in
Children, ed 7, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006.
Brunner HG, van Bokhoven H. Genetic players in esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005;15:341.
Domyan ET, Sun X. Patterning and plasticity in development of the respiratory
lineage. Dev Dyn. 2011;240:477.
Holinger LD. Congenital anomalies of the larynx; congenital anomalies of the
trachea and bronchi. In Behrman RE, Kliegman Jenson HB, editors: Nelson
Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
Ioannides AS, Massa V, Ferraro E, et al. Foregut separation and
tracheoesophageal malformations: the role of tracheal outgrowth, dorso-ventral
patterning and programmed cell death. Dev Dyn. 2010;237:351.
Jobe AH. Lung development and maturation. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of
the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Kays DW. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and neonatal lung lesions. Surg Clin
North Am. 2006;86:329.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.

Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Morrisey EE, Hogan BL. Preparing for the first breath: genetic and cellular
mechanisms in lung development. Dev Cell. 2010;18:8.
O’Rahilly R, Boyden E. The timing and sequence of events in the development
of the human respiratory system during the embryonic period proper. Z Anat
Entwicklungsgesch. 1973;141:237.
Rawlins EL. The building blocks of mammalian lung development. Dev Dyn.
2011;240:463.
Shanks A, Gross G, Shim T, et al. Administration of steroids after 34 weeks of
gestation enhances fetal lung maturity profiles. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2010;203:47.
Shi W, Chen F, Cardoso WV. Mechanisms of lung development. Proc Am
Thorac Soc. 2009;6:558.
Sluiter I, van de Ven CP, Wijnen RM, et al. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011. [Epub ahead of print]
Turell DC. Advances with surfactant. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2008;26:921.
Turner BS, Bradshaw W, Brandon D. Neonatal lung remodeling. J Perinat
Neonat Nurs. 2006;19:362.
Warburton D, El-Hashash A, Carraro G, et al. Lung organogenesis. Curr Top
Dev Biol. 2010;90:73.
Wells LJ, Boyden EA. The development of the bronchopulmonary segments in
human embryos of horizons XVII and XIX. Am J Anat. 1954;95:163.
Whitsett JA, Wert SE. Molecular determinants of lung morphogenesis. In
Chernick V, editor: Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in Children, ed
7, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006.
Wladimiroff JW, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Laudy JAM. Ultrasound evaluation of the
fetal thorax. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.

Chapter 11 Alimentary System
Foregut 214
   Development of Esophagus 214
   Development of Stomach 215
   Omental Bursa 215
   Development of Duodenum 219
   Development of Liver and Biliary Apparatus 221
   Development of Pancreas 223
   Development of Spleen 225
Midgut 227
   Herniation of Midgut Loop 227
   Rotation of Midgut Loop 227
   Retraction of Intestinal Loops 227
   Cecum and Appendix 230
Hindgut 238
   Cloaca 238
   Anal Canal 240
Summary of Alimentary System 243
Clinically Oriented Problems 243
The alimentary system (digestive system) is the digestive tract from the mouth
to the anus with all its associated glands and organs. The primordial gut forms
during the fourth week as the head, caudal eminence (tail), and lateral folds
incorporate the dorsal part of the umbilical vesicle (yolk sac) into the embryo
(see Fig. 5-1, Chapter 5). The primordial gut is initially closed at its cranial end
by the oropharyngeal membrane (see Fig. 9-1E), and at its caudal end by the
cloacal membrane (Fig. 11-1B). The endoderm of the primordial gut gives rise
to most of the gut, epithelium, and glands. The epithelium at the cranial and
caudal ends of the alimentary tract is derived from ectoderm of the stomodeum
and anal pit (proctodeum), respectively (Fig. 11-1A and B).

FIGURE 11–1 A, Lateral view of a 4-week embryo showing the relationship of
the primordial gut to the omphaloenteric duct (yolk sac). B, Drawing of median
section of the embryo showing early alimentary system and its blood supply.
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are involved in early anterior-posterior axial
patterning, and it appears that FGF-4 signals from the adjacent ectoderm and
mesoderm induce the endoderm. Other secreted factors, such as activins,
members of the transforming growth factor β superfamily, contribute to the
formation of the endoderm. The endoderm specifies temporal and positional
information, which is essential for the development of the gut. The muscular,
connective tissue and other layers of the wall of the alimentary tract are derived
from the splanchnic mesenchyme surrounding the primordial gut (digestive
tract).
Mesenchymal factors, FoxF proteins, control proliferation of the endodermal
epithelium that secretes sonic hedgehog (Shh). For descriptive purposes, the
primordial gut is divided into three parts: foregut, midgut, and hindgut.
Molecular studies indicate that Hox and ParaHox genes, as well as Shh, BMP,
and Wnt signals, regulate the regional differentiation of the primordial gut to
form its three parts.

Foregut
The derivatives of the foregut are:
• The primordial pharynx and its derivatives • The lower respiratory system •
The esophagus and stomach • The duodenum, distal to the opening of the bile
duct • The liver, biliary apparatus (hepatic ducts, gallbladder, and bile duct), and
pancreas These foregut derivatives, other than the pharynx, lower respiratory
tract, and most of the esophagus, are supplied by the celiac trunk, the artery of
the foregut (Fig. 11-1B).

 Development of Esophagus
The esophagus develops from the foregut immediately caudal to the pharynx
(Fig. 11-1B). The partitioning of the trachea from the esophagus by the
tracheoesophageal septum is described in Chapter 10 (Fig. 10-2). Initially, the
esophagus is short, but it elongates rapidly, mainly because of the growth and
relocation of the heart and lungs.
The esophagus reaches its final relative length by the seventh week. Its
epithelium and glands are derived from endoderm. The epithelium proliferates
and, partly or completely, obliterates the lumen of the esophagus; however,
recanalization of the esophagus normally occurs by the end of the eighth week.
The striated muscle forming the muscularis externa of the superior third of the
esophagus is derived from mesenchyme in the fourth and sixth pharyngeal
arches. The smooth muscle, mainly in the inferior third of the esophagus,
develops from the surrounding splanchnic mesenchyme. Recent studies indicate
transdifferentiation of smooth muscle cells in the superior part of the esophagus
to striated muscle, which is dependent on myogenic regulatory factors. Both
types of muscle are innervated by branches of the vagus nerves (cranial nerve
X), which supply the caudal pharyngeal arches (see Chapter 9, Table 9-1).
Esophageal Atresia
Blockage (atresia) of the esophageal lumen occurs with an incidence of 1 in
3000 to 4500 live births. Approximately one third of affected infants are born
prematurely. Esophageal atresia is associated with tracheoesophageal fistula in
more than 90% of cases (see Fig. 10-5). Esophageal atresia results from
deviation of the tracheoesophageal septum in a posterior direction (see Fig. 10-
2), and incomplete separation of the esophagus from the laryngotracheal tube.
Isolated esophageal atresia (5%–7% of cases) results from failure of
recanalization of the esophagus during the eighth week of development.
A fetus with esophageal atresia is unable to swallow amniotic fluid;
consequently, this fluid cannot pass to the intestine for absorption and transfer
through the placenta to the maternal blood for disposal. This results in
polyhydramnios, the accumulation of an excessive amount of amniotic fluid.
Neonates with esophageal atresia usually appear healthy initially. Excessive

drooling may be noted soon after birth and the diagnosis of esophageal atresia
should be considered if the infant rejects oral feeding with immediate
regurgitation and coughing.
Inability to pass a catheter through the esophagus into the stomach strongly
suggests esophageal atresia. A radiographic examination demonstrates the
anomaly by imaging the nasogastric tube arrested in the proximal esophageal
pouch. Surgical repair of esophageal atresia now results in survival rates of more
than 85%.
Esophageal Stenosis
Narrowing of the lumen of the esophagus (stenosis) can occur anywhere along
the esophagus, but it usually occurs in its distal third, either as a web or a long
segment with a thread-like lumen. Stenosis results from incomplete
recanalization of the esophagus during the eighth week or from a failure of
esophageal blood vessels to develop in the affected area.

 Development of Stomach
Initially the distal part of the foregut is a tubular structure (Fig. 11-1B). During
the fourth week, a slight dilation indicates the site of the primordium of the
stomach. The dilation first appears as a fusiform enlargement of the caudal
(distal part) of the foregut and is initially oriented in the median plane (Figs. 11-
1 and 11-2B). The primordial stomach soon enlarges and broadens
ventrodorsally. During the next 2 weeks, the dorsal border of the stomach grows
faster than its ventral border; this demarcates the developing greater curvature
of the stomach (Fig. 11-2D).

FIGURE 11–2 Development of the stomach and formation of the omental bursa
and greater omentum. A, Median section of the abdomen of a 28-day embryo. B,
Anterolateral view of the above embryo. C, Embryo of approximately 35 days.
D, Embryo of approximately 40 days. E, Embryo of approximately 48 days. F,
Lateral view of the stomach and greater omentum of an embryo of

approximately 52 days. G, Sagittal section showing the omental bursa and
greater omentum. The arrow in F and G indicates the site of the omental
foramen.
Rotation of Stomach
Enlargement of the mesentery and adjacent organs, as well as growth of the
stomach walls, contribute to the rotation of the stomach. As the stomach enlarges
and acquires its final shape, it slowly rotates 90 degrees in a clockwise direction
(viewed from the cranial end) around its longitudinal axis. The effects of rotation
on the stomach are (Figs. 11-2 and 11-3):
• The ventral border (lesser curvature) moves to the right and the dorsal border
(greater curvature) moves to the left.
• The original left side becomes the ventral surface and the original right side
becomes the dorsal surface.
• Before rotation, the cranial and caudal ends of the stomach are in the median
plane (Fig. 11-2B). During rotation and growth of the stomach, its cranial region
moves to the left and slightly inferiorly, and its caudal region moves to the right
and superiorly.
• After rotation, the stomach assumes its final position with its long axis almost
transverse to the long axis of the body (Fig. 11-2E). The rotation and growth of
the stomach explain why the left vagus nerve supplies the anterior wall of the
adult stomach and the right vagus nerve innervates its posterior wall.

FIGURE 11–3 Development of stomach and mesenteries and formation of
omental bursa. A, Embryo of 5 weeks. B, Transverse section showing clefts in
the dorsal mesogastrium. C, Later stage after coalescence of the clefts to form
the omental bursa. D, Transverse section showing the initial appearance of the
omental bursa. E, The dorsal mesentery has elongated and the omental bursa has

enlarged. F and G, Transverse and sagittal sections, respectively, showing
elongation of the dorsal mesogastrium and expansion of the omental bursa. H,
Embryo of 6 weeks, showing the greater omentum and expansion of the omental
bursa. I and J, Transverse and sagittal sections, respectively, showing the
inferior recess of the omental bursa and the omental foramen. The arrows in E,
F, and I indicate the site of the omental foramen. In J, the arrow indicates the
inferior recess of the omental bursa.
Mesenteries of Stomach
The stomach is suspended from the dorsal wall of the abdominal cavity by a
dorsal mesentery—the primordial dorsal mesogastrium (Figs. 11-2B and C
and 11-3A). This mesentery is originally in the median plane, but it is carried to
the left during rotation of the stomach and formation of the omental bursa or
lesser sac of peritoneum (Fig. 11-3A to E). The dorsal mesentery also contains
the spleen and celiac artery. The primordial ventral mesogastrium attaches to
the stomach, and it also attaches the duodenum to the liver and ventral
abdominal wall (Fig. 11-2C).

 Omental Bursa
Isolated clefts develop in the mesenchyme forming the thick dorsal
mesogastrium (Fig. 11-3A and B). The clefts soon coalesce to form a single
cavity, the omental bursa or lesser peritoneal sac (Fig. 11-3C and D). Rotation
of the stomach pulls the dorsal mesogastrium to the left, thereby enlarging the
bursa, a large recess of the peritoneal cavity. The omental bursa expands
transversely and cranially and soon lies between the stomach and the posterior
abdominal wall. This pouch-like bursa facilitates movements of the stomach.
The superior part of the omental bursa is cut off as the diaphragm develops,
forming a closed space—the infracardiac bursa. If it persists, it usually lies
medial to the base of the right lung. The inferior region of the superior part of
the omental bursa persists as the superior recess of the omental bursa (Fig. 11-
3C).
As the stomach enlarges, the omental bursa expands and acquires an inferior
recess of the omental bursa between the layers of the elongated dorsal
mesogastrium—the greater omentum. This membrane overhangs the
developing intestines (Fig. 11-3J). The inferior recess disappears as the layers of
the greater omentum fuse (see Fig. 11-15F). The omental bursa communicates
with the peritoneal cavity through an opening—the omental foramen (Figs. 11-
2D and F and 11-3C and F).
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis
Anomalies of the stomach are uncommon except for hypertrophic pyloric
stenosis. This anomaly affects one in every 150 males and one in every 750
females. In infants there is a marked muscular thickening of the pylorus, the
distal sphincteric region of the stomach (Fig. 11-4). The circular and, to a lesser
degree, the longitudinal muscles in the pyloric region are hypertrophied. This
results in severe stenosis of the pyloric canal and obstruction of the passage of
food. As a result, the stomach becomes markedly distended (Fig. 11-4C ), and
the infant expels the stomach’s contents with considerable force (projectile
vomiting).


FIGURE 11–4 A, Transverse abdominal sonogram demonstrating a pyloric
muscle wall thickness of greater than 4 mm (distance between crosses). B,
Horizontal image demonstrating a pyloric channel length greater than 14 mm in
an infant with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. C, Contrast radiograph of the
stomach in a 1-month-old male infant with pyloric stenosis. Note the narrowed
pyloric end (arrow) and the distended fundus (F) of the stomach, filled with
contrast material.
(A and B, From Wyllie R: Pyloric stenosis and other congenital anomalies of the
stomach. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Arvin AM [eds]: Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics, 15th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996; C, Courtesy of Dr. Prem
S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Surgical relief of the pyloric obstruction (pyloromyotomy) is the usual treatment.
The cause of congenital pyloric stenosis is unknown, but the high rate of
concordance in monozygotic twins suggests genetic factors may be involved.

 Development of Duodenum
Early in the fourth week, the duodenum begins to develop from the caudal part
of the foregut, the cranial part of the midgut, and the splanchnic mesenchyme
associated with these parts of the primordial gut (Fig. 11-5A). The junction of the
two parts of the duodenum is just distal to the origin of the bile duct (Fig. 11-
5D). The developing duodenum grows rapidly, forming a C-shaped loop that
projects ventrally (Fig. 11-5B to D).
FIGURE 11–5 Progressive stages in the development of the duodenum, liver,
pancreas, and extrahepatic biliary apparatus. A, Embryo of 4 weeks. B and C,

Embryo of 5 weeks. D, Embryo of 6 weeks. The pancreas develops from the
dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds that fuse to form the pancreas. Note that the
entrance of the bile duct into the duodenum gradually shifts from its initial
position to a posterior one. This explains why the bile duct in the adult passes
posterior to the duodenum and the head of the pancreas.
As the stomach rotates, the duodenal loop rotates to the right and becomes
pressed against the posterior wall of the abdominal cavity—retroperitoneal
(external to peritoneum). Because of its derivation from the foregut and midgut,
the duodenum is supplied by branches of the celiac and superior mesenteric
arteries that supply these parts of the primordial gut (Fig. 11-1).
During the fifth and sixth weeks, the lumen of the duodenum becomes
progressively smaller and is temporarily obliterated because of the proliferation
of its epithelial cells. Normally vacuolation occurs as the epithelial cells
degenerate; as a result, the duodenum normally becomes recanalized by the end
of the embryonic period (Fig. 11-6C and D). By this time, most of the ventral
mesentery of the duodenum has disappeared.

FIGURE 11–6 Drawings showing the embryologic basis of the common types of
congenital intestinal obstruction. A, Duodenal stenosis. B, Duodenal atresia. C
to F, Diagrammatic longitudinal and transverse sections of the duodenum
showing (1) normal recanalization (D to D3), (2) stenosis (E to E3), and atresia
(F to F3).

Duodenal Stenosis
Partial occlusion of the duodenal lumen—duodenal stenosis (Fig. 11-6A)—
usually results from incomplete recanalization of the duodenum resulting from
defective vacuolization (Fig. 11-6E3). Most stenoses involve the horizontal
(third) and/or ascending (fourth) parts of the duodenum. Because of the stenosis,
the stomach’s contents (usually containing bile) are often vomited.
Duodenal Atresia
Complete occlusion of the duodenal lumen—duodenal atresia (Fig. 11-6B)—is
not common. During early duodenal development, the lumen is completely
occluded by epithelial cells. If complete recanalization of the lumen fails to
occur (Fig. 11-6D3), a short segment of the duodenum is occluded (Fig. 11-6F3).
The blockage occurs nearly always at the junction of the bile and pancreatic
ducts (hepatopancreatic ampulla); occasionally the blockage involves the
horizontal (third) part of the duodenum. Investigation of families with familial
duodenal atresia suggests an autosomal recessive inheritance.
In infants with duodenal atresia, vomiting begins a few hours after birth. The
vomitus almost always contains bile; often there is distention of the epigastrium
—the upper central area of the abdomen—resulting from an overfilled stomach
and superior part of the duodenum. Duodenal atresia is associated with bilious
emesis (vomiting of bile) because the blockage occurs distal to the opening of
the bile duct. Duodenal atresia may occur as an isolated birth defect, but other
defects are often associated with it, such as annular pancreas (see Fig. 11-11C ),
cardiovascular defects, anorectal anomalies, and malrotation of the gut (see Fig.
11-20). Importantly, approximately one third of affected infants have Down
syndrome and an additional 20% are premature.
Polyhydramnios also occurs because duodenal atresia prevents normal
intestinal absorption of swallowed amniotic fluid. The diagnosis of duodenal
atresia is suggested by the presence of a “double-bubble” sign on plain
radiographs or ultrasound scans (Fig. 11-7). This appearance is caused by a
distended, gas-filled stomach and proximal duodenum.

FIGURE 11–7 Ultrasound scans of a fetus of 33 weeks showing duodenal
atresia. A, An oblique scan showing the dilated, fluid-filled stomach (St)
entering the proximal duodenum (D), which is also enlarged because of the
atresia (blockage) distal to it. B, Transverse scan illustrating the characteristic
“double-bubble” appearance of the stomach and duodenum when there is
duodenal atresia.
(Courtesy of Dr. Lyndon M. Hill, Magee-Women’s Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA.)

 Development of Liver and Biliary Apparatus
The liver, gallbladder, and biliary duct system arise as a ventral outgrowth
—hepatic diverticulum—from the distal part of the foregut early in the fourth
week (Figs. 11-5A and 11-8A). Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway plays a key role
in this process. It has been suggested that both the hepatic diverticulum and the
ventral bud of the pancreas develop from two cell populations in the embryonic
endoderm. At sufficient levels, FGFs (fibroblast growth factors) secreted by the
developing heart, interact with the bipotential cells and induce formation of the
hepatic diverticulum.
FIGURE 11–8 A, Median section of a 4-week embryo. B, Transverse section of
the embryo showing expansion of the peritoneal cavity (arrows). C, Sagittal
section of a 5-week embryo. D, Transverse section of the embryo after formation

of the dorsal and ventral mesenteries.
The diverticulum extends into the septum transversum, a mass of splanchnic
mesoderm between the developing heart and midgut. The septum transversum
forms the ventral mesogastrium in this region. The hepatic diverticulum enlarges
rapidly and divides into two parts as it grows between the layers of the ventral
mesogastrium (Fig. 11-5A).
The larger cranial part of the hepatic diverticulum is the primordium of the
liver; the smaller caudal part becomes the gallbladder. The proliferating
endodermal cells give rise to interlacing cords of hepatocytes and to the
epithelial lining of the intrahepatic part of the biliary apparatus. The hepatic
cords anastomose around endothelium-lined spaces, the primordia of the
hepatic sinusoids. Vascular endothelial growth factor Flk-1 (VEGF-Flk-1)
signaling appears to be important for the early morphogenesis of the hepatic
sinusoids (primitive vascular system). The fibrous and hematopoietic tissue and
Kupffer cells of the liver are derived from mesenchyme in the septum
transversum.
The liver grows rapidly and, from the 5th to 10th weeks, fills a large part of the
upper abdominal cavity (Fig. 11-8C and D). The quantity of oxygenated blood
flowing from the umbilical vein into the liver determines the development and
functional segmentation of the liver. Initially, the right and left lobes are
approximately the same size, but the right lobe soon becomes larger.
Hematopoiesis (formation and development of various types of blood cells)
begins during the sixth week, giving the liver a bright reddish appearance. By
the ninth week, the liver accounts for approximately 10% of the total weight of
the fetus. Bile formation by hepatic cells begins during the 12th week.
The small caudal part of the hepatic diverticulum becomes the gallbladder, and
the stalk of the diverticulum forms the cystic duct (Fig. 11-5C). Initially, the
extrahepatic biliary apparatus is occluded with epithelial cells, but it is later
canalized because of vacuolation resulting from degeneration of these cells. The
stalk connecting the hepatic and cystic ducts to the duodenum becomes the bile
duct. Initially, this duct attaches to the ventral aspect of the duodenal loop;
however, as the duodenum grows and rotates, the entrance of the bile duct is
carried to the dorsal aspect of the duodenum (Fig. 11-5C and D). The bile
entering the duodenum through the bile duct after the 13th week gives the

meconium (intestinal contents) a dark green color.
Ventral Mesentery
This thin, double-layered membrane (Fig. 11-8C and D) gives rise to:
• The lesser omentum, passing from the liver to the lesser curvature of the
stomach (hepatogastric ligament) and from the liver to the duodenum
(hepatoduodenal ligament)
• The falciform ligament, extending from the liver to the ventral abdominal wall
The umbilical vein passes in the free border of the falciform ligament on its way
from the umbilical cord to the liver. The ventral mesentery, derived from the
mesogastrum, also forms the visceral peritoneum of the liver. The liver is
covered by peritoneum except for the bare area that is in direct contact with the
diaphragm (Fig. 11-9).
FIGURE 11–9 Median section of caudal half of an embryo at the end of the fifth
week showing the liver and its associated ligaments. The arrow indicates the
communication of the peritoneal cavity with the extraembryonic coelom.

Anomalies of Liver
Minor variations of liver lobulation are common, but congenital anomalies of the
liver are rare. Variations of the hepatic ducts, bile duct, and cystic duct are
common and clinically significant. Accessory hepatic ducts are present in
approximately 5% of the population and awareness of their possible presence is
of importance in surgery including liver transplantation. The accessory ducts are
narrow channels running from the right lobe of the liver into the anterior surface
of the body of the gallbladder. In some cases, the cystic duct opens into an
accessory hepatic duct rather than into the common hepatic duct.
Extrahepatic Biliary Atresia
This is the most serious anomaly of the extrahepatic biliary system and occurs in
one in 5000 to 20,000 live births. The most common form of extrahepatic biliary
atresia (present in 85% of cases) is obliteration of the bile ducts at or superior
to the porta hepatis—a deep transverse fissure on the visceral surface of the
liver. Previous speculations that there is a failure of the bile ducts to canalize
may not be true.
Biliary atresia could result from a failure of the remodeling process at the
hepatic hilum or from infections or immunologic reactions during late fetal
development. Jaundice occurs soon after birth, the stools are acholic (clay
colored), and the urine appears dark colored. Biliary atresia can be palliated
surgically in most patients, but in greater than 70% of those treated, the disease
continues to progress.

 Development of Pancreas
The pancreas develops between the layers of the mesentery from dorsal and
ventral pancreatic buds of endodermal cells, which arise from the caudal of the
foregut (Figs. 11-9 and 11-10A and B). Most of the pancreas is derived from the
larger dorsal pancreatic bud, which appears first and develops a slight distance
cranial to the ventral bud.

FIGURE 11–10 A to D, Successive stages in the development of the pancreas
from the fifth to the eighth weeks. E to G, Diagrammatic transverse sections
through the duodenum and developing pancreas. Growth and rotation (arrows)
of the duodenum bring the ventral pancreatic bud toward the dorsal bud, where
they subsequently fuse.
The smaller ventral pancreatic bud develops near the entry of the bile duct into
the duodenum and grows between the layers of the ventral mesentery. As the

duodenum rotates to the right and becomes C shaped, the ventral pancreatic bud
is carried dorsally with the bile duct (Fig. 11-10C to G). It soon lies posterior to
the dorsal pancreatic bud and later fuses with it.
The ventral pancreatic bud forms the uncinate process and part of the head of
the pancreas. As the stomach, duodenum, and ventral mesentery rotate, the
pancreas comes to lie along the dorsal abdominal wall. As the pancreatic buds
fuse, their ducts anastomose. The pancreatic duct forms from the duct of the
ventral bud and the distal part of the duct of the dorsal bud (Fig. 11-10G). The
proximal part of the duct of the dorsal bud often persists as an accessory
pancreatic duct that opens into the minor duodenal papilla, located
approximately 2 cm cranial to the main duct. The two ducts often communicate
with each other. In approximately 9% of people, the pancreatic ducts fail to fuse,
resulting in two ducts.
Molecular studies show that the ventral pancreas develops from a bipotential
cell population in the ventral region of the duodenum where the transcription
factor PDX1 is expressed. A default mechanism involving FGF-2, which is
secreted by the developing heart, appears to play a role. Formation of the dorsal
pancreatic bud depends on the notochord secreting activin and FGF-2, which
block the expression of Shh in the associated endoderm.
Histogenesis of Pancreas
The parenchyma (basic cellular tissue) of the pancreas is derived from the
endoderm of the pancreatic buds, which forms a network of tubules. Early in the
fetal period, pancreatic acini begin to develop from cell clusters around the
ends of these tubules (primordial pancreatic ducts). The pancreatic islets
develop from groups of cells that separate from the tubules and lie between the
acini.
Recent studies show that chemokine SDF-1 (stromal cell derived factor),
expressed in the mesechyme, controls formation and branching of the tubules.
Expression of transcription factor Ngn-3 (neurogenin-3) is required for
differentiation of pancreatic islet endocrine cells.
Insulin secretion begins during the early fetal period (10 weeks). The glucagon-
and somatostatin-containing cells develop before differentiation of the insulin-
secreting beta-cells. Glucagon has been detected in fetal plasma at 15 weeks.

The connective tissue sheath and interlobular septa of the pancreas develop from
the surrounding splanchnic mesenchyme. When there is maternal diabetes
mellitus, the insulin-secreting beta cells in the fetal pancreas are chronically
exposed to high levels of glucose. As a result, these cells undergo hypertrophy to
increase the rate of insulin secretion.
Ectopic Pancreas
Ectopic pancreas is most often located in the wall of the stomach, duodenum, or
jejunum. It can present with obstruction, bleeding, or even as cancer.
Annular Pancreas
Although an annular pancreas is rare, the anomaly warrants description because
it may cause duodenal obstruction (Fig. 11-11C). The ring-like or annular part of
the pancreas consists of a thin, flat band of pancreatic tissue surrounding the
descending or second part of the duodenum. An annular pancreas may cause
obstruction of the duodenum. Infants present with symptoms of complete or
partial bowel obstruction.
FIGURE 11–11 A and B show the probable basis of an annular pancreas. C, An
annular pancreas encircling the duodenum. This birth defect produces complete
obstruction (atresia) or partial obstruction (stenosis) of the duodenum.
Blockage of the duodenum develops if inflammation (pancreatitis) develops in
the annular pancreas. An annular pancreas may be associated with Down

syndrome, intestinal malrotation, and cardiac defects. Females are affected more
frequently than males. An annular pancreas probably results from the growth of
a bifid ventral pancreatic bud around the duodenum (Fig. 11-11A to C ). The
parts of the bifid ventral bud then fuse with the dorsal bud, forming a pancreatic
ring. Surgical intervention may be required for management of this condition.

 Development of Spleen
Development of the spleen is described with the alimentary system because this
organ is derived from a mass of mesenchymal cells located between the layers of
the dorsal mesogastrium (Fig. 11-12). The spleen, a vascular lymphatic organ,
begins to develop during the fifth week, but does not acquire its characteristic
shape until early in the fetal period.

FIGURE 11–12 A, Left side of the stomach and associated structures at the end
of the fifth week. Note that the pancreas, spleen, and celiac trunk are between
the layers of the dorsal mesogastrium. B, Transverse section of the liver,
stomach, and spleen at the level shown in A, illustrating their relationship to the
dorsal and ventral mesenteries. C, Transverse section of a fetus showing fusion

of the dorsal mesogastrium with the peritoneum on the posterior abdominal wall.
D and E, Similar sections showing movement of the liver to the right and
rotation of the stomach. Observe the fusion of the dorsal mesogastrium to the
dorsal abdominal wall. As a result, the pancreas becomes retroperitoneal.
Gene-targeting experiments show that capsulin, a basic helix-loop transcription
factor, and homeobox genes NKx2-5, Hox11, and Bapx1 regulate the
development of the spleen.
The spleen is lobulated in the fetus, but the lobules normally disappear before
birth. The notches in the superior border of the adult spleen are remnants of the
grooves that separated the fetal lobules. As the stomach rotates, the left surface
of the mesogastrium fuses with the peritoneum over the left kidney. This fusion
explains the dorsal attachment of the splenorenal ligament and why the adult
splenic artery, the largest branch of the celiac trunk, follows a tortuous course
posterior to the omental bursa and anterior to the left kidney (Fig. 11-12C).
The mesenchymal cells in the splenic primordium differentiate to form the
capsule, connective tissue framework, and parenchyma of the spleen. The spleen
functions as a hematopoietic center until late fetal life; however, it retains its
potential for blood cell formation even in adult life.
Accessory Spleens (Polysplenia)
One or more small splenic masses (about 1 cm in diameter) of fully functional
splenic tissue may exist in one of the peritoneal folds, commonly near the hilum
of the spleen, in the tail of the pancreas, or within the gastrosplenic ligament.
These accessory spleens (polysplenia) are usually isolated but may be attached
to the spleen by thin bands. An accessory spleen occurs in approximately 10% of
people.

Midgut
The derivatives of the midgut are: • The small intestine, including the duodenum
distal to the opening of the bile duct • The cecum, appendix, ascending colon,
and the right one half to two thirds of the transverse colon • These midgut
derivatives are supplied by the superior mesenteric artery (Figs. 11-1 and 11-
9).

Herniation of Midgut Loop
As the midgut elongates, it forms a ventral, U-shaped loop of intestine—the
midgut loop—that projects into the remains of the extraembryonic coelom in
the proximal part of the umbilical cord. The midgut loop of the intestine is a
physiologic umbilical herniation, which occurs at the beginning of the sixth
week (Figs. 11-13 and 11-14). The loop communicates with the umbilical vesicle
through the narrow omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk) until the 10th week.

FIGURE 11–13 Drawings illustrating herniation, rotation, and retraction of the
midgut from the beginning of the 6th week to the 12th week. A, Transverse
section through the midgut loop, illustrating the initial relationship of the limbs
of the loop to the artery. Note that the midgut loop is in the proximal part of the
umbilical cord. B, Later stage showing the beginning of midgut rotation. B1,

Illustration of the 90-degree counterclockwise rotation that carries the cranial
limb of the midgut to the right. C, At approximately 10 weeks, showing the
intestines returning to the abdomen. C1, Illustration of a further rotation of 90
degrees. D, At approximately 11 weeks showing the location of the viscera after
retraction of intestines. D1, Illustration of a further 90-degree rotation of the
viscera, for a total of 270 degrees. E, Later in the fetal period, showing the
cecum rotating to its normal position in the lower right quadrant of the abdomen.
FIGURE 11–14 A, Physiologic hernia in a fetus of approximately 58 days
attached to its placenta. Note the herniated intestine (arrow) in the proximal part
of the umbilical cord. B, Schematic drawing showing the structures in the distal
part of the umbilical cord.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. D.K. Kalousek, Department of Pathology, University of
British Columbia, Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.)
The physiologic umbilical herniation occurs because there is not enough room in
the abdominal cavity for the rapidly growing midgut. The shortage of space is
caused mainly by the relatively massive liver and the kidneys that exist during
this period of development.
The midgut loop has a cranial (proximal) limb and a caudal (distal) limb and is
suspended from the dorsal abdominal wall by an elongated mesentery—the
dorsal mesogastrium (Fig. 11-13A). The omphaloenteric duct is attached to the

apex of the midgut loop where the two limbs join (Fig. 11-13A). The cranial limb
grows rapidly and forms small intestinal loops, but the caudal limb undergoes
very little change except for development of the cecal swelling (diverticulum),
the primordium of the cecum, and appendix (Fig. 11-13B and C).

Rotation of Midgut Loop
While it is in the umbilical cord, the midgut loop rotates 90 degrees
counterclockwise around the axis of the superior mesenteric artery (Fig. 11-
13B). This brings the cranial limb (small intestine) of the midgut loop to the
right and the caudal limb (large intestine) to the left. During rotation, the cranial
limb elongates and forms intestinal loops (e.g., primordia of jejunum and ileum).

 Retraction of Intestinal Loops
During the 10th week, the intestines return to the abdomen (reduction of the
midgut hernia) (Fig. 11-13C and D). It is not known what causes the intestine to
return; however, the enlargement of the abdominal cavity and the relative
decrease in the size of the liver and kidneys are important factors. The small
intestine (formed from the cranial limb) returns first, passing posterior to the
superior mesenteric artery and occupies the central part of the abdomen. As the
large intestine returns, it undergoes a further 180-degree counterclockwise
rotation (see Fig. 11-13C1 and D1). The descending and sigmoid colon move to
the right side of the abdomen. The ascending colon becomes recognizable with
the elongation of the posterior abdominal wall (Fig. 11-13E).
Fixation of Intestines
Rotation of the stomach and duodenum causes the duodenum and pancreas to
fall to the right. The enlarged colon presses the duodenum and pancreas against
the posterior abdominal wall; as a result, most of the duodenal mesentery is
absorbed (Fig. 11-15C, D, and F). Consequently, the duodenum, except for the
first part (derived from foregut), has no mesentery and lies retroperitoneally.
Similarly, the head of the pancreas becomes retroperitoneal (posterior to
peritoneum).

FIGURE 11–15 Illustrations showing the mesenteries and fixation of the
intestines. A, Ventral view of the intestines before their fixation. B, Transverse
section at the level shown in A. The arrows indicate areas of subsequent fusion,
C, Sagittal section at the plane shown in A, illustrating the greater omentum
overhanging the transverse colon. The arrows indicate areas of subsequent
fusion. D, Ventral view of the intestines after their fixation. E, Transverse section
at the level shown in D after disappearance of the mesentery of the ascending
and descending colon. F, Sagittal section at the plane shown in D, illustrating
fusion of the greater omentum with the mesentery of the transverse colon and

fusion of the layers of the greater omentum.
The attachment of the dorsal mesentery to the posterior abdominal wall is greatly
modified after the intestines return to the abdominal cavity. At first, the dorsal
mesentery is in the median plane. As the intestines enlarge, lengthen, and assume
their final positions, their mesenteries are pressed against the posterior
abdominal wall. The mesentery of the ascending colon fuses with the parietal
peritoneum on this wall and disappears; consequently, the ascending colon also
becomes retroperitoneal (Fig. 11-15B and E).
Other derivatives of the midgut loop (e.g., the jejunum and ileum) retain their
mesenteries. The mesentery is at first attached to the median plane of the
posterior abdominal wall (Fig. 11-13B and C). After the mesentery of the
ascending colon disappears, the fan-shaped mesentery of the small intestines
acquires a new line of attachment that passes from the duodenojejunal junction
inferolaterally to the ileocecal junction.

 Cecum and Appendix
The primordium of the cecum and appendix—the cecal swelling (diverticulum)
—appears in the sixth week as an elevation on the antimesenteric border of the
caudal limb of the midgut loop (Fig. 11-13C and 11-16A). The apex of the cecal
swelling does not grow as rapidly as the rest of it; thus, the appendix is initially a
small diverticulum of the cecum (Fig. 11-16B). The appendix increases rapidly
in length so that at birth it is a relatively long tube arising from the distal end of
the cecum (Fig. 11-16D). After birth, the wall of the cecum grows unequally,
with the result that the appendix comes to enter its medial side.
FIGURE 11–16 Successive stages in the development of the cecum and
appendix. A, Embryo of 6 weeks. B, Embryo of 8 weeks. C, Fetus of 12 weeks.
D, Fetus at birth. Note that the appendix is relatively long and is continuous with
the apex of the cecum. E, Child. Note that the opening of the appendix lies on
the medial side of the cecum. In approximately 64% of people, the appendix is
located posterior to the cecum (retrocecal). The tenia coli is a thickened band of

longitudinal muscle in the wall of the colon.
The appendix is subject to considerable variation in position. As the ascending
colon elongates, the appendix may pass posterior to the cecum (retrocecal
appendix) or colon (retrocolic appendix). It may also descend over the brim of
the pelvis (pelvic appendix). In approximately 64% of people, the appendix is
located retrocecally (Fig. 11-16E).
Congenital Omphalocele
This anomaly is a persistence of the herniation of abdominal contents into the
proximal part of the umbilical cord (Figs. 11-17 and 11-18). Herniation of
intestines into the cord occurs in approximately 1 in 5000 births, and herniation
of liver and intestines in 1 in approximately 10,000 births. Up to 50% of cases
are associated with chromosomal abnormalities. The abdominal cavity is
proportionately small when there is an omphalocele because the impetus for it to
grow is absent. Surgical repair is required. Minor omphaloceles may be treated
with primary closure. A staged reduction is often planned if the viscera-
abdominal disproportion is large. Infants with very large omphaloceles can also
suffer from pulmonary and thoracic hypoplasia (underdevelopment).

FIGURE 11–17 A, An infant with a large omphalocele. B, Drawing of the infant
with an omphalocele resulting from a median defect of the abdominal muscles,
fascia, and skin near the umbilicus. This defect resulted in the herniation of
intra-abdominal structures (liver and intestine) into the proximal end of the
umbilical cord. It is covered by a membrane composed of peritoneum and

amnion.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. N.E. Wiseman, pediatric surgeon, Children’s Hospital,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 11–18 Sonogram of the abdomen of a fetus showing a large
omphalocele, with the liver (L) protruding (herniating) from the abdomen (*).
Also observe the stomach (S).
(Courtesy of Dr. G.J. Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Women’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)
Omphalocele results from impaired growth of the mesodermal (muscle) and
ectodermal (skin) components of the abdominal wall. Because the formation of
the abdominal compartment occurs during gastrulation, a critical failure of
growth at this time is often associated with other birth defects involving the
cardiovascular and urogenital systems. The covering of the hernial sac is the
epithelium of the umbilical cord, a derivative of the amnion.
Umbilical Hernia
When the intestines return to the abdominal cavity during the 10th week and
then herniate again through an imperfectly closed umbilicus, an umbilical hernia
forms. This common type of hernia is different from an omphalocele. In an
umbilical hernia, the protruding mass (usually the greater omentum and part of
the small intestine) is covered by subcutaneous tissue and skin.
The hernia usually does not reach its maximum size until the end of the first
month after birth. It usually ranges in diameter from 1 to 5 cm. The defect
through which the hernia occurs is in the linea alba (fibrous band in the median
line of the anterior abdominal wall between the rectus muscles). The hernia
protrudes during crying, straining, or coughing, and can be easily reduced
through the fibrous ring at the umbilicus. Surgery is not usually performed
unless the hernia persists to the age of 3 to 5 years.
Gastroschisis
This birth defect is a relatively uncommon congenital abdominal wall anomaly
(Fig. 11-19). Gastroschisis results from a defect lateral to the median plane of the
anterior abdominal wall. The linear defect permits extrusion of the abdominal

viscera without involving the umbilical cord. The viscera protrude into the
amniotic cavity and are bathed by amniotic fluid. The term gastroschisis, which
literally means a “split or open stomach,” is a misnomer because it is the anterior
abdominal wall that is split, not the stomach.
FIGURE 11–19 A, Photograph of a neonate with viscera protruding from an
anterior abdominal wall birth defect—gastroschisis. The defect was 2 to 4 cm
long and involved all layers of the abdominal wall. B, Photograph of the infant
after the viscera were returned to the abdomen and the defect was surgically
closed. C (sagittal) and D (axial) sonograms of a fetus at 18 weeks with

gastroschisis. Loops of intestine (arrow) can be seen in the amniotic fluid
anterior to the fetus (F).
(A and B, Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, MD, Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada. C and D, Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Departments of
Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Anatomy, Health Sciences Centre
and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba.)
The birth defect usually occurs on the right side lateral to the umbilicus and is
more common in males than females. The exact cause of gastroschisis is
uncertain, but various causes have been proposed including ischemic injury to
the anterior abdominal wall (absence of the right omphalomesenteric artery),
rupture of the anterior abdominal wall, weakness of the wall caused by abnormal
involution of the right umbilical vein, and perhaps rupture of an omphalocele
before the anterior abdominal wall has folded.
Anomalies of Midgut
Birth defects of the intestines are common; most of them are anomalies of gut
rotation—malrotation of the gut—that result from incomplete rotation and/or
fixation of the intestines. Nonrotation of the gut occurs when the intestine does
not rotate as it reenters the abdomen. As a result, the caudal limb of the midgut
loop returns to the abdomen first and the small intestines lie on the right side of
the abdomen and the entire large intestine is on the left. The usual 270-degree
counterclockwise rotation is not completed and the cecum lies just inferior to the
pylorus of the stomach. The cecum is fixed to the posterolateral abdominal wall
by peritoneal bands that pass over the duodenum (Fig. 11-20B). These peritoneal
bands and the volvulus (twisting) of the intestines cause duodenal obstruction.
This type of malrotation results from failure of the midgut loop to complete the
final 90 degrees of rotation (Fig. 11-13D). Only two parts of the intestine are
attached to the posterior abdominal wall: the duodenum and proximal colon.
This improperly positioned and incompletely fixed intestine may lead to a
catastrophic twisting of the midgut—midgut volvulus (Fig. 11-20F ). The small
intestine hangs by a narrow stalk that contains the superior mesenteric artery and
vein.

FIGURE 11–20 Birth defects of midgut rotation. A, Nonrotation. B, Mixed
rotation and volvulus. C, Reversed rotation. D, Subhepatic cecum and appendix.
E, Internal hernia. F, Midgut volvulus. G, CT enterographic image of
nonrotation in an adolescent patient with chronic abdominal pain. The large
intestine is completely on the left side of the abdomen (stool-filled). The small

intestine (fluid-filled) is seen on the right.
(G, Courtesy of Dr. S. Morrison, Children’s Hospital, The Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio.)
When midgut volvulus occurs, the superior mesenteric artery may be obstructed,
resulting in infarction and gangrene of the intestine supplied by it (Fig. 11-20A
and B). Infants with intestinal malrotation are prone to volvulus and present with
bilious emesis (vomiting bile). A contrast x-ray study can determine the
presence of rotational abnormalities.
Reversed Rotation
In rare cases, the midgut loop rotates in a clockwise rather than a
counterclockwise direction (Fig. 11-20C ). As a result, the duodenum lies
anterior to the superior mesenteric artery rather than posterior to it, and the
transverse colon lies posterior instead of anterior to it. In these infants, the
transverse colon may be obstructed by pressure from the superior mesenteric
artery. In more unusual cases, the small intestine lies on the left side of the
abdomen and the large intestine lies on the right side, with the cecum in the
center. This unusual situation results from malrotation of the midgut followed by
failure of fixation of the intestines.
Subhepatic Cecum and Appendix
If the cecum adheres to the inferior surface of the liver when it returns to the
abdomen, it will be drawn superiorly as the liver diminishes in size; as a result,
the cecum remains in its fetal position (Fig. 11-20D). A subhepatic cecum and
appendix are more common in males and occur in approximately 6% of fetuses.
A subhepatic cecum and “high-riding” appendix may be seen in adults; however,
when it occurs, it may create a problem in the diagnosis of appendicitis and
during surgical removal of the appendix (appendectomy).
Mobile Cecum

In approximately 10% of people, the cecum has an abnormal amount of freedom.
In very unusual cases, it may herniate into the right inguinal canal. A mobile
cecum results from incomplete fixation of the ascending colon. This condition is
clinically significant because of the possible variations in the position of the
appendix and because twisting (volvulus) of the cecum may occur.
Internal Hernia
In this rare birth defect, the small intestine passes into the mesentery of the
midgut loop during the return of the intestines to the abdomen (Fig. 11-20E ). As
a result, a hernia-like sac forms. This condition usually does not produce
symptoms and is often detected at autopsy or during an anatomic dissection.
Stenosis and Atresia of Intestine
Partial occlusion (stenosis) and complete occlusion (atresia) of the intestinal
lumen account for approximately one third of cases of intestinal obstruction (Fig.
11-6). The obstructive lesion occurs most often in the duodenum (25%) and
ileum (50%). The length of the area affected varies. These birth defects result
from failure of an adequate number of vacuoles to form during recanalization of
the intestine. In some cases, a transverse septum or web forms, producing the
blockage or atresia (Fig. 11-6F2).
Another possible cause of stenoses and atresias is interruption of the blood
supply to a loop of fetal intestine resulting from a fetal vascular accident caused
by impaired microcirculation that is associated with fetal distress, drug exposure,
or a volvulus. The loss of blood supply leads to necrosis of the intestines and
development of a fibrous cord connecting the proximal and distal ends of normal
intestine. Malfixation of the gut most likely occurs during the 10th week and
predisposes it to volvulus, strangulation, and impairment of its blood supply.
Ileal Diverticulum and Omphaloenteric Remnants
Outpouching of part of the ileum is a common anomaly of the alimentary tract

(Figs. 11-21 and 11-22A). A congenital ileal diverticulum (Meckel diverticulum)
occurs in 2% to 4% of people and is three to five times more prevalent in males
than females. An ileal diverticulum is of clinical significance because it may
become inflamed and cause symptoms that mimic appendicitis.

FIGURE 11–21 Photograph of a large ileal diverticulum (Meckel diverticulum).
Only a small percentage of these diverticula produce symptoms. Ileal diverticula
are one of the most common birth defects of the alimentary tract.
(Courtesy of Dr. M.N. Golarz De Bourne, St. George’s University Medical
School, Grenada.)
FIGURE 11–22 Ileal diverticula and remnants of the omphaloenteric duct. A,
Section of the ileum and a diverticulum with an ulcer. B, A diverticulum
connected to the umbilicus by a fibrous remnant of the omphaloenteric duct. C,
Omphaloenteric fistula resulting from persistence of the intra-abdominal part of
the omphaloenteric duct. D, Omphaloenteric cyst at the umbilicus and in the
fibrous remnant of the omphaloenteric duct. E, Volvulus (twisted) ileal
diverticulum and an umbilical sinus resulting from the persistence of the
omphaloenteric duct in the umbilicus. F, The omphaloenteric duct has persisted
as a fibrous cord connecting the ileum with the umbilicus. A persistent vitelline
artery extends along the fibrous cord to the umbilicus. This artery carried blood
to the umbilical vesicle from the embryo.

The wall of the diverticulum contains all layers of the ileum and may contain
small patches of gastric and pancreatic tissues. This ectopic gastric mucosa often
secretes acid, producing ulceration and bleeding (Fig. 11-22A). An ileal
diverticulum is the remnant of the proximal part of the omphaloenteric duct. It
typically appears as a finger-like pouch approximately 3 to 6 cm long that arises
from the antimesenteric border of the ileum (Fig. 11-21), 40 to 50 cm from the
ileocecal junction. An ileal diverticulum may be connected to the umbilicus by a
fibrous cord (which may predispose to intestinal obstruction as the intestine can
wrap around this cord) or an omphaloenteric fistula (Figs. 11-22B and C, and
11-23B); other possible remnants of the omphaloenteric duct are illustrated in
Figure 11-22D to F.
 

FIGURE 11–23 Male neonate with a patent omphaloenteric duct. A, The
transected umbilical cord shows two umbilical arteries (A), an umbilical vein
(V), and a larger lumen (O) of the omphaloenteric duct. B, An abdominal
radiograph identifies contrast material injected through the omphaloenteric duct
into the ileum.
(From Hinson RM, Biswas A, Mizelelle KM, Tunnessen WW Jr: Picture of the
month (persistent omphalomesenteric duct). Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
151:1161, 1997. Copyright 1997, American Medical Association. All rights
reserved.)
Duplication of Intestine
Most intestinal duplications are cystic or tubular. Cystic duplications are more
common (Fig. 11-24A and B). Tubular duplications usually communicate with
the intestinal lumen (Fig. 11-24C ). Almost all duplications are caused by failure
of normal recanalization of the small intestine; as a result, two lumina form (Fig.
11-24H and I ). The duplicated segment lies on the mesenteric side of the

intestine. The duplication often contains ectopic gastric mucosa, which may
result in local peptic ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding.
FIGURE 11–24 A, Cystic duplication of the small intestine on the mesenteric
side of the intestine; it receives branches from the arteries supplying the
intestine. B, Longitudinal section of the duplication shown in A; its musculature
is continuous with the intestinal wall. C, A short tubular duplication. D, A long
duplication showing a partition consisting of the fused muscular walls. E,
Transverse section of the intestine during the solid stage. F, Normal vacuole
formation. G, Coalescence of the vacuoles and reformation of the lumen. H,
Two groups of vacuoles have formed. I, Coalescence of the vacuoles illustrated
in H results in intestinal duplication.

Hindgut
The derivatives of the hindgut are:
• The left one third to one half of the transverse colon, the descending colon,
sigmoid colon, rectum, and superior part of the anal canal
• The epithelium of the urinary bladder and most of the urethra (see Chapter 12)
All hindgut derivatives are supplied by the inferior mesenteric artery. The
junction between the segment of transverse colon derived from the midgut and
that originating from the hindgut is indicated by the change in blood supply from
a branch of the superior mesenteric artery to a branch of the inferior mesenteric
artery.
The descending colon becomes retroperitoneal as its mesentery fuses with the
parietal peritoneum on the left posterior abdominal wall and then disappears
(Fig. 11-15B and E). The mesentery of the fetal sigmoid colon is retained, but it
is smaller than in the embryo (Fig. 11-15D).

 Cloaca
The expanded terminal part of the hindgut, the cloaca, is an endoderm-lined
chamber that is in contact with the surface ectoderm at the cloacal membrane
(Fig. 11-25A and B). This membrane is composed of endoderm of the cloaca and
ectoderm of the anal pit (Fig. 11-25D). The cloaca receives the allantois
ventrally, which is a finger-like diverticulum (Fig. 11-25A).

FIGURE 11–25 Successive stages in the partitioning of the cloaca into the
rectum and urogenital sinus by the urorectal septum. A, C, and E, Views from
the left side at 4, 6, and 7 weeks, respectively. B, D, and F, Enlargements of the
cloacal region. B1 and D1, Transverse sections of the cloaca at the levels shown
in B and D. Note that the postanal portion (shown in B) degenerates and

disappears as the rectum forms.
Partitioning of Cloaca
The cloaca is divided into dorsal and ventral parts by a wedge of mesenchyme—
the urorectal septum—that develops in the angle between the allantois and
hindgut. As the septum grows toward the cloacal membrane, it develops fork-
like extensions that produce infoldings of the lateral walls of the cloaca (Fig. 11-
25B). These folds grow toward each other and fuse, forming a partition that
divides the cloaca into two parts: the rectum, the cranial part of the anal canal,
and the urogenital sinus (Fig. 11-25D and E).
The cloaca plays a crucial role in anorectal development. New information
indicates that the urorectal septum does not fuse with the cloacal membrane;
therefore, an anal membrane does not exist. After the cloacal membrane ruptures
by apoptotic cell death, the anorectal lumen is temporarily closed by an
epithelial plug, which may have been interpreted as the anal membrane (Fig. 11-
25E).
Mesenchymal proliferations produce elevations of the surface ectoderm around
the epithelial anal plug. Recanalization of the anorectal canal occurs by apoptotic
cell death of the epithelial anal plug, which forms the anal pit (Fig. 11-25E).

 Anal Canal
The superior two thirds of the adult anal canal are derived from the hindgut; the
inferior one third develops from the anal pit (Fig. 11-26). The junction of the
epithelium derived from the ectoderm of the anal pit and the endoderm of the
hindgut is roughly indicated by the irregular pectinate line, located at the
inferior limit of the anal valves. Approximately 2 cm superior to the anus is the
anocutaneous line (“white line”). This is approximately where the composition
of the anal epithelium changes from columnar to stratified squamous cells. At
the anus, the epithelium is keratinized and continuous with the skin around the
anus. The other layers of the wall of the anal canal are derived from splanchnic
mesenchyme. The formation of the anal sphincter appears to be under Hox D
genetic control.
FIGURE 11–26 Sketch of the rectum and anal canal showing their
developmental origins. Note that the superior two thirds of the anal canal are
derived from the hindgut, whereas the inferior one third of the canal is derived
from the anal pit. Because of their different embryologic origins, the superior
and inferior parts of the anal canal are supplied by different arteries and nerves
and have different venous and lymphatic drainages.
Because of its hindgut origin, the superior two thirds of the anal canal are mainly
supplied by the superior rectal artery, the continuation of the inferior mesenteric
artery (hindgut artery). The venous drainage of this superior part is mainly via
the superior rectal vein, a tributary of the inferior mesenteric vein. The
lymphatic drainage of the superior part is eventually to the inferior mesenteric

lymph nodes. Its nerves are from the autonomic nervous system (ANS).
Because of its origin from the anal pit, the inferior one third of the anal canal is
supplied mainly by the inferior rectal arteries, branches of the internal pudendal
artery. The venous drainage is through the inferior rectal vein, a tributary of the
internal pudendal vein that drains into the internal iliac vein. The lymphatic
drainage of the inferior part of the anal canal is to the superficial inguinal lymph
nodes. Its nerve supply is from the inferior rectal nerve; hence, it is sensitive to
pain, temperature, touch, and pressure.
The differences in blood supply, nerve supply, and venous and lymphatic
drainage of the anal canal are important clinically, such as when considering the
metastasis (spread) of cancer cells. The characteristics of carcinomas in the two
parts also differ. Tumors in the superior part are painless and arise from
columnar epithelium, whereas tumors in the inferior part are painful and arise
from stratified squamous epithelium.
Congenital Megacolon or Hirschsprung Disease
This disease is a dominantly inherited multigenic disorder with incomplete
penetrance and variable expressivity. Of the genes so far identified, the RET
proto-oncogene is the major susceptibility gene and accounts for most cases.
This disease affects one in 5000 newborns and is defined as an absence of
ganglion cells (aganglionosis) in a variable length of distal bowel.
Infants with congenital megacolon, or Hirschsprung disease (Fig. 11-27), lack
autonomic ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus distal to the dilated segment of
colon. The enlarged colon—megacolon—has the normal number of ganglion
cells. The dilation results from failure of relaxation of the aganglionic segment,
which prevents movement of the intestinal contents, resulting in dilation. In most
cases, only the rectum and sigmoid colon are involved; occasionally, ganglia are
also absent from more proximal parts of the colon.


FIGURE 11–27 Radiograph of the colon after a barium enema in a 1-month-old
infant with congenital megacolon (Hirschsprung disease). The aganglionic distal
segment (rectum and distal sigmoid colon) is narrow, with distended normal
ganglionic bowel, full of fecal material, proximal to it. Note the transition zone
(arrow).
(Courtesy of Dr. Martin H. Reed, Department of Radiology, University of
Manitoba and Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Megacolon is the most common cause of neonatal obstruction of the colon and
accounts for 33% of all neonatal obstructions; males are affected more often than
females (4 : 1). Megacolon results from failure of neural crest cells to migrate
into the wall of the colon during the fifth to seventh weeks. This results in failure
of parasympathetic ganglion cells to develop in the Auerbach and Meissner
plexuses.
Anorectal Anomalies
Most anorectal anomalies result from abnormal development of the urorectal
septum, resulting in incomplete separation of the cloaca into urogenital and
anorectal parts (see Fig. 11-29A ). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf-10) have been implicated in birth defects of the hindgut. There is
normally a temporary communication between the rectum and anal canal
dorsally from the bladder and urethra ventrally (Fig. 11-25C ). Lesions are
classified as low or high depending on whether the rectum ends superior or
inferior to the puborectalis muscle, which maintains fecal continence and relaxes
to allow defecation.
Low Birth Defects of Anorectal Region
• Imperforate anus occurs in 1 : 5000 newborn infants and is more common in
males (Figs. 11-28 and 11-29C ). The anal canal may end blindly or there may be
an ectopic anus or an anoperineal fistula that opens into the perineum (Fig. 11-
29D and E ). The abnormal canal may, however, open into the vagina in females
or the urethra in males (Figs. 11-29F and G ). More than 90% of low anorectal
anomalies are associated with an external fistula.

• In anal stenosis the anus is in the normal position, but the anus and anal canal
are narrow (Fig. 11-29B ). This birth defect is probably caused by a slight dorsal
deviation of the urorectal septum as it grows caudally.
• In membranous atresia the anus is in the normal position, but a thin layer of
tissue separates the anal canal from the exterior (Figs. 11-28 and 11-29C ). The
remnant of the epithelial anal plug is thin enough to bulge on straining and
appears blue from the presence of meconium (feces of neonate) superior to it.
This defect results from failure of the epithelial plug to perforate at the end of
the eighth week.
 
FIGURE 11–28 Imperforate anus. A, Female neonate with anal atresia
(imperforate anus). In most cases, a thin layer of tissue separates the anal canal
from the exterior. Some form of imperforate anus occurs approximately once in
every 5000 neonates; it is more common in males. B, Radiograph of an infant
with an imperforate anus. The dilated end of the radiopaque probe is at the
bottom of the blindly ending anal pit. The large intestine is distended with feces
and contrast material.

(A, Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, MD, Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada. B, Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the
Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
FIGURE 11–29 Various types of anorectal birth defects. A, Persistent cloaca.
Note the common outlet for the intestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts. B,
Anal stenosis. C, Anal atresia (imperforate anus). D and E, Anal agenesis with a
perineal fistula. F, Anorectal agenesis with a rectovaginal fistula. G, Anorectal
agenesis with a rectourethral fistula. H and I, Rectal atresia.
High Birth Defects of Anorectal Region
In high anomalies of the anorectal region, the rectum ends superior to the
puborectalis muscle when there is anorectal agenesis. This is the most common
type of anorectal birth defect. Although the rectum ends blindly, there is usually

a fistula to the bladder (rectovesical fistula) or urethra (rectourethral fistula) in
males or to the vagina (rectovaginal fistula) or the vestibule of the vagina
(rectovestibular fistula) in females (Fig. 11-29F and G ).
Anorectal agenesis with a fistula is the result of incomplete separation of the
cloaca from the urogenital sinus by the urorectal septum (Fig. 11-25C to E ). In
newborn males with this condition, meconium may be observed in the urine,
whereas fistulas in females result in the presence of meconium in the vestibule
of the vagina.
In rectal atresia, the anal canal and rectum are present but are separated (Fig.
11-29H and I ). Sometimes the two segments of intestine are connected by a
fibrous cord, the remnant of an atretic portion of the rectum. The cause of rectal
atresia may be abnormal recanalization of the colon or, more likely, defective
blood supply.

Summary of Alimentary System
• The primordial gut forms from the dorsal part of the umbilical vesicle, which
is incorporated into the embryo. The endoderm of the primordial gut gives rise to
the epithelial lining of the alimentary tract, except for the cranial and caudal
parts, which are derived from the ectoderm of the stomodeum and cloacal
membrane, respectively. The muscular and connective tissue components of the
alimentary tract are derived from the splanchnic mesenchyme surrounding the
primordial gut.
• The foregut gives rise to the pharynx, lower respiratory system, esophagus,
stomach, proximal part of the duodenum, liver, pancreas, and biliary apparatus.
Because the trachea and esophagus have a common origin from the foregut,
incomplete partitioning by the tracheoesophageal septum results in stenoses or
atresias, with or without fistulas between them.
• The hepatic diverticulum, the primordium of the liver, gallbladder, and biliary
duct system, is an outgrowth of the endodermal epithelial lining of the foregut.
Epithelial liver cords develop from the hepatic diverticulum and grow into the
septum transversum. Between the layers of the ventral mesentery, derived from
the septum transversum, primordial cells differentiate into the hepatic tissues and
the lining of the ducts of the biliary system.
• Congenital duodenal atresia results from failure of the vacuolization and
recanalization process to occur after the normal solid developmental stage of the
duodenum. Usually the epithelial cells degenerate and the lumen of the
duodenum is restored. Obstruction of the duodenum can also be caused by an
annular pancreas or pyloric stenosis.
• The pancreas develops from pancreatic buds that form from the endodermal
lining of the foregut. When the duodenum rotates to the right, the ventral
pancreatic bud moves dorsally and fuses with the dorsal pancreatic bud. The
ventral pancreatic bud forms most of the head of the pancreas, including the
uncinate process. The dorsal pancreatic bud forms the remainder of the
pancreas. In some fetuses, the duct systems of the two buds fail to fuse, and an
accessory pancreatic duct forms.
• The midgut gives rise to the duodenum (the part distal to the entrance of the
bile duct), jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and the right one
half to two thirds of the transverse colon. The midgut forms a U-shaped
umbilical loop of intestine that herniates into the umbilical cord during the sixth

week because there is no room for it in the abdomen. While in the umbilical
cord, the midgut loop rotates counterclockwise 90 degrees. During the 10th
week, the intestines return to the abdomen, rotating a further 180 degrees.
• Omphaloceles, malrotations, and abnormal fixation of the gut result from
failure of return or abnormal rotation of the intestine. Because the gut is
normally occluded during the fifth and sixth weeks, stenosis (partial
obstruction), atresia (complete obstruction), and duplications result if
recanalization fails to occur or occurs abnormally. Remnants of the
omphaloenteric duct may persist. Ileal diverticula are common; however, very
few of them become inflamed and produce pain.
• The hindgut gives rise to the left one third to one half of the transverse colon,
the descending and sigmoid colon, the rectum, and the superior part of the anal
canal. The inferior part of the anal canal develops from the anal pit. The caudal
part of the hindgut divides the cloaca into the urogenital sinus and rectum. The
urogenital sinus gives rise to the urinary bladder and urethra. The rectum and
superior part of the anal canal are separated from the exterior by the epithelial
plug. This mass of epithelial cells breaks down by the end of the eighth week.
• Most anorectal anomalies result from abnormal partitioning of the cloaca into
the rectum and anal canal posteriorly and the urinary bladder and urethra
anteriorly. Arrested growth and/or deviation of the urorectal septum causes most
anorectal abnormalities, such as rectal atresia and fistulas between the rectum
and urethra, urinary bladder, or vagina.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 11–1
A female infant was born prematurely at 32 weeks gestation to a 39-year-old
woman whose pregnancy was complicated by polyhydramnios. Amniocentesis at
16 weeks showed that the infant had trisomy 21. The baby began to vomit within
a few hours after birth. Marked dilation of the epigastrium was noted.
Radiographs of the abdomen showed gas in the stomach and the superior part of
the duodenum, but no other intestinal gas was observed. A diagnosis of duodenal
atresia was made.
• Where does obstruction of the duodenum usually occur?
• What is the embryologic basis of this congenital defect?
• What caused distention of the infant’s epigastrium?
• Is duodenal atresia commonly associated with other defects such as the Down
syndrome?
• What is the embryologic basis of the polyhydramnios in this case?

Case 11–2
The umbilicus of a newborn infant failed to heal normally. It was swollen and
there was a persistent discharge from the umbilical stump. A sinus tract was
outlined with contrast media during fluoroscopy. The tract was resected on the
ninth day after birth and its distal end was found to terminate in a diverticulum
of the ileum.
• What is the embryologic basis of the sinus tract?
• What is the usual clinical name given to this type of ileal diverticulum?
• Is this birth defect common?

Case 11–3
A female infant was born with a small dimple where the anus should have been.
Examination of the infant’s vagina revealed meconium and an opening of a sinus
tract in the posterior wall of the vagina. Radiographic examination using a
contrast medium injected through a tiny catheter inserted into the opening
revealed a fistulous connection.
• With which part of the lower bowel would the fistula probably be connected?
• Name this birth defect.
• What is the embryologic basis of this condition?

Case 11–4
A newborn infant was born with a light gray, shiny mass measuring the size of
an orange that protruded from the umbilical region. The mass was covered by a
thin transparent membrane.
• What is this birth defect called?
• What is the origin of the membrane covering the mass?
• What would be the composition of the mass?
• What is the embryologic basis of this protrusion?

Case 11–5
A newborn infant appeared normal at birth; however, excessive vomiting and
abdominal distention developed after a few hours. The vomitus contained bile
and only a little meconium was passed. Radiographic examination showed a
gas-filled stomach and dilated, gas-filled loops of small bowel, but no air was
present in the large intestine. This indicated a congenital obstruction of the small
bowel.
• What part of the small bowel was probably obstructed?
• What would the condition be called?
• Why was only a little meconium passed?
• What would likely be observed at operation?
• What was the probable embryologic basis of the condition?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Bates MD, Balistreri WF. Development and function of the liver and biliary
system. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
Bronshtein M, Blazer S, Zimmer EZ. The fetal gastrointestinal tract and
abdominal wall. In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Burn SF, Hill RE. Left–right asymmetry in gut development: What happens
next. BioEssays. 2009;31:1026.
Heath JK. Transcriptional networks and signaling pathway that govern vertebrate
intestinal development. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:159.
Kapur RP. Practical pathology and genetics of Hirschsprung’s disease. Semin
Pediatr Surg. 2009;18:212.
Kluth D, Fiegel HC, Metzger. Embryology of the hindgut. Semin Pediatr Sur.
2011;20:152.

Lade AG, Monga SPS. Beta-catenin signaling in hepatic development and
progenitors: which way does WNT blow. Dev Dyn. 2011;240:486.
Lau ST, Caty MG. Hindgut abnormalities. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86:285.
Ledbetter DJ. Gastroschisis and omphalocele. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86:249.
Levitt MA, Pena A. Cloacal malformations: Lessons learned from 490 cases.
Semin Pediatr Surg. 2010;9:118.
Magnuson DK, Parry RL, Chwals WJ. Selected abdominal gastrointestinal
anomalies. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and
Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8,
Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Metzger R, Metzger U, Fiegel HC, et al. Embryology of the midgut. Semin
Pediatr Sur. 2011;20:145.
Metzger R, Wachowiak R, Kluth Dl. Embryology of the early foregut. Semin
Pediatr Sur. 2011;20:136.
Mundt E, Bates MD. Genetics of Hirschsprung disease and anorectal
malformations. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2010;19:107. Wilkins, 2010
Okamoto T, Takamizawa S, Arai H, et al. Esophageal atresia: Prognostic
classification revisited. Surgery. 2009;145:675.
Naik-Mathuria B, Olutoye OO. Foregut abnormalities. Surg Clin North Am.
2006;86:261.
Vakili K, Pomfret EA. Biliary anatomy and embryology. Surg Clin North Am.
2008;88:1159.
Van der Putte SCJ. The development of the human anorectum. Anat Rec.
2009;292:952.

Chapter 12 Urogenital System
Development of Urinary System 247
   Development of Kidneys and Ureters 247
   Development of Urinary Bladder 259
   Development of Urethra 264
Development of Suprarenal Glands 264
Development of Genital System 265
   Development of Gonads 265
   Development of Genital Ducts 269
   Development of Male Genital Ducts and Glands 269
   Development of Female Genital Ducts and Glands 271
   Development of Vagina 271
Development of External Genitalia 273
   Development of Male External Genitalia 273
   Development of Female External Genitalia 275
Development of Inguinal Canals 282
Relocation of Testes and Ovaries 284
   Testicular Descent 284
   Ovarian Descent 284
Summary of Urogenital System 285
Clinically Oriented Problems 286
The urogenital system is divided functionally into the urinary system and the
genital system. The system includes all the organs involved in reproduction and
forming and voiding urine. Embryologically, the systems are closely associated,
especially during their early stages of development.
The urogenital system develops from the intermediate mesenchyme
(mesoderm) derived from the dorsal body wall of the embryo (Fig. 12-1A and
B). This mesenchyme (primordial embryonic connective tissue) is primarily
responsible for the formation of the kidneys and internal genitalia and their
ducts. During folding of the embryo in the horizontal plane (see Chapter 5), this
mesoderm is carried ventrally and loses its connection with the somites (Fig. 12-
1C and D). A longitudinal elevation of mesoderm—the urogenital ridge—forms
on each side of the dorsal aorta (Fig. 12-1F). The part of the urogenital ridge
giving rise to the urinary system is the nephrogenic cord (Fig. 12-1C to F); the
part giving rise to the genital system is the gonadal ridge (see Fig. 12-29C).

FIGURE 12–1 A, Dorsal view of an embryo during the third week
(approximately 18 days). B, Transverse section of the embryo showing the
position of the intermediate mesenchyme before lateral folding of the embryo.
C, Lateral view of an embryo during the fourth week (approximately 24 days).
D, Transverse section of the embryo after the commencement of folding,

showing the nephrogenic cords. E, Lateral view of an embryo later in the fourth
week (approximately 26 days). F, Transverse section of the embryo showing the
lateral folds meeting each other ventrally.
Expression of the following genes is needed for the formation of the urogenital
ridge: Wilms tumor suppressor 1 (WT1), steroidogenic factor 1, and DAX1 gene.

 Development of Urinary System
The urinary system begins to develop before the genital system and consists of: •
Kidneys, which produce and excrete urine • Ureters, which convey urine from
the kidneys to the urinary bladder • Urinary bladder, which stores urine
temporarily
• Urethra, which discharges the urine from the bladder externally

Development of Kidneys and Ureters
Three sets of successive kidneys develop in human embryos. The first set—
pronephroi—is rudimentary and nonfunctional. The second set—mesonephroi—
is well developed and functions briefly during the early fetal period. The third
set—metanephroi—forms the permanent kidneys.
Pronephroi
These bilateral, transitory structures appear early in the fourth week. They are
represented by a few cell clusters and tubular structures in the neck region (Fig.
12-2A). The pronephric ducts run caudally and open into the cloaca (Fig. 12-
2B). The pronephroi soon degenerate; however, most parts of the pronephric
ducts persist and are used by the next set of kidneys.
FIGURE 12–2 Illustrations of the three sets of nephric systems in an embryo
during the fifth week. A, Lateral view. B, Ventral view. The mesonephric tubules
have been pulled laterally; their normal position is shown in A.
Mesonephroi
These large, elongated excretory organs appear late in the fourth week, caudal to
the pronephroi (Fig. 12-2). The mesonephroi are well developed and function as

interim kidneys for approximately 4 weeks, until the permanent kidneys develop
and function (Fig. 12-3). The mesonephric kidneys consist of glomeruli (10–50
per kidney) and tubules (Figs. 12-3 to 12-5). The mesonephric tubules open
into bilateral mesonephric ducts, which were originally the pronephric ducts.
The mesonephric ducts open into the cloaca. The mesonephroi degenerate
toward the end of the first trimester however, their metanephric tubules become
the efferent ductules of the testes. The mesonephric ducts have several adult
derivatives in males (Table 12-1).
FIGURE 12–3 Dissection of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis of an embryo at
approximately 54 days. Observe the large suprarenal glands and the elongated
mesonephroi (mesonephric kidneys). Also observe the gonads (testes or ovaries).
The phallus will develop into a penis or clitoris depending on the genetic sex of
the embryo.
(From Nishimura H [ed]: Atlas of Human Prenatal Histology. Tokyo, Igaku-
Shoin, 1983, with permission.)
FIGURE 12–4 Photomicrograph of a transverse section of an embryo at

approximately 42 days, showing the mesonephros and developing suprarenal
glands.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

FIGURE 12–5 A, Lateral view of a 5-week embryo showing the extent of the
early mesonephros and the ureteric bud, the primordium of the metanephros
(primordium of the permanent kidney). B, Transverse section of the embryo
showing the nephrogenic cords from which the mesonephric tubules develop. C
to F, Successive stages in the development of mesonephric tubules between the
5th and 11th weeks. The expanded medial end of the mesonephric tubule is
invaginated by blood vessels to form a glomerular capsule.
Table 12–1 Derivatives and Vestigial Remains of Embryonic Urogenital
Structures*
MALE
EMBRYONIC
STRUCTURE
FEMALE
Testis
Indifferent gonad
Ovary
Seminiferous tubules
Cortex
Ovarian follicles
Rete testis
Medulla
Rete ovarii
Gubernaculum testis
Gubernaculum
Ovarian ligament
Round ligament of uterus
Efferent ductules of testis
Mesonephric
tubules
Epoophoron
Paradidymis
 
Paroophoron
Appendix of epididymis
Mesonephric duct
Appendix vesiculosa
Duct of epididymis
 
Duct of epoophoron
Ductus deferens
 
Longitudinal duct; Gartner
duct
Ureter, pelvis, calices, and
collecting tubules
 
Ureter; pelvis, calices, and
collecting tubules
Ejaculatory duct and
seminal gland
 
 
Appendix of testis
Paramesonephric
duct
Hydatid (of Morgagni)
 
 
Uterine tube
 
 
Uterus
Urinary bladder
Urogenital sinus
Urinary bladder
Urethra (except navicular

fossa)
 
Urethra
Prostatic utricle
 
Vagina
Prostate
 
Urethral and paraurethral
glands
Bulbourethral glands
 
Greater vestibular glands
Seminal colliculus
Sinus tubercle
Hymen
Penis
Phallus
Clitoris
Glans of penis
 
Glans of clitoris
Corpora cavernosa of penis  
Corpora cavernosa of
clitoris
Corpus spongiosum of penis  
Bulb of vestibule
Ventral aspect of penis
Urogenital folds
Labia minora
Scrotum
Labioscrotal
swellings
Labia majora
* Functional derivatives are in italics.
Metanephroi
Metanephroi—primordia of permanent kidneys—begin to develop in the fifth
week (Fig. 12-6) and become functional approximately 4 weeks later. Urine
formation continues throughout fetal life. It is excreted into the amniotic cavity
and mixes with the amniotic fluid.

FIGURE 12–6 Development of the permanent kidney. A, Lateral view of a 5-
week embryo showing the ureteric bud, the primordium of the metanephros. B to
E, Successive stages in the development of the ureteric bud (fifth to eighth
weeks). Observe the development of the kidney: ureter, renal pelvis, calices, and
collecting tubules.
The permanent kidneys develop from two sources (Fig. 12-6):
• The ureteric bud (metanephric diverticulum)
• The metanephrogenic blastema (metanephric mass of mesenchyme)
The ureteric bud is a diverticulum (outgrowth) from the mesonephric duct near
its entrance into the cloaca. The metanephrogenic blastema is derived from the
caudal part of the nephrogenic cord (Fig. 12-6). As the ureteric bud elongates, it
penetrates the metanephrogenic blastema—a metanephric mass of mesenchyme
(Fig. 12-6B).
The stalk of the ureteric bud becomes the ureter. The cranial part of the bud
undergoes repetitive branching, forming branches which differentiate into the

collecting tubules of the metanephros (Figs. 12-6E and 12-7A and B). The first
four generations of tubules enlarge and become confluent to form the major
calices (see Fig. 12-6D), and the second four generations coalesce to form the
minor calices. The end of each arched collecting tubule induces clusters of
mesenchymal cells in the metanephrogenic blastema to form small metanephric
vesicles (Fig. 12-7A). These vesicles elongate and become metanephric tubules
(Fig. 12-7B and C).
FIGURE 12–7 Development of nephrons. A, Nephrogenesis commences around
the beginning of the eighth week. B and C, Note that the metanephric tubules,
the primordia of the nephrons, connect with the collecting tubules to form
uriniferous tubules. D, Observe that nephrons are derived from the
metanephrogenic blastema and the collecting tubules are derived from the
ureteric bud.

The proximal ends of these tubules are invaginated by glomeruli. The tubules
differentiate into proximal and distal convoluted tubules, and the nephron loop
(Henle loop), together with the glomerulus and its capsule, constitute a nephron
(Fig. 12-7D). Proliferation of the nephron progenitor cells and formation of the
nephrons are dependent on BMP7 and Wnt-4 (Notch)/β-catenin signaling. Each
distal convoluted tubule contacts an arched collecting tubule, and the tubules
become confluent.
A uriniferous tubule consists of two embryologically different parts (Figs. 12-6
and 12-7):
• A nephron derived from the metanephrogenic blastema
• A collecting tubule derived from the ureteric bud
Between the 10th and 18th weeks, the number of glomeruli increases gradually
and then increases rapidly until the 32nd week, when an upper limit is reached.
At term, nephron formation is complete, with each kidney containing as many as
2 million nephrons.
The fetal kidneys are subdivided into lobes (Fig. 12-8). The lobulation usually
disappears at the end of the first year of infancy as the nephrons increase and
grow. The increase in kidney size after birth results mainly from the elongation
of the proximal convoluted tubules as well as an increase of interstitial tissue.
Nephron formation is complete at birth except in premature infants. Although
glomerular filtration begins at approximately the ninth fetal week, functional
maturation of the kidneys and increasing rates of filtration occur after birth.

FIGURE 12–8 The kidneys and suprarenal glands of a 28-week fetus (x2). The
lobes usually disappear by the end of the first postnatal year. Note the large size
of the suprarenal (adrenal) glands.
Branching of the ureteric bud is dependent on induction by the metanephric
mesenchyme. Differentiation of the nephrons depends on induction by the
collecting tubules. The ureteric bud and the metanephrogenic blastema interact
and induce each other, a process known as reciprocal induction, to form the
permanent kidneys.
Molecular studies, especially knockout and transgenic analyses in the mouse,
show that this process involves two principal signaling systems that use
conserved molecular pathways. Recent research has provided insight into the
complex interrelated molecular events regulating the development of the kidneys
(Fig. 12-9). Before induction, a transcription factor WT1 is expressed in the
metanephrogenic blastema supporting the survival of the as yet uninduced
mesenchyme. Expression of Pax2, Eya1, and Sall1 is required for the expression
of glial-derived neurotropic factor (GDNF) in the metanephric mesenchyme. The
transcription factors vHNF1 (HNF1 beta) and GDNF plays an essential role in
the induction and branching of the ureteric bud (branching morphogenesis).
The receptor for GDNF, c-ret, is first expressed in the mesonephric duct, but
later becomes localized on the tip of the ureteric bud. Subsequent branching is
controlled by transcription factors, including Emx2 and Pax2 and growth factor
signals of the Wnt, FGF, and BMP families. Transformation of the metanephric
mesenchyme to the epithelial cells of the nephron—mesenchymal-epithelial
transition—is regulated by mesenchyme factors including Wnt4. Recent studies
reveal that mutation of the angiotensin-type 2 receptor gene might account for
kidney and urinary tract abnormalities.

FIGURE 12–9 Molecular control of kidney development. A, The ureteric bud
requires inductive signals derived from metanephrogenic blastema under control
of transcription factors (orange text), such as WT1 and signaling molecules (red
text) including glial-derived neurotropic factor (GDNF) and its epithelial
receptor, RET. The normal ureteric bud response to these inductive signals is
under the control of transcription factors such as Pax2, Lim1, and the FORMIN
gene. B, Branching of the ureteric bud is initiated and maintained by interaction
with the mesenchyme under the regulation of genes such as Emx2 and specified
expression of GDNF and RET at the tips of the invading ureteric bud.
(From Piscione TD, Rosenblum ND: The malformed kidney: Disruption of
glomerular and tubular development. Clin Genet 56:341–356, 1999.)
Positional Changes of Kidneys
Initially the primordial permanent kidneys lie close to each other in the pelvis,
ventral to the sacrum (Fig. 12-10A). As the abdomen and pelvis grow, the
kidneys gradually relocate to the abdomen and move farther apart (Fig. 12-10B
and C). They attain their adult position by the ninth week (Fig. 12-10D). This
“ascent” results mainly from the growth of the embryo’s body caudal to the
kidneys. In effect, the caudal part of the embryo grows away from the kidneys so
that they progressively occupy their normal position on either side of the
vertebral column.

FIGURE 12–10 A to D, Diagrammatic ventral views of the abdominopelvic
region of embryos and fetuses (sixth to ninth weeks), showing medial rotation
and relocation of the kidneys from the pelvis to the abdomen. C and D, Note that
as the kidneys relocate (ascend), they are supplied by arteries at successively
higher levels and that the hila of the kidneys are directed anteromedially.
Initially the hilum of each kidney, where blood vessels, the ureter, and nerves
enter and leave, face ventrally; however, as the kidneys relocate (“ascend”), they
rotate medially almost 90 degrees. By the ninth week, the hila are directed
anteromedially (Fig. 12-10C and D). Eventually the kidneys become
retroperitoneal (external to the peritoneum) on the posterior abdominal wall.
Changes in Blood Supply of Kidneys
During the changes in the kidneys position, they receive their blood supply from
vessels that are close to them. Initially, the renal arteries are branches of the
common iliac arteries (Fig. 12-10A and B). Later, the kidneys receive their blood
supply from the distal end of the aorta. When they are located at a higher level,
they receive new branches from the aorta (Fig. 12-10C and D). Normally the
caudal branches of the renal vessels undergo involution and disappear.
The position of the kidneys becomes fixed once they come into contact with the
suprarenal glands in the ninth week. The kidneys receive their most cranial
arterial branches from the abdominal aorta; these branches become the
permanent renal arteries. The right renal artery is longer and often more superior.

Accessory Renal Arteries
The common variations in the blood supply to the kidneys reflect the manner in
which the blood supply continually changed during embryonic and early fetal
life (Fig. 12-10). Approximately 25% of adult kidneys have two to four renal
arteries. Accessory (supernumerary) renal arteries usually arise from the aorta
superior or inferior to the main renal artery and follow it to the hilum of the
kidney (Fig. 12-11A, C, and D). Accessory arteries may also enter the kidneys
directly, usually into the superior or inferior poles (Fig. 12-11B). An accessory
artery to the inferior pole (polar renal artery) may cross anterior to the ureter and
obstruct it, causing hydronephrosis—distention of the renal pelvis and calices
with urine. (If the artery enters the inferior pole of the right kidney, it usually
crosses anterior to the inferior vena cava and ureter.)
FIGURE 12–11 Common variations of renal vessels. A, Multiple renal arteries.
B, Note the accessory vessel entering the inferior pole of the kidney and that it is
obstructing the ureter and producing an enlarged renal pelvis. C and D,
Supernumerary renal veins.
The accessory renal arteries are end arteries; consequently, if an accessory artery
is damaged or ligated, the part of the kidney supplied by it will be ischemic (loss
of blood supply). Accessory arteries are approximately twice as common as
accessory veins.

Congenital Anomalies of Kidneys and Ureters
Some type of defect of the kidneys and ureters occurs in 3% to 4% of neonates.
Defects in shape and position are most common. Many fetal urinary tract
abnormalities can be detected before birth by ultrasonography.
Renal Agenesis
Unilateral renal agenesis (absence) occurs approximately once in every 1000
neonates. Males are affected more often than females and the left kidney is
usually the one that is absent (Figs. 12-12A and B and 12-13A). Unilateral renal
agenesis often causes no symptoms and is usually not discovered during infancy
because the other kidney usually undergoes compensatory hypertrophy and
performs the function of the missing kidney. Unilateral renal agenesis should be
suspected in infants with a single umbilical artery (see Chapter 7).
 

FIGURE 12–12 Sonograms of a fetus with unilateral renal agenesis. A,
Transverse scan at the level of the lumbar region of the vertebral column (Sp)
showing the right kidney (RK) but not the left kidney. B, Transverse scan at a
slightly higher level showing the left suprarenal gland (between cursors) within
the left renal fossa. C, Bilateral renal agenesis in a male fetus of 19.5 weeks.
(A and B, From Mahony BS: Ultrasound evaluation of the fetal genitourinary
system. In Callen PW [ed]: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3rd
ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1994. C, Courtesy of Dr. D.K. Kalousek,
Department of Pathology, University of British Columbia, Children’s Hospital,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.)

FIGURE 12–13 Illustrations of various birth defects of the urinary system. The
small sketch to the lower right of each drawing illustrates the probable
embryologic basis of the defect. A, Unilateral renal agenesis. B, Right side,
pelvic kidney; left side, divided kidney with a bifid ureter. C, Right side,
malrotation of the kidney; the hilum is facing laterally; left side, bifid ureter and

supernumerary kidney. D, Crossed renal ectopia. The left kidney crossed to the
right side and fused with the right kidney. E, Pelvic kidney or discoid kidney,
resulting from fusion of the kidneys while they were in the pelvis. F,
Supernumerary left kidney resulting from the development of two ureteric buds.
Bilateral renal agenesis (Fig. 12-12C ) is associated with oligohydramnios
(small amount of amniotic fluid) because little or no urine is excreted into the
amniotic cavity. This condition occurs approximately once in 3000 births, and is
incompatible with postnatal life. About 20% of persons with the Potter
syndrome are caused by bilateral renal agenesis. These infants have a
characteristic facial appearance: the eyes are widely separated and have
palpebronasal folds (epicanthic folds), the ears are low-set, the nose is broad and
flat, the chin is receding, and there are limb and respiratory anomalies. Infants
with bilateral renal agenesis usually die shortly after birth.
Renal agenesis results when the ureteric buds do not develop or the primordia
(stalks of buds) of the ureters degenerate. Failure of the ureteric buds to
penetrate the metanephrogenic blastema results in failure of kidney development
because no nephrons are induced by the collecting tubules to develop from the
metanephrogenic blastema. Renal agenesis probably has a multifactorial
etiology. There is clinical evidence that complete in utero involution of
polycystic kidneys could lead to renal agenesis with a blind ending ureter on the
same side.
Malrotated Kidney
If a kidney fails to rotate, the hilum faces anteriorly; that is, the fetal kidney
retains its embryonic position (Figs. 12-10A and 12-13C ). If the hilum faces
posteriorly, rotation of the kidney proceeded too far; if it faces laterally, lateral
instead of medial rotation occurred. Abnormal rotation of the kidneys is often
associated with ectopic kidneys.
Ectopic Kidneys
One or both kidneys may be in an abnormal position (see Fig. 12-13B, E, and
F ). Most ectopic kidneys are located in the pelvis (Fig. 12-14), but some lie in
the inferior part of the abdomen. Pelvic kidneys and other forms of ectopia result
from failure of the kidneys to ascend.

FIGURE 12–14 Sonogram of the pelvis of a fetus at 29 weeks. Observe the low
position of the right kidney (RK) near the urinary bladder (BL). This pelvic
kidney resulted from its failure to ascend during the sixth to ninth weeks.
Observe the normal location of the right suprarenal gland (AD), which develops

separately from the kidney.
(Courtesy of Dr. Lyndon M. Hill, director of ultrasound, Magee-Women’s
Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA.)
Pelvic kidneys are close to each other and usually fuse to form a discoid
(“pancake”) kidney (Fig. 12-13E ). Ectopic kidneys receive their blood supply
from blood vessels near them (internal or external iliac arteries and/or abdominal
aorta). They are often supplied by several vessels. Sometimes a kidney crosses to
the other side, resulting in crossed renal ectopia with or without fusion (Fig. 12-
15), showing both kidneys on the right side of the abdomen. An unusual type of
abnormal kidney is unilateral fused kidney. In such cases, the developing
kidneys fuse after they leave the pelvis, and one kidney attains its normal
position, carrying the other kidney with it (Fig. 12-13D).


FIGURE 12–15 Intravenous pyelogram (radiograph) showing crossed renal
ectopia (malposition).
(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Horseshoe Kidney
In 0.2% of the population, the poles of the kidneys are fused; usually it is the
inferior poles that fuse. The large U-shaped kidney usually lies in the pubic
region, anterior to the inferior lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 12-16). Normal ascent of
the fused kidneys is prevented because they are held down by the root of the
inferior mesenteric artery.
 

FIGURE 12–16 A, Horseshoe kidney in the lower abdomen of a 13-week female
fetus. B, Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of the abdomen of an
infant with a horseshoe kidney. Note the isthmus (vascular) of renal tissue (I)
connecting the right and left kidneys just anterior to the aorta (arrow) and
inferior vena cava.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. D.K. Kalousek, Department of Pathology, University of
British Columbia, Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; B,
Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
A horseshoe kidney usually produces no symptoms because its collecting system
develops normally and the ureters enter the bladder. If urinary flow is impeded,
signs and symptoms of obstruction and/or infection may appear. Approximately
7% of persons with Turner syndrome have horseshoe kidneys.
Duplications of Urinary Tract
Duplications of the abdominal part of the ureter and the renal pelvis are common
(Fig. 12-13F ). These defects result from abnormal division of the ureteric bud.
Incomplete division of the metanephric diverticulum results in a divided kidney
with a bifid ureter (Fig. 12-13B). Complete division results in a double kidney
with a bifid ureter (Fig. 12-13C ) or separate ureters (Fig. 12-17).

FIGURE 12–17 A duplex kidney with two ureters and renal pelves. A,
Longitudinal section through the kidney showing two renal pelves and calices.
B, Anterior surface of the kidney. C, Intravenous urography showing duplication
of the right kidney and ureter in a 10-year-old male. The distal ends of the right
ureter are fused at the level of the first sacral vertebra.
(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
A supernumerary kidney (Fig. 12-13F ) with its own ureter, which is rare,
probably results from the formation of two ureteric buds.
Ectopic Ureter
An ectopic ureter does not enter the urinary bladder. In males, the ureter usually
opens into the neck of the bladder or the prostatic part of the urethra. They may
also enter the ductus deferens, prostatic utricle, or seminal gland. In females, the
ureter opens into the neck of the bladder, or the urethra, vagina, or vestibule of
vagina (Fig. 12-18). Incontinence is the common complaint resulting from an
ectopic ureter because the urine flowing from the orifice does not enter the
bladder; instead it continually dribbles from the urethra in males and the urethra
and/or vagina in females.

FIGURE 12–18 Ectopic ureter in a young girl. This ureter enters the vestibule of
the vagina near the external urethral orifice. A thin ureteral catheter with
transverse marks has been introduced through the ureteric orifice into the ectopic
ureter. This girl had a normal voiding pattern and constant urinary dribbling.
(From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Arvin AM [eds]: Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics, 15th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996.)
An ectopic ureter results when the ureter is not incorporated into the trigone in
the posterior part of the urinary bladder. Instead it is carried caudally with the
mesonephric duct and is incorporated into the middle pelvic portion of the
vesical part of the urogenital sinus. Because this part of the sinus becomes the
prostatic urethra in males and the urethra in females, the location of ectopic
ureteric orifices is understandable. When two ureters form on one side (Fig. 12-
17), they usually open into the urinary bladder (Fig. 12-13F ).
Cystic Kidney Diseases
In autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, diagnosed at birth or in utero
by ultrasonography, both kidneys contain many small cysts (Fig. 12-19A), which
result in renal insufficiency. Death of the infant usually occurs shortly after birth;
however, an increasing number of these infants are surviving because of
postnatal dialysis and kidney transplantation.

 
FIGURE 12–19 Cystic kidney disease. A, Computed tomography (CT) scan
(contrast enhanced) of the abdomen of a 5-month-old male infant with AR
polycystic kidney disease. Note the linear ectasia (cysts) of collecting tubules. B,
Ultrasound scan of the left kidney of a 15-day-old male infant showing multiple
noncommunicating cysts with no renal tissue (unilateral multicystic dysplastic
kidney).
(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease results from dysmorphology during
development of the renal system (Fig. 12-19B). The outcome for most children
with multicystic dysplastic kidney disease is generally good because the disease
is unilateral in 75% of the cases. In this kidney disease, fewer cysts are seen than
in autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and they range in size from a
few millimeters to many centimeters in the same kidney. It was thought that the
cysts were the result of failure of the ureteric bud derivatives to join the tubules
derived from the metanephrogenic blastema. It is now believed that the cystic
structures are wide dilations of parts of the otherwise continuous nephrons,
particularly the nephron loops (of Henle).

Development of Urinary Bladder
For descriptive purposes, the urogenital sinus is divided into three parts (Fig.
12-20C):
• A vesical part that forms most of the urinary bladder and is continuous with the
allantois
• A pelvic part that becomes the urethra in the neck of the bladder, the prostatic
part of the urethra in males, and the entire urethra in females
• A phallic part that grows toward the genital tubercle (primordium of the penis
or clitoris—(Fig. 12-20C; see Fig. 12-37)

FIGURE 12–20 A, Lateral view of 5-week embryo, showing division of the
cloaca by the urorectal septum into the urogenital sinus and rectum. B, D, and F,
Dorsal views, showing the development of the kidneys and bladder, and changes
in the location of the kidneys. C, E, G, and H, Lateral views. The stages shown
in G and H are reached by the 12th week.

The bladder develops mainly from the vesical part of the urogenital sinus (Fig.
12-20C), but its trigone (triangular area at the base of the bladder between the
openings of the ureters) is derived from the caudal ends of the mesonephric
ducts (Fig. 12-20A and B). The entire epithelium of the bladder is derived from
the endoderm of the vesical part of the urogenital sinus. The other layers of its
wall develop from adjacent splanchnic mesenchyme.
Initially the bladder is continuous with the allantois (Fig. 12-20C). The allantois
soon constricts and becomes a thick fibrous cord, the urachus. It extends from
the apex of the bladder to the umbilicus (Figs. 12-20G and H and 12-21). In
adults, the urachus is represented by the median umbilical ligament. As the
bladder enlarges, distal parts of the mesonephric ducts are incorporated into its
dorsal wall (Fig. 12-20B to H). These ducts contribute to the formation of the
connective tissue in the trigone of the bladder. As the mesonephric ducts are
absorbed, the ureters open separately into the urinary bladder (Fig. 12-20C to H).
Partly because of traction exerted by the kidneys as they ascend, the orifices of
the ureters move superolaterally and enter obliquely through the base of the
bladder. In males, the orifices of the mesonephric ducts move close together and
enter the prostatic part of the urethra as the caudal ends of these ducts develop
into the ejaculatory ducts. In females, the distal ends of the mesonephric ducts
degenerate.
FIGURE 12–21 Dissection of the abdomen and pelvis of an 18-week female
fetus showing the relation of the urachus to the urinary bladder and umbilical
arteries.

In infants and children, the urinary bladder, even when empty, is in the abdomen.
It begins to enter the greater pelvis at approximately 6 years of age, but it does
not enter the lesser pelvis and become a pelvic organ until after puberty.
The apex of the urinary bladder in adults is continuous with the median
umbilical ligament, which extends posteriorly along the posterior surface of the
anterior abdominal wall.
Urachal Anomalies
In infants, a remnant of the urachal lumen may persist in the inferior part of the
urachus. In approximately 50% of cases, the lumen is continuous with the cavity
of the bladder. Remnants of the epithelial lining of the urachus may give rise to
urachal cysts (Fig. 12-22A), which are not usually detected except during a
postmortem unless the cysts become infected and enlarge. The patent inferior
end of the urachus may dilate to form a urachal sinus that opens into the
bladder. The lumen in the superior part of the urachus may also remain patent
and form a urachal sinus that opens at the umbilicus (Fig. 12-22B). Very rarely
the entire urachus remains patent and forms a urachal fistula that allows urine
to escape from its umbilical orifice (Fig. 12-22C ).

FIGURE 12–22 Urachal anomalies. A, Urachal cysts; the common site for them
is in the superior end of the urachus just inferior to the umbilicus. B, Two types
of urachal sinus are shown: one opens into the bladder and the other opens at the
umbilicus. C, A urachal fistula connects the bladder and umbilicus.
Congenital Megacystis
A pathologically large urinary bladder—megacystis or megalocystis—may
result from a congenital disorder of the ureteric bud, which may be associated
with dilation of the renal pelvis. The large bladder may result from posterior

urethral valves (Fig. 12-23). Many infants die from this disorder or suffer from
renal failure in early childhood.
FIGURE 12–23 Sonogram of an 18-week male fetus with megacystis (enlarged
bladder) caused by posterior urethral valves. The cross is placed on the fourth
intercostal space, the level to which the diaphragm has been elevated by this
very large fetal bladder (arrow; black = urine). In this case, the fetus survived
because of the placement of a pigtail catheter within the fetal bladder, allowing
drainage of urine into the amniotic cavity.
(Courtesy of Dr. C.R. Harman, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and

Reproductive Health, University of Maryland Medical Centre, Baltimore, MD.)
Exstrophy of Bladder
This rare birth defect occurs approximately once in every 10,000 to 40,000
births. Exstrophy (eversion) of the bladder (Fig. 12-24) usually occurs in males.
Exposure and protrusion of the mucosal surface of the posterior wall of the
bladder characterize this defect. The trigone of the bladder and the ureteric
orifices are exposed, and urine dribbles intermittently from the everted bladder.
Epispadias (urethra opens on dorsum of penis) and wide separation of the pubic
bones are associated with complete exstrophy of the bladder. In some cases, the
penis is divided into two parts and the halves of the scrotum are widely
separated (Figs. 12-24 and 12-25).
FIGURE 12–24 Exstrophy (eversion) of the bladder and bifid penis in a male
infant. The red bladder mucosa is visible and the halves of the penis and scrotum
are widely separated.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 12–25 A, C, and E, Normal stages in the development of the
infraumbilical abdominal wall and the penis during the fourth to eighth weeks.
B, D, and F, Probable stages in the development of epispadias and exstrophy of
the bladder. B and D, Note that the mesoderm fails to extend into the anterior
abdominal wall anterior to the urinary bladder. Also note that the genital tubercle

is located in a more caudal position than usual and that the urethral groove has
formed on the dorsal surface of the penis. F, The surface ectoderm and anterior
wall of the bladder have ruptured, resulting in exposure of the posterior wall of
the bladder. Note that the musculature of the anterior abdominal wall is present
on each side of the defect.
(Based on Patten BM, Barry A: The genesis of exstrophy of the bladder and
epispadias. Am J Anat 90:35, 1952.)
Exstrophy of the bladder, a deficiency of the anterior abdominal wall, is
caused by incomplete median closure of the inferior part of the wall (Fig. 12-25).
The defect involves both the abdominal wall and the anterior wall of the urinary
bladder; it results from failure of mesoderm to migrate between the ectoderm
and endoderm of the abdominal wall (Fig. 12-25B and C ). As a result, the
inferior parts of the rectus muscles are absent and the external and internal
oblique and the transversus abdominus muscles are deficient.
No muscle and connective tissue form in the anterior abdominal wall over the
urinary bladder. Rupture of the cloacal membrane results in wide
communication between the exterior and the mucous membrane of the bladder.
Rupture of the membrane before rupture of the cloacal membrane produces
exstrophy of the cloaca, resulting in exposure of the posterior wall of the bladder
(Fig. 12-25F ).

Development of Urethra
The epithelium of most of the male urethra and the entire female urethra is
derived from endoderm of the urogenital sinus (Figs. 12-20E and H and 12-26).
In males, the distal part of the urethra in the glans of the penis is derived from a
solid cord of ectodermal cells that grows inward from the tip of the glans and
joins the rest of the spongy urethra (Fig. 12-26A to C). Consequently, the
epithelium of the terminal part of the urethra is derived from the surface
ectoderm. The connective tissue and smooth muscle of the urethra in both sexes
are derived from splanchnic mesenchyme.
FIGURE 12–26 Schematic longitudinal sections of the developing penis
illustrating development of the prepuce (foreskin) and the distal part of the

spongy urethra. A, At 11 weeks. B, At 12 weeks. C, At 14 weeks. The
epithelium of the spongy urethra has a dual origin; most of it is derived from
endoderm of the phallic part of the urogenital sinus; the distal part of the urethra
lining the navicular fossa is derived from surface ectoderm.

 Development Of Suprarenal Glands
The cortex and medulla of the suprarenal glands (adrenal glands) have different
origins (Fig. 12-27). The cortex develops from mesenchyme and the medulla
from neural crest cells. During the sixth week, the cortex begins as an
aggregation of mesenchymal cells on each side of the embryo between the root
of the dorsal mesentery and the developing gonad (Fig. 12-29C). The cells that
form the medulla are derived from an adjacent sympathetic ganglion, which is
derived from neural crest cells.
FIGURE 12–27 Schematic drawings illustrating development of the suprarenal
glands. A, At 6 weeks, showing the mesodermal primordium of the fetal cortex.
B, At 7 weeks, showing the addition of neural crest cells. C, At 8 weeks,
showing the fetal cortex and early permanent cortex beginning to encapsulate the
medulla. D and E, Later stages of encapsulation of the medulla by the cortex. F,
Gland of a neonate showing the fetal cortex and two zones of the permanent
cortex. G, At 1 year, the fetal cortex has almost disappeared. H, At 4 years,
showing the adult pattern of cortical zones. Note that the fetal cortex has
disappeared and that the gland is much smaller than it was at birth (F).
Initially the neural crest cells form a mass on the medial side of the embryonic
cortex (Fig. 12-27B). As they are surrounded by the cortex, the cells differentiate
into the secretory cells of the suprarenal medulla. Later, more mesenchymal cells
arise from the mesothelium and enclose the cortex. These cells give rise to the
permanent cortex of the suprarenal gland (Fig. 12-27C).
Immunohistochemical studies identify a “transitional zone” that is located

between the permanent cortex and the fetal cortex. It has been suggested that the
zona fasciculata is derived from this third layer. The zona glomerulosa and
zona fasciculata are present at birth, but the zona reticularis is not recognizable
until the end of the third year (Fig. 12-27H).
Relative to body weight, the suprarenal glands of the fetus are 10 to 20 times
larger than in the adult and are large compared with the kidneys (Figs. 12-3 and
12-8). These large glands result from the extensive size of the fetal cortex, which
produces steroid precursors that are used by the placenta for the synthesis of
estrogen. The suprarenal medulla remains relatively small until after birth. The
suprarenal glands rapidly become smaller as the fetal cortex regresses during the
first year of infancy (Fig. 12-27). The glands lose approximately one third of
their weight during the first 2 or 3 weeks after birth and do not regain their
original weight until the end of the second year.
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Adrenogenital Syndrome
An abnormal increase in the cells of the suprarenal cortex results in excessive
androgen production during the fetal period. In females, this usually causes
masculinization of the external genitalia (Fig. 12-28). Affected male infants have
normal external genitalia, and the syndrome may go undetected in early infancy.
Later in childhood in both sexes, androgen excess leads to rapid growth and
accelerated skeletal maturation.


FIGURE 12–28 External genitalia of a 6-year-old girl showing an enlarged
clitoris and fused labia majora that have formed a scrotum-like structure. The
arrow indicates the opening into the urogenital sinus. This extreme
masculinization is the result of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).
(Courtesy of Dr. Heather Dean, Department of Pediatric and Child Health,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
The adrenogenital syndrome associated with congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH) manifests itself in various forms that can be correlated with enzymatic
deficiencies of cortisol biosynthesis. CAH is a group of autosomal recessive
disorders that result in virilization of female fetuses. CAH is caused by a
genetically determined mutation in the cytochrome P450c21-steroid 21-
hydroxylase gene, which causes a deficiency of suprarenal cortical enzymes that
are necessary for the biosynthesis of various steroid hormones. The reduced
hormone output results in an increased release of adrenocorticotropin from the
anterior pituitary gland, which causes CAH and overproduction of androgens.
Mutations of DAX1 result in X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita.

 Development Of Genital System
Chromosomal sex of an embryo is determined at fertilization by the kind of
sperm (X or Y) that fertilizes the oocyte Male and female morphologic
characteristics do not begin to develop until the seventh week. The early genital
systems in the two sexes are similar; therefore, the initial period of genital
development is an indifferent stage of sexual development.

 Development of Gonads
The gonads (testes or ovaries) are the organs that produce sex cells (a sperm or
an oocyte). The gonads are derived from three sources (Fig. 12-29):
• Mesothelium (mesodermal epithelium) lining the posterior abdominal wall
• Underlying mesenchyme (embryonic connective tissue)
• Primordial germ cells (earliest undifferentiated sex cells)
FIGURE 12–29 A, Sketch of a 5-week embryo illustrating the migration of
primordial germ cells from the umbilical vesicle into the embryo. B, Three-
dimensional sketch of the caudal region of a 5-week embryo showing the

location and extent of the gonadal ridges. C, Transverse section showing the
primordium of the suprarenal glands, the gonadal ridges, and the migration of
primordial germ cells into the developing gonads. D, Transverse section of a 6-
week embryo showing the gonadal cords. E, Similar section at a later stage
showing the indifferent gonads and paramesonephric ducts.
Indifferent Gonads
The initial stages of gonadal development occur during the fifth week when a
thickened area of mesothelium develops on the medial side of the mesonephros,
a primitive kidney (Fig. 12-29A). Proliferation of this epithelium and the
underlying mesenchyme produces a bulge on the medial side of the mesonephros
—the gonadal ridge (Fig. 12-30). Fingerlike epithelial cords—gonadal cords—
soon grow into the underlying mesenchyme (Fig. 12-29D). The indifferent
gonad now consists of an external cortex and an internal medulla.
FIGURE 12–30 Photomicrograph of a transverse section of the abdomen of an
embryo at approximately 40 days, showing the gonadal ridge, which will
develop into a testis or ovary depending on the chromosomal sex of the embryo.
Most of the developing gonad is composed of mesenchyme derived from the
coelomic epithelium of the gonadal ridge. The large round cells in the gonad are

primordial germ cells.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
In embryos with an XX sex chromosome complex, the cortex of the indifferent
gonad differentiates into an ovary, and the medulla regresses. In embryos with an
XY sex chromosome complex, the medulla differentiates into a testis, and the
cortex regresses.
Primordial Germ Cells
These large, spherical sex cells are first recognizable at 24 days after fertilization
among the endodermal cells of the umbilical vesicle near the origin of the
allantois (Figs. 12-29A and 12-30). During folding of the embryo (see Chapter
5), the dorsal part of the umbilical vesicle is incorporated into the embryo. As
this occurs, the primordial germ cells migrate along the dorsal mesentery of the
hindgut to the gonadal ridges (Fig. 12-29C). During the sixth week, the
primordial germ cells enter the underlying mesenchyme and are incorporated in
the gonadal cords (Fig. 12-29D). The migration of the primordial germ cells is
regulated by the genes stella, fragilis, and BMP-4.
Chromosomal Basis of Sex Determination
Chromosomal sex depends on whether an X-bearing sperm or a Y-bearing sperm
fertilizes the X-bearing oocyte. Before the seventh week, the gonads of the two
sexes are identical in appearance and are called indifferent gonads (Figs. 12-
29E and 12-30).
Development of the male phenotype (characteristics of an individual) requires a
Y chromosome. The SRY gene (sex-determining region on the Y) for a testis-
determining factor (TDF) has been localized in the short arm region of the Y
chromosome. It is the TDF regulated by the Y chromosome that determines
testicular differentiation (Fig. 12-31). Under the influence of this organizing
factor, the gonadal cords differentiate into seminiferous cords (primordia of
seminiferous tubules). Expression of the Sox9 and Fgf9 genes is involved in the
formation of the seminiferous cords. The absence of a Y chromosome results in
the formation of an ovary.

FIGURE 12–31 Schematic illustrations showing differentiation of the indifferent
gonads in a 5-week embryo (top) into ovaries or testes. The left side of the
drawing shows the development of testes resulting from the effects of the testis-
determining factor (TDF) located on the Y chromosome. Note that the gonadal
cords become seminiferous cords, the primordia of the seminiferous tubules. The

parts of the gonadal cords that enter the medulla of the testis form the rete testis.
In the section of the testis at the bottom left, observe that there are two kinds of
cells: spermatogonia, derived from the primordial germ cells, and sustentacular
or Sertoli cells, derived from mesenchyme. The right side shows the
development of ovaries in the absence of TDF. Cortical cords have extended
from the surface epithelium of the gonad and primordial germ cells have entered
them. They are the primordia of the oogonia. Follicular cells are derived from
the surface epithelium of the ovary.
Development of the female phenotype requires two X chromosomes. A number
of genes and regions of the X chromosome have special roles in sex
determination. Consequently, the type of sex chromosome complex established
at fertilization of the oocyte determines the type of gonad that differentiates from
the indifferent gonad. The type of gonad then determines the type of sexual
differentiation that occurs in the genital ducts and external genitalia.
Testosterone, produced by the fetal testes, dihydrotestosterone (a metabolite of
testosterone) and the antimüllerian hormone (AMH), determine normal male
sexual differentiation, which begins during the 7th week. Ovarian development
occurs when no Y chromosome is present, which begins about the 12th week.
Primary female sexual differentiation does not depend on hormones; it occurs
even if the ovaries are absent.
Development of Testes
TDF induces the seminiferous cords to condense and extend into the medulla of
the indifferent gonad, where they branch and anastomose to form the rete testis,
a network of canals (Fig. 12-31). The connection of the seminiferous cords—
with the surface epithelium is lost when a thick fibrous capsule, the tunica
albuginea, develops. The development of the dense tunica albuginea is the
characteristic feature of testicular development. Gradually the enlarging testis
separates from the degenerating mesonephros and is suspended by its own
mesentery, the mesorchium. The seminiferous cords develop into the
seminiferous tubules, tubuli recti, and rete testis.
The seminiferous tubules are separated by mesenchyme that gives rise to the
interstitial cells (Leydig cells). By the eighth week, these cells begin to secrete
androgenic hormones—testosterone and androstenedione, which induce
masculine differentiation of the mesonephric ducts and external genitalia.

Testosterone production is stimulated by human chorionic gonadotropin, which
reaches peak amounts during the 8th-to 12th-week period. In addition to
testosterone, the fetal testes produce a glycoprotein, antimüllerian hormone
(AMH) or müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS). AMH is produced by the
sustentacular cells (Sertoli cells), which continues to puberty after which the
levels of the hormone decrease. AMH suppresses development of the
paramesonephric ducts, which form the uterus and uterine tubes.
The seminiferous tubules have no lumina until puberty. The walls of the
seminiferous tubules are composed of two types of cell (Fig. 12-31):
• Sertoli cells, supporting cells derived from the surface epithelium of the testis
• Spermatogonia, primordial sperm cells derived from the primordial germ cells
Sertoli cells constitute most of the seminiferous epithelium in the fetal testis
(Figs. 12-31 and 12-32A). During later fetal development, the surface epithelium
of the testis flattens to form the mesothelium on the external surface of the testis.
The rete testis becomes continuous with 15 to 20 mesonephric tubules that
become efferent ductules. These ductules are connected with the mesonephric
duct, which becomes the duct of the epididymis (Figs. 12-31 and 12-33A).

FIGURE 12–32 Transverse sections of gonads of human fetuses. A, Section of a
testis from a male fetus born prematurely at 21 weeks, showing seminiferous
tubules. B, Section of an ovary from a 14-day-old female infant that died.
Observe the numerous primordial follicles in the cortex, each of which contains
a primary oocyte. The arrow indicates the relatively thin surface epithelium of
the ovary (x275).
(Reprinted with permission from van Wagenen G, Simpson ME: Embryology of
the Ovary and Testis: Homo sapiens and Macaca mulatta. New Haven, CT, Yale
University Press, 1965. Copyright © Yale University Press.)

FIGURE 12–33 Schematic drawings illustrating development of the male and
female reproductive systems from the genital ducts and urogenital sinus.
Vestigial structures are also shown. A, Reproductive system in a male neonate.
B, Female reproductive system in a 12-week fetus. C, Reproductive system in a
female neonate.

Development of Ovaries
Gonadal development occurs slowly in female embryos (Fig. 12-32). The XX
chromosomes have genes for ovarian development and an autosomal gene also
appears to play a role in ovarian organogenesis. The ovary is not identifiable
histologically until approximately the 10th week. Gonadal cords are not
prominent in the developing ovary, but they extend into the medulla and form a
rudimentary rete ovarii (Fig. 12-31). This network of canals and the gonadal
cords normally degenerate and disappear (Fig. 12-31).
Cortical cords extend from the surface epithelium of the developing ovary into
the underlying mesenchyme during the early fetal period. This epithelium is
derived from the mesothelium of the peritoneum. As the cortical cords increase
in size, primordial germ cells are incorporated in them. At approximately 16
weeks, these cords begin to break up into isolated cell clusters—primordial
follicles—each of which contains an oogonium, derived from a primordial germ
cell. The follicles are surrounded by a single layer of flattened follicular cells
derived from the surface epithelium (Fig. 12-31). Active mitosis of oogonia
occurs during fetal life producing primordial follicles (Fig. 12-32B).
No oogonia form postnatally. Although many oogonia degenerate before birth,
the 2 million or so that remain enlarge to become primary oocytes. After birth,
the surface epithelium of the ovary flattens to a single layer of cells continuous
with the mesothelium of the peritoneum at the hilum of the ovary. The surface
epithelium becomes separated from the follicles in the cortex by a thin fibrous
capsule, the tunica albuginea. As the ovary separates from the regressing
mesonephros, it is suspended by a mesentery—the mesovarium (Fig. 12-31).

Development of Genital Ducts
During the fifth and sixth weeks, the genital system is in an indifferent state, and
two pairs of genital ducts are present. The mesonephric ducts (Wolffian ducts)
play an important part in the development of the male reproductive system (Fig.
12-33A), and the paramesonephric ducts (müllerian ducts) have a leading role
in the development of the female reproductive system.
The paramesonephric ducts develop lateral to the gonads and mesonephric
ducts (Fig. 12-31) on each side from longitudinal invaginations of the
mesothelium on the lateral aspects of the mesonephroi (primordial kidney). The
edges of these grooves approach each other and fuse to form the
paramesonephric ducts (Fig. 12-29C and E). The cranial ends of these ducts
open into the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 12-33B and C). Caudally, the
paramesonephric ducts run parallel to the mesonephric ducts until they reach the
future pelvic region of the embryo. Here they cross ventral to the mesonephric
ducts, approach each other in the median plane, and fuse to form a Y-shaped
uterovaginal primordium (Fig. 12-34A). This tubular structure projects into the
dorsal wall of the urogenital sinus and produces an elevation—the sinus
tubercle (Fig. 12-34B).
FIGURE 12–34 A, Sketch of a ventral view of the posterior abdominal wall of a

7-week embryo showing the two pairs of genital ducts present during the
indifferent stage of sexual development. B, Lateral view of a 9-week fetus
showing the sinus tubercle on the posterior wall of the urogenital sinus. It
becomes the hymen in females and the seminal colliculus in males. The
colliculus is an elevated part of the urethral crest on the posterior wall of the
prostatic urethra.

 Development of Male Genital Ducts and Glands
The fetal testes produce masculinizing hormones (e.g., testosterone) and
Mullerian-inhibiting substance (MIS). The Sertoli cells produce MIS at 6 to 7
weeks. The interstitial cells begin producing testosterone in the eighth week.
Testosterone stimulates the mesonephric ducts to form male genital ducts,
whereas MIS causes the paramesonephric ducts to regress. Under the influence
of testosterone produced by the fetal testes in the eighth week, the proximal part
of each mesonephric duct becomes highly convoluted to form the epididymis.
As the mesonephros degenerates, some mesonephric tubules persist and are
transformed into efferent ductules (Fig. 12-33A). These ductules open into the
duct of the epididymis in this region. Distal to the epididymis, the mesonephric
duct acquires a thick investment of smooth muscle and becomes the ductus
deferens.
Seminal Glands
Lateral outgrowths from the caudal end of each mesonephric duct become
seminal glands (vesicles), which produce a secretion that makes up the majority
of the fluid in ejaculate and nourishes the sperms. The part of the mesonephric
duct between the duct of this gland and the urethra becomes the ejaculatory
duct (Fig. 12-33A).
Prostate
Multiple endodermal outgrowths arise from the prostatic part of the urethra and
grow into the surrounding mesenchyme (Fig. 12-35A to C). The glandular
epithelium of the prostate differentiates from these endodermal cells, and the
associated mesenchyme differentiates into the dense stroma and smooth muscle
of the prostate.

FIGURE 12–35 A, Dorsal view of the developing prostate in an 11-week fetus.
B, Sketch of a median section of the developing urethra and prostate showing
numerous endodermal outgrowths from the prostatic urethra. The vestigial
prostatic utricle is also shown. C, Section of the prostate (16 weeks) at the level
shown in B.
Bulbourethral Glands
These pea-sized glands develop from paired outgrowths derived from the spongy
part of the urethra (Fig. 12-33A). The smooth muscle fibers and the stroma
differentiate from the adjacent mesenchyme. The secretions of these glands

contribute to the semen.

 Development of Female Genital Ducts and Glands
The mesonephric ducts of female embryos regress because of the absence of
testosterone; only a few nonfunctional remnants persist (Fig. 12-33B and C,
Table 12-1). The paramesonephric ducts develop because of the absence of
MIS. Female sexual development during the fetal period does not depend on the
presence of ovaries or hormones. Later, estrogens produced by the maternal
ovaries and the placenta stimulate development of the uterine tube, uterus, and
the superior part of the vagina. The paramesonephric ducts form most of the
female genital tract. The uterine tubes develop from the unfused cranial parts of
these ducts (Figs. 12-33B and C and 12-34). The caudal fused portions of these
ducts form the uterovaginal primordium, which gives rise to the uterus and
the superior part of the vagina. The endometrial stroma and myometrium are
derived from splanchnic mesenchyme. Uterine development is regulated by the
homeobox gene HOXA10.
Fusion of the paramesonephric ducts also forms a peritoneal fold that becomes
the broad ligament, and forms two peritoneal compartments — the
rectouterine pouch and the vesicouterine pouch (Fig. 12-36A to D). Along the
sides of the uterus, between the layers of the broad ligament, the mesenchyme
proliferates and differentiates into cellular tissue—the parametrium—which is
composed of loose connective tissue and smooth muscle.

FIGURE 12–36 Early development of the ovaries and uterus. A, Schematic
drawing of a sagittal section of the caudal region of an 8-week female embryo.
B, Transverse section showing the paramesonephric ducts approaching each
other. C, Similar section at a more caudal level illustrating fusion of the
paramesonephric ducts. A remnant of the septum that separates the
paramesonephric ducts is shown. D, Similar section showing the uterovaginal
primordium, broad ligament, and pouches in the pelvic cavity. Note that the
mesonephric ducts have regressed.
Auxiliary Genital Glands in Females
Outgrowths from the urethra into the surrounding mesenchyme form the bilateral
mucus secreting urethral glands and paraurethral glands (Fig. 12-33B).
Outgrowths from the urogenital sinus form the greater vestibular glands in the
lower third of the labia majora. These tubuloalveolar glands also secrete mucus
and are homologous to the bulbourethral glands in males (Table 12-1).

 Development of Vagina
The fibromuscular wall of the vagina develops from the surrounding
mesenchyme. Contact of the uterovaginal primordium with the urogenital
sinus, forming the sinus tubercle (Fig. 12-34B), induces the formation of paired
endodermal outgrowths—the sinovaginal bulbs (Fig. 12-36A). They extend
from the urogenital sinus to the caudal end of the uterovaginal primordium. The
sinovaginal bulbs fuse to form a vaginal plate (Fig. 12-33B). Later the central
cells of this plate break down, forming the lumen of the vagina. The epithelium
of the vagina is derived from the peripheral cells of the vaginal plate (Fig. 12-
33C).
Until late fetal life, the lumen of the vagina is separated from the cavity of the
urogenital sinus by a membrane—the hymen (Figs. 12-33C and 12-37H). The
membrane is formed by invagination of the posterior wall of the urogenital
sinus, resulting from expansion of the caudal end of the vagina. The hymen
usually ruptures during the perinatal period and remains as a thin fold of mucous
membrane just within the vaginal orifice.

FIGURE 12–37 Development of external genitalia. A and B, Diagrams
illustrating the appearance of the genitalia during the indifferent stage (fourth to
seventh weeks). C, E, and G, Stages in the development of male external
genitalia at 9, 11, and 12 weeks, respectively. To the left are schematic transverse
sections of the developing penis illustrating formation of the spongy urethra. D,

F, and H, Stages in the development of female external genitalia at 9, 11, and 12
weeks, respectively. The mons pubis is a pad of fatty tissue over the symphysis
pubis.
Vestigial Remains of Embryonic Genital Ducts
During conversion of the mesonephric and paramesonephric ducts into adult
structures, parts of them remain as vestigial structures (see Fig. 12-33; Table 12-
1). These vestiges are rarely seen unless pathologic changes develop in them.
Mesonephric Duct Remnants in Males
The cranial end of the mesonephric duct may persist as an appendix of the
epididymis, which is usually attached to the head of the epididymis (Fig. 12-
33A). Caudal to the efferent ductules, some mesonephric tubules may persist as a
small body, the paradidymis.
Mesonephric Duct Remnants in Females
The cranial end of the mesonephric duct may persist as an appendix vesiculosa
(see Fig. 12-33B). A few blind tubules and a duct, the epoophoron may persist
in the mesovarium between the ovary and uterine tube (Fig. 12-33B and C ).
Closer to the uterus, some rudimentary tubules may persist as the paroophoron.
Parts of the mesonephric duct, corresponding to the ductus deferens and
ejaculatory duct, may persist as Gartner duct cysts between the layers of the
broad ligament along the lateral wall of the uterus and in the wall of the vagina
(Fig. 12-33C ).
Paramesonephric Duct Remnants in Males
The cranial end of the paramesonephric duct may persist as a vesicular appendix
of the testis, which is attached to the superior pole of the testis (Fig. 12-33A).
The prostatic utricle, a small saclike structure arising from the paramesonephric
duct, opens into the prostatic urethra. The lining of the prostatic utricle is derived
from the epithelium of the urogenital sinus. Within its epithelium, endocrine

cells containing neuron-specific enolase and serotonin have been detected. The
seminal colliculus, a small elevation in the posterior wall of the prostatic
urethra, is the adult derivative of the sinus tubercle (Fig. 12-34B).
Paramesonephric Duct Remnants in Females Part of the cranial end of the
paramesonephric duct that does not contribute to the infundibulum of the uterine
tube may persist as a vesicular appendage (Fig. 12-33C ), called a hydatid (of
Morgagni).

 Development Of External Genitalia
Up to the seventh week, the external genitalia are similar in both sexes (Fig. 12-
37A and B). Distinguishing sexual characteristics begin to appear during the 9th
week, but the external genitalia are not fully differentiated until the 12th week.
Early in the fourth week, proliferating mesenchyme produces a genital tubercle
(primordium of penis or clitoris) in both sexes at the cranial end of the cloacal
membrane. The cloacal ectoderm is believed to be the source of the genital
initiation signal which involves Fgf8 expression.
Labioscrotal swellings and urogenital folds soon develop on each side of the
cloacal membrane. The genital tubercle elongates to form a primordial phallus.
The urogenital membrane lies in the floor of a median cleft, the urethral
groove, which is bounded by the urethral folds (Fig. 12-37B and D). In female
fetuses, the urethra and vagina open into a common cavity, the vestibule of the
vagina (Fig. 12-37B).

Development of Male External Genitalia
Masculinization of the indifferent external genitalia is induced by testosterone
produced by the interstitial cells of the fetal testes (Fig. 12-37C, E, and G). As
the phallus enlarges and elongates to form the penis, the urethral folds form the
lateral walls of the urethral groove on the ventral surface of the penis (Fig. 12-
38A and B). This groove is lined by a proliferation of endodermal cells, the
urethral plate (Fig. 12-37C), which extends from the phallic portion of the
urogenital sinus. The urethral folds fuse with each other along the ventral surface
of the penis to form the spongy urethra (Figs. 12-37G and 12-38C1 and C3).
The surface ectoderm fuses in the median plane of the penis, forming the penile
raphe and enclosing the spongy urethra within the penis.
FIGURE 12–38 Scanning electron micrographs of the developing external
genitalia. A, The perineum during the indifferent stage of a 17-mm, 7-week
embryo (x100). 1, developing glans of penis with the ectodermal cord; 2,
urethral groove continuous with the urogenital sinus; 3, urethral folds; 4,
labioscrotal swellings; 5, anus. B, The external genitalia of a 7.2-cm, 10-week
female fetus (x45). 1, glans of clitoris; 2, external urethral orifice; 3, opening
into urogenital sinus; 4, urethral fold (primordium of labium minus); 5,
labioscrotal swelling (labium majus); 6, anus. C, The external genitalia of a 5.5-
cm, 10-week male fetus (x40). 1, glans of penis with ectodermal cord; 2, remains
of urethral groove; 3, urethral folds in the process of closing; 4, labioscrotal

swellings fusing to form the scrotal raphe; 5, anus.
(From Hinrichsen KV: Embryologische Grundlagen. In Sohn C, Holzgreve W
[eds]: Ultraschall in Gynäkologie und Geburtshilfe. New York, Georg Thieme
Verlag, 1995, reprinted with permission.)
At the tip of the glans penis, an ectodermal ingrowth forms a cellular ectodermal
cord, which grows toward the root of the penis to meet the spongy urethra (Fig.
12-26A). As this cord canalizes, its lumen joins the previously formed spongy
urethra. This completes the terminal part of the urethra and moves the external
urethral orifice to the tip of the glans penis (Fig. 12-26C). HOX, FGF, and Shh
genes regulate the development of the penis.
During the 12th week, a circular ingrowth of ectoderm occurs at the periphery of
the glans penis (Fig. 12-26B). When this ingrowth breaks down, it forms the
prepuce (foreskin)—a covering fold of skin (Fig. 12-26C). The corpora
cavernosa and corpus spongiosum of the penis develop from mesenchyme in the
phallus. The labioscrotal swellings grow toward each other and fuse to form the
scrotum (Fig. 12-37E and G). The line of fusion of these folds is clearly visible
as the scrotal raphe (Figs. 12-37G and 12-38C).

Development of Female External Genitalia
The primordial phallus in the female fetus gradually becomes the clitoris (Figs.
12-20G and 12-37D, F, and H). The clitoris is still relatively large at 18 weeks
(Fig. 12-21). The urethral folds do not fuse, except posteriorly, where they join
to form the frenulum of the labia minora (Fig. 12-37F). The unfused parts of
the urogenital folds form the labia minora. The labioscrotal folds fuse
posteriorly to form the posterior labial commissure and anteriorly to form the
anterior labial commissure and mons pubis (Fig. 12-37H). Most parts of the
labioscrotal folds remain unfused, but develop into two large folds of skin, the
labia majora.
Determination of Fetal Sex
Visualization of the external genitalia during ultrasonography (Fig. 12-39) is
clinically important for several reasons, including detection of fetuses at risk of
severe X-linked disorders. Careful examination of the perineum may detect
ambiguous genitalia (Fig. 12-40B). Ultrasonographic confirmation of testes in
the scrotum provides the only 100% gender determination, which is not possible
in utero until 22 to 36 weeks. Fetal position prevents good visualization of the
perineum in 30% of fetuses.

FIGURE 12–39 Sonogram of a 33-week male fetus showing normal external
genitalia. Observe the penis (arrow) and scrotum (S). Also note the testes in the
scrotum.
(Courtesy of Dr. G.J. Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Women’s Hospital, Winnipeg,

Manitoba, Canada.)
FIGURE 12–40 Schematic lateral views of the female urogenital system. A,
Normal. B, Female with 46 XX, DSD caused by congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH). Note the enlarged clitoris and persistent urogenital sinus that were
induced by androgens produced by the hyperplastic suprarenal glands.
When there is normal sexual differentiation, the appearance of the external and
internal genitalia is consistent with the sex chromosome complement. Errors in
sex determination and differentiation result in various degrees of intermediate
sex.
Advances in molecular genetics have led to a better understanding of abnormal
sexual development and ambiguous genitalia. Because of psychosocial stigma
and in order to provide better clinical management for infants born with atypical
chromosomal constitution or gonads, a new nomenclature has been introduced to
describe these conditions that are now called disorders of sex development
(DSD). The new classification avoids using the term “hermaphrodite” (see Lee
PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, Hughes IA: Consensus Statement on Management of
Intersex Disorders. Pediatrics 118:e488, 2006). DSD implies a discrepancy
between the morphology of the gonads (testes/ovaries) and the appearance of the
external genitalia. Intersexual conditions are classified according to the
histologic appearance of the gonads:
• Ovotesticular DSD (true hermaphroditism)—ovarian and testicular tissue is
found either in the same or in opposite gonads.
• 46 XX, DSD (female pseudohermaphroditism)—ovaries are present
• 46 XY, DSD (male pseudohermaphroditism)—testicular tissue is present

Ovotesticular DSD
Persons with this rare intersexual condition usually have chromatin-positive
nuclei (sex chromatin in cells observed in a buccal smear). Approximately 70%
of them have a 46, XX chromosome constitution; approximately 20% have 46,
XX/46, XY mosaicism (presence of two or more cell lines), and approximately
10% have a 46, XY chromosome constitution. The causes of ovotesticular DSD
(true hermaphroditism) are still poorly understood. Most persons have both
testicular and ovarian tissue or an ovotestis. These tissues are not usually
functional. An ovotestis (containing both testicular and ovarian tissue) forms if
both the medulla and cortex of the indifferent gonads develop. Ovotesticular
DSD results from an error in sex determination. The phenotype may be male or
female but the external genitalia are always ambiguous.
46 XX, DSD
Persons with this intersexual condition have chromatin-positive nuclei and a 46,
XX chromosome constitution. This anomaly results from exposure of the female
fetus to excessive androgens, causing virilization of the external genitalia
(clitoral enlargement and labial fusion [Figs. 12-28 and 12-40]). A common
cause of 46 XX, DSD (female pseudohermaphroditism) is CAH (congenital
adrenal hyperplasia). There is no ovarian abnormality, but the excessive
production of androgens by the fetal suprarenal glands causes varying degrees of
masculinization of the external genitalia. Commonly there is clitoral
hypertrophy, partial fusion of the labia majora, and a persistent urogenital sinus
(Fig. 12-40). In rare cases, the masculinization may be so intense that a complete
clitoral urethra results. The administration of androgenic agents to women
during early pregnancy may cause similar anomalies of the fetal external
genitalia (see Chapter 20). Most cases have resulted from the use of certain
progestational compounds for the treatment of threatened abortion.
Masculinizing maternal tumors can also cause virilization of female fetuses.
46 XY, DSD
Persons with this intersexual condition have chromatin-negative nuclei (no sex
chromatin) and a 46, XY chromosome constitution. The external genitalia are
developmentally variable as is the development of the internal genitalia due to
varying degrees of development of the paramesonephric ducts. These anomalies

are caused by inadequate production of testosterone and MIS by the fetal testes.
Testicular development in these males ranges from rudimentary to normal.
Genetic defects in the enzymatic synthesis of testosterone by the fetal testes and
in interstitial cells produce 46 XY, DSD (male pseudohermaphroditism) through
inadequate virilization of the male fetus.
Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome
Persons with androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS)—previously called
testicular feminization syndrome—(1 in 20,000 live births) are normal-appearing
females, despite the presence of testes and a 46, XY chromosome constitution
(Fig. 12-41). The external genitalia are female, but the vagina usually ends in a
blind pouch and the uterus and uterine tubes are absent or rudimentary. At
puberty there is normal development of breasts and female characteristics, but
menstruation does not occur. The testes are usually in the abdomen or the
inguinal canals, but they may be within the labia majora. The failure of
masculinization to occur in these individuals results from a resistance to the
action of testosterone at the cellular level in the genital tubercle and labioscrotal
and urethral folds.

FIGURE 12–41 A, Photograph of a 17-year-old woman with androgen
insensitivity syndrome (AIS). The external genitalia are female, but she has a 46,
XY karyotype and testes in the inguinal region. B, Photomicrograph of a section
through a testis removed from the inguinal region of this woman showing
seminiferous tubules lined by Sertoli cells. There are no germ cells and the
interstitial cells are hypoplastic.
(From Jones HW, Scott WW: Hermaphroditism, Genital Anomalies and Related
Endocrine Disorders. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1958. Courtesy of Williams
& Wilkins.)
Persons with partial AIS exhibit some masculinization at birth, such as
ambiguous external genitalia, and may have an enlarged clitoris. The vagina
ends blindly and the uterus is absent. Testes are in the inguinal canals or the labia
majora. There are usually point mutations in the sequence that codes for the
androgen receptor. Usually the testes are removed as soon as they are discovered
because, in approximately one third of these individuals, malignant tumors
develop by 50 years of age. AIS follows X-linked recessive inheritance and the

gene encoding the androgen receptor has been localized.
Mixed Gonadal Dysgenesis
Persons with this rare condition usually have a 46, XY chromosomal
complement, with a testis on one side, and an undifferentiated gonad on the other
side. The internal genitalia are female, but male derivatives of the mesonephric
ducts are sometimes present. The external genitalia range from normal female
through intermediate states to normal male. At puberty, neither breast
development nor menstruation occurs, but varying degrees of virilization are
common.
Hypospadias
Hypospadias is the most common birth defect of the penis. There are four main
types:
• Glanular hypospadias—the most common type
• Penile hypospadias
• Penoscrotal hypospadias
• Perineal hypospadias
In 1 of every 125 male infants, the external urethral orifice is on the ventral
surface of the glans of the penis (glanular hypospadias), or on the ventral
surface of the body of the penis (penile hypospadias). Usually the penis is
underdeveloped and curved ventrally—chordee.
Glanular hypospadias and penile hypospadias constitute approximately 80% of
cases (Fig. 12-42). In penoscrotal hypospadias, the urethral orifice is at the
junction of the penis and scrotum. In perineal hypospadias, the labioscrotal
folds fail to fuse and the external urethral orifice is located between the unfused
halves of the scrotum. Because the external genitalia in this severe type of
hypospadias are ambiguous, persons with perineal hypospadias and
cryptorchidism (undescended testes) are sometimes misdiagnosed as 46 XY,
DSD.

FIGURE 12–42 Glanular hypospadias in an infant. The external urethral orifice
is on the ventral surface of the glans of the penis (arrow).
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Children’s
Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Hypospadias results from inadequate production of androgens by the fetal testes
and/or inadequate receptor sites for the hormones. Most likely, both genomic and
environmental factors are involved. It has been suggested that the expression of
testosterone-related genes is affected. These defects result in failure of
canalization of the ectodermal cord in the glans of the penis and/or failure of
fusion of the urethral folds; as a consequence, there is incomplete formation of
the spongy urethra.
Epispadias
In one of every 30,000 male infants, the urethra opens on the dorsal surface of

the penis. Although epispadias may occur as a separate entity, it is often
associated with exstrophy of the bladder (Figs. 12-24 and 12-25). Epispadias
may result from inadequate ectodermal-mesenchymal interactions during
development of the genital tubercle. As a consequence, the genital tubercle
develops more dorsally than in normal embryos. Consequently, when the
urogenital membrane ruptures, the urogenital sinus opens on the dorsal surface
of the penis. Urine is expelled at the root of the malformed penis.
Agenesis of External Genitalia
Congenital absence of the penis or clitoris is an extremely rare condition (Fig.
12-43). Failure of the genital tubercle to develop may result from inadequate
ectodermal-mesenchymal interactions during the seventh week. The urethra
usually opens into the perineum near the anus.


FIGURE 12–43 Perineum of an infant with agenesis of the external genitalia.
There are no external genitalia.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Bifid Penis and Double Penis
These defects are rare. Bifid penis is usually associated with exstrophy of the
bladder (Fig. 12-24). It may also be associated with urinary tract abnormalities
and imperforate anus. Double penis results when two genital tubercles develop.
Micropenis
In this condition, the penis is so small that it is almost hidden by the suprapubic
pad of fat. Micropenis results from fetal testicular failure and is commonly
associated with hypopituitarism.
Anomalies of Uterine Tubes, Uterus, and Vagina
Defects of the uterine tubes are rare; only a few types have been reported. These
include hydatid cysts, accessory ostia (openings), complete and segmental
absence, duplication of a uterine tube, lack of the muscular layer, and failure of
the tube to canalize. Various types of uterine duplication and vaginal anomalies
result from arrests of development of the uterovaginal primordium during the
eighth week (Fig. 12-44) by:
• Incomplete development of a paramesonephric duct
• Failure of parts of one or both paramesonephric ducts to develop
• Incomplete fusion of the paramesonephric ducts
• Incomplete canalization of the vaginal plate to form the vagina

 
FIGURE 12–44 Uterine anomalies. A, Normal uterus and vagina. B, Double
uterus (uterus didelphys) and double vagina (vagina duplex). Note the septum
separating the vagina into two parts. C, Double uterus with single vagina. D,
Bicornuate uterus (two uterine horns). E, Bicornuate uterus with a rudimentary
left horn. F, Septate uterus; the septum separates the body of the uterus. G,
Unicorn uterus; only one lateral horn exists.

Double uterus (uterus didelphys) results from failure of fusion of the inferior
parts of the paramesonephric ducts. It may be associated with a double or a
single vagina (Fig. 12-44B to D). In some cases, the uterus appears normal
externally but is divided internally by a thin septum (Fig. 12-44F ). If the
duplication involves only the superior part of the body of the uterus, the
condition is called bicornuate uterus (Figs. 12-44D and E and 12-45).
FIGURE 12–45 Sonogram of bicornuate uterus. A, Axial sonogram of the
uterine fundus showing two separate endometrial canals with a 1-week chorionic
(gestational) sac (arrow). B, A three-dimensional ultrasound scan of the same
patient with a 4-week chorionic sac (arrow) on the right of a uterine septum (S).
C, Coronal ultrasound scan of a uterus with a large septum (S) extending down
to the cervix.
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Department of Radiology, Health Sciences Centre
and University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
If growth of one paramesonephric duct is retarded and does not fuse with the
other one, a bicornuate uterus with a rudimentary horn (cornu) develops
(Fig. 12-44E ). The rudimentary horn may not communicate with the cavity of
the uterus. A unicornuate uterus develops when one paramesonephric duct fails
to develop; this results in a uterus with one uterine tube (Fig. 12-44G). In many
cases, the individuals are fertile but may have an increased incidence of preterm
delivery or recurrent pregnancy loss.
Absence of Vagina and Uterus
Once in approximately every 5000 births, absence of the vagina occurs. This
results from failure of the sinovaginal bulbs to develop and form the vaginal
plate (Figs. 12-33B and 12-36A). When the vagina is absent, the uterus is usually

absent because the developing uterus (uterovaginal primordium) induces the
formation of sinovaginal bulbs, which fuse to form the vaginal plate.
Vaginal Atresia
Failure of canalization of the vaginal plate results in atresia (blockage) of the
vagina. A transverse vaginal septum occurs in approximately one in 80,000
women. Usually the septum is located at the junction of the middle and superior
thirds of the vagina. Failure of the inferior end of the vaginal plate to perforate
results in an imperforate hymen. Variations in the appearance of the hymen are
common (Fig. 12-46). The vaginal orifice varies in diameter from very small to
large, and there may be more than one orifice.
FIGURE 12–46 A to F, Congenital anomalies of the hymen. The normal
appearance of the hymen is illustrated in A and in the inset photograph. Inset,
Normal crescentic hymen in a prepubertal child.
(Courtesy of Dr. Margaret Morris, Professor of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Women’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

 Development Of Inguinal Canals
The inguinal canals form pathways for the testes to descend from the dorsal
abdominal wall through the anterior abdominal wall into the scrotum. Inguinal
canals develop in both sexes because of the morphologically indifferent stage of
sexual development. As the mesonephros degenerates, a ligament—the
gubernaculum—develops on each side of the abdomen from the caudal pole of
the gonad (Fig. 12-47A). The gubernaculum passes obliquely through the
developing anterior abdominal wall at the site of the future inguinal canal (Fig.
12-47B to D) and attaches caudally to the internal surface of the labioscrotal
swellings (future halves of the scrotum or labia majora).

FIGURE 12–47 Formation of the inguinal canals and descent of the testes. A,
Sagittal section of a 7-week embryo showing the testis before its descent from
the dorsal abdominal wall. B and C, Similar sections at approximately 28 weeks
showing the processus vaginalis and the testis beginning to pass through the
inguinal canal. Note that the processus vaginalis carries fascial layers of the

abdominal wall before it. D, Frontal section of a fetus approximately 3 days later
illustrating descent of the testis posterior to the processus vaginalis. The
processus has been cut away on the left side to show the testis and ductus
deferens. E, Sagittal section of a male neonate showing the processus vaginalis
communicating with the peritoneal cavity by a narrow stalk. F, Similar section of
a 1-month-old male infant after obliteration of the stalk of the processus
vaginalis. Note that the extended fascial layers of the abdominal wall now form
the coverings of the spermatic cord.
The processus vaginalis, an evagination of peritoneum, develops ventral to the
gubernaculum and herniates through the abdominal wall along the path formed
by the gubernaculum (Fig. 12-47B). The vaginal process carries along extensions
of the layers of the abdominal wall before it, which form the walls of the
inguinal canal. These layers also form the coverings of the spermatic cord and
testis (Fig. 12-47D to F). The opening in the transversalis fascia produced by the
processus vaginalis becomes the deep inguinal ring, and the opening created in
the external oblique aponeurosis forms the superficial inguinal ring.
Abnormal Sex Chromosome Complexes
In embryos with abnormal sex chromosome complexes, such as XXX or XXY,
the number of X chromosomes appears to be unimportant in sex determination.
If a normal Y chromosome is present, the embryo develops as a male. If no Y
chromosome is present or the testis-determining region of the Y chromosome is
absent, female development occurs. The loss of an X chromosome does not
appear to interfere with the migration of primordial germ cells to the gonadal
ridges because some germ cells have been observed in the fetal gonads of 45,
XO females with the Turner syndrome. Two X chromosomes are needed,
however, to bring about normal ovarian development.

 Relocation Of Testes And Ovaries

Testicular Descent
Testicular descent is associated with:
• Enlargement of the testes and atrophy of the mesonephroi (mesonephric
kidneys), allowing movement of the testes caudally along the posterior
abdominal wall
• Atrophy of the paramesonephric ducts induced by the müllerian-inhibiting
substance (MIS), enabling the testes to move transabdominally to the deep
inguinal rings
• Enlargement of the processus vaginalis guiding the testis through the inguinal
canal into the scrotum
By 26 weeks, the testes have usually descended retroperitoneally (external to the
peritoneum) from the superior lumbar region to the posterior abdominal wall to
the deep inguinal rings (Fig. 12-47B and C). This change in position occurs as
the fetal pelvis enlarges and the body or trunk of the embryo elongates.
Transabdominal movement of the testes is largely a relative movement that
results from growth of the cranial part of the abdomen away from the future
pelvic region. Testicular descent through the inguinal canals into the scrotum is
controlled by androgens (e.g., testosterone) produced by the fetal testes. The
gubernaculum forms a path through the anterior abdominal wall for the
processus vaginalis to follow during formation of the inguinal canal. The
gubernaculum anchors the testis to the scrotum and guides its descent into the
scrotum. Passage of the testis through the inguinal canal may also be aided by
the increase in intra-abdominal pressure resulting from the growth of abdominal
viscera.
Descent of the testes through the inguinal canals into the scrotum usually begins
during the 26th week and in some fetuses takes 2 or 3 days. By 32 weeks, both
testes are present in the scrotum in most cases. The testes pass external to the
peritoneum and processus vaginalis. After the testes enter the scrotum, the
inguinal canal contracts around the spermatic cord. More than 97% of full-term
neonates have both testes in the scrotum. During the first 3 months after birth,
most undescended testes descend into the scrotum.
The mode of descent of the testis explains why the ductus deferens crosses
anterior to the ureter (Fig. 12-33A); it also explains the course of the testicular

vessels. These vessels form when the testes are located high on the posterior
abdominal wall. When the testes descend, they carry the ductus deferens and
vessels with them. As the testis and ductus deferens descend, they are
ensheathed by the fascial extensions of the abdominal wall (Fig. 12-47F).
• The extension of the transversalis fascia becomes the internal spermatic
fascia.
• The extensions of the internal oblique muscle and fascia become the
cremasteric muscle and fascia.
• The extension of the external oblique aponeurosis becomes the external
spermatic fascia.
Within the scrotum, the testis projects into the distal end of the processus
vaginalis. During the perinatal period, the connecting stalk of the processus
normally obliterates, forming a serous membrane—tunica vaginalis—which
covers the front and sides of the testis (Fig. 12-47F).

Ovarian Descent
The ovaries also descend from the lumbar region of the posterior abdominal wall
and relocate to the lateral wall of the pelvis; however, they do not pass from the
pelvis and enter the inguinal canals. The gubernaculum is attached to the uterus
near the attachment of the uterine tube. The cranial part of the gubernaculum
becomes the ovarian ligament, and the caudal part forms the round ligament of
the uterus (Fig. 12-33C). The round ligaments pass through the inguinal canals
and terminate in the labia majora. The relatively small processus vaginalis in the
female usually obliterates and disappears long before birth. A persistent
processus in a female fetus is known as a vaginal process of peritoneum or a
canal of Nuck.
Cryptorchidism
Cryptorchidism (hidden testes) is the most common anomaly in neonates and
occurs in about 30% of premature males and in 3% to 5% of full-term males.
This reflects the fact that the testes begin to descend into the scrotum by the end
of the second trimester. Cryptorchidism may be unilateral or bilateral. In most
cases, undescended testes descend into the scrotum by the end of the first year. If
both testes remain within or just outside the abdominal cavity, they fail to mature
and sterility is common. If uncorrected, these men have a significantly higher
risk of developing germ cell tumors, especially in cases of abdominal
cryptorchidism. Undescended testes are often histologically normal at birth, but
failure of development and atrophy are detectable by the end of the first year.
Cryptorchid testes may be in the abdominal cavity or anywhere along the usual
path of descent of the testis, but they are usually in the inguinal canal (Fig. 12-
48A). The cause of most cases of cryptorchidism is unknown, but a deficiency of
androgen production by the fetal testes is an important factor.

FIGURE 12–48 Possible sites of cryptorchid and ectopic testes. A, Positions of
cryptorchid testes, numbered in order of frequency. B, Usual locations of ectopic
testes.
Ectopic Testes
After traversing the inguinal canal, the testes may deviate from its usual path of
descent and lodge in various abnormal locations (Fig. 12-48B): • Interstitial
(external to aponeurosis of external oblique muscle) • In the proximal part of the
medial thigh • Dorsal to the penis • On the opposite side (crossed ectopia) All
types of ectopic testes are rare, but interstitial ectopia occurs most frequently.
An ectopic testis occurs when a part of the gubernaculum passes to an abnormal
location and the testis follows it.
Congenital Inguinal Hernia
If the communication between the tunica vaginalis and the peritoneal cavity fails
to close (Fig. 12-49A and B), a persistent processus vaginalis exists. A loop of
intestine may herniate through it into the scrotum or labium majus (Fig. 12-49B).
Embryonic remnants resembling the ductus deferens or epididymis are often
found in inguinal hernial sacs. Congenital inguinal hernia is much more common
in males, especially when there are undescended testes. Congenital inguinal
hernias are also common with ectopic testes and in females with androgen
insensitivity syndrome (Fig. 12-41).

FIGURE 12–49 Diagrams of sagittal sections illustrating conditions resulting
from failure of closure of the processus vaginalis. A, Incomplete congenital
inguinal hernia resulting from persistence of the proximal part of the processus
vaginalis. B, Complete congenital inguinal hernia into the scrotum resulting
from persistence of the processus vaginalis. Cryptorchidism, a commonly
associated anomaly, is also illustrated. C, Large hydrocele that resulted from an
unobliterated portion of the processus vaginalis. D, Hydrocele of the testis and
spermatic cord resulting from peritoneal fluid passing into an unclosed processus
vaginalis.
Hydrocele
Occasionally the abdominal end of the processus vaginalis remains open but is
too small to permit herniation of intestine (Fig. 12-49D). Peritoneal fluid passes
into the patent processus vaginalis and forms a scrotal hydrocele. If the middle
part of the processus vaginalis remains open, fluid may accumulate and give rise
to a hydrocele of the spermatic cord (Fig. 12-49C ).


Summary Of Urogenital System
• Development of the urinary and genital systems is intimately associated.
• The urinary system develops before the genital system.
• Three successive kidney systems develop: pronephroi (nonfunctional),
mesonephroi (temporary excretory organs), and metanephroi (primordia of
permanent kidneys).
• The metanephroi develop from two sources: the ureteric bud, which gives rise
to the ureter, renal pelvis, calices, and collecting tubules, and the
metanephrogenic blastema, which gives rise to the nephrons.
• At first, the kidneys are located in the pelvis, but they gradually shift position
to the abdomen. This apparent migration results from disproportionate growth of
the fetal lumbar and sacral regions.
• Birth defects of the kidneys and ureters are common. Incomplete division of
the ureteric bud results in a double ureter and supernumerary kidney. An ectopic
kidney that is abnormally rotated results if the developing kidney remains in its
embryonic position in the pelvis.
• The urinary bladder develops from the urogenital sinus and the surrounding
splanchnic mesenchyme. The female urethra and most of the male urethra have a
similar origin.
• Exstrophy of the bladder results from a rare ventral body wall defect through
which the posterior wall of the urinary bladder protrudes onto the abdominal
wall. Epispadias is a common associated anomaly in males; the urethra opens
on the dorsum of the penis.
• The genital system develops in close association with the urinary system.
Chromosomal sex is established at fertilization, but the gonads do not attain
sexual characteristics until the seventh week.
• Primordial germ cells form in the wall of the umbilical vesicle during the
fourth week and migrate into the developing gonads, where they differentiate
into germ cells (oogonia/spermatogonia).
• The external genitalia do not acquire distinct masculine or feminine
characteristics until the 12th week. The genitalia develop from primordia that are
identical in both sexes.
• Gonadal sex is determined by the testes-determining factor (TDF), which is
located on the Y chromosome. TDF directs testicular differentiation. The
interstitial cells (Leydig cells) produce testosterone, which stimulates

development of the mesonephric ducts into male genital ducts. Testosterone
also stimulates development of the indifferent external genitalia into the penis
and scrotum. Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS), produced by the Sertoli
cells, inhibits development of the paramesonephric ducts (primordia of female
genital ducts).
• In the absence of a Y chromosome and the presence of two X chromosomes,
ovaries develop, the mesonephric ducts regress, the paramesonephric ducts
develop into the uterus and uterine tubes; the vagina develops from the vaginal
plate derived from the urogenital sinus, and the indifferent external genitalia
develop into the clitoris and labia (majora and minora).
• Persons with ovotesticular DSD (true hermaphroditism) or disorders of sex
development (DSD) have both ovarian and testicular tissue and variable internal
and external genitalia. Errors in sexual differentiation cause
pseudohermaphroditism. Persons with 46 XY, DSD (male
pseudohermaphroditism) results from failure of the fetal testes to produce
adequate amounts of masculinizing hormones or from the tissue insensitivity of
the sexual structures. Persons with 46 XX, DSD (female
pseudohermaphroditism) usually results from congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH), a disorder of the fetal suprarenal glands that causes excessive production
of androgens and masculinization of the external genitalia.
• Most anomalies of the female genital tract, such as double uterus, result from
incomplete fusion of the paramesonephric ducts. Cryptorchidism and ectopic
testes result from abnormalities of testicular descent.
• Congenital inguinal hernia and hydrocele result from persistence of the
processus vaginalis. Failure of the urethral folds to fuse in males results in
various types of hypospadias.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 12–1
A 4-year-old girl was still in diapers because she was continually wet. The
pediatrician saw urine coming from the infant’s vagina. An intravenous urogram
showed two renal pelves and two ureters on the right side. One ureter was
clearly observed to enter the bladder, but the termination of the other one was
not clearly seen. A pediatric urologist examined the child under general
anesthesia and observed a small opening in the posterior wall of the vagina. She
passed a tiny catheter into it and injected contrast media. This procedure showed
that the opening in the vagina was the orifice of the second ureter.
• What is the embryologic basis for the two renal pelves and ureters?
• Describe the embryologic basis of an ectopic ureteric orifice.
• What is the anatomic basis of the continual dribbling of urine into the vagina?

Case 12–2
A seriously injured young man suffered a cardiac arrest. After cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, his heart began to beat again, but spontaneous respirations did not
occur. Artificial respiration was instituted, but there was no
electroencephalographic evidence of brain activity. After 2 days, the man’s
family agreed that there was no hope of his recovery and asked that his kidneys
be donated for transplantation. The radiologist carried out femoral artery
catheterization and aortography (radiographic visualization of the aorta and its
branches). This technique showed a single large renal artery on the right, but
two renal arteries on the left, one medium in size and the other small. Only the
right kidney was used for transplantation because it is more difficult to implant
small arteries than large ones. Grafting of the small accessory renal artery into
the aorta would be difficult because of its size, and part of the kidney would die
if one of the arteries was not successfully grafted.
• Are accessory renal arteries common?
• What is the embryologic basis of the two left renal arteries?
• In what other circumstance might an accessory renal artery be of clinical
significance?

Case 12–3
A 32-year-old woman with a short history of cramping, lower abdominal pain,
and tenderness underwent a laparotomy because of a suspected ectopic
pregnancy. The operation revealed a pregnancy in a rudimentary right uterine
horn. The gravid (pregnant) uterine horn was totally removed.
• Is this type of uterine anomaly common?
• What is the embryologic basis of the rudimentary uterine horn?

Case 12–4
During the physical examination of a male neonate, it was observed that the
urethra opened on the ventral surface of the penis at the junction of the glans of
penis and the body of the penis. The penis was curved toward the undersurface
of the penis.
• Give the medical terms for the birth defects described.
• What is the embryologic basis of the abnormal urethral orifice?
• Is this anomaly common? Discuss its etiology.

Case 12–5
A 20-year-old woman was prevented from competing in the Olympics because
her buccal smear test was chromatin negative, indicating that she had a male
sex chromosome complement.
• Is she a male or a female?
• What is the probable basis for her failing to pass the sex chromatin test?
• Is there an anatomic basis for not allowing her to compete in the Olympics?

Case 12–6
A 10-year-old boy suffered pain in his left groin while attempting to lift a heavy
box. Later he noticed a lump in his groin. When he told his mother about the
lump, she arranged an appointment with the family physician. After a physical
examination, a diagnosis of indirect inguinal hernia was made.
• Explain the embryologic basis of this type of inguinal hernia.
• Based on your embryologic knowledge, list the layers of the spermatic cord
that would cover the hernial sac.
Discussion of problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Ashley RA, Barthold JS, Kolon TF. Cryptorchidism: pathogenesis, diagnosis and
prognosis. Urol Clin North Am. 2010;37:183.
Avni FE, Maugey-Laulom B, Cassart M, et al. The fetal genitourinary tract. In
Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Bendon RW. Oligohydramnios. Front Fetal Health. 2000;2:10.
Billmire DF. Germ cell tumors. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86:489.
Elder JS. Urologic disorders in infants and children. In Behrman RE, Kliegman
RM, Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2004.
Fiegel HC, Rolle U, Metzger R, et al. Embryology of testicular descent. Semin
Pediatr Surg. 2011;20:161.
Haynes JH. Inguinal and scrotal disorders. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86:371.
Hecht NB. Molecular mechanism of male germ cell differentiation. BioEssays.
1998;20:555.
Kluth D, Fiegel HC, Geyer C. Embryology of the distal urethra and external
genitals. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2011;20:176.

Kraft KH, Shukla AR, Canning DA. Hypospadia. Urol Clin North Am.
2010;37:167.
Kuure S, Vuolteenaho R, Vainio S. Kidney morphogenesis: cellular and
molecular regulation. Mech Dev. 2000;92:19.
Lambert SM, Vilain EJ, Kolon TF. A practical approach to ambiguous genitalia
in the new born period. Urol Clin North Am. 2010;37:195.
Lancaster MA, Gleeson JG. Cystic kidney disease: the role of Wnt signaling.
Trends Mol Med. 2010;16:349.
Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of
intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e4888.
Little M, Georgas K, Pennisi D, et al. Kidney development: two tales of
tubulogenesis. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:193.
Meeks J, Schaeffer EM. Genetic regulation of prostate development. J Androl.
2011;32:210.
Moore KL. The development of clinical sex chromatin tests. In: Moore KL,
editor. The Sex Chromatin. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1966.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Nebot-Cegarra J, Fàbregas PJ, Sánchez-Pérez I. Cellular proliferation in the
urorectal septation complex of the human embryo at Carnegie stages 13–18: A
nuclear area-based morphometric analysis. J Anat. 2005;207:353.
Nishida H, Miyagawa S, Matsumaru D, et al. Gene expression analyses on
embryonic external genitalia: identification of regulatory genes possibly
involved in masculinization process. Congenit Anom. 2008;48:63.
Palmert MR, Dahms WT. Abnormalities of sexual differentiation. In Martin RJ,
Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal
Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Persaud TVN. Embryology of the female genital tract and gonads. In Copeland

LJ, Jarrell J, editors: Textbook of Gynecology, ed 2, Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
2000.
Poder L. Ultrasound evaluation of the uterus. In Callen PW, editor:
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2008.
Powell DM, Newman KD, Randolph J. A proposed classification of vaginal
anomalies and their surgical correction. J Pediatr Surg. 1995;30:271.
Sobel V, Zhu Y-S, Imperato-McGinley J. Fetal hormones and sexual
differentiation. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2004;31:837.
Stec AA. Embryology and bony and pelvic floor anatomy in the bladder and
exstrophy-epispadias complex. Sem Pediatr Surg. 2011;20:66.
Vogt BA, Dell KM, Davis ID. The kidney and urinary tract. In Martin RJ,
Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal
Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Witschi E. Migration of the germ cells of human embryos from the yolk sac to
the primitive gonadal folds. Contr Embryol Carnegie Inst. 1948;32:67.
Woolf AS. A molecular and genetic view of human renal and urinary tract
malformations. Kidney Int. 2000;58:500.
Yiee JH, Baskin LS. Environmental factors in genitourinary development. J
Urol. 2010;184:34.

Chapter 13 Cardiovascular System
Early Development of the Heart and Blood Vessels 290
   Development of Veins Associated with Embryonic Heart 290
   Fate of Vitelline and Umbilical Arteries 295
Later Development of the Heart 295
   Circulation through the Primordial Heart 298
   Partitioning of Primordial Heart 300
   Changes in Sinus Venosus 304
   Conducting System of Heart 312
Birth Defects of the Heart and Great Vessels 313
Derivatives of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 324
   Derivatives of First Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 324
   Derivatives of Second Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 324
   Derivatives of Third Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 325
   Derivatives of Fourth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 325
   Fate of Fifth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 325
   Derivatives of Sixth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries 327
   Pharyngeal Arch Arterial Birth Defects 327
Fetal and Neonatal Circulation 333
   Fetal Circulation 333
   Transitional Neonatal Circulation 333
   Derivatives of Fetal Vessels and Structures 337
Development of Lymphatic System 339
   Development of Lymph Sacs and Lymphatic Ducts 339
   Development of Thoracic Duct 340
   Development of Lymph Nodes 340
   Development of Lymphocytes 340
   Development of Spleen and Tonsils 340
Summary of Cardiovascular System 340
Clinically Oriented Problems 341
The cardiovascular system is the first major system to function in the embryo.
The primordial heart and vascular system appear in the middle of the third week.
This precocious cardiac development occurs because the rapidly growing
embryo can no longer satisfy its nutritional and oxygen requirements by
diffusion alone. Consequently, there is a need for an efficient method of
acquiring oxygen and nutrients from the maternal blood and disposing of carbon

dioxide and waste products. The cardiovascular system is derived mainly from: •
Splanchnic mesoderm, which forms the primordium of the heart (Fig. 13-1A and
B) • Paraxial and lateral mesoderm near the otic placodes • Pharyngeal
mesoderm
• Neural crest cells from the region between the otic vesicles and the caudal
limits of the third pair of somites
FIGURE 13–1 Early development of the heart. A, Drawing of a dorsal view of
an embryo (approximately 18 days). B, Transverse section of the embryo
showing the angioblastic cords in the cardiogenic mesoderm and their
relationship to the pericardial coelom. C, Longitudinal section of the embryo
illustrating the relationship of the angioblastic cords to the oropharyngeal
membrane, pericardial coelom, and septum transversum.
Blood vessel development—angiogenesis—is described in Chapter 4.
Primordial blood vessels cannot be distinguished structurally as arteries or veins,
but they are named according to their future fates and relationship to the heart.

 Early Development Of The Heart
And Blood Vessels
Inductive signals from the anterior endoderm stimulates early formation of the
heart. The earliest sign of the heart is the appearance of paired endothelial
strands—angioblastic cords—in the cardiogenic mesoderm during the third
week (Fig. 13-1B and C). These cords canalize to form two thin heart tubes. As
lateral embryonic folding occurs, the endocardial heart tubes approach each
other and fuse to form a single heart tube (see Figs. 13-7C and 13-9C). Fusion of
the heart tubes begins at the cranial end of the developing heart and extends
caudally. The heart begins to beat at 22 to 23 days (Fig. 13-2). Blood flow
begins during the fourth week and can be visualized by Doppler ultrasonography
(Fig. 13-3).

FIGURE 13–2 Drawing of the embryonic cardiovascular system (approximately
26 days), showing vessels on the left side. The umbilical vein carries well-
oxygenated blood and nutrients from the chorionic sac to the embryo. The
umbilical arteries carry poorly oxygenated blood and waste products from the
embryo to the chorionic sac (the outermost embryonic membrane).

FIGURE 13–3 Endovaginal scan of a 4-week embryo. A, Bright (echogenic)
2.4-mm embryo (calipers). B, Cardiac activity of 116 beats per minute
demonstrated with motion mode. Calipers used to encompass two beats.
(Courtesy of Dr. E.A. Lyons, Professor of Radiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology,
and Human Anatomy, University of Manitoba and Health Sciences Centre,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Molecular studies show that more than 500 genes are involved in the
development of the mammalian heart. Several members of the T-box family of
genes play an essential role in lineage determination, specification of the cardiac

chambers, valvuloseptal development, and the formation of the conducting
system.
Gene expression analysis and lineage tracing experiments suggest that
progenitor cells from the pharyngeal mesoderm, located anterior to the early
heart tube (anterior heart field), gives rise to ventricular myocardium and the
myocardial wall of the outflow tract. Moreover, another wave of progenitor cells
from the pharyngeal mesoderm (second heart field) also contributes to the rapid
growth and elongation of the heart tube. The myocardium of the left ventricle
and the anterior pole of the heart tube are derived mostly from the second field.
Expression of Hes-1, expressed in pharyngeal endoderm and mesoderm (second
heart field) plays an essential role for the development of the outflow tract.
The basic helix-loop-helix genes, dHAND and eHAND, are expressed in the
paired primordial endocardial tubes and in later stages of cardiac morphogenesis.
The MEF2C and Pitx-2 genes, which are expressed in cardiogenic precursor
cells emerging from the primitive streak before formation of the heart tubes
(Wnt 3a–mediated), also appear to be essential regulators in early cardiac
development.

Development of Veins Associated with Embryonic
Heart
Three paired veins drain into the tubular heart of a 4-week embryo (Fig. 13-2):
• Vitelline veins return poorly oxygenated blood from the umbilical vesicle (yolk
sac).
• Umbilical veins carry well-oxygenated blood from the chorionic sac.
• Common cardinal veins return poorly oxygenated blood from the body of the
embryo.
The vitelline veins follow the omphaloenteric duct into the embryo. This duct is
the narrow tube connecting the umbilical vesicle with the midgut (see Fig. 11-1).
After passing through the septum transversum, the vitelline veins enter the
venous end of the heart—the sinus venosus (Figs. 13-2 and 13-4A). The left
vitelline vein regresses while the right vitelline vein forms most of the hepatic
portal system (Fig. 13-5B and C), as well as a portion of the inferior vena cava.
As the liver primordium grows into the septum transversum (see Chapter 11), the
hepatic cords anastomose around preexisting endothelium-lined spaces. These
spaces, the primordia of the hepatic sinusoids, later become linked to the
vitelline veins.

FIGURE 13–4 Illustrations of the primordial veins of embryo bodies (ventral
views). Initially, three systems of veins are present: the umbilical veins from the
chorion, the vitelline veins from the umbilical vesicle, and the cardinal veins
from the body of the embryos. Next the subcardinal veins appear, and finally the
supracardinal veins develop. A, At 6 weeks. B, At 7 weeks. C, At 8 weeks. D,

Adult. This drawing illustrates the transformations that produce the adult venous
pattern.
(Modified from Arey LB: Developmental Anatomy, revised 7th ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 1974.)

FIGURE 13–5 Dorsal views of the developing heart. A, During the fourth week
(approximately 24 days), showing the primordial atrium, sinus venosus and
veins draining into them. B, At 7 weeks, showing the enlarged right sinus horn
and venous circulation through the liver. The organs are not drawn to scale. C,
At 8 weeks, indicating the adult derivatives of the cardinal veins shown in A and
B.
The umbilical veins run on each side of the liver and carry well-oxygenated
blood from the placenta to the sinus venosus. As the liver develops, the
umbilical veins lose their connection with the heart and empty into the liver. The
right umbilical vein disappears during the seventh week, leaving the left
umbilical vein as the only vessel carrying well-oxygenated blood from the
placenta to the embryo.
Transformation of the umbilical veins may be summarized as follows (Fig. 13-
5):
• The right umbilical vein and the cranial part of the left umbilical vein between
the liver and the sinus venosus degenerate.
• The persistent caudal part of the left umbilical vein becomes the umbilical
vein, which carries all the blood from the placenta to the embryo.
• A large venous shunt—the ductus venosus (DV)—develops within the liver
(Fig. 13-5B) and connects the umbilical vein with the inferior vena cava (IVC).
The DV forms a bypass through the liver, enabling most of the blood from the
placenta to pass directly to the heart without passing through the capillary
networks of the liver.
The cardinal veins (Figs. 13-2 and 13-4A) constitute the main venous drainage
system of the embryo. The anterior and posterior cardinal veins, the earliest
veins to develop, drain cranial and caudal parts of the embryo, respectively. They
join the common cardinal veins, which enter the sinus venosus (Fig. 13-2).
During the eighth week, the anterior cardinal veins become connected by an
anastomosis (Fig. 13-5A and B), which shunts blood from the left to the right
anterior cardinal vein. This anastomotic shunt becomes the left brachiocephalic
vein when the caudal part of the left anterior cardinal vein degenerates (Figs. 13-
4D and 13-5C). The superior vena cava (SVC) forms from the right anterior
cardinal vein and the right common cardinal vein.
The posterior cardinal veins develop primarily as the vessels of the

mesonephroi (interim kidneys) and largely disappear with these transitory
kidneys (see Chapter 12). The only adult derivatives of the posterior cardinal
veins are the root of the azygos vein and the common iliac veins (Fig. 13-4D).
The subcardinal and supracardinal veins gradually develop and replace and
supplement the posterior cardinal veins.
The subcardinal veins appear first (Fig. 13-4A). They are connected with each
other through the subcardinal anastomosis and with the posterior cardinal veins
through the mesonephric sinusoids. The subcardinal veins form the stem of the
left renal vein, the suprarenal veins, the gonadal veins (testicular and ovarian),
and a segment of the inferior vena cava (IVC) (Fig. 13-4D). The subcardinal
veins become disrupted in the region of the kidneys (Fig. 13-4C). Cranial to this,
they become united by an anastomosis that is represented in the adult by the
azygos and hemiazygos veins (Figs. 13-4D and 13-5C). Caudal to the kidneys,
the left supracardinal vein degenerates, but the right supracardinal vein becomes
the inferior part of the IVC (Fig. 13-4D).
Development of Inferior Vena Cava
The IVC forms during a series of changes in the primordial veins of the trunk
that occur as blood, returning from the caudal part of the embryo, is shifted from
the left to the right side of the body. The IVC is composed of four main segments
(Fig. 13-4C):
• A hepatic segment derived from the hepatic vein (proximal part of right
vitelline vein) and hepatic sinusoids
• A prerenal segment derived from the right subcardinal vein
• A renal segment derived from the subcardinal–supracardinal anastomosis
• A postrenal segment derived from the right supracardinal vein
Anomalies of Venae Cavae
Because of the many transformations that occur during the formation of the SVC
and IVC, variations in their adult form may occur. The most common anomaly
of the IVC is for its abdominal course to be interrupted; as a result, blood drains
from the lower limbs, abdomen, and pelvis to the heart through the azygos
system of veins.

Double Superior Venae Cavae
Persistence of the left anterior cardinal vein results in a persistent left SVC;
hence, there are two superior venae cavae (Fig. 13-6). This condition causes a
right to left shunting of blood. The anastomosis that usually forms the left
brachiocephalic vein is small or absent. The abnormal left SVC, derived from
the left anterior cardinal and common cardinal veins, opens into the right atrium
through the coronary sinus.
FIGURE 13–6 CT scan showing a duplicated superior vena cava. Note the aorta
(A), the right superior vena cava (R, unopacified), and the left superior vena
cava (L, with contrast from left arm injection).
(Courtesy of Dr. Blair Henderson, Department of Radiology, Health Sciences
Centre, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Left Superior Vena Cava
The left anterior cardinal vein and common cardinal vein may form a left SVC,
and the right anterior cardinal vein and common cardinal vein, which usually
form the SVC, degenerate. As a result, blood from the right side is carried by the
brachiocephalic vein to the unusual left SVC, which empties into the coronary
sinus.

Absence of Hepatic Segment of Inferior Vena Cava
Occasionally the hepatic segment of the IVC fails to form. As a result, blood
from inferior parts of the body drains into the right atrium through the azygos
and hemiazygos veins. The hepatic veins open separately into the right atrium.
Double Inferior Venae Cavae
In unusual cases, the IVC inferior to the renal veins is represented by two
vessels. Usually the left one is much smaller. This condition probably results
from failure of an anastomosis to develop between the veins of the trunk (Fig.
13-4B). As a result, the inferior part of the left supracardinal vein persists as a
second IVC.
Pharyngeal Arch Arteries and Other Branches of Dorsal Aortae
As the pharyngeal arches form during the fourth and fifth weeks, they are
supplied by arteries—the pharyngeal arch arteries—that arise from the aortic
sac and terminate in the dorsal aortae (Fig. 13-2). Initially, the paired dorsal
aortae run through the entire length of the embryo. Later, the caudal portions of
the aortae fuse to form a single lower thoracic/abdominal aorta. Of the remaining
paired dorsal aortae, the right one regresses and the left becomes the primordial
aorta.
Intersegmental Arteries
Thirty or so branches of the dorsal aorta, the intersegmental arteries, pass
between and carry blood to the somites and their derivatives (Fig. 13-2). The
intersegmental arteries in the neck join to form a longitudinal artery on each
side, the vertebral artery. Most of the original connections of the
intersegmental arteries to the dorsal aorta disappear.
In the thorax, the intersegmental arteries persist as intercostal arteries. Most of
the intersegmental arteries in the abdomen become lumbar arteries, but the fifth
pair of lumbar intersegmental arteries remains as the common iliac arteries. In

the sacral region, the intersegmental arteries form the lateral sacral arteries.

Fate of Vitelline and Umbilical Arteries
The unpaired ventral branches of the dorsal aorta supply the umbilical vesicle,
allantois, and chorion (Fig. 13-2). The vitelline arteries pass to the vesicle and
later the primordial gut, which forms from the incorporated part of the umbilical
vesicle. Only three vitelline artery derivatives remain: celiac arterial trunk to
foregut, superior mesenteric artery to midgut, and inferior mesenteric artery to
hindgut.
The paired umbilical arteries pass through the connecting stalk (primordial
umbilical cord) and become continuous with vessels in the chorion, the
embryonic part of the placenta (Chapter 7). The umbilical arteries carry poorly
oxygenated blood to the placenta (Fig. 13-2). Proximal parts of the umbilical
arteries become the internal iliac arteries and superior vesical arteries,
whereas distal parts obliterate after birth and become medial umbilical
ligaments.

Later Development Of The Heart
The external layer of the embryonic heart tube—the myocardium—is formed
from splanchnic mesoderm surrounding the pericardial cavity (Figs. 13-7A and B
and 13-8B). At this stage, the heart is composed of a thin endothelial tube,
separated from a thick myocardium by gelatinous connective tissue, known as
cardiac jelly (Fig. 13-8C and D).

FIGURE 13–7 Drawings showing fusion of the heart tubes and looping of the
tubular heart. A to C, Ventral views of the developing heart and pericardial
region (22–35 days). The ventral pericardial wall has been removed to show the
developing myocardium and fusion of the two heart tubes to form a tubular
heart. The endothelium of the heart tube forms the endocardium of the heart. D
and E, As the straight tubular heart elongates, it bends and undergoes looping,
which forms a D-loop that produces a S-shaped heart.

FIGURE 13–8 A, Dorsal view of an embryo (approximately 20 days). B,
Schematic transverse section of the heart region of the embryo illustrated in A,
showing the two heart tubes and the lateral folds of the body. C, Transverse
section of a slightly older embryo showing the formation of the pericardial
cavity and fusion of the heart tubes. D, Similar section (approximately 22 days)

showing the tubular heart suspended by the dorsal mesocardium. E, Schematic
drawing of the heart (approximately 28 days) showing degeneration of the
central part of the dorsal mesocardium and formation of the transverse
pericardial sinus. The tubular heart now has a D-loop. F, Transverse section of
the embryo at the level indicated in E, showing the layers of the heart wall.
The endothelial tube becomes the internal endothelial lining of the heart
—endocardium—and the primordial myocardium becomes the muscular wall
of the heart or myocardium. The visceral pericardium or epicardium is derived
from mesothelial cells that arise from the external surface of the sinus venosus
and spread over the myocardium (Fig. 13-7D and F).
Prior to the formation of the heart tube, the homeobox transcription factor
(Pitx2c) is expressed in the left heart forming field and plays an important role
in the left-right patterning of the heart tube during formation of the cardiac loop.
Progenitor cells added to the rostral and caudal poles of the heart tube from a
proliferative pool of mesodermal cells located in the dorsal wall of the
pericardial cavity and the pharyngeal arches.
As folding of the head region occurs, the heart and pericardial cavity come to lie
ventral to the foregut and caudal to the oropharyngeal membrane (Fig. 13-9).
Concurrently, the tubular heart elongates and develops alternate dilations and
constrictions (Fig. 13-7C to E): the bulbus cordis (composed of the truncus
arteriosus [TA], the conus arteriosus, and the conus cordis), ventricle, atrium,
and sinus venosus.

FIGURE 13–9 Longitudinal sections through the cranial half of embryos during
the fourth week, showing the effect of the head fold (arrows) on the position of
the heart and other structures. A and B, As the head fold develops, the tubular
heart and pericardial cavity move ventral to the foregut and caudal to the
oropharyngeal membrane. C, Note that the positions of the pericardial cavity and
septum transversum have reversed with respect to each other. The septum
transversum now lies posterior to the pericardial cavity, where it will form the
central tendon of the diaphragm.
The TA is continuous cranially with the aortic sac (Fig. 13-10A), from which
the pharyngeal arch arteries arise. The sinus venosus receives the umbilical,
vitelline, and common cardinal veins from the chorion, umbilical vesicle, and
embryo, respectively (Fig. 13-10B). The arterial and venous ends of the heart are
fixed by the pharyngeal arches and septum transversum, respectively. The
tubular heart undergoes a dextral (right-handed) looping at approximately 23
to 28 days, forming a U-shaped D-loop that results in a heart with the apex
pointing to the left (Fig. 13-7D and E and 13-8E).

FIGURE 13–10 A, Sagittal section of the heart at approximately 24 days,
showing blood flow through it (arrows). B, Dorsal view of the heart at
approximately 26 days, showing the horns of the sinus venosus and the dorsal
location of the primordial atrium. C, Ventral view of the heart and pharyngeal
arch arteries (approximately 35 days). The ventral wall of the pericardial sac has

been removed to show the heart in the pericardial cavity.
The signaling molecule(s) and cellular mechanisms responsible for cardiac
looping are largely unknown. As the primordial heart bends, the atrium and sinus
venosus come to lie dorsal to the TA, bulbus cordis, and ventricle (Fig. 13-10B
and C). By this stage, the sinus venosus has developed lateral expansions, the
right and left sinus horns (Fig. 13-5A).
As the heart elongates and bends, it gradually invaginates into the pericardial
cavity (Figs. 13-7B to D and 13-8C). The heart is initially suspended from the
dorsal wall by a mesentery, the dorsal mesocardium, but the central part of this
mesentery soon degenerates, forming a communication, the transverse
pericardial sinus, between the right and left sides of the pericardial cavity (Fig.
13-8E and F). The heart is now attached only at its cranial and caudal ends.

Circulation through the Primordial Heart
The initial contractions of the heart are of myogenic origin (in or starting from
muscle). The muscle layers of the atrium and ventricle outflow tract are
continuous, and contractions occur in peristalsis-like waves that begin in the
sinus venosus. At first, circulation through the primordial heart is an ebb-and-
flow type; however, by the end of the fourth week, coordinated contractions of
the heart result in unidirectional flow. Blood enters the sinus venosus (Fig. 13-
10A and B) from the: • Embryo through the common cardinal veins
• Developing placenta through the umbilical veins
• Umbilical vesicle through the vitelline veins
Blood from the sinus venosus enters the primordial atrium; flow from it is
controlled by sinuatrial (SA) valves (Fig. 13-11A to D). The blood then passes
through the atrioventricular (AV) canal into the primordial ventricle. When
the ventricle contracts, blood is pumped through the bulbus cordis and truncus
arteriosus (TA) into the aortic sac, from which it is distributed to the pharyngeal
arch arteries in the pharyngeal arches (Fig. 13-10C). The blood then passes into
the dorsal aortae for distribution to the embryo, umbilical vesicle, and placenta
(see Fig. 13-2).

FIGURE 13–11 A and B, Sagittal sections of the heart during the fourth and fifth
weeks, illustrating blood flow through the heart and division of the
atrioventricular canal. The arrows are passing through the sinuatrial (SA) orifice.
C, Fusion of the atrioventricular endocardial cushions. D, Coronal section of the
heart at the plane shown in C. Note that the septum primum and interventricular
septa have started to develop.

 Partitioning of Primordial Heart
Partitioning of the atrioventricular canal, primordial atrium, ventricle, and
outflow tract begins around the middle of the fourth week and is essentially
completed by the end of the eighth week. Although described separately, these
processes occur concurrently.
Partitioning of Atrioventricular Canal
Toward the end of the fourth week, atrioventricular endocardial cushions
form on the dorsal and ventral walls of the atrioventricular (AV) canal. As
these masses of tissue are invaded by mesenchymal cells during the fifth week
(Fig. 13-11B), the AV endocardial cushions approach each other and fuse,
dividing the AV canal into right and left AV canals (Fig. 13-11C and D). These
canals partially separate the primordial atrium from the primordial ventricle, and
the endocardial cushions function as AV valves. The septal valves are derived
from the fused superior and inferior endocardial cushions. The mural leaflets are
mesenchymal in origin.
The AV endocardial cushions develop from a specialized extracellular matrix
(cardiac jelly). After inductive signals from the myocardium of the AV canal, a
segment of the inner endocardial cells undergoes epithelial–mesenchymal
transformation, which then invades the extracellular matrix. The transformed
AV endocardial cushions contribute to the formation of the valves and
membranous septa of the heart.
Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β1 and TGF-β2), bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP-2A and BMP-4), the zinc finger protein Slug, and an activin
receptor–like kinase (ChALK2) have been reported to be involved in the
epithelial–mesenchymal transformation and formation of the endocardial
cushions.
Partitioning of Primordial Atrium
Beginning at the end of the fourth week, the primordial atrium is divided into
right and left atria by the formation and subsequent modification and fusion of
two septa: the septum primum and septum secundum (Figs. 13-12 and 13-13).

FIGURE 13–12 Drawings of the heart showing partitioning of the
atrioventricular (AV) canal, primordial atrium, and ventricle. A, Sketch showing
the plane of the sections. B, Frontal section of the heart during the fourth week
(approximately 28 days) showing the early appearance of the septum primum,
interventricular septum, and dorsal atrioventricular endocardial cushion. C,
Similar section of the heart (approximately 32 days) showing perforations in the
dorsal part of the septum primum. D, Section of the heart (approximately 35
days) showing the foramen secundum. E, Section of the heart (at approximately

8 weeks, showing the heart after it is partitioned into four chambers. The arrow
indicates the flow of well-oxygenated blood from the right into the left atrium. F,
Sonogram of a second trimester fetus showing the four chambers of the heart.
Note the septum secundum (arrow).
(Courtesy of Dr. G.J. Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Women’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)

 

FIGURE 13–13 Diagrammatic sketches illustrating progressive stages in
partitioning of the primordial atrium. A to H, Sketches of the developing
interatrial septum as viewed from the right side. A1 to H1 are coronal sections of
the developing interatrial septum. As the septum secundum grows, note that it
overlaps the opening in the septum primum, the foramen secundum. Observe the

valve of the oval foramen in G1 and H1. When pressure in the right atrium
exceeds that in the left atrium, blood passes from the right to the left side of the
heart. When the pressures are equal or higher in the left atrium, the valve closes
the oval foramen (G1).
The septum primum, a thin crescent-shaped membrane, grows toward the
fusing endocardial cushions from the roof of the primordial atrium, partially
dividing the common atrium into right and left halves. As the curtain-like
septum primum grows, a large opening, the foramen primum, is located
between its crescentic free edge and the endocardial cushions (Figs. 13-12C and
13-13A to C). This foramen serves as a shunt, enabling oxygenated blood to pass
from the right to the left atrium. The foramen primum becomes progressively
smaller and disappears as the septum primum fuses with the fused AV
endocardial cushions to form a primordial AV septum (Fig. 13-13D and D1).
Before the foramen primum disappears, perforations, produced by apoptosis,
appear in the central part of the septum primum. As the septum fuses with the
fused endocardial cushions, these perforations coalesce to form another opening
in the septum primum, the foramen secundum. Concurrently, the free edge of
the septum primum fuses with the left side of the fused endocardial cushions,
obliterating the foramen primum (Figs. 13-12D and 13-13D). The foramen
secundum ensures continued shunting of oxygenated blood from the right to the
left atrium.
The septum secundum, a thick crescentic muscular fold, grows from the
ventrocranial wall of the right atrium, immediately adjacent to the septum
primum (see Fig. 13-13D1). As this thick septum grows during the fifth and sixth
weeks, it gradually overlaps the foramen secundum in the septum primum (see
Fig. 13-13E). The septum secundum forms an incomplete partition between the
atria; consequently, an oval foramen (foramen ovale) forms. The cranial part of
the septum primum, initially attached to the roof of the left atrium, gradually
disappears (Fig. 13-13G1 and H1). The remaining part of the septum primum,
attached to the fused endocardial cushions, forms the flap-like valve of the oval
foramen.
Before birth, the oval foramen allows most of the oxygenated blood entering the
right atrium from the IVC to pass into the left atrium (Fig. 13-14A). This
foramen prevents the passage of blood in the opposite direction because the

septum primum closes against the relatively rigid septum secundum (Fig. 13-
14B).
FIGURE 13–14 Diagrams illustrating the relationship of the septum primum to
the oval foramen and septum secundum. A, Before birth, well-oxygenated blood
is shunted from the right atrium through the oval foramen into the left atrium
when the pressure increases. When the pressure decreases in the right atrium, the
flap-like valve of the oval foramen is pressed against the relatively rigid septum
secundum. This closes the oval foramen. B, After birth, the pressure in the left
atrium increases as the blood returns from the lungs. Eventually the septum

primum is pressed against the septum secundum and adheres to it, permanently
closing the oval foramen and forming the oval fossa.
After birth, the oval foramen functionally closes due to higher pressure in the left
atrium than in the right atrium. Approximately at 3 months of age, the valve of
the oval foramen fuses with the septum secundum, forming the oval fossa (fossa
ovalis).

Changes in Sinus Venosus
Initially, the sinus venosus opens into the center of the dorsal wall of the
primordial atrium, and its right and left horns are approximately the same size
(Fig. 13-5A). Progressive enlargement of the right horn results from two left-to-
right shunts of blood:
• The first shunt results from transformation of the vitelline and umbilical veins.
• The second shunt occurs when the anterior cardinal veins are connected by an
anastomosis (Fig. 13-5B and C). This communication shunts blood from the left
to the right anterior cardinal vein. This shunt becomes the left brachiocephalic
vein. The right anterior cardinal vein and the right common cardinal vein
become the superior vena cava (SVC) (Fig. 13-15C).

FIGURE 13–15 Diagrams illustrating the fate of the sinus venosus. A, Dorsal
view of the heart (approximately 26 days) showing the primordial atrium and
sinus venosus. B, Dorsal view at 8 weeks after incorporation of the right horn of
the sinus venosus into the right atrium. The left horn of the sinus horn becomes
the coronary sinus. C, Internal view of the fetal right atrium showing: (1) the

smooth part of the wall of the right atrium (sinus venarum) that is derived from
the right horn of the sinus venosus and (2) the crista terminalis and valves of the
inferior vena cava and coronary sinus that are derived from the right sinuatrial
valve. The primordial right atrium becomes the right auricle, a conical muscular
pouch.
By the end of the fourth week, the right horn of the sinus venosus is noticeably
larger than the left horn (Fig. 13-15A). As this occurs, the sinuatrial (SA)
orifice moves to the right and opens in the part of the primordial atrium that will
become the adult right atrium (Figs. 13-11 and 13-15C). As the right horn of the
sinus venosus enlarges, it receives all the blood from the head and neck through
the SVC and from the placenta and caudal regions of the body through the IVC.
Initially, the sinus venosus is a separate chamber of the heart and opens into the
dorsal wall of the right atrium (Fig. 13-10A and B). The left horn becomes the
coronary sinus, and the right horn is incorporated into the wall of the right
atrium (Fig. 13-15B and C).
Because it is derived from the sinus venosus, the smooth part of the wall of the
right atrium is called the sinus venarum (Fig. 13-15B and C). The remainder of
the anterior internal surface of the atrial wall and the conical muscular pouch, the
right auricle, have a rough trabeculated appearance. These two parts are derived
from the primordial atrium. The smooth part and the rough part are demarcated
internally in the right atrium by a vertical ridge, the crista terminalis, and
externally by a shallow groove, the sulcus terminalis (Fig. 13-15B and C).
The crista terminalis represents the cranial part of the right SA valve (Fig. 13-
15C); the caudal part of this valve forms the valves of the IVC and coronary
sinus. The left SA valve fuses with the septum secundum and is incorporated
with it into the interatrial septum.
Primordial Pulmonary Vein and Formation of Left Atrium
Most of the wall of the left atrium is smooth because it is formed by
incorporation of the primordial pulmonary vein (Fig. 13-16). This vein
develops as an outgrowth of the dorsal atrial wall, just to the left of the septum
primum. As the atrium expands, the primordial pulmonary vein and its main
branches are incorporated into the wall of the left atrium. As a result, four
pulmonary veins are formed (Fig. 13-16C and D).

FIGURE 13–16 Diagrammatic sketches illustrating absorption of the pulmonary
vein into the left atrium. A, At 5 weeks, showing the primordial pulmonary vein
opening into the primordial left atrium. B, Later stage showing partial absorption
of the primordial pulmonary vein. C, At 6 weeks, showing the openings of two
pulmonary veins into the left atrium resulting from absorption of the primordial
pulmonary vein. D, At 8 weeks, showing four pulmonary veins with separate
atrial orifices. The primordial left atrium becomes the left auricle, a tubular
appendage of the atrium. Most of the left atrium is formed by absorption of the
primordial pulmonary vein and its branches.
Molecular studies have confirmed that atrial myoblasts migrate into the walls of
the pulmonary veins. The functional significance of this pulmonary cardiac
muscle (pulmonary myocardium) is uncertain. The small left auricle is derived
from the primordial atrium; its internal surface has a rough trabeculated
appearance.
Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connections
In total anomalous pulmonary venous connections, none of the pulmonary veins

connects with the left atrium. They open into the right atrium or into one of the
systemic veins or both. In partial anomalous pulmonary venous connections, one
or more pulmonary veins have similar anomalous connections; the others have
normal connections.
Partitioning of Primordial Ventricle
Division of the primordial ventricle is first indicated by a median ridge—the
muscular interventricular (IV) septum—in the floor of the ventricle near its
apex (Fig. 13-12B). Myocytes from both the left and right primordial ventricles
contribute to the formation of the muscular part of the IV septum. The IV septum
has a concave free edge (Fig. 13-17A). Initially, the IV septum attains most of its
height from dilation of the ventricles on each side of the muscular IV septum
(Fig. 13-17B). Later, there is active proliferation of myoblasts in the septum,
which increase its size.
FIGURE 13–17 Schematic diagrams illustrating partitioning of the primordial
heart. A, Sagittal section late in the fifth week showing the cardiac septa and
foramina. B, Coronal section at a slightly later stage illustrating the directions of
blood flow through the heart (blue arrows) and expansion of the ventricles
(black arrows).
Until the seventh week, there is a crescent-shaped IV foramen between the free
edge of the IV septum and the fused endocardial cushions. The IV foramen

permits communication between the right and left ventricles (Figs. 13-17 and 13-
18B). The IV foramen usually closes by the end of the seventh week as the
bulbar ridges fuse with the endocardial cushion (Fig. 13-18C to E).
FIGURE 13–18 Sketches illustrating incorporation of the bulbus cordis into the

ventricles and partitioning of the bulbus cordis and truncus arteriosus into the
aorta and pulmonary trunk. A, Sagittal section at 5 weeks showing the bulbus
cordis as one of the chambers of the primordial heart. B, Schematic coronal
section at 6 weeks, after the bulbus cordis has been incorporated into the
ventricles to become the conus arteriosus of the right ventricle, which gives
origin to the pulmonary trunk and the aortic vestibule of the left ventricle. The
arrow indicates blood flow. C to E, Schematic drawings illustrating closure of
the interventricular foramen and formation of the membranous part of the
interventricular septum. The walls of the truncus arteriosus, bulbus cordis, and
right ventricle have been removed. C, At 5 weeks, showing the bulbar ridges and
fused atrioventicular endocardial cushions. D, At 6 weeks, showing how
proliferation of subendocardial tissue diminishes the interventricular foramen. E,
At 7 weeks, showing the fused bulbar ridges, the membranous part of the
interventricular septum formed by extensions of tissue from the right side of the
atrioventricular endocardial cushions, and closure of the interventricular
foramen.
Closure of the IV foramen and formation of the membranous part of the IV
septum result from the fusion of tissues from three sources: the right bulbar
ridge, the left bulbar ridge, and the endocardial cushion. The membranous part
of the IV septum is derived from an extension of tissue from the right side of
the endocardial cushion to the muscular part of the IV septum. This tissue
merges with the aorticopulmonary septum and the thick muscular part of the
IV septum (Figs. 13-18E and 13-19C). After closure of the IV foramen and
formation of the membranous part of the IV septum, the pulmonary trunk is in
communication with the right ventricle and the aorta communicates with the left
ventricle (Fig. 13-18E).

FIGURE 13–19 Schematic sections of the heart illustrating successive stages in
the development of the atrioventricular valves, tendinous cords, and papillary
muscles. A, At 5 weeks. B, At 6 weeks. C, At 7 weeks. D, At 20 weeks, showing
the conducting system of the heart.
Cavitation of the ventricular walls forms a sponge-work of muscular bundles
—trabeculae carneae. Some of these bundles become the papillary muscles
and tendinous cords (chordae tendineae). The tendinous cords run from the
papillary muscles to the AV valves (Fig. 13-19C and D).

Fetal Cardiac Ultrasonography
Cardiac screening using high-resolution real-time ultrasonography is usually
performed between 18 and 22 weeks of gestation (Fig. 13-20) because the heart
is large enough to examine.

FIGURE 13–20 A, Ultrasound image showing the four-chamber view of the
heart in a fetus of approximately 20 weeks gestation. B, Orientation sketch
(modified from the AIUM Technical Bulletin, Performance of the Basic Fetal
Cardiac Ultrasound Examination). The scan was obtained across the fetal thorax.
The ventricles and atria are well formed and two atrioventricular (AV) valves are

present. The moderator band is one of the trabeculae carneae that carries part of
the right branch of the AV bundle. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right
atrium; RV, right ventricle.
(Courtesy of Dr. Wesley Lee, Division of Fetal Imaging, William Beaumont
Hospital, Royal Oak, Michigan.)
Partitioning of Bulbus Cordis and Truncus Arteriosus
During the fifth week, active proliferation of mesenchymal cells in the walls of
the bulbus cordis results in the formation of bulbar ridges (conotruncal ridges)
(Figs. 13-18C and D and 13-21B and C). Similar ridges that are continuous with
the bulbar ridges form in the truncus arterious (TA). The bulbar and truncal
ridges are derived largely from neural crest mesenchyme.

FIGURE 13–21 Partitioning of the bulbus cordis and truncus arteriosus. A,
Ventral aspect of heart at 5 weeks. The broken lines and arrows indicate the
levels of the sections shown in A. B, Transverse sections of the truncus
arteriosus and bulbus cordis, illustrating the truncal and bulbar ridges. C, The
ventral wall of the heart and truncus arteriosus has been removed to demonstrate

these ridges. D, Ventral aspect of heart after partitioning of the truncus
arteriosus. The broken lines and arrows indicate the levels of the sections shown
in E. E, Sections through the newly formed aorta (A) and pulmonary trunk (PT),
showing the aorticopulmonary septum. F, 6 weeks. The ventral wall of the heart
and pulmonary trunk have been removed to show the aorticopulmonary septum.
G, Diagram illustrating the spiral form of the aorticopulmonary septum. H,
Drawing showing the great arteries (ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk)
twisting around each other as they leave the heart.
Neural crest cells migrate through the primordial pharynx and pharyngeal
arches to reach the ridges. As this occurs, the bulbar and truncal ridges undergo a
180-degree spiraling.
The spiral orientation of the bulbar and truncal ridges, caused in part by
streaming of blood from the ventricles, results in the formation of a spiral
aorticopulmonary septum when the ridges fuse (Fig. 13-21D to G).
This septum divides the bulbus cordis and TA into two arterial channels, the
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk. Because of the spiraling of the
aorticopulmonary septum, the pulmonary trunk twists around the ascending
aorta (Fig. 13-21H). The bulbus cordis is incorporated into the walls of the
definitive ventricles (see Fig. 13-18A and B):
• In the right ventricle, the bulbus cordis is represented by the conus arteriosus
(infundibulum), which gives origin to the pulmonary trunk.
• In the left ventricle, the bulbus cordis forms the walls of the aortic vestibule,
the part of the ventricular cavity just inferior to the aortic valve.
Development of Cardiac Valves
When partitioning of the truncus arteriosus (TA) is nearly completed (Fig. 13-
21A to C), the semilunar valves begin to develop from three swellings of
subendocardial tissue around the orifices of the aorta and pulmonary trunk.
These swellings are hollowed out and reshaped to form three thin-walled cusps
(Figs. 13-19C and D and 13-22). The atrioventricular (AV) valves (tricuspid
and mitral valves) develop similarly from localized proliferations of tissue
around the AV canals.

FIGURE 13–22 Development of the semilunar valves of the aorta and
pulmonary trunk. A, Sketch of a section of the truncus arteriosus and bulbus
cordis showing the valve swellings. B, Transverse section of the bulbus cordis.
C, Similar section after fusion of the bulbar ridges. D, Formation of the walls
and valves of the aorta and pulmonary trunk. E, Rotation of the vessels has
established the adult relations of the valves. F and G, Longitudinal sections of
the aorticoventricular junction illustrating successive stages in the hollowing
(arrows) and thinning of the valve swellings to form the valve cusps.

Conducting System of Heart
Initially, the muscle in the primordial atrium and ventricle is continuous. The
atrium acts as the interim pacemaker of the heart, but the sinus venosus soon
takes over this function. The sinuatrial (SA) node develops during the fifth
week. It is originally in the right wall of the sinus venosus, but it becomes
incorporated into the wall of the right atrium with the sinus venosus (Fig. 13-19A
and D). The SA node is located high in the right atrium, near the entrance of the
superior vena cava (SVC).
After incorporation of the sinus venosus, cells from its left wall are found in the
base of the interatrial septum just anterior to the opening of the coronary sinus.
Together with cells from the AV region, they form the AV node and bundle,
which are located just superior to the endocardial cushions. The fibers arising
from the AV bundle pass from the atrium into the ventricle and split into right
and left bundle branches. These branches are distributed throughout the
ventricular myocardium (Fig. 13-19D).
The SA node, AV node, and AV bundle are richly supplied by nerves; however,
the conducting system is well developed before these nerves enter the heart. This
specialized tissue is normally the only signal pathway from the atria to the
ventricles. As the four chambers of the heart develop, a band of connective
tissue grows in from the epicardium, subsequently separating the muscle of the
atria from that of the ventricles. This connective tissue forms part of the cardiac
skeleton (fibrous skeleton of heart).
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
Conducting tissue abnormalities have been observed in the hearts of several
infants who died unexpectedly from a disorder known as sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS). This is the most common cause of deaths among healthy
infants (0.6 per 1000 live births).
Most likely, no single mechanism is responsible for the sudden and unexpected
deaths of these apparently healthy infants. Some people suggest that they have a
defect in the autonomic nervous system. A brainstem developmental
abnormality or maturational delay related to neuroregulation of

cardiorespiratory control appears to be the most compelling hypothesis.

Birth Defects Of The Heart And
Great Vessels
Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are common, with a frequency of six to eight
cases per 1000 births. Some CHDs are caused by single-gene or chromosomal
mechanisms. Other defects result from exposure to teratogens such as the rubella
virus (see Chapter 20); however, in many cases, the cause is unknown. Most
CHDs are thought to be caused by multiple factors, genetic and environmental
(i.e., multifactorial inheritance), each of which has a minor effect.
The molecular aspects of abnormal cardiac development are poorly understood,
and gene therapy for infants with CHDs is at present a remote prospect. Imaging
technology, such as real-time two-dimensional echocardiography, permits
detection of fetal CHDs as early as the 17th or 18th week.
Most CHDs are well tolerated during fetal life; however, at birth, when the fetus
loses contact with the maternal circulation, the impact of CHDs becomes
apparent. Some types of CHD cause very little disability; others are incompatible
with extrauterine life. Because of recent advances in cardiovascular surgery,
many types of CHD can be palliated or corrected surgically, and fetal cardiac
surgery may soon be possible for complex CHDs.
Dextrocardia
If the embryonic heart tube bends to the left instead of to the right (Fig. 13-23),
the heart is displaced to the right and the heart and its vessels are reversed left to
right as in a mirror image of their normal configuration. Dextrocardia is the most
frequent positional defect of the heart. In dextrocardia with situs inversus
(transposition of abdominal viscera), the incidence of accompanying cardiac
defects is low. If there is no other associated vascular abnormality, these hearts
function normally.

FIGURE 13–23 The embryonic heart tube during the fourth week. A, Normal
looping of the tubular heart to the right. B, Abnormal looping of the tubular heart
to the left.
In isolated dextrocardia, the abnormal position of the heart is not accompanied
by displacement of other viscera. This defect is usually complicated by severe
cardiac anomalies (e.g., single ventricle and transposition of the great vessels).
The TGF-β factor Nodal is involved in looping of the heart tube, but its role in
dextrocardia is unclear.
Ectopia Cordis
In ectopia cordis, a rare condition, the heart is in an abnormal location (Fig. 13-
24). In the thoracic form of ectopia cordis, the heart is partly or completely
exposed on the surface of the thorax. It is usually associated with widely
separated halves of the sternum (nonfusion) and an open pericardial sac. Death
occurs in most cases during the first few days after birth, usually from infection,
cardiac failure, or hypoxemia. If there are not severe cardiac defects, surgical
therapy usually consists of covering the heart with skin. In some cases of ectopia

cordis, the heart protrudes through the diaphragm into the abdomen.


FIGURE 13–24 Neonate with ectopia cordis, cleft sternum, and bilateral cleft
lip. Death occurred in the first days of life from infection, cardiac failure, and
hypoxia.
The clinical outcome for patients with ectopia cordis has improved and many
children have survived to adulthood. The most common thoracic form of ectopia
cordis results from faulty development of the sternum and pericardium because
of failure of complete fusion of the lateral folds in the formation of the thoracic
wall during the fourth week (see Chapter 5, Fig. 5-1).
Atrial Septal Defects
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart defect and occurs
more frequently in females than in males. The most common form of ASD is
patent oval foramen (Fig. 13-25B).
FIGURE 13–25 A, Normal postnatal appearance of the right side of the
interatrial septum after adhesion of the septum primum to the septum secundum.
A1, Sketch of a section of the interatrial septum illustrating formation of the oval
fossa in the right atrium. Note that the floor of the oval fossa is formed by the
septum primum. B and B1, Similar views of a probe patent oval foramen
resulting from incomplete adhesion of the septum primum to the septum
secundum. Some well-oxygenated blood can enter the right atrium via a patent

oval foramen; however, if the opening is small it usually of no hemodynamic
significance.
A probe patent oval foramen is present in up to 25% of people (Fig. 13-25B).
In this circumstance, a probe can be passed from one atrium to the other through
the superior part of the floor of the oval fossa. This defect is not clinically
significant, but a probe patent oval foramen may be forced open because of other
cardiac defects and contribute to the functional pathology of the heart. Probe
patent oval foramen results from incomplete adhesion between the flap-like
valve of the oval foramen and the septum secundum after birth.
There are four clinically significant types of ASD (Figs. 13-26 and 13-27):
ostium secundum defect, endocardial cushion defect with ostium primum defect,
sinus venosus defect, and common atrium. The first two types of ASD are
relatively common.

FIGURE 13–26 Drawings of the right aspect of the interatrial septum. The
adjacent sketches of sections of the septa illustrate various types of atrial septal
defect (ASD). A, Patent oval foramen resulting from resorption of the septum
primum in abnormal locations. B, Patent oval foramen caused by excessive
resorption of the septum primum (short flap defect). C, Patent oval foramen

resulting from an abnormally large oval foramen. D, Patent oval foramen
resulting from an abnormally large oval foramen and excessive resorption of the
septum primum. E, Endocardial cushion defect with primum-type ASD. The
adjacent section shows the cleft in the anterior cusp of the mitral valve. F, Sinus
venosus ASD. The high septal defect resulted from abnormal absorption of the
sinus venosus into the right atrium. In E and F, note that the oval fossa has
formed normally.
FIGURE 13–27 Dissection of an adult heart with a large patent oval foramen.
The arrow passes through a large atrial septal defect (ASD), which resulted from
an abnormally large oval foramen and excessive resorption of the septum
primum. This is referred to as a secundum-type ASD and is one of the most
common types of congenital heart disease.
Ostium secundum ASDs (Figs. 13-26A to D and 13-27) are in the area of the
oval fossa and include defects of the septum primum and septum secundum.
Ostium secundum ASDs are well tolerated during childhood; symptoms such as
pulmonary hypertension usually appear in the 30s or later. Closure of the ASD is
carried out at open heart surgery, and the mortality rate is less than 1%. The
defects may be multiple and, in symptomatic older children, defects of 2 cm or
more in diameter are not unusual. Females with ASD outnumber males 3:1.
Ostium secundum ASDs are one of the most common types of CHD, yet are the
least severe.

The patent oval foramen usually results from abnormal resorption of the
septum primum during the formation of the foramen secundum. If resorption
occurs in abnormal locations, the septum primum is fenestrated or net-like (Fig.
13-26A). If excessive resorption of the septum primum occurs, the resulting
short septum primum will not close the oval foramen (Fig. 13-26B). If an
abnormally large oval foramen occurs because of defective development of the
septum secundum, a normal septum primum will not close the abnormal oval
foramen at birth (Fig. 13-26C ). A small isolated patent oval foramen is of no
hemodynamic significance; however, if there are other defects (e.g., pulmonary
stenosis or atresia), blood is shunted through the oval foramen into the left
atrium and produces cyanosis (deficient oxygenation of blood). Large ostium
secundum ASDs may also occur because of a combination of excessive
resorption of the septum primum and a large oval foramen (Figs. 13-26D and 13-
27).
Endocardial cushion defects with ostium primum ASDs are less common
forms of ASD (Fig. 13-26E ). Several cardiac defects are grouped together under
this heading because they result from the same developmental defect, a
deficiency of the endocardial cushions and the AV septum. The septum primum
does not fuse with the endocardial cushions; as a result, there is a patent
foramen primum-ostium primum defect. Usually there is also a cleft in the
anterior cusp of the mitral valve. In the less common complete type of
endocardial cushion and AV septal defects, fusion of the endocardial cushions
fails to occur. As a result, there is a large defect in the center of the heart known
as an AV septal defect (Fig. 13-28). This type of ASD occurs in approximately
20% of persons with Down syndrome; otherwise, it is a relatively uncommon
cardiac defect. It consists of a continuous interatrial and interventricular defect
with markedly abnormal AV valves.

FIGURE 13–28 A, An infant’s heart, sectioned and viewed from the right side,
showing a patent oval foramen and an atrioventricular septal defect. B,
Schematic drawing of a heart illustrating various septal defects. ASD, atrial
septal defect; VSD, and ventricular septal defect.
(A, From Lev M: Autopsy Diagnosis of Congenitally Malformed Hearts.
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1953.)
All sinus venosus ASDs (high ASDs) are located in the superior part of the
interatrial septum close to the entry of the SVC (Fig. 13-26F ). A sinus venosus
defect is a rare type of ASD. It results from incomplete absorption of the sinus
venosus into the right atrium and/or abnormal development of the septum
secundum. This type of ASD is commonly associated with partial anomalous
pulmonary venous connections.
Common atrium is a rare cardiac defect in which the interatrial septum is
absent. This defect is the result of failure of the septum primum and septum
secundum to develop (combination of ostium secundum, ostium primum, and
sinus venosus defects).
Ventricular Septal Defects

Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are the most common type of CHD, accounting
for approximately 25% of heart defects. VSDs occur more frequently in males
than in females. VSDs may occur in any part of the IV septum (Fig. 13-28B), but
membranous VSD is the most common type (Figs. 13-28B and 13-29A).
Frequently, during the first year, 30% to 50% of small VSDs close
spontaneously.
FIGURE 13–29 A, Ultrasound image of the heart of a second-trimester fetus
with an atrioventricular (AV) canal (atrioventricular septal) defect. An atrial
septal defect and ventricular septal defect are also present. Ao, aorta. B,
Orientation drawing.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. B. Benacerraf, Diagnostic Ultrasound Associates, P.C.,
Boston, Massachusetts.)
Incomplete closure of the IV foramen results from failure of the membranous
part of the IV septum to develop. It results from failure of an extension of
subendocardial tissue to grow from the right side of the endocardial cushion and
fuse with the aorticopulmonary septum and the muscular part of the IV septum
(Fig. 13-18C to E). Large VSDs with excessive pulmonary blood flow (Fig. 13-
30) and pulmonary hypertension result in dyspnea (difficult breathing) and
cardiac failure early in infancy.

FIGURE 13–30 Ultrasound scan of a fetal heart at 23.4 weeks with an
atrioventricular septal defect and a large ventricular septal defect (VSD).
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Wesley Lee, Division of Fetal Imaging, William Beaumont
Hospital, Royal Oak, Michigan.)
Muscular VSD is a less common type of defect and may appear anywhere in the
muscular part of the interventricular septum. Sometimes there are multiple small
defects, producing what is sometimes called the “Swiss cheese” VSD. Muscular
VSDs probably occur because of excessive cavitation of myocardial tissue

during formation of the ventricular walls and the muscular part of the
interventricular septum.
Absence of the IV septum—single ventricle or common ventricle—resulting
from failure of the IV septum to form, is extremely rare and results in a three-
chambered heart (Latin cor triloculare biatriatum). When there is a single
ventricle, the atria empty through a single common valve or two separate AV
valves into a single ventricular chamber. The aorta and pulmonary trunk arise
from the ventricle. TGA (transposition of great arteries) (see Fig. 13-32) and a
rudimentary outlet chamber are present in most infants with a single ventricle.
Some children die during infancy from congestive heart failure.
Persistent Truncus Arteriosus
Persistent truncus arteriosus (TA) results from failure of the truncal ridges and
aorticopulmonary septum to develop normally and divide the TA into the aorta
and pulmonary trunk (Fig. 13-31). A single arterial trunk, the TA, arises from
the heart and supplies the systemic, pulmonary, and coronary circulations. A
VSD is always present with a TA defect; the TA straddles the VSD (Fig. 13-
31B).

FIGURE 13–31 Illustrations of the common types of persistent truncus
arteriosus (PTA). A, The common trunk divides into the aorta and a short
pulmonary trunk. B, Coronal section of the heart shown in A. Observe the
circulation of blood in this heart (arrows) and the ventricular septal defect. C,
The right and left pulmonary arteries arise close together from the truncus
arteriosus. D, The pulmonary arteries arise independently from the sides of the
truncus arteriosus. E, No pulmonary arteries are present; the lungs are supplied
by the bronchial arteries. LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium.

Recent studies indicate that developmental arrest of the outflow tract, semilunar
valves, and aortic sac in the early embryo (days 31-32) is involved in the
pathogenesis of TA defects. The common type of TA is a single arterial vessel
that branches to form the pulmonary trunk and ascending aorta (Fig. 13-31A and
B). In the next most common type, the right and left pulmonary arteries arise
close together from the dorsal wall of the TA (Fig. 13-31C ). Less common types
are illustrated in Figure 13-31D and E.
Aorticopulmonary Septal Defect
Aorticopulmonary septal defect is a rare condition in which there is an opening
(aortic window) between the aorta and pulmonary trunk near the aortic valve.
The aorticopulmonary defect results from localized defect in the formation of the
aorticopulmonary septum. The presence of pulmonary and aortic valves and an
intact IV septum distinguishes this anomaly from the persistent truncus
arteriosus defect.
Transposition of the Great Arteries
Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is the common cause of cyanotic heart
disease in newborn infants (Fig. 13-32). TGA is often associated with other
cardiac anomalies (e.g., ASD and VSD). In typical cases, the aorta lies anterior
and to the right of the pulmonary trunk and arises from the morphologic right
ventricle, whereas the pulmonary trunk arises from the morphologic left
ventricle. The associated ASD and VSD defects permit some interchange
between the pulmonary and systemic circulations.

FIGURE 13–32 Drawing of a heart illustrating transposition of the great arteries
(TGA). The ventricular and atrial septal defects allow mixing of the arterial and
venous blood. This birth defect is often associated with other cardiac defects as
shown (ventricular septal defect [VSD] and atrial septal defect [ASD]).
Because of these anatomic defects, deoxygenated systemic venous blood
returning to the right atrium enters the right ventricle and then passes to the body
through the aorta. Oxygenated pulmonary venous blood passes through the left
ventricle back into the pulmonary circulation. Because of the patent oval
foramen, there is some mixing of the blood. Without surgical correction of the
TGA, these infants usually die within a few months.
Many attempts have been made to explain the basis of TGA, but the conal
growth hypothesis is favored by most investigators. According to this
explanation, the aorticopulmonary septum fails to pursue a spiral course during
partitioning of the bulbus cordis and TA. This defect is thought to result from
failure of the conus arteriosus to develop normally during incorporation of the
bulbus cordis into the ventricles. Defective migration of neural crest cells is
involved.
Unequal Division of the Truncus Arteriosus
Unequal division of the TA (Figs. 13-33A and 13-34B and C ) results when
partitioning of the TA superior to the valves is unequal. One of the great arteries

is large and the other is small. As a result, the aorticopulmonary septum is not
aligned with the IV septum and a VSD results; of the two vessels, the one with
the larger diameter usually straddles the VSD (Fig. 13-33B).
FIGURE 13–33 A, Drawing of an infant’s heart showing a small pulmonary
trunk (pulmonary stenosis) and a large aorta resulting from unequal partitioning
of the truncus arteriosus. There is also hypertrophy of the right ventricle and a
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). B, Frontal section of this heart illustrating the
tetralogy of Fallot. Observe the four cardiac defects of this tetralogy: pulmonary
valve stenosis, ventricular septal defect (VSD), overriding aorta, and
hypertrophy of the right ventricle.

FIGURE 13–34 Abnormal division of the truncus arteriosus (TA). A to C,
Sketches of transverse sections of the TA illustrating normal and abnormal
partitioning of the TA. A, Normal. B, Unequal partitioning of the TA resulting in
a small pulmonary trunk. C, Unequal partitioning resulting in a small aorta. D,
Sketches illustrating a normal semilunar valve and stenotic pulmonary and aortic
valves.
In pulmonary valve stenosis, the cusps of the pulmonary valve are fused to

form a dome with a narrow central opening (Fig. 13-34D).
In infundibular stenosis, the conus arteriosus (infundibulum) of the right
ventricle is underdeveloped. The two types of pulmonary stenosis may occur.
Depending on the degree of obstruction to blood flow, there is a variable degree
of hypertrophy of the right ventricle (Fig. 13-33A and B).
Tetralogy of Fallot
This classic group of four cardiac defects (Figs. 13-33B, 13-35, and 13-36)
consists of:
• Pulmonary artery stenosis (obstruction of right ventricular outflow)
• VSD (ventricular septal defect)
• Dextroposition of aorta (overriding or straddling aorta)
• Right ventricular hypertrophy
FIGURE 13–35 A, Ultrasound image of the heart of a 20-week fetus with
tetralogy of Fallot. Note that the large overriding aorta (AO) straddles the
interventricular septum. As a result, it receives blood from the left (LV) and right
(RV) ventricles. IVS, Interventricular septum; LA, left atrium. B, Orientation
drawing.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. B. Benacerraf, Diagnostic Ultrasound Associates, P.C.,

Boston, Massachusetts.)


FIGURE 13–36 Tetralogy of Fallot. Fine barium powder was injected into the
heart. Note the two ventricles (V), interventricular septum (I), interventricular
septal defect at the superior margin, and origin of the aorta above the right
ventricle (overriding aorta). The main pulmonary artery is not visualized.
(Courtesy of Dr. Joseph R. Siebert, Children’s Hospital & Regional Medical
Center, Seattle, Washington.)
The pulmonary trunk is usually small (Fig. 13-33A) and there may be various
degrees of pulmonary artery stenosis. Cyanosis (deficient oxygenation of blood),
is an obvious sign of the tetralogy, but it is not usually present at birth.
The tetralogy results when division of the TA is unequal and the pulmonary
trunk is stenotic. Pulmonary atresia with VSD is an extreme form of tetralogy of
Fallot; the entire right ventricular output is through the aorta. Pulmonary blood
flow is dependent on a PDA (patent ductus arteriosus) or on bronchial collateral
vessels. Initial treatment may require surgical placement of a temporary shunt,
but in many cases, primary surgical repair is the treatment of choice in early
infancy.
Aortic Stenosis and Aortic Atresia
In aortic valve stenosis, the edges of the valve are usually fused to form a dome
with a narrow opening (Fig. 13-34D). This defect may be congenital or develop
after birth. The valvular stenosis causes extra work for the heart and results in
hypertrophy of the left ventricle and abnormal heart sounds (heart murmurs).
In subaortic stenosis, there is often a band of fibrous tissue just inferior to the
aortic valve. The narrowing of the aorta results from persistence of tissue that
normally degenerates as the valve forms.
Aortic atresia is present when obstruction of the aorta or its valve is complete.
Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome

The left ventricle is small and nonfunctional (Fig. 13-37); the right ventricle
maintains both pulmonary and systemic circulations. The blood passes through
an atrial septal defect or a dilated oval foramen from the left to the right side of
the heart, where it mixes with the systemic venous blood.
FIGURE 13–37 A, Ultrasound image of the heart of a second-trimester fetus
with a hypoplastic left heart. Note that the left ventricle (LV) is much smaller
than the right ventricle (RV). This is an oblique scan of the fetal thorax through
the long axis of the ventricles. B, Orientation drawing.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. B. Benacerraf, Diagnostic Ultrasound Associates, P.C.,
Boston, Massachusetts.)
In addition to the underdeveloped left ventricle, there are atresia of the aortic or
mitral orifice and hypoplasia of the ascending aorta. Infants with this severe
defect usually die during the first few weeks after birth. Disturbances in the
migration of neural crest cells, in hemodynamic function, in apoptosis, and in the
proliferation of the extracellular matrix are likely responsible for the
pathogenesis of many CHDs such as this syndrome.

 Derivatives Of Pharyngeal Arch
Arteries
As the pharyngeal arches develop during the fourth week, they are supplied by
arteries—the pharyngeal arch arteries—from the aortic sac (Fig. 13-38B).
Mesodermal cells migrate from the pharyngeal arches to the aortic sac,
connecting the pharyngeal arch arteries to the outflow tract. These arteries
terminate in the dorsal aorta of the ipsilateral side. Although six pairs of
pharyngeal arch arteries usually develop, they are not all present at the same
time. By the time the sixth pair of pharyngeal arch arteries has formed, the first
two pairs have disappeared (Fig. 13-38C). During the eighth week, the
primordial pharyngeal arch arterial pattern is transformed into the final fetal
arterial arrangement (Fig. 13-39C).

FIGURE 13–38 Pharyngeal arches and pharyngeal arch arteries. A, Left side of
an embryo (approximately 26 days). B, Schematic drawing of this embryo
showing the left pharyngeal arch arteries arising from the aortic sac, running
through the pharyngeal arches, and terminating in the left dorsal aorta. C, An
embryo (approximately 37 days) showing the single dorsal aorta and that most of
the first two pairs of pharyngeal arch arteries have degenerated.

FIGURE 13–39 Schematic drawings illustrating the arterial changes that result
during transformation of the truncus arteriosus, aortic sac, pharyngeal arch
arteries, and dorsal aortae into the adult arterial pattern. The vessels that are not
colored are not derived from these structures. A, Pharyngeal arch arteries at 6
weeks; by this stage, the first two pairs of arteries have largely disappeared. B,
Pharyngeal arch arteries at 7 weeks; the parts of the dorsal aortae and pharyngeal

arch arteries that normally disappear are indicated with broken lines. C, Arterial
arrangement at 8 weeks. D, Sketch of the arterial vessels of a 6-month-old infant.
Note that the ascending aorta and pulmonary arteries are considerably smaller in
C than in D. This represents the relative flow through these vessels at the
different stages of development. Observe the large size of the ductus arteriosus
(DA) in C and that it is essentially a direct continuation of the pulmonary trunk.
The DA normally becomes functionally closed within the first few days after
birth. Eventually the DA becomes the ligamentum arteriosum, as shown in D.
Molecular studies indicate that the transcription factor Tbx1 regulates migration
of the neural crest cells which contribute to the formation of the pharyngeal arch
arteries.

Derivatives of First Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries
Most of these pharyngeal arch arteries disappear, but remnants of them form part
of the maxillary arteries, which supply the ears, teeth, and muscles of the eye
and face. These arteries may also contribute to the formation of the external
carotid arteries.

Derivatives of Second Pair of Pharyngeal Arch
Arteries
Dorsal parts of these arteries persist and form the stems of the stapedial
arteries; these small vessels run through the ring of the stapes, a small bone in
the middle ear.

Derivatives of Third Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries
Proximal parts of these arteries form the common carotid arteries, which
supply structures in the head (Fig. 13-39D). Distal parts of the third pair of
pharyngeal arch arteries join with the dorsal aortae to form the internal carotid
arteries, which supply the middle ears, orbits, brain and its meninges, and the
pituitary gland.

Derivatives of Fourth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch
Arteries
The left fourth pharyngeal arch artery forms part of the arch of the aorta (Fig.
13-39C). The proximal part of the artery develops from the aortic sac and the
distal part is derived from the left dorsal aorta.
The right fourth pharyngeal arch artery becomes the proximal part of the right
subclavian artery. The distal part of the right subclavian artery forms from the
right dorsal aorta and right seventh intersegmental artery. The left
subclavian artery is not derived from a pharyngeal arch artery; it forms from the
left seventh intersegmental artery (Fig. 13-39A). As development proceeds,
differential growth shifts the origin of the left subclavian artery cranially.
Consequently, it lies close to the origin of the left common carotid artery (Fig.
13-39D).

Fate of Fifth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries
Approximately 50% of the time, the fifth pair of pharyngeal arch arteries
consists of rudimentary vessels that soon degenerate, leaving no vascular
derivatives. In the other 50%, these arteries do not develop.

Derivatives of Sixth Pair of Pharyngeal Arch Arteries
The left sixth pharyngeal arch artery develops as follows (Fig. 13-39B and C):
• The proximal part of the artery persists as the proximal part of the left
pulmonary artery.
• The distal part of the artery passes from the left pulmonary artery to the dorsal
aorta and forms a prenatal shunt, the ductus arteriosus (DA).
The right sixth pharyngeal arch artery develops as follows:
• The proximal part of the artery persists as the proximal part of the right
pulmonary artery.
• The distal part of the artery degenerates.
The transformation of the sixth pair of pharyngeal arch arteries explains why the
course of the recurrent laryngeal nerves differs on the two sides. These nerves
supply the sixth pair of pharyngeal arches and hook around the sixth pair of
pharyngeal arch arteries on their way to the developing larynx (Fig. 13-40A). On
the right, because the distal part of the right sixth artery degenerates, the right
recurrent laryngeal nerve moves superiorly and hooks around the proximal part
of the right subclavian artery, the derivative of the fourth pharyngeal arch artery
(Fig. 13-40B). On the left, the left recurrent laryngeal nerve hooks around the
ductus arterious (DA) formed by the distal part of the sixth pharyngeal arch
artery. When this arterial shunt involutes after birth, the nerve remains around
the ligamentum arteriosum (remnant of DA), and the arch of the aorta (Fig. 13-
40C).

FIGURE 13–40 The relation of the recurrent laryngeal nerves to the pharyngeal
arch arteries. A, At 6 weeks, showing the recurrent laryngeal nerves hooked
around the sixth pair of pharyngeal arch arteries. B, At 8 weeks, showing the
right recurrent laryngeal nerve hooked around the right subclavian artery, and the
left recurrent laryngeal nerve hooked around the ductus arteriosus and the arch
of the aorta. C, After birth, showing the left recurrent nerve hooked around the
ligamentum arteriosum and the arch of the aorta.

Pharyngeal Arch Arterial Birth Defects
Because of the many changes involved in transformation of the embryonic
pharyngeal arch arterial system into the adult arterial pattern, arterial birth
defects may occur. Most defects result from the persistence of parts of the
pharyngeal arch arteries that usually disappear, or from disappearance of parts
that normally persist.
Coarctation of Aorta
Aortic coarctation (constriction) occurs in approximately 10% of children with
congenital heart defects (CHDs). Coarctation is characterized by an aortic
constriction of varying length (Fig. 13-41). Most coarctations occur distal to the
origin of the left subclavian artery at the entrance of the ductus arteriosis (DA)
(juxtaductal coarctation).

FIGURE 13–41 A, Postductal coarctation of the aorta. B, Diagrammatic
representation of the common routes of collateral circulation that develop in
association with postductal coarctation of the aorta. C and D, Preductal
coarctation. E, Sketch of the pharyngeal arch arterial pattern in a 7-week
embryo, showing the areas that normally involute (see dotted branches of

arteries). Note that the distal segment of the right dorsal aorta normally involutes
as the right subclavian artery develops. F, Abnormal involution of a small distal
segment of the left dorsal aorta. G, Later stage showing the abnormally
involuted segment appearing as a coarctation of the aorta. This moves to the
region of the ductus arteriosus with the left subclavian artery. These drawings (E
to G) illustrate one hypothesis about the embryologic basis of coarctation of the
aorta.
The classification into preductal and postductal coarctations is commonly used;
however, in 90% of instances, the coarctation is directly opposite the DA.
Coarctation of the aorta occurs twice as often in males as in females and is
associated with a bicuspid aortic valve in 70% of cases.
In postductal coarctation (Fig. 13-41A and B), the constriction is just distal to
the DA. This permits development of a collateral circulation during the fetal
period (Fig. 13-41B), thereby assisting with passage of blood to inferior parts of
the body.
In preductal coarctation (Fig. 13-41C ), the constriction is proximal to the DA.
The narrowed segment may be extensive (Fig. 13-41D); before birth, blood
flows through the DA to the descending aorta for distribution to the lower body.
In an infant with severe aortic coarctation, closure of the DA results in
hypoperfusion and rapid deterioration of the infant. These babies usually receive
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in an attempt to reopen the DA and establish an
adequate blood flow to the lower limbs. Aortic coarctation may be a feature of
Turner syndrome (see Chapter 20). This and other observations suggest that
genetic and/or environmental factors cause coarctation.
There are three main views about the embryologic basis of coarctation of the
aorta:
• During formation of the arch of the aorta, muscle tissue of the DA may be
incorporated into the wall of the aorta; then, when the DA constricts at birth, the
ductal muscle in the aorta also constricts, forming a coarctation.
• There may be abnormal involution of a small segment of the left dorsal aorta
(Fig. 13-41F ). Later, this stenotic segment (area of coarctation) moves cranially
with the left subclavian artery (Fig. 13-41G).
• During fetal life, the segment of the arch of the aorta between the left

subclavian artery and the DA is normally narrow because it carries very little
blood. After closure of the DA, this narrow area (isthmus) normally enlarges
until it is the same diameter as the aorta. If the isthmus persists, a coarctation
forms.
Double Pharyngeal Arch Artery
This rare anomaly is characterized by a vascular ring around the trachea and
esophagus (Fig. 13-42B). Varying degrees of compression of these structures
may occur in infants. If the compression is significant, it causes wheezing
respirations that are aggravated by crying, feeding, and flexion of the neck. The
vascular ring results from failure of the distal part of the right dorsal aorta to
disappear (Fig. 13-42A); as a result, right and left arches form. Usually the right
arch of the aorta is larger and passes posterior to the trachea and esophagus (Fig.
13-42B).
FIGURE 13–42 A, Drawing of the embryonic pharyngeal arch arteries
illustrating the embryologic basis of the right and left arches of the aorta (double
arch of aorta). B, A large right arch of the aorta and a small left arch of the aorta
arise from the ascending aorta and form a vascular ring around the trachea and
esophagus. Observe that there is compression of the esophagus and trachea. The
right common carotid and subclavian arteries arise separately from the large
right arch of the aorta.

Right Arch of Aorta
When the entire right dorsal aorta persists (Fig. 13-43A and B) and the distal part
of the left dorsal aorta involutes, a right arch of the aorta results. There are two
main types:
• Right arch of the aorta without a retroesophageal component (see Fig. 13-
43B). The DA (or ligamentum arteriosum) passes from the right pulmonary
artery to the right arch of the aorta. Because no vascular ring is formed, this
condition is usually asymptomatic.
• Right arch of the aorta with a retroesophageal component (Fig. 13-43C ).
Originally, there was probably a small left arch of the aorta that involuted,
leaving the right arch of the aorta posterior to the esophagus. The DA
(ligamentum arteriosum) attaches to the distal part of the arch of the aorta and
forms a ring, which may constrict the esophagus and trachea.

FIGURE 13–43 A, Sketch of the pharyngeal arch arteries showing the normal
involution of the distal portion of the left dorsal aorta. There is also persistence
of the entire right dorsal aorta and the distal part of the right sixth pharyngeal
arch artery. B, Right pharyngeal arch artery without a retroesophageal
component. C, Right arch of the aorta with a retroesophageal component. The
abnormal right arch of the aorta and the ligamentum arteriosum (postnatal
remnant of the ductus arteriosus) form a ring that compresses the esophagus and
trachea.
Anomalous Right Subclavian Artery

The right subclavian artery arises from the distal part of the arch of the aorta and
passes posterior to the trachea and esophagus to supply the right upper limb
(Figs. 13-44 and 13-45). A retroesophageal right subclavian artery occurs
when the right fourth pharyngeal arch artery and the right dorsal aorta disappear
cranial to the seventh intersegmental artery. As a result, the right subclavian
artery forms from the right seventh intersegmental artery and the distal part of
the right dorsal aorta. As development proceeds, differential growth shifts the
origin of the right subclavian artery cranially until it comes to lie close to the
origin of the left subclavian artery.
FIGURE 13–44 Sketches illustrating the possible embryologic basis of abnormal
origin of the right subclavian artery. A, The right fourth pharyngeal arch artery
and the cranial part of the right dorsal aorta have involuted. As a result, the right

subclavian artery forms from the right seventh intersegmental artery and the
distal segment of the right dorsal aorta. B, As the arch of the aorta forms, the
right subclavian artery is carried cranially (arrows) with the left subclavian
artery. C, The abnormal right subclavian artery arises from the aorta and passes
posterior to the trachea and esophagus.


FIGURE 13–45 Abnormal origin of right subclavian artery. This left anterior
oblique view of an aortic arch arteriogram shows both common carotid arteries
arising from a common stem of the arch of the aorta (BT). The origin of the right
subclavian artery (RS) is distal to the separate origin of the left subclavian artery
(LS), but is superimposed in this view. The right subclavian artery then courses
cranially and to the right, posterior to the esophagus and trachea. AA, Arch of
aorta; BT, brachiocephalic trunk; RCC, right common carotid artery; LCC, left
common carotid artery; LV, left vertebral artery.
(Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, ND.)
Although an anomalous right subclavian artery is fairly common and always
forms a vascular ring, it is rarely clinically significant because the ring is usually
not tight enough to constrict the esophagus and trachea very much.

 Fetal And Neonatal Circulation
The fetal cardiovascular system (Fig. 13-46) is designed to serve prenatal
needs and permit modifications at birth that establish the neonatal circulatory
pattern (Fig. 13-47). Good respiration in a neonate is dependent on normal
circulatory changes occurring at birth, which result in oxygenation of the blood
occurring in the lungs when fetal blood flow through the placenta ceases.
Prenatally, the lungs do not provide gas exchange and the pulmonary vessels are
vasoconstricted. The three vascular structures most important in the transitional
circulation are the DV, oval foramen, and DA.

FIGURE 13–46 Fetal circulation. The colors indicate the oxygen saturation of
the blood, and the arrows show the course of the blood from the placenta to the
heart. The organs are not drawn to scale. A small amount of highly oxygenated
blood from the inferior vena cava remains in the right atrium and mixes with
poorly oxygenated blood from the superior vena cava. The medium oxygenated

blood then passes into the right ventricle. Observe that three shunts permit most
of the blood to bypass the liver and lungs: (1) ductus venosus, (2) oval foramen,
and (3) ductus arteriosus. The poorly oxygenated blood returns to the placenta
for oxygenation and nutrients through the umbilical arteries.

FIGURE 13–47 Neonatal circulation. The adult derivatives of the fetal vessels
and structures that become nonfunctional at birth are shown. The arrows indicate
the course of the blood in the infant. The organs are not drawn to scale. After
birth, the three shunts that shortcircuited the blood during fetal life cease to
function, and the pulmonary and systemic circulations become separated.

Fetal Circulation
Highly oxygenated, nutrient-rich blood returns under high pressure from the
placenta in the umbilical vein (Fig. 13-46). On approaching the liver,
approximately half of the blood passes directly into the DV, a fetal vessel
connecting the umbilical vein to the IVC (Figs. 13-48 and 13-49); consequently,
this blood bypasses the liver. The other half of the blood in the umbilical vein
flows into the sinusoids of the liver and enters the IVC through the hepatic
veins.
FIGURE 13–48 A, Schematic illustration of the course of the umbilical vein
from the umbilical cord to the liver. B, Ultrasound scan showing the umbilical
cord and the course of its vessels in the embryo, b, bladder; c, umbilical cord;
DV, ductus venosus; UV, umbilical vein; UA, umbilical artery. C, Schematic
presentation of the relationship among the ductus venosus, umbilical vein,
hepatic veins, and inferior vena cava. The oxygenated blood is coded with red.
(B, From Goldstein RB: Ultrasound evaluation of the fetal abdomen. In Callen
PW [ed]: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 1996. C, From Tekay A, Campbell S: Doppler ultrasonography in
obstetrics. In Callen PW [ed]: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology,
4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

FIGURE 13–49 Dissection of the visceral surface of the fetal liver.
Approximately 50% of umbilical venous blood bypasses the liver and joins the
inferior vena cava through the ductus venosus.
Blood flow through the DV is regulated by a sphincter mechanism close to the
umbilical vein. When the sphincter contracts, more blood is diverted to the portal
vein and hepatic sinusoids and less to the DV (Fig. 13-49). Although an
anatomic sphincter in the DV has been described, its presence is not universally
accepted. However, it is generally agreed that there is a physiologic sphincter
that prevents overloading of the heart when venous flow in the umbilical vein is
high (e.g., during uterine contractions).
After a short course in the IVC, the blood enters the right atrium of the heart.
Because the IVC also contains poorly oxygenated blood from the lower limbs,
abdomen, and pelvis, the blood entering the right atrium is not as well
oxygenated as that in the umbilical vein, but it still has a high oxygen content
(Fig. 13-46). Most blood from the IVC is directed by the crista dividens
(inferior border of the septum secundum), through the oval foramen into the left
atrium (Fig. 13-50). Here it mixes with the relatively small amount of poorly
oxygenated blood returning from the lungs through the pulmonary veins. The
fetal lungs use oxygen from the blood instead of replenishing it. From the left
atrium, the blood then passes to the left ventricle and leaves through the
ascending aorta.

FIGURE 13–50 Schematic diagram of blood flow through the fetal atria
illustrating how the crista dividens (lower edge of septum secundum) separates
the blood coming from the inferior vena cava into two streams. The larger
stream passes through the oval foramen into the left atrium, where it mixes with
the small amount of poorly oxygenated blood coming from the lungs through the
pulmonary veins. The smaller stream of blood from the inferior vena cava
remains in the right atrium and mixes with poorly oxygenated blood from the
superior vena cava and coronary sinus.
The arteries to the heart, neck, head, and upper limbs receive well-oxygenated
blood from the ascending aorta. The liver also receives well-oxygenated blood
from the umbilical vein (Figs. 13-48 and 13-49). The small amount of well-
oxygenated blood from the IVC in the right atrium that does not enter the oval
foramen mixes with poorly oxygenated blood from the SVC and coronary sinus
and passes into the right ventricle. This blood, with a medium oxygen content,
leaves through the pulmonary trunk.
Approximately 10% of this blood flow goes to the lungs; most blood passes
through the ductus arteriosus (DA) into the descending aorta to the fetal body
and returns to the placenta through the umbilical arteries (Fig. 13-46). The DA
protects the lungs from circulatory overloading and allows the right ventricle to
strengthen in preparation for functioning at full capacity at birth. Because of the
high pulmonary vascular resistance in fetal life, pulmonary blood flow is low.
Approximately 10% of blood from the ascending aorta enters the descending
aorta; 65% of the blood in the descending aorta passes into the umbilical arteries
and is returned to the placenta for reoxygenation. The remaining 35% of the
blood in the descending aorta supplies the viscera and the inferior part of the
body.

Transitional Neonatal Circulation
Important circulatory adjustments occur at birth when the circulation of fetal
blood through the placenta ceases and the infant’s lungs expand and begin to
function (Fig. 13-47).
As soon as the baby is born, the oval foramen, DA, DV, and umbilical vessels
are no longer needed. The sphincter in the DV constricts, so that all blood
entering the liver passes through the hepatic sinusoids. Occlusion of the
placental circulation causes an immediate decrease in blood pressure in the IVC
and right atrium.
Aeration of the lungs at birth is associated with a:
• Dramatic decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance
• Marked increase in pulmonary blood flow
• Progressive thinning of the walls of the pulmonary arteries
The thinning of the arterial walls results mainly from stretching the lungs at
birth.
Because of increased pulmonary blood flow and loss of flow from the umbilical
vein, the pressure in the left atrium is higher than in the right atrium. The
increased left atrial pressure functionally closes the oval foramen by pressing
the valve of the oval foramen against the septum secundum (Fig. 13-47). The
output from the right ventricle now flows into the pulmonary trunk. Because
pulmonary vascular resistance is lower than the systemic vascular resistance,
blood flow in the DA reverses, passing from the descending aorta to the
pulmonary trunk.
The right ventricular wall is thicker than the left ventricular wall in fetuses and
newborn infants because the right ventricle has been working harder in utero. By
the end of the first month, the left ventricular wall thickness is greater than the
right because the left ventricle is now working harder. The right ventricular wall
becomes thinner because of the atrophy associated with its lighter workload.
The DA constricts at birth but there is often a small shunt of blood via the DA
from the aorta to the pulmonary trunk for 24 to 48 hours in a normal full-term

infant. At the end of 24 hours, 20% of ducts are functionally closed, about 80%
by 48 hours, and 100% at 96 hours. In premature infants and in those with
persistent hypoxia, the DA may remain open much longer. In full-term infants,
oxygen is the most important factor in controlling closure of the DA and appears
to be mediated by bradykinin, a substance released from the lungs during their
initial inflation. Bradykinin has potent contractile effects on smooth muscle. The
action of this substance appears to be dependent on the high oxygen content of
the blood in the aorta resulting from aeration of the lungs at birth. When the pO2
of the blood passing through the DA reaches approximately 50 mm Hg, the wall
of the ductus constricts. The mechanisms by which oxygen causes ductal
constriction are not well understood.
The effects of oxygen on the ductal smooth muscle may be direct or may be
mediated by its effects on prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) secretion. Transforming
growth factor β (TGF-β) is probably involved in the anatomic closure of the DA
after birth. During fetal life, the patency of the DA before birth is controlled by
the lower content of oxygen in the blood passing through it and by endogenously
produced prostaglandins (PGs) that act on the smooth muscle in the wall of the
DA. The PGs cause the DA to relax. Hypoxia and other ill-defined influences
cause the local production of PGE2 and prostacyclin (PGI2), which keep the DA
open. Inhibitors of PG synthesis, such as indomethacin, can cause constriction
of a patent DA (PDA) in premature infants.
The umbilical arteries constrict at birth, preventing loss of the neonate’s
blood. Because the umbilical cord is not tied for a minute or so, blood flow
through the umbilical vein continues, transferring well-oxygenated fetal blood
from the placenta to the infant. The change from the fetal to the adult pattern of
blood circulation is not a sudden occurrence. Some changes occur with the first
breath; others take place over hours and days. During the transitional stage, there
may be a right-to-left flow through the oval foramen. The closure of fetal vessels
and the oval foramen is initially a functional change. Later, anatomic closure
results from proliferation of endothelial and fibrous tissues.

 Derivatives of Fetal Vessels and Structures
Because of the changes in the cardiovascular system at birth, some vessels and
structures are no longer required. Over a period of months, these fetal vessels
form nonfunctional ligaments. Fetal structures, such as the oval foramen, persist
as anatomic vestiges (e.g., oval fossa; see Fig. 13-52).
Umbilical Vein and Round Ligament of Liver
The umbilical vein remains patent for a considerable period and may be used for
exchange transfusions of blood during early infancy. These transfusions are often
done to prevent brain damage and death in infants with anemia from
erythroblastosis fetalis (a grave hemolytic anemia). In exchange transfusions,
most of the infant’s blood is replaced with donor blood. The lumen of the
umbilical vein usually does not disappear completely; in these people, the round
ligament can be cannulated, if necessary, for the injection of contrast media or
chemotherapeutic drugs.
The intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein eventually becomes the round
ligament of liver (ligamentum teres) (Fig. 13-47), which passes from the
umbilicus to the porta hepatis; here it is attached to the left branch of the portal
vein (Fig. 13-51).

FIGURE 13–51 Dissection of the visceral surface of an adult liver. Note that the
umbilical vein is represented by the round ligament of the liver and the ductus
venosus by the ligamentum venosum.
Ductus Venosus and Ligamentum Venosum
The ductus venosus (DV) becomes the ligamentum venosum. This ligament
passes through the liver from the left branch of the portal vein and attaches to the
IVC (Fig. 13-51).
Umbilical Arteries and Abdominal Ligaments
Most of the intra-abdominal parts of the umbilical arteries become medial
umbilical ligaments (Fig. 13-47); the proximal parts of these vessels persist as
the superior vesical arteries, which supply the urinary bladder.
Oval Foramen and Oval Fossa
The oval foramen usually closes functionally at birth. Anatomic closure occurs
by the third month and results from tissue proliferation and adhesion of the
septum primum to the left margin of the septum secundum. The septum primum
forms the floor of the oval fossa (Fig. 13-52). The inferior edge of the septum
secundum forms a rounded fold, the border of the oval fossa (limbus fossae
ovalis), which marks the former boundary of the oval foramen.

FIGURE 13–52 Dissection of the right atrial aspect of the interatrial septum of
an adult heart. Observe the oval fossa and the border of the oval fossa. The floor
of the oval fossa is formed by the septum primum, whereas the border of the
fossa is formed by the free edge of the septum secundum. Aeration of the lungs
at birth is associated with a dramatic decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance
and a marked increase in pulmonary flow. Because of the increased pulmonary
blood flow, the pressure in the left atrium is increased above that in the right
atrium. This increased left atrial pressure closes the oval foramen by pressing the
valve of the oval foramen against the septum secundum. This forms the oval
fossa.
Ductus Arteriosus and Ligamentum Arteriosum
Functional closure of the ductus arteriosus (DA) in healthy term neonates is
usually completed within the first few days after birth (Fig. 13-53A). Anatomic
closure of the DA and formation of the ligamentum arteriosum normally occurs
by the 12th postnatal week (Fig. 13-53C). The short, thick ligamentum
arteriosum extends from the left pulmonary artery to the arch of the aorta.

FIGURE 13–53 Closure of the ductus arteriosus (DA). A, The DA of a neonate.
B, Abnormal patent DA in a 6-month-old infant. C, The ligamentum arteriosum
in a 6-month-old infant.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), a common birth defect, is two to three times
more frequent in females than in males (Fig. 13-53B). Functional closure of the
DA usually occurs soon after birth; however, if it remains patent, aortic blood is
shunted into the pulmonary trunk. It has been suggested that persistent patency
of the DA may result from failure of TGF-β induction after birth.
PDA is a common birth defect that is associated with maternal rubella infection
during early pregnancy (see Chapter 20). Preterm infants and infants born at
high altitude may have a PDA; the patency is the result of hypoxia and
immaturity. Virtually all preterm infants (≤28 weeks) whose birth weight is less
than 1750 g have a PDA in the first 24 hours of postnatal life.
The embryologic basis of PDA is failure of the DA to involute after birth and
form the ligamentum arteriosum. Failure of contraction of the muscular wall of
the DA after birth is the primary cause of patency. There is some evidence that
low oxygen content of the blood in newborn infants with respiratory distress
syndrome can adversely affect closure of the DA. For example, PDA commonly
occurs in small premature infants with respiratory difficulties associated with a
deficiency of surfactant (a phospholipid that reduces surface tension in alveoli in
the lungs).
PDA may occur as an isolated anomaly or in infants with certain chromosomal
anomalies or cardiac defects. Large differences between aortic and pulmonary

blood pressures can cause a heavy flow of blood through the DA, thereby
preventing normal constriction. Such pressure differences may be caused by
coarctation of the aorta (Fig. 13-41C), transposition of the great arteries (TGA)
(Fig. 13-32), or pulmonary stenosis and atresia (Fig. 13-34).

Development Of Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system begins to develop at the end of the sixth week,
approximately 2 weeks after the primordia of the cardiovascular system are
recognizable. Lymphatic vessels develop in a manner similar to that previously
described for blood vessels (see Chapter 4), and make connections with the
venous system. The early lymphatic capillaries join each other to form a network
of lymphatics (Fig. 13-54A).

FIGURE 13–54 Development of the lymphatic system. A, Left side of a 
-
week embryo showing the primary lymph sacs. B, Ventral view of the lymphatic
system at 9 weeks showing the paired thoracic ducts. C, Later in the fetal period,
illustrating formation of the thoracic duct and right lymphatic duct.

Development of Lymph Sacs and Lymphatic Ducts
There are six primary lymph sacs present at the end of the embryonic period
(Fig. 13-54A):
• Two jugular lymph sacs near the junction of the subclavian veins with the
anterior cardinal veins (the future internal jugular veins)
• Two iliac lymph sacs near the junction of the iliac veins with the posterior
cardinal veins
• One retroperitoneal lymph sac in the root of the mesentery on the posterior
abdominal wall
• One cisterna chyli (chyle cistern) located dorsal to the retroperitoneal lymph
sac
Lymphatic vessels soon connect to the lymph sacs and pass along main veins: to
the head, neck, and upper limbs from the jugular lymph sacs; to the lower trunk
and lower limbs from the iliac lymph sacs; and to the primordial gut from the
retroperitoneal lymph sac and the cisterna chyli. Two large channels (right and
left thoracic ducts) connect the jugular lymph sacs with this cistern. Soon a large
anastomosis forms between these channels (Fig. 13-54B).

Development of Thoracic Duct
The thoracic duct develops from the caudal part of the right thoracic duct, the
anastomosis between the left and right thoracic ducts, and the cranial part of the
left thoracic duct. As a result, there are many variations in the origin, course, and
termination of the thoracic duct. The right lymphatic duct is derived from the
cranial part of the right thoracic duct (Fig. 13-54C). The thoracic duct and right
lymphatic duct connect with the venous system at the venous angle between the
internal jugular and subclavian veins (Fig. 13-54B).

Development of Lymph Nodes
Except for the superior part of the cisterna chyli, the lymph sacs are transformed
into groups of lymph nodes during the early fetal period. Mesenchymal cells
invade each lymph sac and break up its cavity into a network of lymphatic
channels—the primordia of the lymph sinuses. Other mesenchymal cells give
rise to the capsule and connective tissue framework of the lymph nodes.

Development of Lymphocytes
The lymphocytes are derived originally from stem cells in the umbilical vesicle
mesenchyme and later from the liver and spleen. These early lymphocytes
eventually enter the bone marrow, where they divide to form lymphoblasts. The
lymphocytes that appear in lymph nodes before birth are derived from the
thymus, a derivative of the third pair of pharyngeal pouches (see Chapter 9).
Small lymphocytes leave the thymus and circulate to other lymphoid organs.
Later, some mesenchymal cells in the lymph nodes also differentiate into
lymphocytes. Lymph nodules do not appear in the lymph nodes until just before
and/or after birth.

Development of Spleen and Tonsils
The spleen develops from an aggregation of mesenchymal cells in the dorsal
mesogastrium (see Chapter 11). The palatine tonsils develop from the second
pair of pharyngeal pouches and nearby mesenchyme. The tubal tonsils develop
from aggregations of lymph nodules around the pharyngeal openings of the
pharyngotympanic tubes. The pharyngeal tonsils develop from an aggregation
of lymph nodules in the wall of the nasopharynx. The lingual tonsil develops
from an aggregation of lymph nodules in the root of the tongue. Lymph nodules
also develop in the mucosa of the respiratory and alimentary systems.
Anomalies of Lymphatic System
Congenital anomalies of the lymphatic system are rare. There may be diffuse
swelling of a part of the body—congenital lymphedema. This condition may
result from dilation of primordial lymphatic channels, or from congenital
hypoplasia of lymphatic vessels. More rarely, diffuse cystic dilation of lymphatic
channels involves widespread portions of the body.
In cystic hygroma, large swellings usually appear in the inferolateral part of the
neck and consist of large single or multilocular, fluid-filled cavities (Fig. 13-55).
Hygromas may be present at birth, but they often enlarge and become evident
during infancy, especially after infection or hemorrhage. Most hygromas appear
to be derived from abnormal transformation of the jugular lymph sacs.
Hygromas are believed to arise from parts of a jugular lymph sac that are
pinched off or from lymphatic spaces that fail to establish connections with the
main lymphatic channels. Hygromas diagnosed in utero in the first trimester are
associated with chromosomal abnormalities in about 50% of cases. Fetal
outcome in these cases is poor.

FIGURE 13–55 Cystic hygroma. A, Transverse axial sonogram of the neck of a
fetus with a large cystic hygroma. B, Photograph of a neck dissection. Cystic
hygroma was demonstrated from this cross-sectional view of the posterior fetal
neck at 18.5 weeks. The lesion was characterized by multiple, septated cystic
areas within the mass itself as shown in the pathology specimen. Post, posterior.
(Courtesy of Dr. Wesley Lee, Division of Fetal Imaging, William Beaumont
Hospital, Royal Oak, Michigan.)

 Summary Of Cardiovascular
System
• The cardiovascular system begins to develop at the end of the third week. The
primordial heart starts to beat at the beginning of the fourth week. Mesenchymal
cells derived from splanchnic mesoderm proliferate and form isolated cell
clusters, which soon develop into two heart tubes that join to form the primordial
vascular system. Splanchnic mesoderm surrounding the heart tube forms the
primordial myocardium.
• The heart primordium consists of four chambers: the bulbus cordis, ventricle,
atrium, and sinus venosus.
• The truncus arteriosus (primordium of ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk) is
continuous caudally with the bulbus cordis, which becomes part of the
ventricles. As the heart grows, it bends to the right and soon acquires the general
external appearance of the adult heart. The heart becomes partitioned into four
chambers between the fourth and seventh weeks.
• Three systems of paired veins drain into the primordial heart: the vitelline
system, which becomes the portal system; the cardinal veins, which form the
caval system; and the umbilical veins, which involutes after birth.
• As the pharyngeal arches form during the fourth and fifth weeks, they are
penetrated by pharyngeal arteries that arise from the aortic sac. During the sixth
to eighth weeks, the pharyngeal arch arteries are transformed into the adult
arterial arrangement of the carotid, subclavian, and pulmonary arteries.
• The critical period of heart development is from day 20 to day 50 after
fertilization. Numerous events occur during cardiac development, and deviation
from the normal pattern at any time may produce one or more congenital heart
defects. Because partitioning of the primordial heart results from complex
cellular and molecular processes, defects of the cardiac septa are relatively
common, particularly ventricular septal defects (VSDs). Some birth defects
result from abnormal transformation of the pharyngeal arch arteries into the
adult arterial pattern.
• Because the lungs are nonfunctional during prenatal life, the fetal
cardiovascular system is structurally designed so that blood is oxygenated in the
placenta and most of it bypasses the lungs. The modifications that establish the
postnatal circulatory pattern at birth are not abrupt, but extend into infancy.

Failure of these changes in the circulatory system to occur at birth results in two
of the most common congenital anomalies of the heart and great vessels: patent
oval foramen and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
• The lymphatic system begins to develop late in the sixth week in close
association with the venous system. Six primary lymph sacs develop, which later
become interconnected by lymphatic vessels. Lymph nodes develop along the
network of lymphatic vessels; lymph nodules do not appear until just before or
after birth.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 13–1
A pediatrician detected a congenital cardiac defect in an infant, and he
explained to the baby’s mother that this is a common birth defect.
• What is the most common type of congenital cardiac defect?
• What percentage of congenital heart disease results from this defect?
• Discuss blood flow in infants with this defect.
• What problems would the infant likely encounter if the cardiac defect were
large?

Case 13–2
A female infant was born normally after a pregnancy complicated by a rubella
infection during the first trimester of pregnancy. She had congenital cataracts
and congenital heart disease. A radiograph of the infant’s chest at 3 weeks
showed generalized cardiac enlargement with some increase in pulmonary
vascularity.
• What congenital cardiovascular anomaly is commonly associated with
maternal rubella during early pregnancy?
• What probably caused the cardiac enlargement?

Case 13–3
A male neonate was referred to a pediatrician because of the blue color of his
skin (cyanosis). An ultrasound examination was ordered to confirm the
preliminary diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot.
• In the tetralogy of Fallot, there are four cardiac defects. What are they?
• What is one of the most obvious signs of the tetralogy of Fallot?
• What radiographic technique might be used to confirm a tentative diagnosis of
this type of CHD?
• What do you think would be the main aim of therapy in these cases?

Case 13–4
A male neonate was born after a full-term normal pregnancy. Severe generalized
cyanosis was observed on the first day. A chest radiograph revealed a slightly
enlarged heart with a narrow base and increased pulmonary vascularity. A
clinical diagnosis of transformation of the great arteries (TGA) was made.
• What radiographic technique would likely be used to verify the diagnosis?
• What would this technique reveal in the present case?
• How was the infant able to survive after birth with this severe heart defect?

Case 13–5
During an autopsy of a 72-year-old man who died from chronic heart failure, it
was observed that his heart was very large and that the pulmonary artery and its
main branches were dilated. Opening the heart revealed a very large atrial
septal defect (ASD).
• What type of ASD was probably present?
• Where would the defect likely be located?
• Explain why the pulmonary artery and its main branches were dilated.
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Adams SM, Good MW, De Franco GM. Sudden infant death syndrome. Am Fam
Physician. 2009;79:870.
Anderson RH, Brown NA, Moorman AFM. Development and structures of the
venous pole of the heart. Dev Dyn. 2006;235:2.
Bajolle F, Zaffran S, Bonnet D. Genetics and embryological mechanisms of
congenital heart disease. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2009;102:59.
Baschat AA. Examination of the fetal cardiovascular system. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2011;16:2.
Bentham J, Bhattacharya S. Genetic mechanisms controlling cardiovascular
development. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1123:10.
Bernstein E. The cardiovascular system. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson
HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
2004.
Camp E, Munsterberg A. Ingression, migration and early differentiation of
cardiac progenitors. Front Biosci. 2011;17:2416.
Chappell JC, Bautch VL. Vascular development:genetic mechanisms and links to
vascular disease. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:43.

Combs MD, Yutzey KE. Heart valve development: regulatory networks in
development and disease. Circ Res. 2009;105:408.
Conte G, Pellegrini A. On the development of the coronary arteries in human
embryos, stages 13–19. Anat Embryol. 1984;169:209.
Dyer LA, Kirby ML. The role of secondary heart field in cardiac development.
Develop Dyn. 2009;336:137.
Hildreth V, Anderson RH, Henderson DJH. Autonomic innervations of the
developing heart. Origins and function. Clin Anat. 2009;22:36.
Gessert S, Kuhl M. The multiple phases and faces of Wnt signaling during
cardiac differentiation and development. Circ Res. 2010;107:186.
Gloviczki P, Duncan A, Kaira M, et al. Vascular malformations: an update.
Perspect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther. 2009;21:133.
Harvey RP, Meilhac SM, Buckingham M. Landmarks and lineages in the
developing heart. Circ Res. 2009;104:1235.
Horsthuis T, Christoffels VM, Anderson RH, et al. Can recent insights into
cardiac development improve our understanding of congenitally malformed
heart. Clin Anat. 2009;22:4.
Jones PN, Showengerdt KOJr. Prenatal diagnosis of congenital heart disease.
Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009;56:709.
Kamedia Y. Hoxa3 and signaling molecules involved in aortic arch patterning
and remodeling. Cell Tissue Res. 2010;336:165.
Loukas M, Groat C, Khangura R, et al. Cardiac veins: a review of the literature.
Clin Anat. 2009;22:129.
Loukas M, Bilinsky C, Bilinski E, et al. The normal and abnormal anatomy of
the coronary arteries. Clin Anat. 2009;22:114.
Männer J. The anatomy of cardiac looping: A step towards the understanding of
the morphogenesis of several forms of congenital cardiac malformations. Clin
Anat. 2009;22:21.

Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Moorman AFM, Brown N, Anderson RH. Embryology of the heart. In Anderson
RH, Baker EJ, Penny DJ, et al, editors: Pediatric Cardiology, ed 3, Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2009.
Nemer M. Genetic insights into normal and abnormal heart development.
Cardiovasc Pathol. 2008;17:48.
O’Rahilly R. The timing and sequence of events in human cardiogenesis. Acta
Anat. 1971;79:70.
Penny DJ, Vick GW. Ventricular septal defect. Lancet. 2011;377:1103.
Pierpont MEM, Markwald RR, Lin AE. Genetic aspects of atrioventricular
septal defects. Am J Med Genet. 2000;97:289-296.
Solloway M, Harvey RP. Molecular pathways in myocardial development: a
stem cell perspective. Cardiovasc Res. 2006;58:264.
Srivastava D. Genetic regulation of cardiogenesis and congenital heart disease.
Ann Rev Pathol. 2006;1:199.
Vincent SD, Buckingham ME. How to make a heart: the origin and regulation of
cardiac progenitor cells. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:1.
Watanabe M, Schaefer KS. Cardiac embryology. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA,
Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine:
Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Yoo S-J, Jaeggi E. Ultrasound evaluation of the fetal heart. In Callen PW, editor:
Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2008.
Zavos PM. Stem cells and cellular therapy: Potential treatment for
cardiovascular diseases. Int J Cardiol. 2006;107:1.

Chapter 14 Skeletal System
Development of Bone and Cartilage 343
   Histogenesis of Cartilage 345
   Histogenesis of Bone 345
   Membranous Ossification 345
   Endochondral Ossification 346
Development of Joints 346
   Fibrous Joints 346
   Cartilaginous Joints 348
   Synovial Joints 348
Development of Axial Skeleton 348
   Development of Vertebral Column 348
   Development of Ribs 350
   Development of Sternum 351
   Development of Cranium 351
   Cranium of Neonate 351
   Postnatal Growth of Cranium 352
Development of Appendicular Skeleton 357
Summary of Skeletal System 360
Clinically Oriented Problems 360
As the notochord and neural tube form in the third week, the intraembryonic
mesoderm lateral to these structures thickens to form two longitudinal columns
of paraxial mesoderm (Fig. 14-1A and B). Toward the end of the third week,
these dorsolateral columns, located in the trunk, become segmented into blocks
of mesoderm—somites (Fig. 14-1C). Externally the somites appear as bead-like
elevations along the dorsolateral surface of the embryo (see Chapter 5). Each
somite differentiates into two parts (Fig. 14-1D and E):
• The ventromedial part is the sclerotome; its cells form the vertebrae and ribs.
• The dorsolateral part is the dermomyotome; its cells from the myotome region
form myoblasts (primordial muscle cells), and those from its dermatome region
form the dermis (fibroblasts).

FIGURE 14–1 Illustrations of formation and early differentiation of somites. A,
Dorsal view of an embryo of approximately 18 days. B, Transverse section of
the embryo shown in A illustrating the paraxial mesoderm from which the
somites are derived. C, Transverse section of an embryo of approximately 22
days showing the appearance of the early somites. Note that the neural folds are

about to fuse to form the neural tube. D, Transverse section of an embryo of
approximately 24 days showing folding of the embryo in the horizontal plane
(arrows). The dermomyotome region of the somite gives rise to the dermatome
and myotome. E, Transverse section of an embryo of approximately 26 days
showing the dermatome, myotome, and sclerotome regions of a somite.

Development Of Bone And Cartilage
At the end of the fourth week, the sclerotome cells form a loosely woven tissue,
mesenchyme (embryonic connective tissue), which has bone-forming capacity.
Bones first appear as condensations of mesenchymal cells that form bone
models. Condensation marks the beginning of selective gene activity, which
precedes cell differentiation (Fig. 14-2). Most flat bones develop in mesenchyme
within preexisting membranous sheaths; this type of osteogenesis is called
membranous (intramembranous) bone formation. Mesenchymal models of
most limb bones are transformed into cartilage bone models, which later become
ossified by endochondral bone formation.
FIGURE 14–2 Schematic representation of secreted molecules and transcription
factors regulating the initial differentiation, proliferation, and terminal
differentiation of chondrocytes. From top to bottom: mesenchymal cells (blue),
resting and proliferating (nonhypertrophic) chondrocytes (red), and hypertrophic
chondrocytes (yellow). Line with arrowheads indicate a positive action, and lines
with bars indicate an inhibition.

(From Karsenty G, Kronenberg HM, Settembre C: Genetic control of bone
formation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25:629, 2009.)
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-5 and BMP-7), the growth factor Gdf5,
members of the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) superfamily, and other
signaling molecules have been implicated as endogenous regulators of
chondrogenesis and skeletal development. Lineage commitment of skeletal
precursor cells to chondrocytes and osteoblasts is determined by β-catenin
levels. β-catenin in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in
the formation of cartilage and bone.

Histogenesis of Cartilage
Cartilage development begins from mesenchyme during the fifth week. In areas
where cartilage is to develop, the mesenchyme condenses to form
chondrification centers. The mesenchymal cells differentiate first into
precondrocytes and then into chondroblasts, which secrete collagenous fibrils
and ground substance (extracellular matrix). Subsequently, collagenous and/or
elastic fibers are deposited in the intercellular substance or matrix. Three types
of cartilage are distinguished according to the type of matrix that is formed: •
Hyaline cartilage, the most widely distributed type (e.g., in joints)
• Fibrocartilage (e.g., in intervertebral discs)
• Elastic cartilage (e.g., in auricles of the external ears)

Histogenesis of Bone
Bone primarily develops in two types of connective tissue, mesenchyme and
cartilage, but it can also develop in other connective tissues (e.g., the patella
develops in a tendon). Like cartilage, bone consists of cells and an organic
intercellular substance—bone matrix—that comprises collagen fibrils
embedded in an amorphous component. Studies of the cellular and molecular
events during embryonic bone formation suggest that osteogenesis and
chondrogenesis are programmed early in development, and are independent
events under the influence of vascular changes (see Chapter 21).

Membranous Ossification
This type of bone formation occurs in mesenchyme that has formed a
membranous sheath (Fig. 14-3). The mesenchyme condenses and becomes
highly vascular; precursor cells differentiate into osteoblasts (bone-forming
cells) and begin to deposit unmineralized matrix—osteoid. Calcium phosphate is
then deposited in the osteoid tissue as it is organized into bone. Bone osteoblasts
are trapped in the matrix and become osteocytes.
FIGURE 14–3 Light micrograph of membranous ossification (x132). Trabeculae
of bone are being formed by osteoblasts lining their surface (arrows). Observe
osteocytes trapped in lacunae (arrowheads) and that primordial osteons are
beginning to form. The osteons (canals) contain blood capillaries.
(From Gartner LP, Hiatt JL: Color Textbook of Histology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2001.)
At first, new bone has no organized pattern. Spicules of bone soon become
organized and coalesce into lamellae (layers). Concentric lamellae develop
around blood vessels, forming osteons (Haversian systems). Some osteoblasts

remain at the periphery of the developing bone and continue to lay down
lamellae, forming plates of compact bone on the surfaces. Between the surface
plates, the intervening bone remains spiculated or spongy. This spongy
environment is somewhat accentuated by the action of cells—osteoclasts—that
reabsorb bone. Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells with a hematopoietic origin.
In the interstices of spongy bone, the mesenchyme differentiates into bone
marrow. Hormones and cytokines regulate remodeling of bone by the
coordinated action of osteoclasts and osteoblasts.

Endochondral Ossification
Endochondral ossification (cartilaginous bone formation) is a type of bone
formation that occurs in preexisting cartilaginous models (Fig. 14-4A to E). In a
long bone, for example, the primary center of ossification appears in the
diaphysis—the part of a long bone between its ends—which forms the shaft of a
bone (e.g., the humerus). At this center of ossification, chondrocytes (cartilage
cells) increase in size (hypertrophy), the matrix becomes calcified, and the cells
die.

FIGURE 14–4 A to E, Schematic longitudinal sections of a 5-week embryo,
illustrating endochondral ossification in a developing long bone.
Concurrently, a thin layer of bone is deposited under the perichondrium
surrounding the diaphysis; thus, the perichondrium becomes the periosteum.

Invasion by vascular connective tissue from blood vessels surrounding the
periosteum also breaks up the cartilage. Osteoblasts reach the developing bone
from these blood vessels. Some invading cells differentiate into hemopoietic
cells, blood cells of the bone marrow. This process continues toward the
epiphyses (ends of the bones). The spicules of bone are remodeled by the action
of osteoclasts and osteoblasts. The transcription factor SOX9 and the co-
activator-associated arginine methyltransferase-1 (CARM1) regulate
ossochondral ossification.
Lengthening of long bones occurs at the diaphysial–epiphysial junction.
Lengthening of bone depends on the epiphysial cartilage plates (growth plates),
whose chondrocytes proliferate and participate in endochondral bone formation
(Fig. 14-4E). Toward the diaphysis, the cartilage cells hypertrophy (increase in
size) and the matrix becomes calcified. The spicules of the bone are isolated
from each other by vascular invasion from the medullary (marrow) cavity of
long bone (Fig. 14-4E). Bone is deposited on these spicules by osteoblasts;
resorption of the bone keeps the spongy bone masses relatively constant in
length and enlarges the medullary cavity.
Ossification of limb bones begins at the end of the embryonic period (56 days
after fertilization). Thereafter it makes demands on the supply of calcium and
phosphorus in pregnant women. Therefore, these women are advised to maintain
an adequate intake of these elements to preserve healthy bones and teeth.
At birth, the diaphyses are largely ossified, but most of the epiphyses are still
cartilaginous. Secondary ossification centers appear in the epiphyses in most
bones during the first few years after birth. The epiphysial cartilage cells
hypertrophy, and there is invasion by vascular connective tissue. Ossification
spreads radially, and only the articular cartilage and a transverse plate of
cartilage, the epiphysial cartilage plate, remain cartilaginous (see Fig. 14-4E).
Upon completion of growth, this plate is replaced by spongy bone; the epiphyses
and diaphysis are united, and no further elongation of the bone occurs.
In most bones, the epiphyses fuse with the diaphysis by the age of 20 years.
Growth in the diameter of a bone results from deposition of bone at the
periosteum (Fig. 14-4B), and from resorption on the internal medullary surface.
The rate of deposition and resorption is balanced to regulate the thickness of the
compact bone and the size of the medullary cavity. The internal reorganization of
bone continues throughout life. The development of irregular bones is similar to

that of the epiphyses of long bones. Ossification begins centrally and spreads in
all directions.
Rickets
Rickets is a disease in children attributable to vitamin D deficiency. This vitamin
is required for calcium absorption by the intestine. The resulting calcium (and
also phosphorus) deficiency causes disturbances of ossification of the epiphysial
cartilage plates (i.e., they are not adequately mineralized), and there is
disorientation of cells at the metaphysis. The limbs are shortened and deformed,
with severe bowing of the limb bones. Rickets can also delay closure of the
fontanelles of the cranial bones in infants.

Development Of Joints
Joints begin to develop with the appearance of condensed mesenchyme in the
joint interzone during the sixth week, and by the end of the eighth week, they
resemble adult joints (Fig. 14-5). Joints are classified as fibrous joints,
cartilaginous joints, and synovial joints. Joints with little or no movement are
classified according to the type of material holding the bones together; for
example, the bones involved in fibrous joints are joined by fibrous tissue.
Molecular studies show that a distinct cohort of progenitor cells present at the
prospective joint sites contribute to the formation of the synovial joints and
articular cartilages.

FIGURE 14–5 Development of joints during the sixth and seventh weeks. A,
Condensed interzonal mesenchyme in the gap between the developing bones.
This primordial joint may differentiate into a synovial joint (B), a cartilaginous
joint (C), or a fibrous joint (D).

Fibrous Joints
During the development of fibrous joints, the interzonal mesenchyme between
the developing bones differentiates into dense fibrous tissue (Fig. 14-5D); for
example, the sutures of the cranium are fibrous joints (see Fig. 14-9).

Cartilaginous Joints
During the development of cartilaginous joints, the interzonal mesenchyme
between the developing bones differentiates into hyaline cartilage (e.g.,
costochondral joints) or fibrocartilage (e.g., pubic symphysis) (Fig. 14-5C).

Synovial Joints
During the development of synovial joints (e.g., the knee joint), the interzonal
mesenchyme between the developing bones differentiates as follows (Fig. 14-
5B):
• Peripherally the interzonal mesenchyme forms the joint capsule and other
ligaments.
• Centrally the mesenchyme disappears and the resulting space becomes the
joint cavity or synovial cavity.
• Where it lines the joint capsule and articular surfaces, it forms the synovial
membrane (which secretes synovial fluid), a part of the joint capsule (fibrous
capsule lined with synovial membrane)
Probably as a result of joint movements, the mesenchymal cells subsequently
disappear from the surfaces of the articular cartilages. An abnormal intrauterine
environment restricting embryonic and fetal movements may interfere with limb
development and cause joint fixation.

Development Of Axial Skeleton
The axial skeleton is composed of the cranium (skull), vertebral column, ribs,
and sternum. During the fourth week, cells in the sclerotomes surround the
neural tube (primordium of spinal cord) and the notochord, the structure around
which the primordia of the vertebrae develop (Fig. 14-6A). This positional
change of the sclerotomal cells is effected by differential growth of the
surrounding structures and not by active migration of sclerotomal cells. The Hox
and Pax genes regulate the patterning and regional development of the vertebrae
along the anterior-posterior axis.
FIGURE 14–6 A, Transverse section through a 4-week embryo. The arrows
indicate the dorsal growth of the neural tube and the simultaneous dorsolateral
movement of the somite remnant, leaving behind a trail of sclerotomal cells. B,
Diagrammatic frontal section of this embryo showing that the condensation of
sclerotomal cells around the notochord consists of a cranial area of loosely
packed cells and a caudal area of densely packed cells. C, Transverse section
through a 5-week embryo showing the condensation of sclerotomal cells around

the notochord and neural tube, which forms a mesenchymal vertebra. D,
Diagrammatic frontal section illustrating that the vertebral body forms from the
cranial and caudal halves of two successive sclerotomal masses. The
intersegmental arteries now cross the bodies of the vertebrae, and the spinal
nerves lie between the vertebrae. The notochord is degenerating except in the
region of the intervertebral disc, where it forms the nucleus pulposus.

Development of Vertebral Column
During the precartilaginous or mesenchymal stage, mesenchymal cells from the
sclerotomes are found in three main areas (Fig. 14-6A): around the notochord,
surrounding the neural tube, and in the body wall. In a frontal section of a 4-
week embryo, the sclerotomes appear as paired condensations of mesenchymal
cells around the notochord (Fig. 14-6B). Each sclerotome consists of loosely
arranged cells cranially and densely packed cells caudally.
Some densely packed cells move cranially, opposite the center of the myotome,
where they form the intervertebral (IV) disc (Fig. 14-6C and D). The
remaining densely packed cells fuse with the loosely arranged cells of the
immediately caudal sclerotome to form the mesenchymal centrum, the
primordium of the body of a vertebra. Thus, each centrum develops from two
adjacent sclerotomes and becomes an intersegmental structure.
The nerves lie in close relationship to the IV discs, and the intersegmental
arteries lie on each side of the vertebral bodies. In the thorax, the dorsal
intersegmental arteries become the intercostal arteries.
The notochord degenerates and disappears where it is surrounded by the
developing vertebral bodies. Between the vertebrae, the notochord expands to
form the gelatinous center of the IV disc—the nucleus pulposus (Fig. 14-6D).
This nucleus is later surrounded by circularly arranged fibers that form the
annulus fibrosus. The nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosus together form the
IV disc. The mesenchymal cells, surrounding the neural tube, form the neural
arch, that is, the primordium of vertebral arch (Fig. 14-6C). The
mesenchymal cells in the body wall form costal processes, which form the ribs
in the thoracic region.
Chordoma
Remnants of the notochord may persist and form a chordoma, a rare neoplasm
(tumor). Approximately one third of these slow-growing malignant tumors occur
at the base of the cranium and extend to the nasopharynx. Chordomas infiltrate
bone and are difficult to remove. Chordomas also develop in the lumbosacral
region. Surgical resection has provided long-term disease-free survival for many

patients.
Cartilaginous Stage of Vertebral Development
During the sixth week, chondrification centers appear in each mesenchymal
vertebra (Fig. 14-7A and B). The two centers in each centrum fuse at the end of
the embryonic period to form a cartilaginous centrum. Concomitantly, the
centers in the neural arches fuse with each other and the centrum. The spinous
and transverse processes develop from extensions of chondrification centers in
the neural arch. Chondrification spreads until a cartilaginous vertebral column is
formed.
FIGURE 14–7 Stages of vertebral development. A, Mesenchymal vertebra at 5
weeks. B, Chondrification centers in a mesenchymal vertebra at 6 weeks. The
neural arch is the primordium of the vertebral arch. C, Primary ossification
centers in a cartilaginous vertebra at 7 weeks. D, Thoracic vertebra at birth
consisting of three bony parts: vertebral arch, body of vertebra and transverse
processes. Note the cartilage between the halves of the vertebral arch and
between the arch and the centrum (neurocentral joint). E and F, Two views of a
typical thoracic vertebra at puberty showing the location of the secondary
centers of ossification.

Bony Stage of Vertebral Development
Ossification of typical vertebrae begins during the seventh week and ends by the
25th year. There are two primary ossification centers, ventral and dorsal, for
the centrum (see Fig. 14-7C). These centers soon fuse to form one center. Three
primary centers are present by the eighth week: one in the centrum and one in
each half of the neural arch.
Ossification becomes evident in the neural arches during the eighth week. Each
typical vertebra consists of three bony parts connected by cartilage: a vertebral
arch, a body, and transverse processes (Fig. 14-7D). The bony halves of the
vertebral arch usually fuse during the first 3 to 5 years. The arches first unite in
the lumbar region, and union progresses cranially. The vertebral arch articulates
with the centrum at cartilaginous neurocentral joints, which permit the
vertebral arches to grow as the spinal cord enlarges. These joints disappear when
the vertebral arch fuses with the centrum during the third to sixth years.
Five secondary ossification centers appear in the vertebrae after puberty:
• One for the tip of the spinous process
• One for the tip of each transverse process
• Two anular epiphyses, one on the superior and one on the inferior rim of the
vertebral body (see Fig. 14-7E and F).
The vertebral body is a composite of the anular epiphyses and the mass of bone
between them. The vertebral body includes the centrum, parts of the vertebral
arch, and the facets for the heads of the ribs. All secondary centers unite with the
rest of the vertebrae at approximately 25 years of age. Exceptions to the typical
ossification of vertebrae occur in the atlas or C1 vertebra, axis or C2 vertebra,
C7 vertebra, lumbar vertebrae, sacrum, and coccyx.
The Notch signaling pathways are involved in the patterning of the vertebral
column. Severe congenital birth defects, including: VACTERL Syndrome
(Vertebral, Anal, Cardiac, Tracheal, Esophageal, Renal, and Limb birth defects),
and CHARGE Association (coloboma of eye, heart defects: tetralogy of Fallot,
patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular or atrial septal defect) are associated with
mutation in Notch pathway genes. Minor defects of the vertebrae are common,
but usually they are of little clinical importance.

Variation in the Number of Vertebrae
Most people have 7 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, and 5 sacral vertebrae. A few
have one or two additional vertebrae or one fewer. To determine the number of
vertebrae, it is necessary to examine the entire vertebral column because an
apparent extra (or absent) vertebra in one segment of the column may be
compensated for by an absent (or extra) vertebra in an adjacent segment; for
example, 11 thoracic-type vertebrae with 6 lumbar-type vertebrae.

Development of Ribs
The ribs develop from the mesenchymal costal processes of the thoracic
vertebrae (Fig. 14-7A). They become cartilaginous during the embryonic period
and ossify during the fetal period. The original site of union of the costal
processes with the vertebra is replaced by costovertebral synovial joints (Fig. 14-
7D). Seven pairs of ribs (1–7)—true ribs—attach through their own cartilages
to the sternum. Five pairs of ribs (8–12)—false ribs—attach to the sternum
through the cartilage of another rib or ribs. The last two pairs of ribs (11 and 12)
—floating ribs—do not attach to the sternum.

Development of Sternum
A pair of vertical mesenchymal bands, sternal bars, develop ventrolaterally in
the body wall. Chondrification occurs in these bars as they move medially. By 10
weeks, they fuse craniocaudally in the median plane to form cartilaginous
models of the manubrium, sternebrae (segments of sternal body), and xiphoid
process. Centers of ossification appear craniocaudally in the sternum before
birth, except that for the xiphoid process, which appears during childhood.

Development of Cranium
The cranium (skull) develops from mesenchyme around the developing brain.
The growth of the neurocranium (bones of cranium enclosing the brain) is
initiated from ossification centers within the desmocranium mesenchyme,
which is the primordium of the cranium. Transforming growth factors beta
(TGF-β) plays a critical role in the development of the cranium by regulating
osteoblast differentiation. The cranium consists of the:
• Neurocranium, the bones of the cranium enclosing the brain (brain box)
• Viscerocranium, the bones of the facial skeleton derived from the pharyngeal
arches
Cartilaginous Neurocranium
Initially, the cartilaginous neurocranium or chondrocranium consists of the
cartilaginous base of the developing cranium, which forms by fusion of several
cartilages (Fig. 14-8A to D). Later, endochondral ossification of the
chondrocranium forms the bones in the base of the cranium. The ossification
pattern of these bones has a definite sequence, beginning with the occipital bone,
body of sphenoid, and ethmoid bone.

FIGURE 14–8 Stages in the development of the cranium. A to C, Views of the
base of the developing cranium (viewed superiorly). D, A lateral view. A, At 6
weeks showing the various cartilages that will fuse to form the chondrocranium.
B, At 7 weeks, after fusion of some of the paired cartilages. C, At 12 weeks
showing the cartilaginous base of the cranium formed by the fusion of various
cartilages. D, At 20 weeks indicating the derivation of the bones of the fetal
cranium.

The parachordal cartilage, or basal plate, forms around the cranial end of the
notochord (Fig. 14-8A), and fuses with the cartilages derived from the
sclerotome regions of the occipital somites. This cartilaginous mass contributes
to the base of the occipital bone; later, extensions grow around the cranial end
of the spinal cord and form the boundaries of the foramen magnum (Fig. 14-8C).
The hypophysial cartilage forms around the developing pituitary gland
(hypophysis cerebri) and fuses to form the body of the sphenoid bone. The
trabeculae cranii fuse to form the body of the ethmoid bone, and the ala
orbitalis forms the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone.
Otic capsules develop around the otic vesicles, the primordia of the internal ears
(see Chapter 18), and form the petrous and mastoid parts of the temporal bone.
Nasal capsules develop around the nasal sacs (Chapter 18) and contribute to the
formation of the ethmoid bone.
Membranous Neurocranium
Membranous ossification (intramembranous ossification) occurs in the head
mesenchyme at the sides and top of the brain, forming the calvaria (skullcap).
During fetal life, the flat bones of the calvaria are separated by dense connective
tissue membranes that form fibrous joints, the sutures of the calvaria (Fig. 14-
9).

FIGURE 14–9 A fetal cranium showing the bones, fontanelles, and sutures. A,
Lateral view. B, Superior view. The posterior and anterolateral fontanelles
disappear because of growth of surrounding bones, within 2 or 3 months after
birth, but they remain as sutures for several years. The posterolateral fontanelles
disappear in a similar manner by the end of the first year and the anterior

fontanelle by the end of the second year. The halves of the frontal bone normally
begin to fuse during the second year, and the frontal suture is usually obliterated
by the eighth year. The other sutures disappear during adult life, but the times
when the sutures close are subject to wide variations. C, Three-dimensional
ultrasound rendering of the fetal head at 22 weeks. Note the anterior fontanelle
(*) and the frontal suture (arrow). The coronal and sagittal sutures are also
shown.
(C, Courtesy of Dr. G. J. Reid, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Manitoba, Women’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)
Six large fibrous areas—fontanelles—are present where several sutures meet.
The softness of the bones and their loose connections at the sutures enable the
calvaria to undergo changes of shape during birth, called molding. During
molding of the fetal cranium (adaptation of the fetus’s head to the pelvic cavity
during birth), the frontal bones become flat, the occipital bone is drawn out, and
one parietal bone slightly overrides the other one. Within a few days after birth,
the shape of the calvaria returns to normal.
Cartilaginous Viscerocranium
Most mesenchyme in the head region is derived from the neural crest. Neural
crest cells migrate into the pharyngeal arches and form the bones and connective
tissue of craniofacial structures. Homeobox (Hox) genes regulate the migration
and subsequent differentiation of the neural crest cells, which are crucial for the
complex patterning of the head and face. These parts of the fetal cranium are
derived from the cartilaginous skeleton of the first two pairs of pharyngeal
arches (see Chapter 9).
• The dorsal end of the first pharyngeal arch cartilage forms two middle ear
bones, the malleus and incus.
• The dorsal end of the second pharyngeal arch cartilage forms the stapes of the
middle ear and the styloid process of the temporal bone. Its ventral end ossifies
to form the lesser horn or cornu and superior part of the body of the hyoid bone.
• The third, fourth, and sixth pharyngeal arch cartilages form only in the ventral
parts of the arches. The third arch cartilages form the greater horns of the hyoid
bone and the inferior part of the body of the hyoid bone.
• The fourth pharyngeal arch cartilages fuse to form the laryngeal cartilages,

except for the epiglottis (see Chapter 9).
Membranous Viscerocranium
Membranous ossification occurs in the maxillary prominence of the first
pharyngeal arch (see Chapter 9), and subsequently forms the squamous
temporal, maxillary, and zygomatic bones. The squamous temporal bones
become part of the neurocranium. The mesenchyme in the mandibular
prominence of the first pharyngeal arch condenses around its cartilage and
undergoes membranous ossification to form the mandible. Some
endochondral ossification (formation of osseous tissue by the replacement of
calcified cartilage) occurs in the median plane of the chin and the mandibular
condyle.

Cranium of Neonate
After recovering from molding, the neonate’s cranium is rather round and its
bones are thin. Like the fetal cranium (Fig. 14-9), it is large in proportion to the
rest of the skeleton, and the face is relatively small compared with the calvaria.
The small facial region of the cranium results from the small size of the jaws,
virtual absence of paranasal (air) sinuses, and underdevelopment of the facial
bones.

Postnatal Growth of Cranium
The fibrous sutures of the neonate’s calvaria permit the brain to enlarge during
infancy and childhood. The increase in the size of the calvaria is greatest during
the first 2 years, the period of most rapid postnatal growth of the brain. The
calvaria normally increases in capacity until approximately 16 years of age.
After this, it usually increases slightly in size for 3 to 4 years because of
thickening of its bones. There is also rapid growth of the face and jaws,
coinciding with eruption of the primary (deciduous) teeth. These facial changes
are more marked after the secondary (permanent) teeth erupt (see Chapter 19).
There is concurrent enlargement of the frontal and facial regions, associated with
the increase in the size of the paranasal sinuses (e.g., frontal and ethmoid
sinuses). Most paranasal sinuses are rudimentary or absent at birth. Growth of
these sinuses is important in altering the shape of the face and in adding
resonance to the voice.
Klippel-Feil Syndrome (Brevicollis)
The main features of this syndrome are shortness of the neck, low hairline, and
restricted neck movements, fusion of cervical vertebral bodies and abnormalities
of the brainstem and cerebellum. In most cases, the number of cervical vertebral
bodies is fewer than normal due to fusion of vertebrae before birth. In some
cases, there is a lack of segmentation of several elements of the cervical region
of the vertebral column. The number of cervical nerve roots may be normal but
they are small, as are the intervertebral foramina. Individuals with this syndrome
may have other birth defects, including scoliosis (abnormal lateral and rotational
curvature of the vertebral column) and urinary tract disorders.
Spina Bifida
Failure of the halves of the embryonic cartilaginous neural arch to fuse results in
major birth defects—spina bifida (see Fig. 17-12). The incidence of these
vertebral defects ranges from 0.04% to 0.15%; they occur more frequently in
girls than boys. Most cases of spina bifida (80%) are “open” and covered by a
thin membrane. For a description of the various types of spina bifida, see

Chapter 17 (Figs. 17-14 to 17-17).
Accessory Ribs
Accessory ribs, usually rudimentary, result from the development of the costal
processes of cervical or lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 14-10A). These processes usually
form ribs only in the thoracic region. The most common type of accessory rib is
a lumbar rib, but it usually does not cause problems. A cervical rib occurs in
0.5% to 1% of individuals. This supernumerary rib is usually attached to the
manubrium of the sternum (Fig. 14-10A), or the seventh cervical vertebra.
Accessory ribs may be unilateral or bilateral. Pressure of a cervical rib on the
brachial plexus of nerves, located partly in the neck and axilla, or on the
subclavian artery often produces neurovascular symptoms (e.g., paralysis and
anesthesia of the upper limb).
FIGURE 14–10 Vertebral and rib abnormalities. A, Cervical and forked ribs.
Observe that the left cervical rib has a fibrous band that passes posterior to the
subclavian vessels and attaches to the manubrium of the sternum. B, Anterior
view of the vertebral column showing a hemivertebra. The right half of the third
thoracic vertebra is absent. Note the associated lateral curvature (scoliosis) of the
vertebral column. C, Radiograph of a child with the kyphoscoliotic deformity of
the lumbar region of the vertebral column showing multiple anomalies of the
vertebrae and ribs. Note the fused ribs (arrow).

(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Fused Ribs
Fusion of ribs occasionally occurs posteriorly when two or more ribs arise from
a single vertebra (Fig. 14-10C ). Fused ribs are often associated with a
hemivertebra.
Hemivertebra
In normal circumstances, the developing vertebral bodies have two
chondrification centers that soon unite. A hemivertebra results from failure of
one of the chondrification centers to appear and subsequent failure of half of the
vertebra to form (see Fig. 14-10B). Hemivertebrae are the most common cause
of congenital scoliosis (lateral and rotational curvature) of the vertebral column
(Fig. 14-10C ). There are other less common causes of scoliosis (e.g., myopathic
scoliosis resulting from weakness of the back muscles).
Rachischisis
Rachischisis (cleft vertebral column) refers to vertebral abnormalities in a
complex group of anomalies (spinal dysraphism) that primarily affect axial
structures (Fig. 14-11). In these infants the neural folds fail to fuse, either
because of faulty induction by the underlying notochord, or from the action of
teratogenic agents on the neuroepithelial cells in the neural folds. The neural and
vertebral defects may be extensive or be restricted to a small area.

 
FIGURE 14–11 A, A second-trimester fetus with holoacrania (absence of the
cranium, i.e., acrania). Note the cyst-like structure surrounding the intact fetal
brain. B, Lateral view of a newborn infant with acrania and meroencephaly
(partial absence of the brain), as well as rachischisis, which are extensive clefts
in vertebral arches of the vertebral column (not clearly visible).
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Children’s
Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Anomalies of Sternum
A concave depression of the lower sternum—pectus excavatum—is the most
common (90%) thoracic wall defect seen. Males are more often affected (1:400–
1:1000 live births). It is probably due to overgrowth of the costal cartilages,
which displaces the lower sternum inward. Minor sternal clefts (e.g., a notch or
foramen in the xiphoid process) are common and are of no clinical concern. A
sternal foramen of varying size and form occurs occasionally at the junction of
the third and fourth sternebrae (segments of primordial sternum). This
insignificant foramen is the result of incomplete fusion of the cartilaginous

sternal bars during the embryonic period.
Cranial Birth Defects
These abnormalities range from major defects that are incompatible with life
(Fig. 14-11) to those that are minor and insignificant. With large defects, there is
often herniation of the meninges and/or brain (see Chapter 17).
Acrania
In this condition, there is complete or partial absence of the neurocranium (brain
box); extensive defects of the vertebral column are often present (Fig. 14-11).
Acrania associated with meroencephaly (partial absence of the brain) occurs
approximately once in 1000 births and is incompatible with life. Meroencephaly
results from failure of the cranial end of the neural tube to close during the
fourth week. This birth defect causes subsequent failure of the neurocranium to
form (Fig. 14-11B).
Craniosynostosis
Prenatal fusion of the cranial sutures results in several birth defects. The cause of
craniosynostosis is unclear. Homeobox gene Msx2, Alx4, FGFR, TWIST, and
MSX2 mutations have been implicated in the molecular mechanisms of
craniosynostosis and other cranial defects. A strong association between
maternal anticonvulsant use during early pregnancy and infant craniosynostosis
has been reported. These birth defects are more common in males than in
females and they are often associated with other skeletal anomalies.
The type of deformed cranium produced depends on which sutures close
prematurely. If the sagittal suture closes early, the cranium becomes long,
narrow, and wedge shaped—scaphocephaly (Fig. 14-12A and B). This type of
cranial deformity constitutes about half the cases of craniosynostosis. Another
30% of cases involve premature closure of the coronal suture, which results in a
high, tower-like cranium—brachycephaly (Fig. 14-12C ). If the coronal suture

closes prematurely on one side only, the cranium is twisted and asymmetrical
—plagiocephaly. Premature closure of the frontal (metopic) suture results in a
deformity of the frontal bone and other anomalies—trigonocephaly (Fig. 14-
12D).
 
 
 

FIGURE 14–12 Craniosynostosis. A and B, An infant with scaphocephaly. This
condition results from premature closure (synostosis) of the sagittal suture. Note
the elongated, wedge-shaped cranium seen from above (A) and the side (B). C,
An infant with bilateral premature closure of the coronal suture
(brachycephaly). Note the high, markedly elevated forehead. D, An infant with
premature closure of the frontal suture (trigonocephaly). Note the hypertelorism
(abnormal distance between the eyes) and prominent midline ridging of the
forehead.
(Courtesy of Dr. John A. Jane, Sr., David D. Weaver Professor of Neurosurgery,
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia.)
Microcephaly
Infants with this birth defect are born with a normal sized or slightly small
calvaria. The fontanelles close during early infancy and the other sutures close
during the first year. However, this defect is not caused by premature closure of
sutures. Microcephaly is the result of abnormal development of the central
nervous system in which the brain, and consequently the neurocranium, fail to
grow. Generally, infants with microcephaly have small heads and are mentally
deficient. This birth defect is also illustrated and discussed in Chapter 17.
Anomalies at Craniovertebral Junction

Congenital abnormalities at the craniovertebral junction are present in
approximately 1% of neonates, but they may not produce symptoms until adult
life. The following are examples of these anomalies: basilar invagination
(superior displacement of bone around the foramen magnum), assimilation of
the atlas (nonsegmentation at the junction of the atlas and occipital bone),
atlantoaxial dislocation, Arnold-Chiari malformation (see Chapter 17), and a
separate dens (failure of the centers in the dens to fuse with the centrum of the
axis).

Development Of Appendicular
Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton consists of the pectoral and pelvic girdles and the
limb bones. Mesenchymal bones form during the fifth week as condensations of
mesenchyme appear in the limb buds (Fig. 14-13A to C). During the sixth week,
the mesenchymal bone models in the limbs undergo chondrification to form
hyaline cartilage bone models (Fig. 14-13D and E).
FIGURE 14–13 A, Photograph of an embryo at approximately 28 days showing
the early appearance of the limb buds. B, Longitudinal section through an upper
limb bud showing the apical ectodermal ridge, which has an inductive influence
on the mesenchyme in the limb bud. This ridge promotes growth of the

mesenchyme and appears to give it the ability to form specific cartilaginous
elements. C, Similar sketch of an upper limb bud at approximately 33 days
showing the mesenchymal primordia of the forearm bones. The digital rays are
mesenchymal condensations that undergo chondrification and ossification to
form the bones of the hand. D, Upper limb at 6 weeks showing the cartilage
models of the bones. E, Later in the sixth week showing the completed
cartilaginous models of the bones of the upper limb.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Brad Smith, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.)
The clavicle initially develops by membranous ossification and it later forms
growth cartilages at both ends. The models of the pectoral girdle and upper limb
bones appear slightly before those of the pelvic girdle and lower limb bones. The
bone models appear in a proximodistal sequence. Patterning in the developing
limbs is regulated by homeobox containing (Hox) genes (see Chapter 21).
Ossification begins in the long bones by the eighth week and initially occurs in
the diaphyses of the bones from primary ossification centers (Fig. 14-4). By 12
weeks, primary ossification centers have appeared in nearly all bones of the
limbs (Fig. 14-14). The clavicles begin to ossify before any other bones in the
body. The femora are the next bones to show traces of ossification. The first
indication of the primary center of ossification in the cartilaginous model of a
long bone is visible near the center of its future shaft, the diaphysis (Fig. 14-4C).
Primary centers appear at different times in different bones, but most of them
appear between the 7th and 12th weeks. Virtually all primary centers of
ossification are present at birth.

FIGURE 14–14 Alizarin-stained and cleared human fetuses. A, A 12-week fetus.
Observe the degree of progression of ossification from the primary centers of
ossification, which is endochondral in the appendicular and axial parts of the
skeleton except for most of the cranial bones (i.e., those that form the
neurocranium). Observe that the carpus and tarsus are wholly cartilaginous at

this stage, as are the epiphyses of all long bones. B and C, An approximately 20-
week fetus.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Gary Geddes, Lake Oswego, Oregon. B and C, Courtesy of
Dr. David Bolender, Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.)
The secondary ossification centers of the bones at the knee are the first to
appear in utero. The centers for the distal end of the femur and the proximal end
of the tibia usually appear during the last month of intrauterine life.
Consequently, these centers are usually present at birth; however, most
secondary centers of ossification appear after birth. The part of a bone ossified
from a secondary center is the epiphysis (Fig. 14-4C). The bone formed from
the primary center in the diaphysis does not fuse with that formed from the
secondary centers in the epiphyses until the bone grows to its adult length. This
delay enables lengthening of the bone to continue until the final size is reached.
During bone growth, a plate of cartilage known as the epiphysial cartilage plate
intervenes between the diaphysis and the epiphysis (see Fig. 14-4E). The
epiphysial plate is eventually replaced by bone development on each of its two
sides, diaphysial and epiphysial. When this occurs, growth of the bone ceases.
Bone Age
Bone age is a good index of general maturation. Determination of the number,
size, and fusion of epiphysial centers from radiographs is a commonly used
method. A radiologist determines the bone age of a person by assessing the
ossification centers using two criteria:
• The time of appearance of calcified material in the diaphysis and/or the
epiphysis is specific for each diaphysis and epiphysis and for each bone and sex.
• The disappearance of the dark line representing the epiphysial cartilage plate
indicates that the epiphysis has fused with the diaphysis.
Fusion of the diaphysial–epiphysial centers, which occurs at specific times for
each epiphysis, happens 1 to 2 years earlier in females than in males. Individual
variation also occurs. In the fetus, ultrasonography is used for the evaluation and
measurement of bones as well as for determination of fertilization age.

Generalized Skeletal Malformations
Achondroplasia is the most common cause of dwarfism—shortness of stature
(see Chapter 20). It occurs approximately once in 15,000 births. The limbs
become bowed and short (Fig. 14-15) because of disturbance of endochondral
ossification during fetal life at the epiphysial cartilage plates, particularly of long
bones. The trunk (of body) is usually short and the head is enlarged with a
bulging forehead and “scooped-out” nose (flat nasal bridge).


FIGURE 14–15 Radiograph of the skeletal system of a 2-year-old child with
achondroplasia. Note the shortening of the humerus and femur with metaphysis
flaring.
(Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Achondroplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder and approximately 80% of
cases arise from new mutations; the rate increases with paternal age. The
majority of cases are due to a point mutation (f.1,11,12) in the FGFR3 gene,
which results in magnification of the normal inhibiting effect of endochondral
ossification, specifically in the zone of chondrocyte proliferation. This results in
shortened bones but does not affect periosteal bone growth.
Thanatophoric dysplasia is the most common type of lethal skeletal dysplasia.
It occurs approximately once in 20,000 births. The affected infants die within
minutes or days of respiratory failure. This lethal disorder is associated with
mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3.
Hyperpituitarism
Congenital infantile hyperpituitarism, which causes an infant to grow at an
abnormally rapid rate, is rare. This may result in gigantism (excessive height
and body proportions) or acromegaly in the adult (enlargement of soft tissues,
visceral organs, and bones of face, hands, and feet [acral bones, limb bones]).
Both gigantism and acromegaly result from an excessive secretion of growth
hormone.
Hypothyroidism and Cretinism
A severe deficiency of fetal thyroid hormone production results in cretinism, a
condition characterized by growth retardation, mental deficiency, skeletal
abnormalities, and auditory and neurologic disorders. Bone age appears as less
than chronologic age because epiphysial development is delayed. Cretinism is
rare except in areas where there is a lack of iodine in the soil and water.

Agenesis (absence) of the thyroid gland also results in cretinism.

Summary Of Skeletal System
• The skeletal system develops from mesenchyme, derived from mesoderm and
the neural crest. In most bones, such as the long bones in the limbs, the
condensed mesenchyme undergoes chondrification to form cartilage bone
models. Ossification centers appear in the models by the end of the embryonic
period, and the bones ossify later by endochondral ossification. Some bones, the
flat bones of the cranium, for example, develop by membranous ossification.
• The vertebral column and ribs develop from mesenchymal cells derived from
the sclerotomes of somites. Each vertebra is formed by fusion of a condensation
of the caudal half of one pair of sclerotomes with the cranial half of the
subjacent pair of sclerotomes.
• The developing cranium consists of a neurocranium and a viscerocranium, each
of which has membranous and cartilaginous components. The neurocranium
forms the calvaria and the viscerocranium forms the skeleton of the face.
• The appendicular skeleton develops from endochondral ossification of the
cartilaginous bone models, which form from mesenchyme in the developing
limbs.
• Joints are classified as fibrous joints, cartilaginous joints, and synovial joints.
They develop from interzonal mesenchyme between the primordia of bones. In a
fibrous joint, the intervening mesenchyme differentiates into dense fibrous
connective tissue. In a cartilaginous joint, the mesenchyme between the bones
differentiates into cartilage. In a synovial joint, a synovial cavity is formed
within the intervening mesenchyme by breakdown of the cells. Mesenchyme
also gives rise to the synovial membrane, capsule, and ligaments of the joint.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 14–1
A neonate presented with a lesion in his lower back, which was thought to be a
neural arch defect.
• What is the most common birth defect of the vertebral column?
• Where is the defect usually located?
• Does this birth defect usually cause symptoms (e.g., back problems)?

Case 14–2
A young girl presented with pain in her upper limb, which worsened when she
lifted heavy objects. After a radiographic examination, the physician told her
parents that she had an accessory rib in her neck.
• Occasionally rudimentary ribs are associated with the seventh cervical vertebra
and the first lumbar vertebra. Are these accessory ribs of clinical importance?
• What is the embryologic basis of an accessory rib?

Case 14–3
A mother of a girl with a “crooked spine” was told that her daughter had
scoliosis.
• What vertebral defect can produce scoliosis?
• Define this condition.
• What is the embryological basis of the vertebral defect?

Case 14–4
A boy presented with a long, thin head. His mother was concerned that her son
might become mentally deficient.
• What is meant by the term craniosynostosis?
• What results from this developmental abnormality?
• Give a common example and describe it.

Case 14–5
A child presented with characteristics of the Klippel-Feil syndrome.
• What are the main features of this condition?
• What vertebral anomalies are usually present?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Alexander PG, Tuan RS. Role of environmental factors in axial skeletal
dysmorphogenesis. Birth Defects Res C. 2010;90:118.
Bamshad M, Van Heest AE, Pleasure D. Arthrogryposis: a review and update. J
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(Suppl 4):40.
Brewin J, Hill M, Ellis H. The prevalence of cervical ribs in a London
population. Clin Anat. 2009;22:331.
Buckingham M. Myogenic progenitor cells and skeletal myogenesis in
vertebrates. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2006;16:525.
Cohen MMJr. Perspectives on craniosynostosis: sutural biology, some well-
known syndromes and some unusual syndromes. J Craniofac Surg. 2009;20:646.
Cooperman DR, Thompson GH. Musculoskeletal disorders. In Martin RJ,
Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal
Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Dallas SL, Bonewald LF. Dynamics of the transition from osteoblast to
osteocyte. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2010;1192:437.
Dunwoodie SL. The role of Notch in patterning the human vertebral column.
Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2009;19:329.
Franz-Odendaal TA, Hall BK, Witten PE. Buried alive: How osteoblasts become
osteocytes. Dev Dyn. 2006;235:176.

Gibb S, Maroto M, Dale JK. The segmentation clock mechanism moves up a
notch. Trends Cell Biol. 2010;20:593.
Gardner LP, Hiatt JL. Color Textbook of Histology, ed 3. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2007.
Hall BK. Bones and Cartilage: Developmental Skeletal Biology. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2005.
Hinrichsen KV, Jacob HJ, Jacob M, et al. Principles of ontogenesis of leg and
foot in man. Ann Anat. 1994;176:121.
Iimura T, Denans N, Pourquie O. Establishment of Hox vertebral identities in the
embryonic spine precursors. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2009;88:201.
Javed A, Chen H, Ghori FY. Genetic and transcriptional control of bone
formation. Oral Maxillofacial Surg Clin North Am. 2010;22:283.
Karsenty G, Kronenberg HM, Settembre C. Genetic control of bone formation.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2009;25:629.
Keller B, Yang T, Munivez E, et al. Interaction of TGF-beta and BMP signaling
pathways during chondrogenesis. PloS ONE. 2011;6:e16421.
Kubota T, Michigami T, Ozono K. Wnt signaling in bone. Clin Pediatr
Endocrinol. 2010;19:49.
Lefebvre V, Bhattaram P. Vertebrate skeletogenesis. Curr Top Dev Biol.
2010;90:291.
Lewis J, Hanisch A, Holder M. Notch signaling, the segmentation clock, and the
patterning of vertebrate somites. J Biol. 2009;8:44.
Mackie EJ, Tatarczuch L, Mirams M. The growth plate chondrocyte and
endochondral ossification. J Endocrinol. 2011 Jun 3. [Epub ahead of print]
Seo HS, Serra R. Tgfbr2 I required for development of the skull vault. Dev Biol.
2009;334:481.
Thornton GK, Woods CG. Primary microcephaly: Do all roads lead to Rome?

Trend Genet. 2009;25:501.
Wellik DM. Hox patterning of the vertebrate axial skeleton. Dev Dyn.
2007;236:2454.

Chapter 15 Muscular System
Development of Skeletal Muscle 363
   Myotomes 365
   Pharyngeal Arch Muscles 366
   Ocular Muscles 366
   Tongue Muscles 366
   Limb Muscles 366
Development of Smooth Muscle 366
Development of Cardiac Muscle 367
Summary of Muscular System 369
Clinically Oriented Problems 369
The muscular system develops from mesoderm, except for the muscles of the
iris, which develop from neuroectoderm, and the muscles of the esophagus,
which are believed to develop by transdifferentiation from smooth muscle.
Myoblasts (embryonic muscle cells) are derived from mesenchyme (embryonic
connective tissue). Three types of muscle—skeletal, cardiac, and smooth—are
formed during the embryonic period.
MyoD, a member of the family of myogenic regulatory factors, activates
transcription of muscle-specific genes and is considered an important regulatory
gene for the induction of myogenic differentiation. The induction of myogenesis
in mesenchymal cells by MyoD is dependent on their degree of mesenchymal cell
differentiation.
Much of the mesenchyme in the head is derived from the neural crest (see
Chapters 4 and 5), particularly the tissues derived from the pharyngeal arches
(see Chapter 9); however, the original mesenchyme in these arches gives rise to
the musculature of the face and neck (see Table 9-1).

Development of Skeletal Muscle
Limb and axial muscles develop by epitheliomesenchymal transformation
from myogenic precursor cells. Studies show that myogenic precursor cells
originate from the somatic mesoderm and from the ventral dermomyotome of
somites in response to molecular signals from nearby tissues (Figs. 15-1 and 15-
2).

FIGURE 15–1 A, Sketch of an embryo (approximately 41 days) showing the
myotomes and developing muscular system. B, Transverse section of the embryo
illustrating the epaxial and hypaxial derivatives of a myotome. C, Similar
section of a 7-week embryo showing the muscle layers formed from the
myotomes.

FIGURE 15–2 A model for molecular interactions during myogenesis. Shh and
Wnts, produced by the neural tube (NT) and notochord (NC), induce Pax-3 and
Myf-5 in the somites. Either of them can activate the initiation of MyoD
transcription and myogenesis. Surface ectoderm (E) is also capable of inducing
Myf-5 and MyoD. In addition, Pax-3 regulates the expression of c-met,
necessary for the migratory ability of myogenic precursor cells, that also express
En-1, Sim-1, lbx-1, and 26M15. DM, dermamyotome; S, sclerotome.
(From Kablar B, Rudnicki MA: Skeletal muscle development in the mouse
embryo. Histol Histopathol 15:649, 2000.)
The first indication of myogenesis (muscle formation) is the elongation of the
nuclei and cell bodies of mesenchymal cells as they differentiate into myoblasts.
Soon these primordial muscle cells fuse to form elongated, multinucleated,
cylindrical structures—myotubes.
At the molecular level, these events are preceded by gene activation and
expression of the MyoD family of muscle-specific, basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors (MyoD, myogenin, Myf-5, and myogenic regulatory factor
4) in the precursor myogenic cells. Retinoic acid enhances skeletal myogenesis
by upregulating the expression of mesodermal markers and myogenic regulatory
factors. It has been suggested that signaling molecules (Shh, from the ventral

neural tube and notochord), and others from the dorsal neural tube (Wnts, bone
morphogenetic protein [BMP]-4) and overlying ectoderm (Wnts, BMP-4)
regulate the beginning of myogenesis and the induction of the myotome (Fig. 15-
3). Further muscle growth in the fetus results from the ongoing fusion of
myoblasts and myotubes.
FIGURE 15–3 Embryonic structures and myogenesis. The current view suggests
that the dorsal neural tube (NT) and the overlying non-neural ectoderm (E) are
sources of signaling molecules belonging to the family of Wnt-secreted proteins
and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4, whereas the notochord (NC) and the
ventral neural tube (green) are sources of the Shh. They positively regulate the
onset of myogenesis and the induction of the myotome. By contrast, the lateral
plate mesoderm (LPM) produces BMP-4 and FGF5 (fibroblast growth factor 5),
negatively regulating muscle terminal differentiation in the lateral part of the
myotome lineage. Response to the BMP-4 signal may be mediated by its binding
proteins noggin and follistatin. DM, dermamyotome; S, sclerotome.
(From Kablar B, Rudnicki MA: Skeletal muscle development in the mouse
embryo. Histol Histopathol 15:649, 2000.)
During or after fusion of the myoblasts, myofilaments develop in the cytoplasm
of the myotubes. Other organelles characteristic of striated muscle cells, such as

myofibrils, also form. As the myotubes develop, they become invested with
external laminae, which segregate them from the surrounding connective tissue.
Fibroblasts produce the perimysium and epimysium layers of the fibrous
sheath of the muscle; the endomysium is formed by the external lamina and
reticular fibers.
Most skeletal muscles develop before birth and almost all remaining ones are
formed by the end of the first year. The increase in the size of a muscle after the
first year results from an increase in the diameter of the fibers because of the
formation of more myofilaments. Muscles increase in length and width to grow
with the skeleton. Their ultimate size depends on the amount of exercise that is
performed. Not all embryonic muscle fibers persist; many of them fail to
establish themselves as necessary units of the muscle and soon degenerate.

Myotomes
Each typical myotome part of a somite divides into a dorsal epaxial division and
a ventral hypaxial division (Fig. 15-1B). Every developing spinal nerve also
divides and sends a branch to each myotome division; the dorsal primary ramus
supplies the epaxial division and the ventral primary ramus, the hypaxial
division. The myoblasts that form the skeletal muscles of the trunk are derived
from mesenchyme in the myotome regions of the somites (Fig. 15-1). Some
muscles, such as the intercostal muscles, remain segmentally arranged like the
somites, but most myoblasts migrate away from the myotome and form
nonsegmented muscles.
Gene targeting studies in the mouse embryo show that myogenic regulatory
factors (MyoD, MrfH, Myf-5, and myogenin) are essential for the development
of the hypaxial and epaxial muscles, as well as the abdominal and intercostal
muscles.
Myoblasts from epaxial divisions of the myotomes form the extensor muscles of
the neck and vertebral column (Fig. 15-4). The embryonic extensor muscles
derived from the sacral and coccygeal myotomes degenerate; their adult
derivatives are the dorsal sacrococcygeal ligaments. Myoblasts from the
hypaxial divisions of the cervical myotomes form the scalene, prevertebral,
geniohyoid, and infrahyoid muscles (Fig. 15-4). The thoracic myotomes form
the lateral and ventral flexor muscles of the vertebral column, and the lumbar
myotomes form the quadratus lumborum muscle. The sacrococcygeal
myotomes form the muscles of the pelvic diaphragm and probably the striated
muscles of the anus and sex organs.

FIGURE 15–4 Illustrations of the developing muscular system. A, A 6-week
embryo showing the myotome regions of the somites that give rise to skeletal
muscles. B, An 8-week embryo showing the developing trunk and limb
musculature.

Pharyngeal Arch Muscles
Myoblasts from the pharyngeal arches, which originate from the unsegmented
paraxial mesoderm and prechordal plate form the muscles of mastication, facial
expression, pharynx, and larynx as described in Chapter 9. These muscles are
innervated by pharyngeal arch nerves.

Ocular Muscles
The origin of the extrinsic eye muscles is unclear, but they may be derived from
mesenchymal cells near the prechordal plate (Figs. 15-1 and 15-4). The
mesenchyme in this area is thought to give rise to three preotic myotomes.
Myoblasts differentiate from mesenchymal cells derived from these myotomes.
Groups of myoblasts, each supplied by its own nerve (cranial nerve [CN] III, CN
IV, or CN VI), form the extrinsic muscles of the eye.

Tongue Muscles
Initially there are four occipital (postotic) myotomes; the first pair disappears.
Myoblasts from the remaining myotomes form the tongue muscles, which are
innervated by the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII).

Limb Muscles
The musculature of the limbs develops from myoblasts surrounding the
developing bones (Fig. 15-1). The myoblasts form a mass of tissue on the dorsal
(extensor) and ventral (flexor) aspects of the limbs. Grafting and gene targeting
studies in birds and mammals have demonstrated that the precursor myogenic
cells in the limb buds originate from the somites. These cells are first located in
the ventral part of the dermomyotome and are epithelial in nature (Fig. 14-1D).
After epitheliomesenchymal transformation, the cells then migrate into the
primordium of the limb.
Molecular signals from the neural tube and notochord induce Pax-3, MyoD, and
Myf-5 in the somites. Pax-3 regulates the expression of c-met in the limb bud (a
migratory peptide growth factor), which regulates migration of the precursor
myogenic cells.

Development of Smooth Muscle
Smooth muscle fibers differentiate from splanchnic mesenchyme surrounding
the endoderm of the primordial gut and its derivatives (Fig. 15-1). The somatic
mesoderm provides smooth muscle in the walls of many blood and lymphatic
vessels. The muscles of the iris (sphincter and dilator pupillae) and the
myoepithelial cells in mammary and sweat glands are thought to be derived from
mesenchymal cells that originate from ectoderm.
The first sign of differentiation of smooth muscle is the development of
elongated nuclei in spindle-shaped myoblasts. During early development,
additional myoblasts continue to differentiate from mesenchymal cells but do not
fuse as in skeletal muscle; they remain mononucleated.
During later development, division of existing myoblasts gradually replaces the
differentiation of new myoblasts in the production of new smooth muscle tissue.
As smooth muscle cells differentiate, filamentous but nonsarcomeric contractile
elements develop in their cytoplasm, and the external surface of each cell
acquires a surrounding external lamina. As smooth muscle fibers develop into
sheets or bundles, they receive autonomic innervation. Muscle cells and
fibroblasts synthesize and lay down collagenous, elastic, and reticular fibers.

Development of Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle develops from the lateral splanchnic mesoderm, which gives rise
to the mesenchyme surrounding the developing heart tube (Chapter 13). Cardiac
myoblasts differentiate from the primordial myocardium. Heart muscle is
recognizable in the fourth week and likely develops through expression of
cardiac-specific genes. Recent studies suggest that Pbx proteins interacting with
the transcription factors Hand2, promote cardiac muscle differentiation.
Immunohistochemical studies have revealed a spatial distribution of tissue-
specific antigens (myosin heavy chain isoforms) in the embryonic heart between
the fourth and eighth weeks.
Cardiac muscle fibers arise by differentiation and growth of single cells, unlike
striated skeletal muscle fibers, which develop by fusion of cells. Growth of
cardiac muscle fibers results from the formation of new myofilaments. The
myoblasts adhere to each other as in developing skeletal muscle, but the
intervening cell membranes do not disintegrate; these areas of adhesion give rise
to intercalated discs. Late in the embryonic period, special bundles of muscle
cells develop with relatively few myofibrils and relatively larger diameters than
typical cardiac muscle fibers. These atypical cardiac muscle cells—Purkinje
fibers—form the conducting system of the heart (Chapter 13).
Anomalies of Muscles
Absence of one or more skeletal muscles is more common than is generally
recognized; common examples are the sternocostal head of the pectoralis major
(Fig. 15-5), the palmaris longus, trapezius, serratus anterior, and quadratus
femoris. Usually only a single muscle is absent on one side of the body, or only
part of the muscle fails to develop. Occasionally the same muscle or muscles
may be absent on both sides of the body.

FIGURE 15–5 The thorax of an infant with congenital absence of the left
pectoralis major muscle. Note the absence of the anterior axillary fold on the left
and the low location of the left nipple.
(From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Arvin AM [eds]: Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics, 15th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996.)
Absence of the pectoralis major, often its sternal part, is usually associated with
syndactyly (fusion of digits). These birth defects are part of the Poland
syndrome (absence of the pectoralis major and minor muscles, ipsilateral breast
hypoplasia, and absence of two to four ribs). Absence of the pectoralis major is
occasionally associated with absence of the mammary gland in the breast and/or
hypoplasia of the nipple.

Some muscular birth defects, such as congenital absence of the diaphragm,
cause difficulty in breathing, which is usually associated with incomplete
expansion of the lungs or part of a lung (pulmonary atelectasis) and
pneumonitis (pneumonia). Absence of muscles of the anterior abdominal wall
may be associated with severe gastrointestinal and genitourinary defects, for
example, exstrophy of the bladder (see Chapter 12). Both muscle development
and muscle repair have distinctive dependence on expression of muscle
regulatory genes.
Arthrogryposis
The term arthrogryposis (arthrogryposis multiplex congenita) is a clinical term
used to describe multiple congenital joint contractions that affect different parts
of the body (Fig. 15-6). The incidence of arthrogryposis is 1 : 3000 live births. It
includes more than 300 heterogeneous disorders. The causes of arthrogryposis
are unclear. In about 30% of cases, genetic factors are involved. Neuropathic
disorders and muscle and connective tissue abnormalities restrict intrauterine
movement and may lead to fetal akinesia and joint contractures.


FIGURE 15–6 Neonate with multiple joint contractures: arthrogryposis. Infants
with this syndrome have stiffness of the joints associated with hypoplasia of the
associated muscles.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Variations in Muscles
All muscles are subject to a certain amount of variation, but some are affected
more often than others. Certain muscles are functionally vestigial (rudimentary),
such as those of the external ear and scalp. Some muscles present in other
primates appear in only some humans (e.g., the sternalis muscle, a band
sometimes found parallel to the sternum). Variations in the form, position, and
attachments of muscles are common and are usually functionally insignificant.
Congenital Torticollis
Some cases of torticollis (wryneck) may result from tearing of fibers of the
sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle during childbirth. Bleeding into the muscle
occurs in a localized area, forming a hematoma (a small swelling due to a
collection of blood). Later a solid mass develops because of necrosis (death) of
muscle fibers and fibrosis (formation of fibrous tissue). Shortening of the muscle
usually follows, which causes lateral bending of the head to the affected side and
a slight turning away of the head from the side of the short muscle (Fig. 15-7).


FIGURE 15–7 The head and neck of a 12-year-old boy with congenital
torticollis (wryneck). Shortening of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle has
caused tilting of the head to the right and turning of the chin to the left. There is
also asymmetrical development of the face and cranium.
(From Behrman RE, Vaughan VC III: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 13th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1987.)
Although birth trauma may be a cause of congenital torticollis, the fact that the
condition has been observed in infants delivered by cesarean section suggests
that there are other causes as well, including intrauterine crowding and primary
SCM myopathy.
Abdominal Muscle Deficiency
Congenital partial or complete absence of abdominal muscles (also called prune
belly syndrome) results from abdominal laxity secondary to abdominal
distension from ascites (accumulation of serous fluid in the peritoneal cavity).
The accumulation of fluid distends the abdomen, resulting in atrophy of the
abdominal muscles. Male neonates with this syndrome have associated
cryptorchidism (failure of one or both testes to descend) and megaureters
(dilation of ureters). Usually the abdominal wall is so thin that the viscera (e.g.,
intestines) are visible and easily palpated.
Accessory Muscles
Accessory muscles occasionally develop; for example, an accessory soleus
muscle is present in approximately 3% of people. It has been suggested that the
primordium of the soleus muscle undergoes early splitting to form an accessory
soleus. In some cases, accessory muscles cause clinically significant symptoms.

Summary of Muscular System
• Muscle development occurs through the formation of myoblasts, which
undergo proliferation to form myocytes.
• Skeletal muscle is derived from the myotome regions of somites.
• Some head and neck muscles are derived from pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.
• The limb muscles develop from myogenic precursor cells surrounding bones in
the limbs.
• Cardiac muscle and most smooth muscle are derived from splanchnic
mesoderm.
• Absence or variation of some muscles is common and is usually of little
consequence.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 15–1
An infant presented with absence of the left anterior axillary fold. In addition,
the left nipple was much lower than usual.
• Absence of which muscle probably caused these unusual observations?
• What syndrome would you suspect may be present?
• For what features would you look?
• Would the infant be likely to suffer any disability if absence of this muscle was
the only birth defect present?

Case 15–2
A medical student was concerned when she learned that she had only one
palmaris longus muscle.
• Is this a common occurrence?
• What is its incidence?
• Does the absence of this muscle cause a disability?

Case 15–3
The parents of a 4-year-old girl observed that she always held her head slightly
tilted to the right side and that one of her neck muscles was more prominent than
the others. The clinical history revealed that her delivery had been a breech
birth, one in which the buttocks presented.
• Name the muscle that was likely prominent.
• Did this muscle pull the child’s head to the right side?
• What is this deformity called?
• What may have caused the muscle shortening that resulted in this condition?

Case 15–4
A neonate presented with an abdominal wall defect. Failure of striated muscle to
develop in the median plane of the anterior abdominal wall is associated with
the formation of a severe congenital birth defect of the urinary system.
• What is this anomaly called?
• What is the probable embryologic basis of the failure of muscle to form in this
infant?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Bamshad M, Van Heest AE, Pleasure D. Arthrogryposis: A review and update. J
Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(Suppl 4):40.
Bonnet A, Dai F, Brand-Saberi B, et al. Vestigial-like 2 acts downstream of
MyoD activation and is associated with skeletal muscle differentiation in chick
myogenesis. Mech Dev. 2010;127:120.
Bothe I, Tenin G, Oseni A, et al. Dynamic control of head mesoderm patterning.
Development. 2011;138:2807.
Buckingham M. Myogenic progenitor cells and skeletal myogenesis in
vertebrates. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2006;16:525.
Goncalves LF, Kusanovic JP, Gotsch F, et al. The fetal musculoskeletal system.
In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5,
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2008.
Cooperman DR, Thompson GH. Musculoskeletal disorders. In Martin RJ,
Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal
Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Cheng JCY, Tang SP, Chen MWN, et al. The clinical presentation and outcome
of treatment of congenital muscular torticollis in infants—a study of 1,086 cases.
J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:1091.

Gasser RF. The development of the facial muscle in man. Am J Anat.
1967;120:357.
Giacinti C, Giodano A. Cell cycle regulation in myogenesis. In: Giordano A,
Galderisi U, editors. Cell Cycle Regulation and Differentiation in
Cardiovascular and Neural Systems. New York: Springer, 2010.
Gibb S, Maroto M, Dale JK. The segmentation clock mechanism moves up a
notch. Trends Cell Biol. 2010;20:593.
Kablar B, Krastel K, Ying C, et al. Myogenic determination occurs
independently in somites and limb buds. Dev Biol. 1999;206:219.
Kablar B, Tajbakhsh S, Rudnick MA. Transdifferentiation of esophageal smooth
muscle is myogenic bHLH factor-dependent. Development. 2000;127:1627.
Kalcheim C, Ben-Yair R. Cell rearrangements during development of the somite
and its derivatives. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005;15:371.
Martin J, Afouda BA, Hoppler S. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates
cardiomyogenesis via GATA transcription factors. J Anat. 2010;216:92.
Mathew SJ, Hansen JM, Merrell AJ, et al. Connective tissue fibroblasts and Tcf4
regulate myogenesis. Development. 2011;138:371.
Maves L, Tyler A, Moens CB, et al. Pbx acts with Hand 2 in early myocardial
differentiation. Dev Biol. 2009;333:409.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Noden DM. Vertebrate craniofacial development—the relation between
ontogenetic process and morphological outcome. Brain Behav Evol.
1991;38:190.
Messina G, Biressi S, Monteverde S, et al. NFix regulates fetal-specific
transcription in developing skeletal muscle. Cell. 2010;140:554.

Chapter 16 Development of Limbs
Early Stages of Limb Development 371
Final Stages of Limb Development 375
   Cutaneous Innervation of Limbs 375
   Blood Supply of Limbs 380
Birth Defects of Limbs 382
Summary of Limb Development 386
Clinically Oriented Problems 386

 Early Stages of Limb Development
Development of the limbs begins near the end of the fourth week (Fig. 16-1A)
with the activation of a group of mesenchymal cells in the somatic lateral
mesoderm. Homeobox genes regulate patterning in the formation of the limbs.
The limb buds form deep to a thick band of ectoderm, the apical ectodermal
ridge (AER). The buds first appear as small bulges on the ventrolateral body
wall (Figs. 16-1A and 16-2). The upper limb buds are visible by day 24 and the
lower limb buds appear 1 or 2 days later. Each limb bud consists of a
mesenchymal core of mesoderm covered by a layer of ectoderm.

FIGURE 16–1 Drawings of human embryos showing development of the limbs.
A, Lateral view of an embryo at approximately 28 days. The upper limb bud
appears as a swelling or bulge on the ventrolateral body wall. The lower limb
bud is smaller than the upper limb bud. B, Lateral view of an embryo at
approximately 32 days. The upper limb buds are paddle-shaped and the lower

limb buds are flipper-like.
(Modified from Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal
Development of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures:
An Atlas. Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)
FIGURE 16–2 A, Oblique section of an embryo at approximately 28 days.

Observe the paddle-like upper limb bud lateral to the embryonic heart and AER.
B, Signaling pathways regulating the elongation and segmentation of the digit
ray. AER-Fgf signal (red ) maintains a small population of subridge
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, which are being actively incorporated into
the digital condensation (blue). At the presumptive joint site, the newly
differentiated chondrogenic cells de-differentiate into the interzone fate under
the regulation of multiple signaling pathways. Wnts promote chondrocyte
dedifferentiation through canonical Wnt signaling. Ihh signals to the interzone
region through the localized Gli2/Gli3 expression. TGFs signals to the interzone
cells through the type II receptor. Gdf5 regulates the progression of the joint and
skeletogenesis of the digit elements.
(A, From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical
Embryology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000. B, Reprinted from
Journal of Genetics and Genomics, 35, Hu J, He L: Patterning mechanisms
controlling digit development, 517-524, Copyright 2008, with permission from
Elsevier.)
The limb buds elongate by proliferation of the mesenchyme. The upper limb
buds appear disproportionately low on the embryo’s trunk because of the early
development of the cranial half of the embryo. The earliest stages of limb
development are alike for the upper and lower limbs (Figs. 16-1B and see Figure
16-4). Because of their form and function, there are distinct differences between
the development of the hands and feet.
The upper limb buds develop opposite the caudal cervical segments, and the
lower limb buds form opposite the lumbar and upper sacral segments. At the
apex of each limb bud, the ectoderm thickens to form an apical ectodermal ridge.
This ridge is a multilayered epithelial structure (Fig. 16-2) that is induced by the
paracrine factor FGF-10 from the underlying mesenchyme. Bone morphogenetic
protein signaling is required for its formation.
The AER secretes FGF-8, which exerts an inductive influence on the limb
mesenchyme that initiates growth and development of the limbs in a
proximodistal axis. Retinoic acid promotes formation of the limb bud by
inhibiting FGF signaling. Mesenchymal cells aggregate at the posterior margin
of the limb bud to form the zone of polarizing activity, an important signaling
center in limb development. Fibroblast growth factors from the AER activate the
zone of polarizing activity, which causes expression of the sonic hedgehog (Shh)

genes. Shh secretions (morphogens) control the normal patterning of the limbs
along the anterior-posterior axis. Expression of Wnt7a from the dorsal non-AER
ectoderm of the limb bud and engrailed-1 (EN-1) from the ventral aspect are
involved in specifying the dorsal-ventral axis. The AER itself is maintained by
inductive signals from Shh and Wnt7. It has been suggested that epiprofin, a
zinc-finger transcription factor, regulates Wnt signaling in the limb bud (see Fig.
16-2B).
The mesenchyme adjacent to the AER consists of undifferentiated, rapidly
proliferating cells, whereas mesenchymal cells proximal to it differentiate into
blood vessels and cartilage bone models. The distal ends of the limb buds flatten
into paddle-like hand plates and flipper-like foot plates (Fig. 16-3). Studies have
shown that endogenous retinoic acid is also involved in limb development and
pattern formation.

FIGURE 16–3 Illustrations of development of the limbs (32–56 days). The upper
limbs develop earlier than the lower limbs.
By the end of the sixth week, mesenchymal tissue in the hand plates has
condensed to form digital rays (Figs. 16-3 and 16-4A to C). These mesenchymal

condensations outline the pattern of the digits (fingers) in the hand plates.
During the seventh week, similar condensations of mesenchyme condense to
form digital rays and digits (toes) in the foot plates (Fig. 16-4G to I).
FIGURE 16–4 Illustrations of development of the hands and feet between the
fourth and eighth weeks. The early stages of limb development are alike, except
that development of the hands precedes that of the feet by a day or two. A, At 27
days. B, At 32 days. C, At 41 days. D, At 46 days. E, At 50 days. F, At 52 days.
G, At 28 days. H, At 36 days. I, At 46 days. J, At 49 days. K, At 52 days. L, At
56 days. The arrows in D and J indicate the tissue breakdown process
(apoptosis) that separates the fingers and toes.
At the tip of each digital ray, a part of the AER induces development of the
mesenchyme into the mesenchymal primordia of the bones (phalanges) in the
digits (see Fig. 16-6C and D). The intervals between the digital rays are
occupied by loose mesenchyme. Soon the intervening regions of mesenchyme
break down, forming notches between the digital rays (Figs. 16-3, 16-4D and F,
and 16-5A to D). As the tissue breakdown progresses, separate digits (fingers
and toes) are formed by the end of the eighth week (Fig. 16-4E, F, K, and L).

FIGURE 16–5 Scanning electron micrographs showing dorsal (A) and plantar
(B) views of the right foot of an embryo at approximately 48 days. The toe buds
(arrowheads in A) and the heel cushion and metatarsal tactile elevation
(asterisks in B) have just appeared. Dorsal (C) and distal (D) views of the right
foot of embryos at approximately 55 days. The tips of the toes are separated and

interdigital degeneration has begun. Note the dorsiflexion of the metatarsus and
toes (C) as well as the thickened heel cushion (D).
(From Hinrichsen KV, Jacob HJ, Jacob M, et al: Principles of ontogenesis of leg
and foot in man. Ann Anat 176:121, 1994.)

FIGURE 16–6 A and B, Scanning electron micrographs. A, Dorsal view of the
right foot of an embryo at 8 weeks. B, Plantar view of the left foot of this
embryo. Although supinated, dorsiflexion of the foot is distinct. C and D,
Paraffin sections of the tarsus and metatarsus of a young fetus, stained with
hematoxylin and eosin: 1–5, metatarsal cartilages; 6, cubital cartilage; 7,
calcaneus. The separation of the interosseous muscles (im) and short flexor
muscles of the big toe (sfh) is clearly seen. The plantar crossing (cr) of the
tendons of the long flexors of the digits and hallux (great toe) is shown in D.
(From Hinrichsen KV, Jacob HJ, Jacob M, et al: Principles of ontogenesis of leg
and foot in man. Ann Anat 176:121, 1994.)
Molecular studies indicate that the earliest stages of limb patterning and digit
formation involve expression of patched 1 (Ptc 1) gene which is essential for the
downstream regulation of the Shh pathway. Programmed cell death (apoptosis)
is responsible for the tissue breakdown in the interdigital regions, which is
probably mediated by bone morphogenetic proteins (signaling molecules of the
transforming growth factor β superfamily). Blocking these cellular and
molecular events could account for syndactyly or webbing of the fingers or toes
(see Fig. 16-14D).

 Final Stages of Limb Development
As the limbs elongate, mesenchymal models of the bones are formed by cellular
aggregations (Fig. 16-7B). Chondrification centers appear in the fifth week. By
the end of the sixth week, the entire limb skeleton is cartilaginous (Figs. 16-6A
to D and 16-7C and D). Osteogenesis of long bones begins in the seventh week
from primary ossification centers in the middle of the cartilaginous models of the
long bones. Ossification centers are present in all long bones by the 12th week
(see Chapter 14). Ossification of the carpal (wrist) bones begins during the first
year after birth.

FIGURE 16–7 Schematic longitudinal sections of the upper limb of a human
embryo, showing the development of cartilaginous bones. A, At 28 days. B, At
44 days. C, At 48 days. D, At 56 days.
From the dermomyotome regions of the somites, myogenic precursor cells
migrate into the limb buds and later differentiate into myoblasts, precursors of

muscle cells. The c-met receptor tyrosine kinase plays an essential role in
regulating this process. As the long bones form, the myoblasts aggregate and
form a large muscle mass in each limb bud (Fig. 16-1). In general, this muscle
mass separates into dorsal (extensor) and ventral (flexor) components. The
mesenchyme in the limb bud also gives rise to ligaments and blood vessels (Fig.
16-6).
Early in the seventh week, the limbs extend ventrally. Originally the flexor
aspect of the limbs is ventral and the extensor aspect dorsal, and the preaxial and
postaxial borders are cranial and caudal, respectively (see Fig. 16-10A and D).
The developing upper and lower limbs rotate in opposite directions and to
different degrees (Figs. 16-8 and 16-9):
• The upper limbs rotate laterally through 90 degrees on their longitudinal axes;
thus, the future elbows come to point dorsally and the extensor muscles lie on
the lateral and posterior aspects of the limbs.
• The lower limbs rotate medially through almost 90 degrees; thus, the future
knees come to face ventrally and the extensor muscles lie on the anterior aspect
of the lower limbs.

FIGURE 16–8 Drawings of lateral views of embryos. A, At approximately 52
days. The fingers are separated and the toes are beginning to separate. Note that
the feet are fan shaped. B, At approximately 56 days. All regions of the limbs are
apparent and the digits of the hands and feet are separated.

(Modified from Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal
Development of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures:
An Atlas. Washington, DC, National Institutes of Health, 1977.)
FIGURE 16–9 Illustrations of positional changes of the developing limbs of
embryos. A, At approximately 48 days, showing the limbs extending ventrally
and the hand plates and foot plates facing each other. B, At approximately 51
days, showing the upper limbs bent at the elbows and the hands curved over the
thorax. C, At approximately 54 days, showing the soles of the feet facing
medially. D, At approximately 56 days (end of embryonic stage). Note that the
elbows now point caudally and the knees cranially.
FIGURE 16–10 Illustrations of development of the dermatomal patterns of the
limbs. The axial lines indicate where there is no sensory overlap. A and D,

Ventral aspect of the limb buds early in the fifth week. At this stage, the
dermatomal patterns show the primordial segmental arrangement. B and E,
Similar views later in the fifth week showing the modified arrangement of
dermatomes. C and F, The dermatomal patterns in the adult upper and lower
limbs. The primordial dermatomal pattern has disappeared, but an orderly
sequence of dermatomes can still be recognized. F, Note that most of the original
ventral surface of the lower limb lies on the back of the adult limb. This results
from the medial rotation of the lower limb that occurs toward the end of the
embryonic period. In the upper limb, the ventral axial line extends along the
anterior surface of the arm and forearm. In the lower limb, the ventral axial line
extends along the medial side of the thigh and knee to the posteromedial aspect
of the leg to the heel.
Developmentally, the radius and tibia are homologous bones, as are the ulna and
fibula, just as the thumb and great toe are homologous digits. Synovial joints
appear at the beginning of the fetal period (ninth week), coinciding with
functional differentiation of the limb muscles and their innervation.

 Cutaneous Innervation of Limbs
There is a strong relationship between the growth and rotation of the limbs and
the cutaneous segmental nerve supply of the limbs. Motor axons arising from
the spinal cord enter the limb buds during the fifth week and grow into the dorsal
and ventral muscle masses. Sensory axons enter the limb buds after the motor
axons and use them for guidance. Neural crest cells, the precursors of Schwann
cells, surround the motor and sensory nerve fibers in the limbs and form the
neurolemma (sheath of Schwann) and myelin sheaths (see Chapter 17).
During the fifth week, peripheral nerves grow from the developing limb
plexuses (brachial and lumbosacral) into the mesenchyme of the limbs (Fig. 16-
10B and E). The spinal nerves are distributed in segmental bands, supplying both
dorsal and ventral surfaces of the limbs. A dermatome is the area of skin
supplied by a single spinal nerve and its spinal ganglion; however, cutaneous
nerve areas and dermatomes show considerable overlapping. As the limbs
elongate, the cutaneous distribution of the spinal nerves migrates along the limbs
and no longer reaches the surface in the distal part of the limbs. Although the
original dermatomal pattern changes during growth of the limbs, an orderly
sequence of distribution can still be recognized in the adult (Fig. 16-10C and F).
In the upper limb, observe that the areas supplied by C5 and C6 adjoin the areas
supplied by T2, T1, and C8, but the overlap between them is minimal at the
ventral axial line.
A cutaneous nerve area is the area of skin supplied by a peripheral nerve. If the
dorsal root supplying the area is cut, the dermatomal patterns indicate that there
may be a slight deficit in the area indicated. Because there is overlapping of
dermatomes, a particular area of skin is not exclusively innervated by a single
segmental nerve. The limb dermatomes may be traced progressively down the
lateral aspect of the upper limbs and back up its medial aspect. A comparable
distribution of dermatomes occurs in the lower limbs, which may be traced down
the ventral aspect and then up the dorsal aspect of the lower limbs. As the limbs
descend, they carry their nerves with them; this explains the oblique course of
the nerves arising from the brachial and lumbosacral plexuses.

 Blood Supply of Limbs
The limb buds are supplied by branches of the intersegmental arteries (Fig. 16-
11A), which arise from the dorsal aorta and form a fine capillary network
throughout the mesenchyme. The primordial vascular pattern consists of a
primary axial artery and its branches (Fig. 16-11B and C), which drain into a
peripheral marginal sinus. Blood in the marginal sinus drains into a peripheral
vein. The vascular patterns change as the limbs develop, chiefly by angiogenesis
(sprouting from existing vessels). The new vessels coalesce with other sprouts to
form new vessels.

FIGURE 16–11 Development of limb arteries. A, Sketch of the primordial
cardiovascular system in an embryo at approximately 26 days. B, Development
of arteries in the upper limb. C, Development of arteries in the lower limb.
The primary axial artery becomes the brachial artery in the arm and the common

interosseous artery in the forearm (Fig. 16-11B), which has anterior and posterior
interosseous branches. The ulnar and radial arteries are terminal branches of the
brachial artery. As the digits (fingers) form, the marginal sinus breaks up and the
final venous pattern, represented by the basilic and cephalic veins and their
tributaries, develops. The primary axial artery becomes the deep artery of the
thigh (profunda femoris artery), and the anterior and posterior tibial arteries in
the leg.

Birth Defects of Limbs
Minor birth defects are relatively common and can usually be corrected
surgically. Although these anomalies are usually of no serious medical
consequence, they may serve as indicators of more serious defects, which may
be part of a recognizable pattern of birth defects.
The critical period of limb development is from 24 to 36 days after
fertilization. This statement is based on clinical studies of infants who were
exposed in utero to the drug thalidomide, a potent human teratogen—a factor
known to cause a defect—during the embryonic period. Exposure to this
teratogen before day 36 may cause severe limb defects, such as amelia, the
absence of limbs (Fig. 16-12A). Consequently, a teratogen that may cause amelia
or meromelia (partial absence of limbs) must be taken before the end of the
critical period of limb development. Many severe limb anomalies occurred from
1957 to 1962 as a result of maternal ingestion of thalidomide. This hypnotic
drug, widely used as a sedative and antinauseant, was withdrawn from the
market in December 1961. Since that time, similar limb defects have rarely been
observed. Because thalidomide is now used for the treatment of leprosy and
other disorders, it must be emphasized that thalidomide is absolutely
contraindicated in women of child-bearing age.

FIGURE 16–12 Birth defects of limbs caused by maternal ingestion of
thalidomide. A, Quadruple amelia: absence of upper and lower limbs. B,
Meromelia of the upper limbs; the limbs are represented by rudimentary stumps.
C, Meromelia with the rudimentary upper limbs attached directly to the trunk.
(From Lenz W, Knapp K: Foetal malformation due to thalidomide. Geriatr Med
Monthly 7:253, 1962.)
Major limb defects appear approximately twice in 1000 neonates. Most of these

defects are caused by genetic factors (see Fig. 16-14). Molecular studies have
implicated gene mutation (Hox gene, BMP, Shh, Wnt7, En-1, and others) in some
cases of limb defects. Several unrelated birth defects of the lower limb were
found to be associated with an aberrant arterial pattern, which might be of some
importance in the pathogenesis of these defects. Experimental studies indicate
that thalidomide affects the formation of early blood vessels in the limb buds.
Limb Anomalies
There are two main types of limb anomalies or defects: • Amelia, absence of a
limb or limbs (Figs. 16-12A and 16-13A) • Meromelia, absence of part of a
limb, such as hemimelia, absence of the fibula in the leg, and phocomelia,
hands and feet are attached close to the body (Figs. 16-12B and 16-13B).
 
 

 
 
FIGURE 16–13 Various types of birth defects. A, Female neonate with amelia,
complete absence of the upper limbs. B, Radiograph of a female fetus showing
absence of the right fibula. Note also that the right leg is shorter and the femur
and tibia are bowed and hypoplastic (underdevelopment of tissue of the limb). C,
Radiograph showing partial absence and fusion of the lower ends of the tibia and
fibula in a 5-year-old child. D, Absence of the central digits of the hands,
resulting in a defect called bifurcate (forked) hand or split hand. E, Absence of
the second to fourth toes, resulting in a bifurcate hand or split foot.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Y. Suzuki, Achi, Japan. B, Courtesy of Dr. Joseph R. Siebert,
Children’s Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Seattle, Washington. C,
Courtesy of Dr. Prem S. Sahni, formerly of the Department of Radiology,
Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. D and E, Courtesy of A.E.
Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics

and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Causes of Limb Anomalies
Birth defects of the limbs originate at different stages of development.
Suppression of limb bud development during the early part of the fourth week
results in absence of the limbs, known as amelia. Arrest or disturbance of
differentiation or growth of the limbs during the fifth week results in various
types of meromelia. Like other congenital anomalies, limb defects are caused
by: • Genetic factors, such as chromosomal abnormalities associated with
trisomy 18 (see Chapter 20) • Mutant genes as in brachydactyly, abnormal
shortness of the fingers, or osteogenesis imperfecta, a severe limb defect with
fractures occurring before birth • Environmental factors, such as teratogens
(thalidomide, alcohol, etc.) • A combination of genetic and environmental factors
(multifactorial inheritance), such as congenital dislocation of the hip (see
Chapter 20) • Vascular disruption and ischemia (diminished blood supply), such
as limb reduction defects Experimental studies support the suggestion that
mechanical influences during intrauterine development may cause some fetal
limb defects. A reduced quantity of amniotic fluid (oligohydramnios) is
commonly associated with limb deformations; however, the significance of in
utero mechanical influences on congenital postural deformation is still open to
question.
Bifurcate Hand and Cleft Foot or Split Hand/Foot Malformations
In severe birth defects such as bifurcate (forked) hand and cleft foot, which
clinically is called split hand/foot malformations (SHFM), there is absence of
one or more central digits (fingers or toes), resulting from failure of development
of one or more digital rays (Fig. 16-13D and E ). The hand or foot is divided into
two parts that oppose and curve inward. This is a rare condition affecting
approximately 1 : 20,000 live births. The split hand syndrome is an autosomal
dominant abnormality with incomplete penetrance. The malformation originates
in the fifth to sixth week of development, when the hands are forming. This
disorder has 70% penetrance; that is, only 70% of the people who have the gene
exhibit the defect.

Congenital Absence of Radius
The radius is partially or completely absent. The hand deviates laterally and the
ulna bows with the concavity on the lateral side of the forearm. This defect
results from failure of the mesenchymal primordium of the radius to form during
the fifth week of development. Absence of the radius is usually caused by
genetic factors.
Brachydactyly
Shortness of the digits (fingers or toes) is the result of reduction in the length of
the phalanges. This birth defect is usually inherited as a dominant trait and is
often associated with shortness of stature.
Polydactyly
Polydactyly is the presence of more than five digits on the hands or feet, that is,
supernumerary digits (Figs. 16-14A and B). Often the extra digit is
incompletely formed and lacks normal muscular development. If the hand is
affected, the extra digit is most commonly medial or lateral rather than central.
In the foot, the extra toe is usually on the lateral side. Polydactyly is inherited as
a dominant trait.
 

 
 

FIGURE 16–14 Types of digital birth defects. Polydactyly (more than five digits,
fingers or toes, on the hands (A) or (B) feet). Syndactyly (webbing or fusion) of
the fingers (C) or toes (D).
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Syndactyly
Syndactyly is a common birth defect of the hand or foot. Cutaneous syndactyly
(simple webbing between digits) is a common limb defect. It is more frequent in
the foot than in the hand (Fig. 16-14C and D). Cutaneous syndactyly results
from failure of the webs to degenerate between two or more digits. Programmed
cell death (apoptosis) is responsible for the tissue breakdown between the digits.
Blocking of the cellular and molecular events are likely responsible for the
defects of the fingers.
Osseous syndactyly (fusion of bones, synostosis) occurs when the notches
between the digital rays fail to develop; as a result, separation of the digits does
not occur. Syndactyly is most frequently observed between the third and fourth
fingers and between the second and third toes (SD type I). It is inherited as a
simple autosomal dominant. A case of synpolydactyly (SD type II) (syndactyly
and polydactyly), caused by mutations in the NH2-terminal, non–DNA binding
part of HoxD13, has been reported.

Congenital Clubfoot
Talipes equinovarus (clubfoot) is a relatively common birth defect, occurring
approximately once in 1000 births. It is the most common musculoskeletal
defect. It is characterized by multiple components that lead to an abnormal
position of the foot that prevents normal weight bearing. The sole of the foot is
turned medially and the foot is inverted (Fig. 16-15). Clubfoot is bilateral in
approximately 50% of cases and it occurs approximately twice as frequently in
males.

FIGURE 16–15 Neonate with bilateral talipes equinovarus (clubfeet). Observe

the hyperextension and incurving of the feet.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Although it is commonly stated that clubfoot results from abnormal positioning
or restricted movement of the fetus’s lower limbs in utero, the evidence of this is
inconclusive. Clubfoot appears to be caused by multifactorial inheritance
(genetic and environmental factors acting together). In this condition all
anatomical structures are present so the majority of cases can be treated with
casting or taping.
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip
This birth defect occurs approximately once in 1500 neonates, and is more
common in females than in males. The joint capsule is very relaxed at birth and
there is underdevelopment of the acetabulum of the hip bone and the head of
femur. Dislocation almost always occurs after birth. There are two causative
factors: • Abnormal development of the acetabulum occurs in approximately
15% of infants with congenital dislocation of the hip, which is common after
breech (buttocks) deliveries, suggesting that breech posture during the terminal
months of pregnancy may result in abnormal development of the acetabulum and
the head of femur.
• Generalized joint laxity is often a dominantly inherited condition that appears
to be associated with congenital dislocation of the hip, which follows a
multifactorial pattern of inheritance.

 Summary of Limb Development
• Limb buds appear toward the end of the fourth week as slight bulges of the
ventrolateral body wall. The upper limb buds develop approximately 2 days
before the lower limb buds. The tissues of the limb buds are derived from two
main sources: mesoderm and ectoderm.
• The AER (apical ectodermal ridge) exerts an inductive influence on the limb
mesenchyme (Fig. 16-2), promoting growth and development of the limbs. The
limb buds elongate by proliferation of the mesenchyme within them. Apoptosis
(programmed cell death) is an important mechanism in limb development; for
example, in the breakdown of the tissue in the notches between the digital rays.
• Limb muscles are derived from mesenchyme (myogenic precursor cells)
originating in the somites. The muscle-forming cells (myoblasts) form dorsal
and ventral muscle masses. Nerves grow into the limb buds after the muscle
masses have formed. Most blood vessels in the limb buds arise as buds from the
intersegmental arteries.
• Initially, the developing limbs are directed caudally; later they project ventrally,
and finally, they rotate on their longitudinal axes. The upper and lower limbs
rotate in opposite directions and to different degrees (Fig. 16-9).
• The majority of birth defects of the limbs are caused by genetic factors;
however, many defects probably result from an interaction of genetic and
environmental factors (multifactorial inheritance).

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 16–1
A mother consulted her pediatrician after noticing that when her 11-month-old
daughter began to stand independently, her legs seemed to be of different
lengths.
• Do more female infants have congenital dislocation of the hip than male
infants?
• Are the hip joints of these infants usually dislocated at birth?
• What are the probable causes of congenital dislocation of the hip?

Case 16–2
A male infant was born with limb defects. His mother said that one of her
relatives had similar defects.
• Are limb defects similar to those caused by the drug thalidomide common?
• What was the characteristic syndrome produced by thalidomide?
• Name the limb and other defects commonly associated with the thalidomide
syndrome.

Case 16–3
A neonate presented with clubfeet. The physician explained that this is a
common birth defect.
• What is the most common type of clubfoot?
• How common is it?
• Describe the feet of infants born with this birth defect.

Case 16–4
A baby was born with syndactyly (webbing between her fingers). The doctor
stated this minor defect can be easily corrected surgically.
• Is syndactyly common?
• Does it occur more often in the hands than in the feet?
• What is the embryologic basis of syndactyly?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Ambler CA, Nowicki JL, Burke AC, et al. Assembly of trunk and limb blood
vessels involves extensive migration and vasculogenesis of somite-derived
angioblasts. Dev Biol. 2001;234:352.
Butterfield NC, McGlinn E, Wicking C. The molecular regulation of vertebrate
limb patterning. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:319.
Cole P, Kaufman Y, Hatef DA, et al. Embryology of the hand and upper
extremity. J Craniofac Surg. 2009;20:992.
Cooperman DR, Thompson GH. Congenital abnormalities of the upper and
lower extremities and spine. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors:
Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and
Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Dahn RD, Fallon JF. Limiting outgrowth: BMPs as negative regulators in limb
development. BioEssays. 1999;21:721.
Elliott AM, Evans JA, Chudley AE. Split hand foot malformation (SHFM). Clin
Genet. 2005;68:501.
Gold NB, Westgate MN, Holmes LB. Anatomic and etiological classification of
congenital limb deficiencies. Am J Med Genet A. 2011;155:1225.
Goncalves LF, Kusanovic JP, Gotsch F, et al. The fetal musculoskeletal system.
In Callen PW, editor: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed 5,

Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2008.
Grzeschik K-H. Human limb malformations: An approach to the molecular basis
of development. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46:983.
Hall BK. Bones and Cartilage: Developmental Skeletal Biology. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2005.
Hinrichsen KV, Jacob HJ, Jacob M, et al. Principles of ontogenesis of leg and
foot in man. Ann Anat. 1994;176:121.
Kabak S, Boizow L. Organogenese des Extremitätenskeletts und der
Extremitätengelenke beim Menschenembryo. Anat Anz. 1990;170:349.
Logan M. Finger or toe: The molecular basis of limb identity. Development.
2003;130:6401.
Manske PR, Oberg KC. Classification and developmental biology of congenital
anomalies of the hand and upper extremity. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91:3.
Marini JC, Gerber NL. Osteogenesis imperfecta. JAMA. 1997;277:746.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Muragaki Y, Mundlos S, Upton J, et al. Altered growth and branching patterns in
synpolydactyly caused by mutations in HoxD13. Science. 1996;272:548.
O’Rahilly R, Müller F. Developmental Stages in Human Embryos. Washington,
DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington; 1987.
Robertson WWJr, Corbett D. Congenital clubfoot. Clin Orthop. 1997;338:14.
Sammer DM, Chung KC. Congenital hand differences: embryology and
classification. Hand Clin. 2009;25:151.
Talamillo A, Delgado I, Nakamura T, et al. Role of Epiprofin, a zinc-finger
transcription factor in limb development. Dev Biol. 2010;337:363.
Towers M, Tickle C. Generation of pattern and form in the developing limb. Int

J Dev Biol. 2009;53:805.
Van Allen MI. Structural anomalies resulting from vascular disruption. Pediatr
Clin North Am. 1992;39:255.
Van Heest AE. Congenital disorders of the hand and upper extremity. Pediatr
Clin North Am. 1996;43:1113.
Zuniga A. Globalisation reaches gene regulation: The case for vertebrate limb
development. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005;15:403.

Chapter 17 Nervous System
Development of Nervous System 389
Development of Spinal Cord 392
   Development of Spinal Ganglia 394
   Development of Meninges 394
   Positional Changes of Spinal Cord 395
   Myelination of Nerve Fibers 398
   Birth Defects of Spinal Cord 398
Development of Brain 404
   Brain Flexures 404
   Hindbrain 404
   Choroid Plexuses and Cerebrospinal Fluid 406
   Midbrain 407
   Forebrain 408
Birth Defects of Brain 414
Development of Peripheral Nervous System 423
   Spinal Nerves 423
   Cranial Nerves 424
Development of Autonomic Nervous System 425
   Sympathetic Nervous System 425
   Parasympathetic Nervous System 426
Summary of Nervous System 426
Clinically Oriented Problems 426
The nervous system consists of three main regions:
• The central nervous system (CNS), which consists of the brain and spinal
cord, and is protected by the cranium and the vertebral column.
• The peripheral nervous system (PNS) includes the neurons outside the CNS;
cranial nerves and ganglia, and spinal nerves and ganglia, which connect the
brain and spinal cord with peripheral structures.
• The autonomic nervous system (ANS) has parts in both the CNS and PNS
and consists of the neurons that innervate smooth muscle, cardiac muscle,
glandular epithelium, or combinations of these tissues.

Development of Nervous System
The first indications of the developing nervous system appear during the third
week as the neural plate and neural groove develop on the posterior aspect of the
trilaminar embryo (Fig. 17-1A). It is the notochord and paraxial mesenchyme
that induce the overlying ectoderm to differentiate into the neural plate.
Signaling molecules involve members of the transforming growth factor β family,
Shh, and BMPs. Formation of the neural folds, neural crest, and neural tube is
illustrated in Figs. 17-1B to F and 17-2.
• The neural tube differentiates into the CNS.
• The neural crest gives rise to cells that form most of the PNS and ANS.

FIGURE 17–1 Illustrations of the neural plate and folding of it to form the
neural tube. A, Dorsal view of an embryo of approximately 17 days, exposed by
removing the amnion. B, Transverse section of the embryo showing the neural
plate and early development of the neural groove and neural folds. C, Dorsal
view of an embryo of approximately 22 days. The neural folds have fused

opposite the fourth to sixth somites, but are spread apart at both ends. D to F,
Transverse sections of this embryo at the levels shown in C illustrating
formation of the neural tube and its detachment from the surface ectoderm. Note
that some neuroectodermal cells are not included in the neural tube, but remain
between it and the surface ectoderm as the neural crest.
 
FIGURE 17–2 Morphogens and transcription factors specify the fate of
progenitors in the ventral neural tube. A, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is secreted by
the notochord (NC) and the floor plate (FP) of the neural tube in a ventral to
dorsal gradient. Similarly, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the
transforming growth factor β superfamily, are secreted by the roof plate (RP) of
the neural tube and the overlying epidermis, in a dorsal to ventral gradient.
These opposing morphogen gradients determine dorsal-ventral cell fates. B, Shh
concentration gradients define the ventral expression domains of class I
(repressed) and class II (activated) homeobox transcription factors. Reciprocal
negative interactions assist to establish boundaries of gene expression in the
embryonic ventral spinal cord. P, progenitor; MN, motor neuron; V, ventral

interneuron.
(Courtesy of Dr. David Eisenstat, Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, and
Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science; and Dr. Jeffrey T. Wigle,
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Adapted by permission from Macmillan
Publishers Ltd.: Nature Reviews Genetics. Jessel TM: Neuronal specification in
the spinal cord: Inductive signals and transcription codes. Nat Rev Genet 1:20,
2000.)
Neurulation—formation of the neural plate and neural tube—begins during the
fourth week (22–23 days) in the region of the fourth to sixth pairs of somites
(Fig. 17-1C and D). At this stage, the cranial two thirds of the neural plate and
tube, as far caudal as the fourth pair of somites, represent the future brain, and
the caudal one third of the plate and tube represents the future spinal cord.
Fusion of the neural folds and formation of the neural tube begins at the fifth
somite and proceeds in both cranial and caudal directions until only small areas
of the tube remain open at both ends (Fig. 17-3A and B). The lumen of the neural
tube becomes the neural canal, which communicates freely with the amniotic
cavity (Fig. 17-3C). The cranial opening, the rostral neuropore, closes at
approximately the 25th day and the caudal neuropore closes at approximately
the 27th day (Fig. 17-3D).

FIGURE 17–3 A, Dorsal view of an embryo of approximately 23 days showing
fusion of the neural folds, which forms the neural tube. B, Lateral view of an
embryo of approximately 24 days showing the forebrain prominence and closing
of the rostral neuropore. C, Diagrammatic sagittal section of the embryo
showing the transitory communication of the neural canal with the amniotic
cavity (arrows). D, Lateral view of an embryo of approximately 27 days. Note
that the neuropores shown in B are closed.
Closure of the neuropores coincides with the establishment of a vascular
circulation for the neural tube. The walls of the neural tube thicken to form the
brain and spinal cord (Fig. 17-4). The neural canal forms the ventricular system
of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord.

FIGURE 17–4 A, Schematic lateral view of an embryo of approximately 28 days
showing the three primary brain vesicles: forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.
Two flexures demarcate the primary divisions of the brain. B, Transverse section
of the embryo showing the neural tube that will develop into the spinal cord in
this region. The spinal ganglia derived from the neural crest are also shown. C,
Schematic lateral view of the central nervous system (CNS) of a 6-week embryo
showing the secondary brain vesicles and pontine flexure, which occurs as the
brain grows rapidly.

Nonclosure of Neural Tube
The current hypothesis is that there are multiple, possibly five, closure sites
involved in the formation of the neural tube. Failure of closure of site 1 results in
spina bifida cystica (see Fig. 17-15); meroencephaly (anencephaly) results from
failure of closure of site 2 (see Fig. 17-13); craniorachischisis results from
failure of sites 2, 4, and 1 to close; site 3 nonfusion is rare.
Descriptions of these neural tube defects (NTDs) are given later (see Fig. 17-19).
It has been suggested that the most caudal region may have a fifth closure site
from the second lumbar vertebra to the second sacral vertebra, and that closure
inferior to the second sacral vertebra is by secondary neurulation. Epidemiologic
analysis of neonates with NTD supports the concept that there are multiple
closure of the neural tube in humans.

Development of Spinal Cord
The spinal cord develops from the caudal part of the neural plate and the caudal
eminence. The neural tube caudal to the fourth pair of somites develops into the
spinal cord (Figs. 17-3, 17-4, and 17-5). The lateral walls of the neural tube
thicken, gradually reducing the size of the neural canal until only a minute
central canal of the spinal cord is present at 9 to 10 weeks (Fig. 17-5C).
Initially, the wall of the neural tube is composed of a thick, pseudostratified,
columnar neuroepithelium (Fig. 17-5D).
FIGURE 17–5 Illustrations of the development of the spinal cord. A, Transverse
section of the neural tube of an embryo of approximately 23 days. B and C,
Similar sections at 6 and 9 weeks, respectively. D, Section of the wall of the
neural tube shown in A. E, Section of the wall of the developing spinal cord
showing its three zones. In A to C, note that the neural canal of the neural tube is

converted into the central canal of the spinal cord.
These neuroepithelial cells constitute the ventricular zone (ependymal layer),
which gives rise to all neurons and macroglial cells (macroglia) in the spinal
cord (Figs. 17-5E and 17-6). Macroglial cells are the larger members of the
neuroglial family of cells, which includes astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Soon
a marginal zone composed of the outer parts of the neuroepithelial cells
becomes recognizable (Fig. 17-5E). This zone gradually becomes the white
matter of the spinal cord as axons grow into it from nerve cell bodies in the
spinal cord, spinal ganglia, and brain.

FIGURE 17–6 Histogenesis of cells in the central nervous system. After further
development, the multipolar neuroblast (lower left) becomes a nerve cell or
neuron. Neuroepithelial cells give rise to all neurons and macroglial cells.
Microglial cells are derived from mesenchymal cells that invade the developing
nervous system with the blood vessels.
Some dividing neuroepithelial cells in the ventricular zone differentiate into
primordial neurons—neuroblasts. These embryonic cells form an intermediate

zone (mantle layer) between the ventricular and marginal zones. Neuroblasts
become neurons as they develop cytoplasmic processes (Fig. 17-6).
The supporting cells of the CNS—glioblasts (spongioblasts)—differentiate from
neuroepithelial cells, mainly after neuroblast formation has ceased. The
glioblasts migrate from the ventricular zone into the intermediate and marginal
zones. Some glioblasts become astroblasts and later astrocytes, whereas others
become oligodendroblasts and eventually oligodendrocytes (Fig. 17-6). When
the neuroepithelial cells cease producing neuroblasts and glioblasts, they
differentiate into ependymal cells, which form the ependyma (ependymal
epithelium) lining the central canal of the spinal cord.
Sonic hedgehog signaling controls the proliferation, survival, and patterning of
neuroepithelial progenitor cells by regulating Gli transcription factors (Fig. 17-
2).
Microglia (microglial cells), which are scattered throughout the gray and white
matter, are small cells that are derived from mesenchymal cells (Fig. 17-6).
Microglia invade the CNS rather late in the fetal period after it has been
penetrated by blood vessels. Microglia originate in the bone marrow and are part
of the mononuclear phagocytic cell population.
Proliferation and differentiation of neuroepithelial cells in the developing spinal
cord produce thick walls and thin roof-plates and floor-plates (Fig. 17-5B).
Differential thickening of the lateral walls of the spinal cord soon produces a
shallow longitudinal groove on each side—the sulcus limitans (Figs. 17-5B and
17-7). This groove separates the dorsal part, the alar plate, from the ventral part,
the basal plate. The alar and basal plates produce longitudinal bulges extending
through most of the length of the developing spinal cord. This regional
separation is of fundamental importance because the alar and basal plates are
later associated with afferent and efferent functions, respectively.

FIGURE 17–7 Transverse section of an embryo (x100) at Carnegie stage 16 at
approximately 40 days. The ventral root of the spinal nerve is composed of nerve
fibers arising from neuroblasts in the basal plate (developing ventral horn of
spinal cord), whereas the dorsal root is formed by nerve processes arising from
neuroblasts in the spinal ganglion.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
Cell bodies in the alar plates form the dorsal gray columns, which extend the
length of the spinal cord. In transverse sections of the cord, these columns are
the dorsal gray horns (Fig. 17-7). Neurons in these columns constitute afferent
nuclei and groups of them form the dorsal gray columns. As the alar plates
enlarge, the dorsal median septum forms. Cell bodies in the basal plates form the
ventral and lateral gray columns.
In transverse sections of the spinal cord, these columns are the ventral gray
horns and lateral gray horns, respectively (Fig. 17-5C). Axons of ventral horn

cells grow out of the spinal cord and form the ventral roots of the spinal nerves.
As the basal plates enlarge, they bulge ventrally on each side of the median
plane. As this occurs, the ventral median septum forms and a deep longitudinal
groove—the ventral median fissure—develops on the ventral surface of the
spinal cord (Fig. 17-5C).

Development of Spinal Ganglia
The unipolar neurons in the spinal ganglia (dorsal root ganglia) are derived
from neural crest cells (Figs. 17-8 and 17-9). The axons of cells in the spinal
ganglia are at first bipolar, but the two processes soon unite in a T-shaped
fashion. Both processes of spinal ganglion cells have the structural
characteristics of axons, but the peripheral process is a dendrite in that there is
conduction toward the cell body. The peripheral processes of spinal ganglion
cells pass in the spinal nerves to sensory endings in somatic or visceral structures
(Fig. 17-8). The central processes enter the spinal cord and constitute the dorsal
roots of spinal nerves.

FIGURE 17–8 Diagrams showing some derivatives of the neural crest. Neural
crest cells also differentiate into the cells in the afferent ganglia of cranial nerves
and many other structures (see Chapter 5). The formation of a spinal nerve is
also illustrated.

FIGURE 17–9 A to D, Diagrams of successive stages in the differentiation of a
neural crest cell into a unipolar afferent neuron in a spinal ganglion.

Development of Meninges
The meninges (membranous coverings of brain and spinal cord) develop from
cells of the neural crest and mesenchyme during days 20 and 35 days, which
migrate to surround the neural tube (primordium of brain and spinal cord) and
form the primordial meninges (Figs. 17-1F and 17-3C). The external layer of
these membranes thickens to form the dura mater (Fig. 17-10) and the internal
layer, the pia arachnoid is composed of pia mater and arachnoid mater
(leptomeninges). Fluid-filled spaces appear within the leptomeninges that soon
coalesce to form the subarachnoid space (Fig. 17-10B). The origin of the pia
mater and arachnoid from a single layer is indicated in the adult by arachnoid
trabeculae—numerous delicate strands of connective tissue that pass between
the pia and arachnoid. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) begins to form during the fifth
week.
FIGURE 17–10 Diagrams showing the position of the caudal end of the spinal
cord in relation to the vertebral column and meninges at various stages of
development. The increasing inclination of the root of the first sacral nerve is
also illustrated. A, At 8 weeks. B, At 24 weeks. C, Neonate. D, Adult.

Positional Changes of Spinal Cord
The spinal cord in the embryo extends the entire length of the vertebral canal
(Fig. 17-10A). The spinal nerves pass through the intervertebral foramina
opposite their levels of origin. Because the vertebral column and dura mater
grow more rapidly than the spinal cord, this positional relationship of the spinal
nerves does not persist. The caudal end of the spinal cord in fetuses gradually
comes to lie at relatively higher levels. In a 24-week-old fetus, it lies at the level
of the first sacral vertebra (Fig. 17-10B).
The spinal cord in the neonate terminates at the level of the second or third
lumbar vertebra (Fig. 17-10C). In an adult, the cord usually terminates at the
inferior border of the first lumbar vertebra (Fig. 17-10D). This is an average
level because the caudal end of the spinal cord in adults may be as superior as
the 12th thoracic vertebra or as inferior as the third lumbar vertebra. The spinal
nerve roots, especially those of the lumbar and sacral segments, run obliquely
from the spinal cord to the corresponding level of the vertebral column. The
nerve roots inferior to the end of the cord—the medullary cone—form a bundle
of spinal nerve roots—the cauda equina (horse tail)—which arises from the
lumbosacral enlargement (swelling) and medullary cone of the spinal cord (Fig.
17-10D).
Although the dura mater and arachnoid mater usually end at the S2 vertebra in
adults, the pia mater does not. Distal to the caudal end of the spinal cord, the pia
mater forms a long fibrous thread, the filum terminale (terminal filum), which
indicates the original level of the caudal end of the embryonic spinal cord (Fig.
17-10C). This filum extends from the medullary cone and attaches to the
periosteum of the first coccygeal vertebra (Fig. 17-10D).

Myelination of Nerve Fibers
Myelin sheaths (membranous wrapping) around the nerve fibers within the
spinal cord begin to form during the late fetal period, and continue to form
during the first postnatal year (Fig. 17-11E). Myelin basic proteins, a family of
related polypeptide isoforms, are essential in myelination; β1 integrins regulate
this process. In general, fiber tracts become functional at approximately the time
they become myelinated. Motor roots are myelinated before sensory roots. The
myelin sheaths around the nerve fibers in the spinal cord are formed by
oligodendrocytes that originate from the neuroepithelium. The plasma
membranes of these cells wrap around the axon, forming a number of layers
(Fig. 17-11F to H).
FIGURE 17–11 Diagrammatic sketches illustrating myelination of nerve fibers.
A to E, Successive stages in the myelination of an axon of a peripheral nerve
fiber by the neurolemma (sheath of Schwann). The axon first indents the cell; the
cell then rotates around the axon as the mesaxon (site of invagination) elongates.
The cytoplasm between the layers of the cell membrane gradually condenses.
Cytoplasm remains on the inside of the sheath between the myelin and axon. F
to H, Successive stages in the myelination of a nerve fiber in the central nervous
system by an oligodendrocyte. A process of the neuroglial cell wraps itself
around an axon, and the intervening layers of cytoplasm move to the body of the
cell.

The myelin sheaths around the axons of peripheral nerve fibers are formed by
the plasma membranes of the neurolemma (sheath of Schwann cells), which are
analogous to oligodendrocytes. Neurolemma cells are derived from neural crest
cells that migrate peripherally and wrap themselves around the axons of somatic
motor neurons and preganglionic autonomic motor neurons as they pass out of
the CNS (Figs. 17-8 and 17-11A to E). These cells also wrap themselves around
both the central and peripheral processes of somatic and visceral sensory
neurons, as well as around the axons of postsynaptic autonomic motor neurons.
Beginning at approximately 20 weeks, peripheral nerve fibers have a whitish
appearance, resulting from the deposition of myelin (layers of lipid and protein
substances).

Birth Defects of Spinal Cord
Most defects result from failure of fusion of one or more neural arches of the
developing vertebrae during the fourth week. Neural tube defects (NTD) affect
the tissues overlying the spinal cord: meninges, vertebral arches, muscles, and
skin (Fig. 17-12B to D). Birth defects involving the embryonic neural arches
are referred to as spina bifida; subtypes of this defect are based on the degree
and pattern of the NTD. The term—spina bifida—denotes nonfusion of the
halves of the embryonic neural arches, which is common to all types of spina
bifida (Fig. 17-12). Severe defects also involve the spinal cord, meninges, and
neurocranium—the bones of the cranium enclosing the brain (Fig. 17-13). Spina
bifida ranges from clinically significant types to minor defects that are
functionally unimportant (Fig. 17-14).
FIGURE 17–12 Diagrammatic sketches illustrating various types of spina bifida

and the associated defects of the vertebral arches (one or more), spinal cord, and
meninges. A, Spina bifida occulta. Observe the unfused vertebral arch. B, Spina
bifida with meningocele. C, Spina bifida with meningomyelocele. D, Spina
bifida with myeloschisis. The defects illustrated in B to D are referred to
collectively as spina bifida cystica because of the cyst-like sac or cyst associated
with them.
FIGURE 17–13 A fetus at 20 weeks with severe neural tube defects, including
acrania, cerebral regression (meroencephaly), iniencephaly (enlargement of
foramen magnum), and a sacral dimple (arrow).
(Courtesy of Dr. Marc Del Bigio, Department of Pathology [Neuropathology],
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)


FIGURE 17–14 A female child with a hairy patch in the lumbosacral region
indicating the site of a spina bifida occulta.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, MD, Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Dermal Sinus
This sinus (channel) is associated with closure of the neural tube and formation
of the meninges in the lumbosacral region of the spinal cord. The birth defect is
caused by failure of the surface ectoderm (future skin) to detach from the
neuroectoderm and meninges that envelop it. As a result, the meninges are
continuous with a narrow channel that extends to a dimple in the skin of the
sacral region of the back (Fig. 17-13; see arrow). The dimple indicates the
region of closure of the caudal neuropore at the end of the fourth week;
therefore, it represents the last place of separation between the surface ectoderm
and the neural tube.
Spina Bifida Occulta
This NTD is the result of failure of the embryonic halves of one or more neural
arches to fuse in the median plane (Fig. 17-12A). Spina bifida occulta occurs in
the L5 or S1 vertebra in approximately 10% of otherwise normal people. In its
most minor form, the only evidence of its presence may be a small dimple with a
tuft of hair arising from it (Fig. 17-14). An overlying lipoma, dermal sinus, or
other birthmarks may also occur. Spina bifida occulta usually produces no
symptoms. A small percentage of affected infants have functionally significant
defects of the underlying spinal cord and dorsal roots.
Spina Bifida Cystica
Severe types of spina bifida, involving protrusion of the spinal cord and/or
meninges through defects in the vertebral arches, are referred to collectively as

spina bifida cystica because of the meningeal cyst (cyst-like sac) that is
associated with these defects (Figs. 17-12B to D and 17-15). This NTD occurs
approximately once in every 5000 births and shows considerable geographic
variation in incidence. When the cyst contains meninges and CSF, the defect is
called spina bifida with meningocele (Fig. 17-12B). The spinal cord and spinal
roots are in the normal position, but there may be spinal cord defects. Protrusion
of the meninges and CSF of the spinal cord is through a defect in the vertebral
column.
 
FIGURE 17–15 Infants with spina bifida cystica. A, Spina bifida with
meningomyelocele in the lumbar region. B, Spina bifida with myeloschisis in the
lumbar region. Note the nerve involvement has affected the lower limbs.
(Courtesy of the late Dr. Dwight Parkinson, Department of Surgery and
Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

If the spinal cord and/or nerve roots are contained within the cyst, the defect is
called spina bifida with meningomyelocele (Figs. 17-12C and 17-15). Severe
cases involving several vertebrae are often associated with absence of the
calvaria, partial absence of the brain, and facial abnormalities, known as
meroencephaly (Figs. 17-13 and 17-17). The term meroencephaly recognizes
that the defects entail drastic effects in some brain areas and lesser or no effects
in others. In these neonates, death is inevitable. The term anencephaly for these
severe defects is inappropriate because it indicates that no part of the brain is
present.
Spina bifida cystica shows varying degrees of neurologic deficit, depending on
the position and extent of the lesion. There is usually a corresponding
dermatome loss of sensation along with complete or partial skeletal muscle
paralysis. The level of the lesion determines the area of anesthesia (area of skin
without sensation) and the muscles affected. Sphincter paralysis (bladder
and/or anal sphincters) is common with lumbosacral meningomyelocele (Figs.
17-12C and 17-15A). There is almost invariably a saddle anesthesia when the
sphincters are involved, that is, loss of sensation in the body region that would
contact a saddle.
Meroencephaly is strongly suspected in utero when there is a high level of alpha
fetoprotein (AFP) in the amniotic fluid (see Chapter 6). AFP may also be
elevated in the maternal blood serum. Amniocentesis is usually performed on
pregnant women with high levels of serum AFP for the determination of the AFP
level in the amniotic fluid (see Chapter 6, Fig. 6-13). An ultrasound scan may
reveal the presence of an NTD that has resulted in spina bifida cystica. The fetal
vertebral column can be detected by ultrasound at 10 to 12 weeks and if there is
a defect in the vertebral arch, a cystic mass may be present in the affected area
(Figs. 17-12C and 17-15A).
Menigomyelocele
Spina bifida with meningomyelocele (Fig. 17-12C ) is a more common and a
more severe defect than spina bifida with meningocele (Fig. 17-12B). This NTD
may occur anywhere along the vertebral column, but they are most common in
the lumbar and sacral region (see Fig. 17-17). Some cases of meningomyelocele
are associated with craniolacunia (defective development of calvaria); this

results in depressed, nonossified areas on the inner surfaces of the flat bones of
the calvaria.
Myeloschisis
This is the most severe type of spina bifida (Figs. 17-12D, 17-15B, and 17-16).
In this defect, the spinal cord in the affected area is open because the neural folds
failed to fuse (schisis, a cleaving). As a result, the spinal cord is represented by a
flattened mass of nervous tissue. This defect usually results in permanent
paralysis or weakness of the lower limbs.


FIGURE 17–16 A 19-week female fetus showing an open spinal defect in the
lumbosacral region (spina bifida with myeloschisis).
(Courtesy of Dr. Joseph R. Siebert, Children’s Hospital and Regional Medical
Center, Seattle, Washington.)
Etiology of Neural Tube Defects
Nutritional and environmental factors undoubtedly play a role in the production
of NTDs. Both food fortification with folic acid and folic acid supplements taken
before conception and continued for at least 3 months during pregnancy reduce
the incidence of NTDs. As a result, the U.S. Public Health Service recommended
in 1992 that “all women of childbearing age who are capable of becoming
pregnant should consume 0.4 mg, 400 µg, of folic acid daily.” Epidemiological
studies have also shown that low maternal B12 levels may significantly increase
the risk for NTD. Certain drugs increase the risk of meningomyelocele (e.g.,
valproic acid). This anticonvulsant drug causes NTDs in 1% to 2% of
pregnancies if taken during early pregnancy (fourth week of development) when
the neural folds are fusing (Fig. 17-17).

FIGURE 17–17 Schematic illustrations showing the embryologic basis of neural
tube defects. Meroencephaly, partial absence of brain, results from defective
closure of the rostral neuropore, and meningomyelocele results from defective
closure of the caudal neuropore.

(Modified from Jones KL: Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human
Malformations, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1988.)

 Development of Brain
The brain begins to develop in the third week when the neural plate and tube are
developing from the neuroectoderm (Fig. 17-1). The neural tube, cranial to the
fourth pair of somites, develops into the brain. Fusion of the neural folds in the
cranial region and closure of the rostral neuropore form three primary brain
vesicles from which the brain develops (Fig. 17-18). The three primary brain
vesicles form the:
• Forebrain (prosencephalon)
• Midbrain (mesencephalon)
• Hindbrain (rhombencephalon)
FIGURE 17–18 Diagrammatic sketches of the brain vesicles indicating the adult
derivatives of their walls and cavities. The rostral part of the third ventricle (*)
forms from the cavity of the telencephalon; most of this ventricle is derived from
the cavity of the diencephalon.
During the fifth week, the forebrain partly divides into two secondary brain
vesicles, the telencephalon and diencephalon; the midbrain does not divide; and
the hindbrain partly divides into two vesicles, the metencephalon and
myelencephalon. Consequently, there are five secondary brain vesicles.

 Brain Flexures
During the fifth week, the embryonic brain grows rapidly and bends ventrally
with the head fold. This produces the midbrain flexure in the midbrain region
and the cervical flexure at the junction of the hindbrain and spinal cord (Fig. 17-
19A). Later, unequal growth of the brain between these flexures produces the
pontine flexure in the opposite direction. This flexure results in thinning of the
roof of the hindbrain (Fig. 17-1C).
FIGURE 17–19 A, Sketch of the developing brain at the end of the fifth week
showing the three primary divisions of the brain and the brain flexures. B,
Transverse section of the caudal part of the myelencephalon (developing closed
part of the medulla). C and D, Similar sections of the rostral part of the
myelencephalon (developing open part of the medulla) showing the position and
successive stages of differentiation of the alar and basal plates. The arrows in C
show the pathway taken by neuroblasts from the alar plates to form the olivary
nuclei.

Initially, the primordial brain has the same basic structure as the developing
spinal cord; however, the brain flexures produce considerable variation in the
outline of transverse sections at different levels of the brain and in the position of
the gray and white matter. The sulcus limitans extends cranially to the junction
of the midbrain and forebrain, and the alar and basal plates are recognizable only
in the midbrain and hindbrain (Figs. 17-5C and 17-19C).

Hindbrain
The cervical flexure demarcates the hindbrain from the spinal cord (Fig. 17-
19A). Later, this junction is arbitrarily defined as the level of the superior rootlet
of the first cervical nerve, which is located roughly at the foramen magnum. The
pontine flexure, located in the future pontine region, divides the hindbrain into
caudal (myelencephalon) and rostral (metencephalon) parts. The
myelencephalon becomes the medulla oblongata (commonly called the
medulla), and the metencephalon becomes the pons and cerebellum. The
cavity of the hindbrain becomes the fourth ventricle and the central canal in
the medulla.
Myelencephalon
The caudal part of the myelencephalon (closed part of medulla) resembles the
spinal cord, both developmentally and structurally (Fig. 17-19B). The neural
canal of the neural tube forms the small central canal of the myelencephalon.
Unlike those of the spinal cord, neuroblasts from the alar plates in the
myelencephalon migrate into the marginal zone and form isolated areas of gray
matter—the gracile nuclei medially and the cuneate nuclei laterally. These
nuclei are associated with correspondingly named nerve tracts that enter the
medulla from the spinal cord. The ventral area of the medulla contains a pair of
fiber bundles—the pyramids—that consist of corticospinal fibers descending
from the developing cerebral cortex (Fig. 17-19B).
The rostral part of the myelencephalon (“open” part of medulla) is wide and
rather flat, especially opposite the pontine flexure (Fig. 17-19C and D). The
pontine flexure causes the lateral walls of the medulla to move laterally like the
pages of an open book. As a result, its roof plate is stretched and greatly
thinned. In addition, the cavity of this part of the myelencephalon (part of future
fourth ventricle) becomes somewhat rhomboidal (diamond shaped). As the walls
of the medulla move laterally, the alar plates come to lie lateral to the basal
plates. As the positions of the plates change, the motor nuclei generally develop
medial to the sensory nuclei (Fig. 17-19C).
Neuroblasts in the basal plates of the medulla, like those in the spinal cord,
develop into motor neurons. The neuroblasts form nuclei (groups of nerve cells)

and organize into three cell columns on each side (Fig. 17-19D). From medial to
lateral, the columns are the:
• General somatic efferent, represented by neurons of the hypoglossal nerve
• Special visceral efferent, represented by neurons innervating muscles derived
from the pharyngeal arches (see Chapter 9)
• General visceral efferent, represented by some neurons of the vagus and
glossopharyngeal nerves
Neuroblasts in the alar plates of the medulla form neurons that are arranged in
four columns on each side. From medial to lateral, the columns are the:
• General visceral afferent receiving impulses from the viscera
• Special visceral afferent receiving taste fibers
• General somatic afferent receiving impulses from the surface of the head
• Special somatic afferent receiving impulses from the ear
Some neuroblasts from the alar plates migrate ventrally and form the neurons in
the olivary nuclei (Fig. 17-19C and D).
Metencephalon
The walls of the metencephalon form the pons and cerebellum, and the cavity
of the metencephalon forms the superior part of the fourth ventricle (Fig. 17-
20A). As in the rostral part of the myelencephalon, the pontine flexure causes
divergence of the lateral walls of the pons, which spreads the gray matter in the
floor of the fourth ventricle (Fig. 17-20B). As in the myelencephalon,
neuroblasts in each basal plate develop into motor nuclei and organize into three
columns on each side.

FIGURE 17–20 A, Sketch of the developing brain at the end of the fifth week.
B, Transverse section of the metencephalon (developing pons and cerebellum)
showing the derivatives of the alar and basal plates. C and D, Sagittal sections of
the hindbrain at 6 and 17 weeks, respectively, showing successive stages in the
development of the pons and cerebellum.
The cerebellum develops from thickenings of dorsal parts of the alar plates.
Initially, the cerebellar swellings project into the fourth ventricle (Fig. 17-20B).
As the swellings enlarge and fuse in the median plane, they overgrow the rostral
half of the fourth ventricle and overlap the pons and medulla (Fig. 17-20D).
Some neuroblasts in the intermediate zone of the alar plates migrate to the
marginal zone and differentiate into the neurons of the cerebellar cortex. Other
neuroblasts from these plates give rise to the central nuclei, the largest of which
is the dentate nucleus (Fig. 17-20D). Cells from the alar plates also give rise to
the pontine nuclei, the cochlear and vestibular nuclei, and the sensory nuclei of
the trigeminal nerve.

The structure of the cerebellum reflects its phylogenetic (evolutionary)
development (Fig. 17-20C and D):
• The archicerebellum (flocculonodular lobe), the oldest part phylogenetically,
has connections with the vestibular apparatus, especially the vestibule of the ear.
• The paleocerebellum (vermis and anterior lobe), of more recent development,
is associated with sensory data from the limbs.
• The neocerebellum (posterior lobe), the newest part phylogenetically, is
concerned with selective control of limb movements.
Nerve fibers connecting the cerebral and cerebellar cortices with the spinal cord
pass through the marginal layer of the ventral region of the metencephalon. This
region of the brainstem is the pons (bridge) because of the robust band of nerve
fibers that crosses the median plane and forms a bulky ridge on its anterior and
lateral aspects (Fig. 17-20C and D).

 Choroid Plexuses and Cerebrospinal Fluid
The thin ependymal roof of the fourth ventricle is covered externally by pia
mater, derived from mesenchyme associated with the hindbrain (Fig. 17-20B, C,
and D). This vascular membrane, together with the ependymal roof, forms the
tela choroidea of the fourth ventricle (Fig. 17-19D). Because of the active
proliferation of the pia mater, the tela choroidea invaginates the fourth ventricle,
where it differentiates into the choroid plexus, infoldings of choroidal arteries of
the pia mater (Figs. 17-19C and 17-20C and D). Similar plexuses develop in the
roof of the third ventricle and in the medial walls of the lateral ventricles.
The choroid plexuses secrete ventricular fluid, which becomes cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) when additions are made to it from the surfaces of the brain and
spinal cord, and from the pia-arachnoid layer of the meninges. The thin roof of
the fourth ventricle evaginates in three locations. These outpouchings rupture to
form openings, median and lateral apertures (foramen of Magendie and
foramina of Luschka, respectively), which permit the CSF to enter the
subarachnoid space from the fourth ventricle.
The main site of absorption of CSF into the venous system is through the
arachnoid villi, which are protrusions of arachnoid mater into the dural venous
sinuses (large venous channels between the layers of the dura mater). The
arachnoid villi consist of a thin, cellular layer derived from the epithelium of the
arachnoid and the endothelium of the sinus.

Midbrain
The midbrain (mesencephalon) undergoes less change than any other part of the
developing brain (Fig. 17-21A), except for the caudal part of the hindbrain. The
neural canal narrows and becomes the cerebral aqueduct (Figs. 17-20D and 17-
21D), a channel that connects the third and fourth ventricles.
FIGURE 17–21 A, Sketch of the developing brain at the end of the fifth week.
B, Transverse section of the developing midbrain showing the early migration of
cells from the basal and alar plates. C, Sketch of the developing brain at 11
weeks. D and E, Transverse sections of the developing midbrain at the level of
the inferior and superior colliculi, respectively. CN, cranial nerve.
Neuroblasts migrate from the alar plates of the midbrain into the tectum (roof)

and aggregate to form four large groups of neurons, the paired superior and
inferior colliculi (Fig. 17-21D and E), which are concerned with visual and
auditory reflexes, respectively. Neuroblasts from the basal plates may give rise to
groups of neurons in the tegmentum of midbrain (red nuclei, nuclei of third
and fourth cranial nerves, and the reticular nuclei). The substantia nigra, a
broad layer of gray matter adjacent to the cerebral peduncle (see Fig. 17-21D
and E), may also differentiate from the basal plate, but some authorities believe
that it is derived from cells in the alar plate that migrate ventrally.
Fibers growing from the cerebrum (principal part of brain, including the
diencephalon and cerebral hemispheres) form the crus cerebri or cerebral
peduncles anteriorly (Fig. 17-21B). The peduncles become progressively more
prominent as more descending fiber groups (corticopontine, corticobulbar, and
corticospinal) pass through the developing midbrain on their way to the
brainstem and spinal cord.

Forebrain
As closure of the rostral neuropore occurs, two lateral outgrowths—optic
vesicles—appear (Fig. 17-4A), one on each side of the forebrain. The optic
vesicles are the primordia of the retinae and optic nerves (see Chapter 18). A
second pair of diverticula, the telencephalic vesicles, soon arise more dorsally
and rostrally (Fig. 17-21C). They are the primordia of the cerebral hemispheres,
and their cavities become the lateral ventricles (see Fig. 17-26B).
The rostral (anterior) part of the forebrain, including the primordia of the
cerebral hemispheres, is the telencephalon; the caudal (posterior) part of the
forebrain is the diencephalon. The cavities of the telencephalon and
diencephalon contribute to the formation of the third ventricle, although the
cavity of the diencephalon contributes more (Fig. 17-22E).

FIGURE 17–22 A, External view of the brain at the end of the fifth week. B,
Similar view at 7 weeks. C, Median section of this brain showing the medial
surface of the forebrain and midbrain. D, Similar section at 8 weeks. E,
Transverse section of the diencephalon showing the epithalamus dorsally, the
thalamus laterally, and the hypothalamus ventrally.
Diencephalon

Three swellings develop in the lateral walls of the third ventricle, which later
become the thalamus, hypothalamus, and epithalamus (see Fig. 17-22C to E).
The thalamus is separated from the epithalamus by the epithalamic sulcus and
from the hypothalamus by the hypothalamic sulcus (Fig. 17-22E). The latter
sulcus is not a continuation of the sulcus limitans into the forebrain and does
not, like the sulcus limitans, divide sensory and motor areas (Fig. 17-22C).
The thalamus develops rapidly on each side of the third ventricle and bulges
into its cavity (Fig. 17-22E). The thalami meet and fuse in the midline in
approximately 70% of brains, forming a bridge of gray matter across the third
ventricle—the interthalamic adhesion.
The hypothalamus arises by proliferation of neuroblasts in the intermediate
zone of the diencephalic walls, ventral to the hypothalamic sulci. Differential
expression of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is involved in the patterning of the
hypothalamus. Later, a number of nuclei concerned with endocrine activities and
homeostasis develop. A pair of nuclei, the mammillary bodies, form pea-sized
swellings on the ventral surface of the hypothalamus (Fig. 17-22C).
The epithalamus develops from the roof and dorsal portion of the lateral wall of
the diencephalons (Fig. 17-22C to E). Initially, the epithalamic swellings are
large, but later they become relatively small.
The pineal gland (body) develops as a median diverticulum of the caudal part of
the roof of the diencephalon (Fig. 17-22D). Proliferation of cells in its walls
soon converts it into a solid cone-shaped gland.
The pituitary gland (hypophysis) is ectodermal in origin (Fig. 17-23 and Table
17-1). It develops from two sources:
• An upgrowth from the ectodermal roof of the stomodeum, the hypophysial
diverticulum (Rathke pouch)
• A downgrowth from the neuroectoderm of the diencephalon, the
neurohypophysial diverticulum

FIGURE 17–23 Diagrammatic sketches illustrating the development of the
pituitary gland. A, Sagittal section of the cranial end of an embryo at
approximately 36 days showing the hypophysial diverticulum, an upgrowth from
the stomodeum, and the neurohypophysial diverticulum, a downgrowth from the
forebrain. B to D, Successive stages of the developing pituitary gland. By 8
weeks, the diverticulum loses its connection with the oral cavity and is in close
contact with the infundibulum and the posterior lobe (neurohypophysis) of the
pituitary gland. E and F, Later stages showing proliferation of the anterior wall
of the hypophysial diverticulum to form the anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) of
the pituitary gland.
Table 17–1 Derivation and Terminology of Pituitary Gland

This double origin explains why the pituitary gland is composed of two
completely different types of tissue:
• The adenohypophysis (glandular part) or anterior lobe, which arises from oral
ectoderm
• The neurohypophysis (nervous part) or posterior lobe, which arises from
neuroectoderm
By the third week, the hypophysial diverticulum projects from the roof of the
stomodeum and lies adjacent to the floor (ventral wall) of the diencephalon (Fig.
17-23C). By the fifth week, this diverticulum has elongated and constricted at its
attachment to the oral epithelium, giving it a nipple-like appearance. By this
stage, it has come into contact with the infundibulum (derived from the
neurohypophysial diverticulum), a ventral downgrowth of the diencephalon
(Figs. 17-22C and D and 17-23).
The stalk of the hypophysial diverticulum passes between the chondrification
centers of the developing presphenoid and basisphenoid bones of the cranium
(Fig. 17-23E). During the sixth week, the connection of the diverticulum with
the oral cavity degenerates (Fig. 17-23D and E). Cells of the anterior wall of the
hypophysial diverticulum proliferate and give rise to the pars anterior of the
pituitary gland (Table 17-1). Later an extension, the pars tuberalis, grows
around the infundibular stem (Fig. 17-23E). The extensive proliferation of the
anterior wall of the hypophysial diverticulum reduces its lumen to a narrow cleft
(Fig. 17-23E). This residual cleft is usually not recognizable in the adult pituitary
gland, but it may be represented by a zone of cysts. Cells in the posterior wall of
the hypophysial pouch do not proliferate; they give rise to the thin, poorly
defined pars intermedia (Fig. 17-23F).
The part of the pituitary gland that develops from the neuroectoderm

(neurohypophysial diverticulum) is the neurohypophysis (Fig. 17-23B to F
and Table 17-1). The infundibulum gives rise to the median eminence,
infundibular stem, and pars nervosa. Initially, the walls of the infundibulum
are thin, but the distal end of the infundibulum soon becomes solid as the
neuroepithelial cells proliferate. These cells later differentiate into pituicytes, the
primary cells of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland, which are closely
related to neuroglial cells. Nerve fibers grow into the pars nervosa from the
hypothalamic area, to which the infundibular stem is attached (Fig. 17-23F).
Recent studies indicate that secreted inductive molecules (e.g., FGF8, BMP4,
and Wnt5A) from the diencephalon are involved in the formation of the anterior
and intermediate lobes of the pituitary gland; the LIM-homeobox gene Lhx2
appears to control development of the posterior lobe.
Pharyngeal Hypophysis and Craniopharyngioma
A remnant of the stalk of the hypophysial diverticulum may persist and form a
pharyngeal hypophysis in the roof of the oropharynx (Fig. 17-23F ). Rarely,
masses of anterior lobe tissue develop outside the capsule of the pituitary gland,
within the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone. A remnant of the hypophysial
diverticulum, the basipharyngeal canal, is visible in sections of the neonate’s
sphenoid bone in approximately 1% of cases. It can also be identified in a small
number of radiographs of crania of neonates (usually those with cranial defects).
Occasionally, a craniopharyngioma develops in the pharynx or basisphenoid
(posterior part of sphenoid) from remnants of the stalk of the hypophysial
diverticulum (Fig. 17-24), but most often they form in and/or superior to the
sella turcica. These tumors arise along the path of the hypophysial diverticulum
from epithelial remnants.

FIGURE 17–24 Sagittal magnetic resonance image of a 4-year-old boy who
presented with a headache and optic atrophy. A large mass (4 cm) occupies an
enlarged sella turcica, expanding inferiorly into the sphenoid bone and superiorly
into the suprasellar cistern. A craniopharyngioma was confirmed by surgery. The
inferior half of the mass is solid and appears dark, whereas the superior half is
cystic and appears brighter.
(Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, North
Dakota.)
Telencephalon
The telencephalon consists of a median part and two lateral diverticula, the
cerebral vesicles (Fig. 17-23A). These vesicles are the primordia of the cerebral
hemispheres (Figs. 17-22B and 17-23A). The cavity of the median portion of the
telencephalon forms the extreme anterior part of the third ventricle (Fig. 17-25).
At first, the cerebral hemispheres are in wide communication with the cavity of
the third ventricle through the interventricular foramina (Figs. 17-25 and 17-
26B).

FIGURE 17–25 Photomicrograph of a transverse section through the
diencephalon and cerebral vesicles of a human embryo (approximately 50 days)
at the level of the interventricular foramina (×20). The choroid fissure is located
at the junction of the choroid plexus and the medial wall of the lateral ventricle.
(Courtesy of Professor Jean Hay [retired], Department of Anatomy, University
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 17–26 A, Sketch of the dorsal surface of the forebrain indicating how
the ependymal roof of the diencephalon is carried out to the dorsomedial surface
of the cerebral hemispheres. B, Diagrammatic section of the forebrain showing
how the developing cerebral hemispheres grow from the lateral walls of the
forebrain and expand in all directions until they cover the diencephalon. The
arrows indicate some directions in which the hemispheres expand. The rostral
wall of the forebrain, the lamina terminalis, is very thin. C, Sketch of the
forebrain showing how the ependymal roof is finally carried into the temporal
lobes as a result of the C-shaped growth pattern of the cerebral hemispheres.
Along the choroid fissure, part of the medial wall of the developing cerebral
hemisphere becomes very thin (Figs. 17-25 and 17-26). Initially, this ependymal
portion lies in the roof of the hemisphere and is continuous with the ependymal
roof of the third ventricle (Fig. 17-26A). The choroid plexus of the lateral
ventricle later forms at this site (Figs. 17-25 and 17-27).

FIGURE 17–27 A, Drawing of the medial surface of the forebrain of a 10-week
embryo showing the diencephalic derivatives, the main commissures, and the
expanding cerebral hemispheres. B, Transverse section of the forebrain at the
level of the interventricular foramina showing the corpus striatum and choroid
plexuses of the lateral ventricles. C, Similar section at approximately 11 weeks
showing division of the corpus striatum into the caudate and lentiform nuclei by
the internal capsule. The developing relationship of the cerebral hemispheres to
the diencephalon is also illustrated.
As the cerebral hemispheres expand, they cover successively the diencephalon,
midbrain, and hindbrain. The hemispheres eventually meet each other in the
midline, flattening their medial surfaces. The mesenchyme trapped in the
longitudinal fissure between them gives rise to the cerebral falx (falx cerebri), a
median fold of dura mater.

The corpus striatum appears during the sixth week as a prominent swelling in
the floor of each cerebral hemisphere (Fig. 17-27B). The floor of each
hemisphere expands more slowly than its thin cortical walls because it contains
the rather large corpus striatum; consequently, the cerebral hemispheres become
C-shaped (Fig. 17-28).
FIGURE 17–28 Schematic diagrams of the medial surface of the developing
right cerebral hemisphere, showing the development of the lateral ventricle,
choroid fissure, and corpus striatum. A, At 13 weeks. B, At 21 weeks. C, At 32

weeks.
The growth and curvature of the hemispheres also affect the shape of the lateral
ventricles. They become roughly C-shaped cavities filled with CSF. The caudal
end of each cerebral hemisphere turns ventrally and then rostrally, forming the
temporal lobe; in so doing, it carries the lateral ventricle (forming its temporal
horn) and choroid fissure with it (Fig. 17-28). Here, the thin medial wall of the
hemisphere is invaginated along the choroid fissure by vascular pia mater to
form the choroid plexus of the temporal horn (Fig. 17-27B).
As the cerebral cortex differentiates, fibers passing to and from it pass through
the corpus striatum and divide it into caudate and lentiform nuclei. This fiber
pathway—the internal capsule (Fig. 17-27C)—becomes C shaped as the
hemisphere assumes this form. The caudate nucleus becomes elongated and C
shaped, conforming to the outline of the lateral ventricle (Fig. 17-28). Its pear-
shaped head and elongated body lie in the floor of the frontal horn and body of
the lateral ventricle, whereas its tail makes a U-shaped turn to gain the roof of
the temporal or inferior horn.
Cerebral Commissures
As the cerebral cortex develops, groups of nerve fibers—commissures—connect
corresponding areas of the cerebral hemispheres with one another (Fig. 17-27A).
The most important of these commissures cross in the lamina terminalis, the
rostral (anterior) end of the forebrain. This lamina extends from the roof plate of
the diencephalon to the optic chiasm (decussation or crossing of the fibers of the
optic nerve). This lamina is the natural pathway from one hemisphere to the
other.
The first commissures to form, the anterior commissure and hippocampal
commissure, are small fiber bundles that connect phylogenetically older parts of
the brain. The anterior commissure connects the olfactory bulb and related
areas of one hemisphere with those of the opposite side. The hippocampal
commissure connects the hippocampal formations.
The largest cerebral commissure is the corpus callosum (Figs. 17-27A and 17-
28A), connecting neocortical areas. The corpus callosum initially lies in the
lamina terminalis, but fibers are added to it as the cortex enlarges; as a result, it
gradually extends beyond the lamina terminalis. The rest of the lamina

terminalis lies between the corpus callosum and the fornix. It becomes stretched
to form the thin septum pellucidum, a thin plate of brain tissue.
At birth, the corpus callosum extends over the roof of the diencephalon. The
optic chiasm, which develops in the ventral part of the lamina terminalis (Fig.
17-27A), consists of fibers from the medial halves of the retinae, which cross to
join the optic tract of the opposite side.
The walls of the developing cerebral hemispheres initially show the three typical
zones of the neural tube (ventricular, intermediate, and marginal); later a fourth
one, the subventricular zone, appears. Cells of the intermediate zone migrate into
the marginal zone and give rise to the cortical layers. The gray matter is thus
located peripherally, and axons from its cell bodies pass centrally to form the
large volume of white matter—the medullary center.
Initially, the surface of the cerebral hemispheres is smooth (Fig. 17-29A);
however, as growth proceeds, sulci (grooves between the gyri) and gyri (tortuous
convolutions) develop (Figs. 17-29B and C). The gyri are caused by infolding of
the cerebral cortex. The sulci and gyri permit a considerable increase in the
surface area of the cerebral cortex without requiring an extensive increase in the
size of the neurocranium (Fig. 17-30B and C). As each cerebral hemisphere
grows, the cortex covering the external surface of the corpus striatum grows
relatively slowly and is soon overgrown (Fig. 17-29D). This buried cortex,
hidden from view in the depths of the lateral sulcus of the cerebral hemisphere
(Fig. 17-30), is the insula (island).


FIGURE 17–29 Sketches of lateral views of the left cerebral hemisphere,
diencephalon, and brainstem, showing successive stages in the development of
the sulci and gyri in the cerebral cortex. Note the gradual narrowing of the lateral
sulcus and burying of the insula (island), an area of cerebral cortex that is
concealed from surface view. Note that the surface of the cerebral hemispheres
grows rapidly during the fetal period, forming many gyri (convolutions), which
are separated by many sulci (grooves). A, At 14 weeks. B, At 26 weeks. C, At
30 weeks. D, At 38 weeks. E, Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of a pregnant
woman showing a mature fetus. Observe the brain and spinal cord. Inset, The
smooth lateral (top) and medial (bottom) surfaces of a human fetal brain (14
weeks).
(Inset, Courtesy of Dr. Marc Del Bigio, Department of Pathology
[Neuropathology], University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. E,
Courtesy of Dr. Stuart C. Morrison, Division of Radiology [Pediatric
Radiology], The Children’s Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio.)

FIGURE 17–30 A, Lateral view of the brain of a stillborn fetus (25 weeks). B,
The medial (top) and lateral (bottom) surfaces of the fetal brain (week 25). C,
The lateral (top) and medial (bottom) surfaces of the fetal brain (week 38). Note
that as the brain enlarges, the gyral pattern of the cerebral hemispheres becomes
more complex; compare with Figure 17-29.
(A, From Nishimura H, Semba R, Tanimura T, Tanaka O: Prenatal Development
of the Human with Special Reference to Craniofacial Structures: An Atlas. U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, 1977. B and C, Courtesy of Dr. Marc Del Bigio,
Department of Pathology [Neuropathology], University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.)

Birth Defects of Brain
Because of the complexity of its embryologic history, abnormal development of
the brain is common (approximately 3 per 1000 births). Most major birth
defects, such as meroencephaly and meningoencephalocele, result from
defective closure of the rostral neuropore (NTD) during the fourth week (Fig.
17-31C) and involve the overlying tissues (meninges and calvaria). The factors
causing NTD are genetic, nutritional, and/or environmental in nature. Birth
defects of the brain can be caused by alterations in the morphogenesis or
histogenesis of the nervous tissue, or can result from developmental failures
occurring in associated structures (notochord, somites, mesenchyme, and
cranium).
FIGURE 17–31 Schematic drawings illustrating encephalocele (cranium
bifidum) and various types of herniation of the brain and/or meninges. A, Sketch
of the head of a newborn infant with a large protrusion from the occipital region
of the cranium. The upper red circle indicates a cranial defect at the posterior
fontanelle (membranous interval between cranial bones). The lower red circle
indicates a cranial defect near the foramen magnum. B, Meningocele consisting

of a protrusion of the cranial meninges that is filled with cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF). C, Meningoencephalocele consisting of a protrusion of part of the
cerebellum that is covered by meninges and skin. D,
Meningohydroencephalocele consisting of a protrusion of part of the occipital
lobe that contains part of the posterior horn of a lateral ventricle.
Abnormal histogenesis of the cerebral cortex can result in seizures (Fig. 17-
32) and various types of mental deficiency. Subnormal intellectual development
may result from exposure of the embryo/fetus during the 8-to 16-week period to
certain viruses and high levels of radiation (see Chapter 20). Prenatal factors
(e.g., risk factors include maternal infection or thyroid disorder, Rh factor
incompatibility, some hereditary and genetic conditions) result in the majority of
cases of cerebral palsy; however, this central motor deficit may result from
events during birth.
 

FIGURE 17–32 A, Focal heterotopic cerebral cortex. Magnetic resonance image
of a 19-year-old woman with seizures, showing a focal heterotopic cortex of the
right parietal lobe, indenting the right lateral ventricle; note the lack of organized
cortex at the overlying surface of the brain. Heterotopic cortex is the result of an
arrest of centrifugal migration of neuroblasts along the radial processes of glial
cells. B, A coronal section of an adult brain with periventricular heterotopia
(arrow) in the parietal cerebrum. The lobulated gray matter structures along the
ventricle represent cells that failed to migrate but nevertheless differentiated into
neurons.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Gerald Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, North
Dakota. B, Courtesy of Dr. Marc R. Del Bigio, Department of Pathology
[Neuropathology], University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Encephalocele
Encephalocele is a herniation of intracranial contents through a defect in the
cranium (cranium bifidum). Encephaloceles are most common in the occipital
region (Figs. 17-31A to D, 17-33, and 17-34). The hernia may contain meninges
(menigocele), meninges and part of the brain (meningoencephalocele), or
meninges, part of the brain, and part of the ventricular system
(meningohydroencephalocele). Encephalocele occurs approximately once in
every 2000 births.

FIGURE 17–33 An infant with a large meningoencephalocele in the occipital
area.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 17–34 Magnetic resonance images (MRIs) of a 1-day-old infant,
showing a menigocele. A, Sagittal MRI taken so that the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) is bright. The image is blurred because of movement of the infant. B,
Axial image located at the cranial defect near the foramen magnum and taken so
that CSF appears dark.
(Compare with Figure 17-31C.) (Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health
System, Grand Forks, North Dakota.)
Meroencephaly
Meroencephaly (anencephaly, an inappropriate term) is a severe defect of the
calvaria and brain that results from failure of the rostral neuropore to close
during the fourth week. As a result, the forebrain, midbrain, most of the
hindbrain and calvaria are absent (Figs. 17-13, 17-17, and 17-35). Most of the
embryo’s brain is exposed or extruding from the cranium—exencephaly.
Because of the abnormal structure and vascularization of the embryonic
exencephalic brain, the nervous tissue undergoes degeneration. The remains of
the brain appear as a spongy, vascular mass consisting mostly of hindbrain
structures.

 
FIGURE 17–35 A, Sonogram of a normal fetus at 12 weeks (left) and a fetus at
14 weeks, showing acrania and meroencephaly (right). B, Magnetic resonance
image (MRI) of diamniotic-monochorionic twins, one with meroencephaly. Note
the absent calvaria (white arrow) of the abnormal twin and the amnion of the
normal twin (black arrow).
(A, From Pooh RK, Pooh KH: Transvaginal 3D and Doppler ultrasonography of
the fetal brain. Semin Perinatol 25:38, 2001. B, Courtesy of Deborah Levine,

M.D., director, Obstetric and Gynecologic Ultrasound, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.)
Meroencephaly is a common lethal defect, occurring at least once in every 1000
births. It is two to four times more common in females than in males and it is
always associated with acrania (complete or partial absence of the
neurocranium). It may be associated with rachischisis when defective neural
tube closure is extensive (Figs. 17-13 and 17-35). Meroencephaly is the most
common serious defect seen in stillborn fetuses. Infants with this severe NTD
may survive after birth, but only for a short period. Meroencephaly can be easily
diagnosed by ultrasonography and MRI (Fig. 17-35), fetoscopy, and radiography
because extensive parts of the brain and calvaria are absent.
Meroencephaly usually has a multifactorial mode of inheritance. An excess of
amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios) is often associated with meroencephaly,
possibly because the fetus lacks the neural control for swallowing amniotic fluid;
thus, the fluid does not pass into the intestines for absorption and subsequent
transfer to the placenta for disposal.
Microcephaly
Microcephaly is a neurodevelopmental disorder. The calvaria and brain are
small, but the face is normal size (Fig. 17-36). These infants are grossly mentally
deficient because the brain is underdeveloped. Microcephaly is the result of a
reduction in brain growth. Inadequate pressure from the growing brain leads to
the small size of the neurocranium. In the United States, about 25,000 infants are
diagnosed annually.


FIGURE 17–36 An infant with microcephaly showing the typical normal-sized
face and small neurocranium. Usually this defect is associated with mental
deficiency.
(Courtesy of A.E. Chudley, M.D., Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Some cases appear to be genetic in origin. In autosomal recessive primary
microcephaly, embryonic brain growth is reduced without affecting the structure
of the brain. Exposure to large amounts of ionizing radiation, infectious agents
(e.g., cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, and Toxoplasma gondii [see Chapter 20]),
and certain drugs (maternal alcohol abuse) during the fetal period are
contributing factors in some cases.
Microcephaly can be detected in utero by ultrasound scans carried out over the
period of gestation. A small head may result from premature synostosis
(osseous union) of all the cranial sutures (see Chapter 14); however, the
neurocranium is thin with exaggerated convolutional markings.
Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
In this condition, there is a complete or partial absence of the corpus callosum,
the main neocortical commissure of the cerebral hemispheres (Fig. 17-37A and
B). The condition may be asymptomatic, but seizures and mental deficiency are
common. Agenesis of the corpus callosum is associated with more than 50
different human congenital syndromes.

FIGURE 17–37 A, Sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the brain of a 22-
year-old normal functioning male. There is complete absence of the corpus
callosum. B, A coronal slice through a child’s brain showing agenesis of the
corpus callosum, which would normally cross the midline to connect the two
cerebral hemispheres. Note the thalamus (T) and the downward displacement of
the cingulum into the lateral and third ventricles (arrow).

(A, Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, North
Dakota. B, Courtesy of Dr. Marc R. Del Bigio, Department of Pathology
[Neuropathology], University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Hydrocephalus
Significant enlargement of the head results from an imbalance between the
production and absorption of CSF; as a result, there is an excess of CSF in the
ventricular system of the brain (Fig. 17-38). Hydrocephalus results from
impaired circulation and absorption of CSF and, in rare cases, from increased
production of CSF by a choroid plexus adenoma (benign tumor). Impaired
circulation of CSF often results from congenital aqueductal stenosis (Figs. 17-
38 and 17-39). The cerebral aqueduct is narrow or consists of several minute
channels. In a few cases, aqueductal stenosis is transmitted by an X-linked
recessive trait, but most cases appear to result from a fetal viral infection (e.g.,
cytomegalovirus or Toxoplasma gondii [see Chapter 20]), or prematurity
associated with intraventricular hemorrhage. Blood in the subarachnoid space
may cause obliteration of the cisterns or arachnoid villi.

FIGURE 17–38 A, An infant with hydrocephalus and bilateral cleft palate. B and
C, The brain of a 10-year-old child who had developed hydrocephalus in utero
as a result of aqueductal stenosis. The thin white matter is well myelinated. A
shunt tube meant to treat the hydrocephalus lies in the frontal horn of the
ventricle.
(Courtesy of Dr. Marc R. Del Bigio, Department of Pathology [Neuropathology],
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)


FIGURE 17–39 MRI demonstrating congenital stenosis of the cerebral aqueduct.
This sagittal magnetic resonance image shows large lateral and third ventricles.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) appears bright in this image. There is also a
marked flow void within the cerebral aqueduct.
(From Dr. Frank Gaillard, Radiopaedia.org, with permission.)
Blockage of CSF circulation results in dilation of the ventricles proximal to the
obstruction, internal accumulation of CSF, and pressure on the cerebral
hemispheres (Fig. 17-39). This squeezes the brain between the ventricular fluid
and the neurocranium. In infants, the internal pressure results in an accelerated
rate of expansion of the brain and neurocranium because most of the fibrous
sutures are not fused. Hydrocephalus usually refers to obstructive or
noncommunicating hydrocephalus, in which all or part of the ventricular
system is enlarged. All ventricles are enlarged if the apertures of the fourth
ventricle or the subarachnoid spaces are blocked, whereas the lateral and third
ventricles are dilated when only the cerebral aqueduct is obstructed (Fig. 17-
39). Obstruction of an interventricular foramen can produce dilation of one
ventricle.
Hydrocephalus resulting from obliteration of the subarachnoid cisterns or
malfunction of the arachnoid villi is called nonobstructive or communicating
hydrocephalus. Although hydrocephalus may be associated with spina bifida
cystica, enlargement of the head may not be obvious at birth. Hydrocephalus
often produces thinning of the bones of the calvaria, prominence of the forehead,
atrophy of the cerebral cortex and white matter (Fig. 17-38B and C ), and
compression of the basal ganglia and diencephalon.
Holoprosencephaly
Holoprosencephalopathy (HPS) results from incomplete separation of the
cerebral hemispheres and most are associated with facial abnormalities. Genetic
and environmental factors have been implicated in this severe and relatively
common (1 : 250 fetuses and 1 : 15,000 live births) developmental defect (Fig.
17-40). Maternal diabetes and teratogens, such as high doses of alcohol, can
destroy embryonic cells in the median plane of the embryonic disc during the
third week, producing a wide range of birth defects resulting from defective

formation of the forebrain. In alobar holoprosencephaly, the forebrain is small
and the lateral ventricles often merge to form one large ventricle.
 
FIGURE 17–40 A frontal view of an intact (A) and coronally sectioned (B) fetal
brain 21 weeks with holoprosencephaly. This defect results from failure of
cleavage of the prosencephalon (rostral neural tube) into right and left cerebral
hemispheres, telencephalon and diencephalon, and into olfactory bulbs and optic
tracts.
(Courtesy of Dr. Marc R. Del Bigio, Department of Pathology [Neuropathology],
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada).
Defects in forebrain development often cause facial anomalies resulting from a
reduction in tissue in the frontonasal prominence (see Chapter 9).
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is often indicated when the eyes are abnormally
close together (hypotelorism). Molecular studies have led to the identification of
several holoprosencephaly-related genes, including sonic hedgehog (Shh).
Hydranencephaly
In this rare anomaly (Fig. 17-41), the cerebral hemispheres are absent or
represented by membranous sacs with remnants of the cerebral cortex dispersed
over the membranes. The brainstem (midbrain, pons, and medulla) is relatively
intact. These infants generally appear normal at birth; however, the head grows
excessively after birth because of the accumulation of CSF. A
ventriculoperitoneal shunt is usually made to prevent further enlargement of
the neurocranium. Mental development fails to occur and there is little or no
cognitive development. The cause of this unusual, severe anomaly is uncertain;

however, there is evidence that it may be the result of an early obstruction of
blood flow to the areas supplied by the internal carotid arteries.
FIGURE 17–41 MRI of a fetus with massive hydrocephalus or hydrocephaly (*),
showing excessive accumulation of CSF. Note the greatly reduced cerebral and
displaced cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum.
(Courtesy of Dr. Stuart C. Morrison, Division of Radiology [Pediatric
Radiology], The Children’s Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio.)
Arnold-Chiari Malformation
This is the most common birth defect involving the cerebellum (Fig. 17-42). It is
a tongue-like projection of the medulla and inferior displacement of the vermis
of the cerebellum through the foramen magnum into the cervical canal. The
defect results in a type of communicating hydrocephalus in which there is
interference with the absorption of CSF; as a result, the entire ventricular system

is distended. The Arnold-Chiari malformation occurs once in every 1000
births and is always associated with spina bifida with meningomyelocele and
hydrocephaly. The cause of the Arnold-Chiari malformation is uncertain;
however, the posterior cranial fossa is abnormally small in these infants.
 
FIGURE 17–42 A, An Arnold-Chiari type II malformation in a fetus at 23
weeks. In situ exposure of the hindbrain reveals cerebellar tissue (arrow) well

below the foramen magnum. B, MRI of a child with Arnold-Chiari type I
malformation. Note the cerebellar tonsils lie inferior to the foramen magnum
(red arrow).
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Marc R. Del Bigio, Department of Pathology
[Neuropathology], University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. B,
Courtesy of Dr. R. Shane Tubbs and Dr. W. Jerry Oakes, Children’s Hospital
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.)
Mental Deficiency
Congenital impairment of intelligence may result from various genetically
determined conditions (e.g., Down syndrome). Mental deficiency (retardation)
may also result from the action of a mutant gene or from a chromosomal
abnormality (e.g., an extra chromosome 13, 17, or 21). Chromosomal
abnormalities and mental deficiency are discussed in Chapter 20. Approximately
25% of cases have a demonstrable cause.
Maternal alcohol abuse is a common identifiable cause of mental deficiency. The
8th to 16th week period of human development is also the period of greatest
sensitivity for fetal brain damage resulting from large doses of radiation. By the
end of the 16th week, most neuronal proliferation and cell migration to the
cerebral cortex are completed.
Cell depletion of sufficient degree in the cerebral cortex results in severe mental
deficiency. Disorders of protein, carbohydrate, or fat metabolism may also cause
mental deficiency. Maternal and fetal infections (e.g., syphilis, rubella virus,
toxoplasmosis, and cytomegalovirus) and cretinism are commonly associated
with mental deficiency. Deficient mental development throughout the postnatal
growth period can result from birth injuries, toxins (e.g., lead), cerebral
infections (e.g., meningitis), cerebral trauma from head injuries, and poisoning.

Development of Peripheral Nervous
System
The Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) consists of cranial, spinal, and visceral
nerves, and cranial, spinal, and autonomic ganglia. The PNS develops from
various sources, mostly from the neural crest. All sensory cells (somatic and
visceral) of the PNS are derived from neural crest cells. The cell bodies of these
sensory cells are located outside the CNS. With the exception of the cells in the
spiral ganglion of the cochlea and the vestibular ganglion of CN VIII
(vestibulocochlear nerve), all peripheral sensory cells are at first bipolar. Later,
the two processes unite to form a single process with peripheral and central
components resulting in a unipolar type of neuron (Fig. 17-9D). The peripheral
process terminates in a sensory ending, whereas the central process enters the
spinal cord or brain (Fig. 17-8). The sensory cells in the ganglion of CN VIII
remain bipolar.
The cell body of each afferent neuron is closely invested by a capsule of
modified Schwann cells—satellite cells (Fig. 17-8), which are derived from
neural crest cells. This capsule is continuous with the neurolemma (sheath of
Schwann) that surrounds the axons of afferent neurons. External to the satellite
cells is a layer of connective tissue that is continuous with the endoneurial sheath
of the nerve fibers. This connective tissue and the endoneurial sheath are derived
from mesenchyme.
Neural crest cells in the developing brain migrate to form sensory ganglia only
in relation to the trigeminal (CN V), facial (CN VII), vestibulocochlear (CN
VIII), glossopharyngeal (CN IX), and vagus (CN X) nerves. Neural crest cells
also differentiate into multipolar neurons of the autonomic ganglia (Fig. 17-8),
including ganglia of the sympathetic trunks that lie along the sides of the
vertebral bodies; collateral, or prevertebral, ganglia in plexuses of the thorax and
abdomen (e.g., cardiac, celiac, and mesenteric plexuses); and parasympathetic,
or terminal, ganglia in or near the viscera (e.g., submucosal or Meissner plexus).
Cells of the paraganglia—chromaffin cells—are also derived from the neural
crest The term paraganglia includes several widely scattered groups of cells that
are similar in many ways to medullary cells of the suprarenal glands. The cell

groups largely lie retroperitoneally, often in association with sympathetic
ganglia. The carotid and aortic bodies also have small islands of chromaffin cells
associated with them. These widely scattered groups of cells constitute the
chromaffin system. Neural crest cells also give rise to melanoblasts (precursors
of melanocytes) and cells of the medulla of the suprarenal gland.

Spinal Nerves
Motor nerve fibers arising from the spinal cord begin to appear at the end of the
fourth week (Figs. 17-4, 17-7, and 17-8). The nerve fibers arise from cells in the
basal plates of the developing spinal cord and emerge as a continuous series of
rootlets along its ventrolateral surface. The fibers destined for a particular
developing muscle group become arranged in a bundle, forming a ventral nerve
root. The nerve fibers of the dorsal nerve root are formed by axons derived
from neural crest cells that migrate to the dorsolateral aspect of the spinal cord,
where they differentiate into the cells of the spinal ganglion (Figs. 17-8 and 17-
9).
The central processes of neurons in the spinal ganglion form a single bundle that
grows into the spinal cord, opposite the apex of the dorsal horn of gray matter
(Fig. 17-5B and C). The distal processes of spinal ganglion cells grow toward the
ventral nerve root and eventually join it to form a spinal nerve.
Immediately after being formed, a mixed spinal nerve divides into dorsal and
ventral primary rami (Latin, branches). The dorsal primary ramus, the smaller
division, innervates the dorsal axial musculature (Fig. 15-1), vertebrae, posterior
intervertebral joints, and part of the skin of the back. The ventral primary
ramus, the major division of each spinal nerve, contributes to the innervation of
the limbs and ventrolateral parts of the body wall. The major nerve plexuses
(cervical, brachial, and lumbosacral) are formed by ventral primary rami.
As the limb buds develop, the nerves from the spinal cord segments opposite to
the bud elongate and grow into the limb. The nerve fibers are distributed to its
muscles, which differentiate from myogenic cells that originate from the somites
(see Chapter 15).
The skin of the developing limbs is also innervated in a segmental manner. Early
in development, successive ventral primary rami are joined by connecting loops
of nerve fibers, especially those supplying the limbs (e.g., the brachial plexus).
The dorsal division of the trunks of these plexuses supplies the extensor muscles
and the extensor surface of the limbs; the ventral divisions of the trunks supply
the flexor muscles and the flexor surface. The dermatomes and cutaneous
innervation of the limbs are described in Chapter 16.

Cranial Nerves
Twelve pairs of cranial nerves form during the fifth and sixth weeks. They are
classified into three groups, according to their embryologic origins.
Somatic Efferent Cranial Nerves
The trochlear (CN IV), abducent (CN VI), hypoglossal (CN XII), and the greater
part of the oculomotor (CN III) nerves are homologous with the ventral roots of
spinal nerves (Fig. 17-43). The cells of origin of these nerves are located in the
somatic efferent column (derived from the basal plates) of the brainstem. Their
axons are distributed to muscles derived from the head myotomes (preotic and
occipital; Fig. 15-4).
FIGURE 17–43 A, Schematic drawing of a 5-week embryo showing distribution
of most of the cranial nerves, especially those supplying the pharyngeal arches.
B, Schematic drawing of the head and neck of an adult showing the general
distribution of most of the cranial nerves.
The hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) resembles a spinal nerve more than do the

other somatic efferent CNs. CN XII develops by the fusion of the ventral root
fibers of three or four occipital nerves (Fig. 17-43A). Sensory roots,
corresponding to the dorsal roots of spinal nerves, are absent. The somatic motor
fibers originate from the hypoglossal nucleus, consisting of motor cells
resembling those of the ventral horn of the spinal cord. These fibers leave the
ventrolateral wall of the medulla in several groups, the hypoglossal nerve roots,
which converge to form the common trunk of CN XII (Fig. 17-43B). They grow
rostrally and eventually innervate the muscles of the tongue, which are thought
to be derived from occipital myotomes (see Fig. 15-4). With development of the
neck, the hypoglossal nerve comes to lie at a progressively higher level.
The abducent nerve (CN VI) arises from nerve cells in the basal plates of the
metencephalon. It passes from its ventral surface to the posterior of the three
preotic myotomes from which the lateral rectus muscle of the eye is thought to
originate.
The trochlear nerve (CN IV) arises from nerve cells in the somatic efferent
column in the posterior part of the midbrain. Although a motor nerve, it emerges
from the brainstem dorsally and passes ventrally to supply the superior oblique
muscle of the eye.
The oculomotor nerve (CN III) supplies most muscles of the eye (i.e., the
superior, inferior, and medial recti and inferior oblique muscles), which are
derived from the first preotic myotomes.
Nerves of Pharyngeal Arches
CNs V, VII, IX, and X supply the embryonic pharyngeal arches; thus, the
structures that develop from these arches are innervated by these CNs (Fig. 17-
43A, Table 9-1).
The trigeminal nerve (CN V) is the nerve of the first pharyngeal arch, but it has
an ophthalmic division that is not a pharyngeal arch component. CN V is chiefly
sensory and is the principal sensory nerve for the head. The large trigeminal
ganglion lies beside the rostral end of the pons, and its cells are derived from the
most anterior part of the neural crest. The central processes of cells in this
ganglion form the large sensory root of CN V, which enters the lateral portion of
the pons. The peripheral processes of cells in this ganglion separate into three
large divisions (ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular nerves). Their sensory

fibers supply the skin of the face as well as the lining of the mouth and nose
(Fig. 9-7).
The motor fibers of CN V arise from cells in the most anterior part of the special
visceral efferent column in the metencephalon. The motor nucleus of CN V lies
at the mid-level of the pons. The fibers leave the pons at the site of the entering
sensory fibers and pass to the muscles of mastication and to other muscles that
develop in the mandibular prominence of the first pharyngeal arch (Table 9-1).
The mesencephalic nucleus of CN V differentiates from cells in the midbrain
that extend rostrally from the metencephalon.
The facial nerve (CN VII) is the nerve of the second pharyngeal arch. It
consists mostly of motor fibers that arise principally from a nuclear group in the
special visceral efferent column in the caudal part of the pons. These fibers are
distributed to the muscles of facial expression and to other muscles that develop
in the mesenchyme of the second pharyngeal arch (Table 9-1). The small general
visceral efferent component of CN VII terminates in the peripheral autonomic
ganglia of the head. The sensory fibers of CN VII arise from the cells of the
geniculate ganglion. The central processes of these cells enter the pons, and the
peripheral processes pass to the greater superficial petrosal nerve and, via the
chorda tympani nerve, to the taste buds in the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) is the nerve of the third pharyngeal arch.
Its motor fibers arise from the special and, to a lesser extent, general visceral
efferent columns of the anterior part of the myelencephalon. CN IX forms from
several rootlets that arise from the medulla just caudal to the developing internal
ear. All fibers from the special visceral efferent column are distributed to the
stylopharyngeus muscle, which is derived from mesenchyme in the third
pharyngeal arch (Table 9-1). The general efferent fibers are distributed to the otic
ganglion, from which postganglionic fibers pass to the parotid and posterior
lingual glands. The sensory fibers of CN IX are distributed as general sensory
and special visceral afferent fibers (taste fibers) to the posterior part of the
tongue.
The vagus nerve (CN X) is formed by fusion of the nerves of the fourth and
sixth pharyngeal arches (Table 9-1). It has large visceral efferent and visceral
afferent components that are distributed to the heart, foregut and its derivatives,
and to a large part of the midgut. The nerve of the fourth pharyngeal arch
becomes the superior laryngeal nerve, which supplies the cricothyroid muscle

and constrictor muscles of the pharynx. The nerve of the sixth pharyngeal arch
becomes the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which supplies various laryngeal
muscles.
The spinal accessory nerve (CN XI) emerges as a series of rootlets from the
cranial five or six cervical segments of the spinal cord (Fig. 17-43). The fibers of
the traditional cranial root are now considered to be part of CN X. The fibers of
the CN X supply the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles.
Special Sensory Nerves
The olfactory nerve (CN I) arises from the olfactory organ. The olfactory
receptor neurons differentiate from cells in the epithelial lining of the
primordial nasal sac. The central processes of the bipolar olfactory neurons are
collected into bundles to form approximately 20 olfactory nerves around which
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone develops. These unmyelinated nerve
fibers end in the olfactory bulb.
The optic nerve (CN II) is formed by more than a million nerve fibers that grow
into the brain from neuroblasts in the primordial retina. Because the retina
develops from the evaginated wall of the forebrain, the optic nerve actually
represents a fiber tract of the brain. Development of the optic nerve is described
in Chapter 18.
The vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) consists of two kinds of sensory fiber
in two bundles; these fibers are known as the vestibular and cochlear nerves. The
vestibular nerve originates in the semicircular ducts, and the cochlear nerve
proceeds from the cochlear duct, in which the spiral organ (of Corti) develops.
The bipolar neurons of the vestibular nerve have their cell bodies in the
vestibular ganglion. The central processes of these cells terminate in the
vestibular nuclei in the floor of the fourth ventricle. The bipolar neurons of the
cochlear nerve have their cell bodies in the spiral ganglion. The central
processes of these cells end in the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei in the
medulla.

 Development of Autonomic Nervous
System
Functionally, the ANS can be divided into sympathetic (thoracolumbar) and
parasympathetic (craniosacral) parts.

Sympathetic Nervous System
During the fifth week, neural crest cells in the thoracic region migrate along
each side of the spinal cord, where they form paired cellular masses (ganglia)
dorsolateral to the aorta (Fig. 17-8). All these segmentally arranged sympathetic
ganglia are connected in a bilateral chain by longitudinal nerve fibers. These
ganglionated cords—sympathetic trunks—are located on each side of the
vertebral bodies. Some neural crest cells migrate ventral to the aorta and form
neurons in the preaortic ganglia, such as the celiac and mesenteric ganglia (Fig.
17-8). Other neural crest cells migrate to the area of the heart, lungs, and
gastrointestinal tract, where they form terminal ganglia in sympathetic organ
plexuses, located near or within these organs.
After the sympathetic trunks have formed, axons of sympathetic neurons, located
in the intermediolateral cell column (lateral horn) of the thoracolumbar
segments of the spinal cord, pass through the ventral root of a spinal nerve and a
white ramus communicans (communicating branch) to a paravertebral
ganglion (Fig. 17-8). Here they may synapse with neurons or ascend or descend
in the sympathetic trunk to synapse at other levels. Other presynaptic fibers pass
through the paravertebral ganglia without synapsing, forming splanchnic
nerves to the viscera. The postsynaptic fibers course through a gray
communicating branch (gray ramus communicans), passing from a
sympathetic ganglion into a spinal nerve; hence, the sympathetic trunks are
composed of ascending and descending fibers. Bone morphogenic protein
(BMP) signaling regulates the development of the sympathetic system through
Smad 4 pathways.

Parasympathetic Nervous System
The presynaptic parasympathetic fibers arise from neurons in nuclei of the
brainstem and in the sacral region of the spinal cord. The fibers from the
brainstem leave through the oculomotor (CN III), facial (CN VII),
glossopharyngeal (CN IX), and vagus (CN X) nerves. The postsynaptic
neurons are located in peripheral ganglia or in plexuses near or within the
structure being innervated (e.g., the pupil of the eye and salivary glands).

Summary of Nervous System
• The central nervous system (CNS) develops from a dorsal thickening of
ectoderm—the neural plate, which appears around the middle of the third week.
The neural plate is induced by the underlying notochord and paraxial
mesenchyme.
• The neural plate enfolds to form a neural groove that has neural folds on each
side. When the neural folds start to fuse to form the neural tube beginning
during the fourth week, some neuroectodermal cells are not included in it, but
remain between the neural tube and surface ectoderm as the neural crest. As the
neural folds are fusing to form the neural tube, its ends are open. The openings
at each end, the rostral and caudal neuropores, communicate with the overlying
amniotic cavity. Closure of the rostral neuropore occurs by the 25th day and the
caudal neuropore 2 days later.
• The cranial end of the neural tube forms the brain, the primordia of which are
the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The forebrain gives rise to the cerebral
hemispheres and diencephalon. The midbrain becomes the adult midbrain, and
the hindbrain gives rise to the pons, cerebellum, and medulla. The remainder
of the neural tube becomes the spinal cord.
• The neural canal, the lumen of the neural tube, becomes the ventricles of the
brain and the central canal of the medulla and spinal cord. The walls of the
neural tube thicken by proliferation of its neuroepithelial cells. These cells give
rise to all nerve and macroglial cells in the CNS. The microglia differentiate
from mesenchymal cells that enter the CNS with the blood vessels.
• The pituitary gland develops from two completely different parts (Table 17-
1): an ectodermal upgrowth from the stomodeum, the hypophysial
diverticulum that forms the adenohypophysis, and a neuroectodermal
downgrowth from the diencephalon, the neurohypophysial diverticulum that
forms the neurohypophysis.
• Cells in the cranial, spinal, and autonomic ganglia are derived from neural
crest cells that originate in the neural crest. Schwann cells, which myelinate the
axons external to the spinal cord, also arise from neural crest cells. Similarly,
most of the ANS and all chromaffin tissue, including the suprarenal medulla,
develop from neural crest cells.
• Birth defects of the CNS are common (approximately 3 per 1000 births).
Neural tube defects (NTDs) in the closure of the neural tube account for most

severe defects (e.g., spinal bifida cystica). Some birth defects are caused by
genetic factors (e.g., numerical chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 21);
others result from environmental factors such as infectious agents, drugs, and
metabolic disease. Other CNS defects are caused by a combination of genetic
and environmental factors (multifactorial inheritance).
• Gross birth defects (e.g., meroencephaly) are incompatible with life. Severe
birth defects (e.g., spina bifida with meningomyelocele) cause functional
disability (e.g., muscle paralysis in the lower limbs).
• There are two main types of hydrocephalus: obstructive or
noncommunicating hydrocephalus (blockage of CSF flow in the ventricular
system), and nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus (blockage of
CSF flow in the subarachnoid space). In most cases, congenital hydrocephalus is
associated with spina bifida with meningomyelocele.
• Mental deficiency may result from chromosomal abnormalities occurring
during gametogenesis, metabolic disorders, maternal alcohol abuse, or infections
occurring during prenatal life.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 17–1
A pregnant woman developed polyhydramnios over the course of a few days
(acute polyhydramnios). After an ultrasound examination, a radiologist reported
that the fetus had acrania and meroencephaly.
• How soon can meroencephaly be detected by ultrasound scanning?
• Why is polyhydramnios associated with meroencephaly?
• What other techniques could be used to confirm the diagnosis of
meroencephaly?

Case 17–2
A male infant was born with a large lumbar meningomyelocele that was covered
with a thin membranous sac. Within a few days, the sac ulcerated and began to
leak. A marked neurologic deficit was detected inferior to the level of the sac.
• What is the embryologic basis of this defect?
• What is the basis of the neurologic deficit?
• What structures would likely be affected?

Case 17–3
An MRI scan of an infant with an enlarged head showed dilation of the lateral
and third ventricles.
• What is this condition called?
• Where would the blockage most likely be to produce this dilation of the
ventricles?
• Is this condition usually recognizable before birth?
• How do you think this condition might be treated surgically?

Case 17–4
An infant was born with an abnormally large head.
• Is an enlarged head in an infant synonymous with hydrocephalus?
• What condition is usually associated with an abnormally small head?
• Is growth of the cranium dependent on growth of the brain?
• What environmental factors are known to cause microencephaly?

Case 17–5
A radiologist reported that a child’s cerebral ventricles were dilated posteriorly
and that the lateral ventricles were widely separated by a dilated third ventricle.
Agenesis of the corpus callosum was diagnosed.
• What is the common symptom associated with agenesis of the corpus
callosum?
• Are some patients asymptomatic?
• What is the basis of the dilated third ventricle?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Amron D, Walsh CA. Genetic malformations of the human frontal lobe.
Epilepsia. 2010;51(suppl 1):13.
Barros CS, Nguyen T, Spencer KS, et al. β1 integrins are required for normal
CNS myelination and promote AKT-dependent myelin outgrowth. Development.
2009;136:2717.
Bekiesinska-Figatowska M, Herman-Sucharska I, Romaniuk-Doroszewska A, et
al. Brain development of the human fetus in magnetic resonance imaging. Med
Wieku Rozwoj. 2010;14:5.
Bell JE. The pathology of central nervous system defects in human fetuses of
different gestational ages. In: Persaud TVN, editor. Advances in the Study of
Birth Defects, Vol 7, Central Nervous System and Craniofacial Malformations.
New York: Alan R. Liss, 1982.
Biencowe H, Cousens S, Modell B, et al. Folic acid to reduce neonatal mortality
from neural tube disorders. Int J Epidemiol. 2010;39(Suppl 1):i110.
Cau E, Blader P. Notch activity in the nervous system: to switch or not switch.
Neural Dev. 2009;4:36.
Copp AJ, Greene ND. Genetics and development of neural tube defects. J

Pathol. 2010;220:217.
Cordero A, Mulinare J, Berry RJ, et al. CDC grand rounds: Additional
opportunities to prevent neural tube defects with folic acid fortification. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59:980.
Davis SW, Castinetti F, Carvalho LR, et al. Molecular mechanisms of pituitary
organogenesis: in search of novel regulatory genes. Mol Cell Endocrinol.
2010;323:4.
De Wals P, Tairou F, Van Allen MI, et al. Reduction in neural-tube defects after
folic acid fortification in Canada. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:135.
Diaz AL, Gleeson JG. The molecular and genetic mechanisms of neocortex
development. Clin Perinatol. 2009;36:503.
Evans OB, Hutchins JB. Development of the nervous system. In Haines DE,
editor: Fundamental Neuroscience, ed 3, New York: Churchill Livingstone,
2006.
Gressens P, Hüppi PS. Normal and abnormal brain development. In Martin RJ,
Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-Perinatal
Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Guillemont F, Molnar Z, Tarabykin V, et al. Molecular mechanisms of cortical
differentiation. Eur J Neurosci. 2006;23:857.
Haines DE. Neuroanatomy: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, and Systems, ed 8.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
Howard B, Chen Y, Zecevic N. Cortical progenitor cells in the developing
human telencephalon. Glia. 2006;53:57.
Johnston MV, Kinsman S. Congenital anomalies of the central nervous system.
In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
Liu W, Komiya Y, Mezzacappa C, et al. MIM regulates vertebrate neural tube
closure. Development. 2011;138:2035.

Lowery LA, Sive H. Totally tubular: the mystery behind function and origin of
the brain ventricular system. BioEssays. 2009;31:446.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Nakatsu T, Uwabe C, Shiota K. Neural tube closure in humans initiates at
multiple sites: Evidence from human embryos and implications for the
pathogenesis of neural tube defects. Anat Embryol. 2000;201:455.
Noden DM. Spatial integration among cells forming the cranial peripheral
neurons. J Neurobiol. 1993;24:248.
O’Rahilly R, Müller F. Embryonic Human Brain: An Atlas of Developmental
Stages, ed 2. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1999.
ten Donkelaar HT, Lammens M. Development of the human cerebellum and its
disorders. Clin Perinatol. 2009;36:513.
Thomaidou D, Politis PK, Matsas R. Neurogenesis in the central nervous
system: cell cycle progression/exit and differentiation of neuronal progenitors.
In: Giordano A, Galderisi U, editors. Cell Cycle Regulation and Differentiation
in Cardiovascular and Neural Systems. New York: Springer, 2010.

Chapter 18 Development of Eyes and Ears
Development of Eyes and Related Structures 429
   Development of Retina 431
   Development of Ciliary Body 435
   Development of Iris 435
   Development of Lens 437
   Development of Aqueous Chambers 438
   Development of Cornea 440
   Development of Choroid and Sclera 440
   Development of Eyelids 440
   Development of Lacrimal Glands 441
Development of Ears 441
   Development of Internal Ear 441
   Development of Middle Ear 443
   Development of External Ear 444
Summary of Development of Eyes 448
Summary of Development of Ears 448
Clinically Oriented Problems 448

Development of Eyes and Related
Structures
The eyes are derived from four sources:
• Neuroectoderm of the forebrain
• Surface ectoderm of the head
• Mesoderm between the above layers
• Neural crest cells
The neuroectoderm of the forebrain differentiates into the retina, the posterior
layers of the iris, and the optic nerve. The surface ectoderm forms the lens of
the eye and the corneal epithelium. The mesoderm between the neuroectoderm
and the surface ectoderm gives rise to the fibrous and vascular coats of the eye.
Neural crest cells migrate into the mesenchyme and differentiate into the
choroid, sclera, and corneal endothelium. Early eye development results from a
series of inductive signals.
Homeobox-containing genes, including the transcription regulator Pax6,
fibroblast growth factors, and other inducing factors play an important role in
the molecular development of the eye (see Chapter 21).
The first evidence of eye development is at 22 days when optic grooves (sulci)
appear in the neural folds at the cranial end of the embryo (Fig. 18-1A and B). As
the neural folds fuse to form the forebrain, the optic grooves evaginate
(protrude) from the future diencephalon to form hollow diverticula—optic
vesicles—that project from the wall of the forebrain into the adjacent
mesenchyme (Fig. 18-1C). The cavities of the optic vesicles are continuous with
the cavity of the forebrain. Formation of the optic vesicles is induced by the
mesenchyme adjacent to the developing brain.

FIGURE 18–1 Illustrations of the early stages of eye development. A, Dorsal
view of the cranial end of an embryo at approximately 22 days, showing the
optic grooves, the first indication of eye development. B, Transverse section of a
neural fold showing the optic groove in it. C, Schematic drawing of the forebrain
of an embryo at approximately 28 days, showing its covering layers of

mesenchyme and surface ectoderm. D, F, and H, Schematic sections of the
developing eye, illustrating successive stages in the development of the optic cup
and lens vesicle. E, Lateral view of the brain of an embryo at approximately 32
days, showing the external appearance of the optic cup. G, Transverse section of
the optic stalk, showing the retinal fissure and its contents. Note that the edges of
the retinal fissure are growing together, thereby completing the optic cup and
enclosing the central artery and vein of the retina in the optic stalk and cup.
As the optic vesicles grow, their distal ends expand and their connections with
the forebrain constrict to form hollow optic stalks (Fig. 18-1D). The vesicles
soon come in contact with the surface ectoderm. Concurrently, the surface
ectoderm adjacent to the vesicles thickens to form lens placodes, the primordia
of the lenses (Fig. 18-1C). Formation of placodes is induced by the optic
vesicles after the surface ectoderm has been conditioned by the underlying
mesenchyme. An inductive message passes from the vesicles, stimulating the
surface ectodermal cells to form the lens primordia. The lens placodes
invaginate as they sink deep to the surface ectoderm, forming lens pits (Figs. 18-
1D and 18-2). The edges of the pits approach each other and fuse to form
spherical lens vesicles (Figs. 18-1F and H), which gradually lose their
connection with the surface ectoderm.
FIGURE 18–2 Photomicrograph of a sagittal section of the eye of an embryo
(x200) at approximately 32 days. Observe the primordium of the lens
(invaginated lens placode), the walls of the optic cup (primordium of retina), and

the optic stalk (primordium of optic nerve).
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
As the lens vesicles are developing, the optic vesicles invaginate to form double-
walled optic cups, which consist of two layers that are connected to the
developing brain by the optic stalks (Figs. 18-1E and F and 18-2). The optic cup
becomes the retina and the optic stalk becomes the optic nerve. The lens and part
of the cornea develop from the ectoderm and mesoderm. The opening of each
optic cup is large at first, but the rim of the cup infolds around the lens (Fig. 18-
3A). By this time, the lens vesicles have lost their connection with the surface
ectoderm and have entered the cavities of the optic cups (Fig. 18-4). Linear
grooves—retinal fissures (optic fissures)—develop on the ventral surface of the
optic cups and along the optic stalks (Figs. 18-1E to H and 18-3A to D). The
center of the optic cup, where the retinal fissure is deepest, forms the optic disc,
where the neural retina is continuous with the optic stalk (Figs. 18-2 and18-3C
and D). The developing axons of the ganglion cells pass directly into the optic
stalk and convert it into the optic nerve. Myelination of nerve fibers (formation
of a sheath around the fibers) begins during the later part of fetal development
and during the first postnatal year.

FIGURE 18–3 Illustrations of the closure of the retinal fissure and formation of
the optic nerve. A, C, and E, Views of the inferior surface of the optic cup and
stalk, showing progressive stages in the closure of the retinal fissure. C1,
Schematic sketch of a longitudinal section of a part of the optic cup and stalk,
showing the optic disc and axons of ganglion cells of the retina growing through
the optic stalk to the brain. B, D, and F, Transverse sections of the optic stalk
showing successive stages in closure of the retinal fissure and formation of the

optic nerve. Note that the lumen of the optic stalk is gradually obliterated as
axons of ganglion cells accumulate in the inner layer of the optic stalk as the
optic nerve forms.
FIGURE 18–4 Photomicrograph of a sagittal section of the eye of an embryo
(x100) at approximately 44 days. Observe that it is the posterior wall of the lens
vesicle that forms the lens fibers. The anterior wall does not change appreciably
as it becomes the anterior lens epithelium.
(From Nishimura H [ed]: Atlas of Human Prenatal Histology. Tokyo, Igaku-
Shoin, 1983.)
The retinal fissures contain vascular mesenchyme from which hyaloid blood
vessels develop (Fig. 18-3B and C). The hyaloid artery, a branch of the
ophthalmic artery, supplies the inner layer of the optic cup, the lens vesicle, and
the mesenchyme in the cavity of the optic cup (Figs. 18-1H and 18-3C). The
hyaloid vein returns blood from these structures. As the edges of the retinal
fissure fuse, the hyaloid vessels are enclosed within the primordial optic nerve
(Fig. 18-3C to F). Distal parts of the hyaloid vessels eventually degenerate, but
proximal parts persist as the central artery and vein of retina (see Fig. 18-9D).

Development of Retina
The retina develops from the walls of the optic cup, an outgrowth of the
forebrain (Figs. 18-1C to F and 18-2).The walls of the cup develop into the two
layers of the retina: the outer, thin layer of the cup becomes the pigment layer of
retina, and the inner, thick layer differentiates into the neural retina. The
proliferation and differentiation of retinal precursor cells are regulated by
forkhead transcription factors. By the sixth week, melanin appears in the retinal
pigment epithelium (Fig. 18-4).
During the embryonic and early fetal periods, the two layers of the retina are
separated by an intraretinal space (Fig. 18-4 and see Fig. 18-9A and B); which
is derived from the cavity of the optic cup. This space gradually disappears as
the two layers of the retina fuse (see Fig. 18-8D), but the fusion is not firm.
Because the optic cup is an outgrowth of the forebrain, the layers of the optic
cup are continuous with the wall of the brain (Fig. 18-1H).
Under the influence of the developing lens, the inner layer of the optic cup
proliferates to form a thick neuroepithelium (Figs. 18-2 and 18-4).
Subsequently, the cells of this layer differentiate into the neural retina, the light-
sensitive region of the retina. This region contains photoreceptors (rods and
cones) and the cell bodies of neurons (e.g., bipolar and ganglion cells).
Fibroblast growth factor signaling regulates retinal ganglion cell differentiation.
Because the optic vesicle invaginates as it forms the optic cup, the neural retina
is “inverted,” that is, light-sensitive parts of the photoreceptor cells are adjacent
to the outer retinal pigment epithelium. As a result, light traverses the thickest
part of the retina before reaching the photoreceptors; however, because the
neural retina is thin and transparent, it does not form a barrier to light. The axons
of ganglion cells in the superficial layer of the neural retina grow proximally in
the wall of the optic stalk (Figs. 18-3B to D and 18-4). As a result, the cavity of
the optic stalk is gradually obliterated as the axons of the many ganglion cells
form the optic nerve (Fig. 18-3F).
The optic nerve is surrounded by three sheaths that evaginated with the optic
vesicle and stalk; consequently, they are continuous with the meninges of the
brain.

• The outer dural sheath from the dura mater is thick and fibrous and blends with
the sclera.
• The intermediate sheath from the arachnoid mater is thin.
• The inner sheath from the pia mater is vascular and closely invests the optic
nerve and central arterial and venous vessels of the retina as far as the optic disc.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is present in the subarachnoid space between the
intermediate and inner sheaths of the optic nerve.
Myelination of the axons within the optic nerves begins in the late fetal period.
After the eyes have been exposed to light for approximately 10 weeks,
myelination is complete, but the process normally stops short of the optic disc,
where the optic nerves leave the eyeballs. Normal neonates can see, but not too
well because they are farsighted; they respond to changes in illumination and are
able to fixate points of contrast. Visual acuity improves rapidly over the first
year of infancy to almost normal adult levels.
Birth Defects of the Eyes
Coloboma
Coloboma results when the optic fissure fails to close completely, leaving a gap
in eye structures. These defects can occur in any ocular structure from the cornea
to the optic nerve. The eyelid may be involved but it is caused by other
mechanisms. Retinochoroidal coloboma is characterized by a localized gap in
the retina, usually inferior to the optic disc. The defect is bilateral in most cases.
Coloboma of the iris is a defect in the inferior sector of the iris or a notch in the
pupillary margin, giving the pupil a keyhole appearance (Fig. 18-5). The defect
may be limited to the iris or it may extend deeper and involve the ciliary body
and retina. The defect may be caused by environmental factors, but a simple
coloboma is frequently hereditary and is transmitted as an autosomal dominant
characteristic.

FIGURE 18–5 Coloboma of iris. Observe the defect in the inferior part of the
iris.
(Reprinted from Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America 40(1), Guercio J,
Martyn L, Congenital malformations of the eye and orbit, 113-140, Copyright
2007, with permission from Elsevier.)
Detachment of the Retina

This defect occurs when the inner and outer layers of the optic cup fail to fuse
during the fetal period to form the retina and obliterate the intraretinal space
(Figs. 18-3 and 18-9). It occurs in conjunction with other syndromes such as
Down syndrome and Marfan syndrome (a connective tissue multisystemic
disorder). The separation of the neural and pigment layers of the retina may be
partial or complete. Retinal detachment may result from unequal rates of growth
of the two retinal layers; as a result, the layers of the optic cup are not in perfect
apposition. Sometimes the layers of the optic cup appear to have fused and
separated later; such secondary detachments usually occur in association with
other defects of the eye and head or trauma.
Knowledge about eye development makes it clear that when there is a detached
retina, it is not a detachment of the entire retina because the retinal pigment layer
remains firmly attached to the choroid—vascular layer of the eyeball (see Fig.
18-9D). The detachment is at the site of adherence of the outer and inner layers
of the optic cup. Although separated from the pigment layer of the retina, the
neural retina retains its blood supply (central artery of retina), derived from the
embryonic hyaloid artery (see Fig. 18-9A and D).
Postnatally, the pigment layer normally becomes fixed to the choroid, but its
attachment to the neural retina is not firm; hence, a detached retina may follow a
blow to the eye or occur spontaneously. As a result, fluid accumulates between
the pigment and neural layers, and vision is impaired.
Cyclopia
In this rare anomaly, the eyes are partially or completely fused, forming a single
median eye enclosed in a single orbit (Fig. 18-6). There is usually a tubular nose
(proboscis) superior to the eye. Cyclopia (single midline eye) and
synophthalmia (fusion of eyes) represent a spectrum of ocular defects. These
severe eye defects are associated with other craniocerebral defects that are
incompatible with life. Cyclopia appears to result from severe suppression of
midline cerebral structures—holoprosencephaly (see Chapter 17)—that develop
from the cranial part of the neural plate. Cyclopia is transmitted by recessive
inheritance.

FIGURE 18–6 Male neonate with cyclopia (synophthalmia). Cyclopia (fusion of
eyes) is a severe, uncommon birth defect of the face and eye, associated with a
proboscis that represents the nose. The white substance covering his head is
vernix caseosa—a normal fatty protective covering.
(Courtesy of Dr. Susan Phillips, Department of Pathology, Health Sciences
Centre, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Microphthalmia
Congenital microphthalmia is a heterogeneous group of eye defects. The eye
may be very small and associated with other ocular defects (e.g., such as a facial
cleft; see Chapter 9, and trisomy13; see Chapter 20), or it may be a normal-
appearing rudimentary eye. The affected side of the face is underdeveloped and
the orbit is small.
Severe microphthalmia results from arrested development of the eye before or
shortly after the optic vesicle has formed in the fourth week. The eye is
essentially underdeveloped and the lens does not form. If the interference with

development occurs before the retinal fissure closes in the sixth week, the eye is
larger, but the microphthalmos is associated with gross ocular defects. When eye
development is arrested in the eighth week or during the early fetal period,
simple microphthalmos results (small eye with minor ocular abnormalities).
Some cases of microphthalmos are inherited. The hereditary pattern may be
autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked. Most cases of simple
microphthalmia are caused by infectious agents (e.g., rubella virus, Toxoplasma
gondii, and herpes simplex virus) that cross the placental membrane during the
late embryonic and early fetal periods (see Chapter 20).
Anophthalmia
Anophthalmia (unilateral or bilateral) denotes absence of the eye, which is rare.
The eyelids form, but no eyeball develops (Fig. 18-7). The formation of the orbit
relies on stimulation from the developing eye, so orbit defects are always
present. This severe defect is usually accompanied by other severe
craniocerebral defects. In primary anophthalmos, eye development is arrested
early in the fourth week and results from failure of the optic vesicle to form. In
secondary anophthalmos, development of the forebrain is suppressed and
absence of the eye or eyes is one of several associated defects.


FIGURE 18–7 Photograph of the head of an infant with anophthalmia
(congenital absence of most eye tissues) and a single nostril. The eyelids are
formed but are mostly fused.

Development of Ciliary Body
The ciliary body is a wedge-shaped extension of the choroid. Its medial surface
projects toward the lens, forming ciliary processes (see Fig. 18-9C and D). The
pigmented portion of the ciliary epithelium is derived from the outer layer of the
optic cup, which is continuous with the pigment layer of the retina (Figs. 18-8
and 18-9D). The nonvisual retina is the non-pigmented, ciliary epithelium,
which represents the anterior prolongation of the neural retina in which no neural
elements develop (see Fig. 18-11). The ciliary muscle—the smooth muscle of
the ciliary body that is responsible for focusing the lens—and the connective
tissue in the ciliary body develop from mesenchyme located at the edge of the
optic cup in the region between the anterior scleral condensation and the ciliary
pigment epithelium.
FIGURE 18–8 Sagittal section of part of the developing eye of an embryo
(x280) at approximately 56 days. The lens fibers have elongated and obliterated
the cavity of the lens vesicle. Note that the inner layer of the optic cup has
thickened to form the primordial neural retina, and that the outer layer is heavily
pigmented, which is the primordium of the pigment layer of the retina.

(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
FIGURE 18–9 Diagrammatic drawings of sagittal sections of the eye, showing
successive developmental stages of development of the lens, retina, iris, and
cornea. A, At 5 weeks. B, At 6 weeks. C, At 20 weeks. D, Neonate. Note that the
retina and optic nerve are formed from the optic cup and optic stalk (Fig. 18-1C).

Development of Iris
The iris develops from the rim of the optic cup (Fig. 18-3A), which grows
inward and partially covers the lens (see Figs. 18-7 and 18-9). The two layers of
the optic cup remain thin in this area. The epithelium of the iris represents both
layers of the optic cup; it is continuous with the double-layered epithelium of the
ciliary body and with the retinal pigment epithelium and neural retina. The
connective tissue framework (stroma) of the iris is derived from neural crest
cells that migrate into the iris. The dilator pupillae and sphincter pupillae
muscles of the iris are derived from neuroectoderm of the optic cup. They
appear to arise from the anterior epithelial cells of the iris. These smooth
muscles result from a transformation of epithelial cells into smooth muscle cells.
Color of the Iris
The iris is typically light blue or gray in most neonates. The iris acquires its
definitive color after birth as pigmentation occurs during the first 6 to 10 months.
The concentration and distribution of pigment-containing cells
—chromatophores—in the loose vascular connective tissue of the iris
determine eye color. If the melanin pigment is confined to the pigmented
epithelium on the posterior surface of the iris, the iris appears blue. If melanin is
also distributed throughout the stroma (supporting tissue) of the iris, the eye
appears brown. Iris heterochromia can also result from changes to the
sympathetic innervations to the eye.
Congenital Aniridia In this rare anomaly, there is a lack of iris tissue or almost
complete absence of the iris. This defect results from an arrest of development at
the rim of the optic cup during the eighth week (Fig. 18-3A). The defect may be
associated with glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye abnormalities. Aniridia may
be familial, the transmission being dominant or sporadic. Mutation of the Pax6
gene results in aniridia.

Development of Lens
The lens develops from the lens vesicle, a derivative of the surface ectoderm
(Fig. 18-1F and H). The anterior wall of the vesicle, composed of cuboidal
epithelium, becomes the subcapsular lens epithelium (Fig. 18-9C). The nuclei
of the tall columnar cells forming the posterior wall of the lens vesicle undergo
dissolution. These cells lengthen considerably to form highly transparent
epithelial cells, the primary lens fibers. As these fibers grow, they gradually
obliterate the cavity of the lens vesicle (Figs. 18-9A to C, 18-10, and 18-11). Pax
6 and Sox 2 are required for the induction of the lens. The transcription factors
Pitx3, GATA-3 and FoxE3, regulate the formation and differentiation of the lens
fibers.
FIGURE 18–10 Photomicrograph of a sagittal section of the eye of an embryo
(x50) at approximately 56 days. Observe the developing neural retina and
pigment layer of the retina. The intraretinal space disappears when these two
layers of the retina fuse.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)

FIGURE 18–11 Photomicrograph of a portion of the developing eye of an
embryo at the end of the embryonic period. Observe that the lens fibers have
elongated and obliterated the cavity of the lens vesicle.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
The rim of the lens is called the equatorial zone because it is located midway
between the anterior and posterior poles of the lens (Figs. 18-9C and 18-11). The
cells in the equatorial zone are cuboidal; as they elongate, they lose their nuclei
and become secondary lens fibers. These new lens fibers are added to the
external sides of the primary lens fibers. Although secondary lens fibers continue
to form during adulthood and the lens increases in diameter, the primary lens
fibers must last a lifetime.
The developing lens is supplied with blood by the distal part of the hyaloid
artery (Figs. 18-4 and 18-9); however, it becomes avascular in the fetal period
when this part of the hyaloid artery degenerates. Thereafter, the lens depends on
diffusion from the aqueous humor (watery fluid) in the anterior chamber of
the eye (Fig. 18-9C), which bathes its anterior surface, and from the vitreous
humor in other parts. The developing lens is invested by a vascular
mesenchymal layer, the tunica vasculosa lentis. The anterior part of this capsule
is the pupillary membrane (Fig. 18-9B). The pupillary membrane develops
from the mesenchyme posterior to the cornea in continuity with the mesenchyme
developing in the sclera. The part of the hyaloid artery that supplies the tunica
vasculosa lentis disappears during the late fetal period. As a result, the tunica
vasculosa lentis and pupillary membrane degenerate (Fig. 18-9C and D);
however, the lens capsule produced by the anterior lens epithelium and the lens
fibers persists. This capsule represents a greatly thickened basement membrane
and has a lamellar structure because of its development. The former site of the

hyaloid artery is indicated by the hyaloid canal in the vitreous body (Fig. 18-
9D), which is usually inconspicuous in the living eye.
The vitreous body forms within the cavity of the optic cup (Figs. 18-4 and 18-
9C). It is composed of vitreous humor, the fluid component of the vitreous
body. The primary vitreous humor is derived from mesenchymal cells of
neural crest origin, which secrete a gelatinous matrix, a surrounding substance,
called the primary vitreous body. The primary vitreous humor is surrounded
later by a gelatinous secondary vitreous humor, which is generally believed to
arise from the inner layer of the optic cup. The secondary vitreous humor
consists of primitive hyalocytes (vitreous cells), collagenous material, and traces
of hyaluronic acid.
Persistent Pupillary Membrane
Remnants of the pupillary membrane, which cover the anterior surface of the
lens during the embryonic period and most of the fetal period (Fig. 18-9B), may
persist as web-like strands of connective tissue or vascular arcades over the pupil
in neonates, especially in premature infants. This tissue seldom interferes with
vision and tends to atrophy. Very rarely the entire pupillary membrane persists,
giving rise to congenital atresia of the pupil (absence of opening of the pupil);
surgery or laser treatment is needed in some cases to provide an adequate pupil.
Persistence of Hyaloid Artery
The distal part of the hyaloid artery normally degenerates as its proximal part
becomes the central artery of the retina (Fig. 18-9C and D). If the distal part of
the hyaloid artery persists, it may appear as a freely moving, nonfunctional
vessel or as a worm-like structure projecting from the optic disc (Fig. 18-3C).
Sometimes the hyaloid artery remnant may appear as a fine strand traversing the
vitreous body. A remnant of the artery may also form a cyst. In unusual cases,
the entire distal part of the artery persists and extends from the optic disc through
the vitreous body to the lens. In most of these unusual cases, the eye is
microphthalmic (very small).

Congenital Aphakia
Absence of the lens is extremely rare and results from failure of the lens placode
to form during the fourth week. Aphakia may also result from failure of lens
induction by the optic vesicle.

Development of Aqueous Chambers
The anterior chamber of the eye develops from a cleft-like space that forms in
the mesenchyme located between the developing lens and cornea (Figs. 18-4,
18-9A to C, and 18-11). The mesenchyme superficial to this space forms the
substantia propria (transparent connective tissue) of the cornea and the
mesothelium of the anterior chamber. After the lens is established, it induces the
surface ectoderm to develop into the epithelium of the cornea and conjunctiva.
The posterior chamber of the eye develops from a space that forms in the
mesenchyme posterior to the developing iris and anterior to the developing lens.
When the pupillary membrane disappears and the pupil forms (Fig. 18-9C and
D), the anterior and posterior chambers of the eye are able to communicate with
each other through the scleral venous sinus (Fig. 18-9D). This vascular
structure encircling the anterior chamber of the eye is the outflow site of aqueous
humor from the anterior chamber to the venous system.
Congenital Glaucoma
Abnormal elevation of intraocular pressure in neonates usually results from
abnormal development of the drainage mechanism of the aqueous humor during
the fetal period (Fig. 18-12). Intraocular tension rises because of an imbalance
between the production of aqueous humor and its outflow. This imbalance may
result from abnormal development of the scleral venous sinus (Fig. 18-9D).
Congenital glaucoma is genetically heterogeneous (includes a number of
phenotypes that are similar but are actually determined by different genotypes),
but the condition may also result from a rubella infection during early pregnancy
(see Chapter 20). Mutations in the CYP1B1 gene are associated with
approximately 85% of cases of congenital glaucoma.


FIGURE 18–12 Clouding of the cornea caused by congenital glaucoma. The
clouding may also result from infection, trauma, or metabolic disorders.
(Reprinted from Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America 40(1), Guercio J,
Martyn L, Congenital malformations of the eye and orbit, 113-140, Copyright
2007, with permission from Elsevier.)
Congenital Cataracts
In this condition, the lens is opaque and frequently appears grayish white.
Without treatment, blindness results. Many lens opacities are inherited, dominant
transmission being more common than recessive or sex-linked transmission.
Some congenital cataracts are caused by teratogenic agents, particularly the
rubella virus (Fig. 18-13), that affect early development of the lenses. The
lenses are vulnerable to rubella virus between the fourth and seventh weeks,
when primary lens fibers are forming (see Chapter 20). Cataract and other ocular
defects caused by the rubella virus could be completely prevented if immunity to
rubella were conferred on all women of reproductive age.

FIGURE 18–13 Typical appearance of a child with a congenital cataract that
may be caused by the rubella virus. Cardiac defects and deafness are other birth
defects common to this infection.

(Reprinted from Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America 40(1), Guercio J,
Martyn L, Congenital malformations of the eye and orbit, 113-140, Copyright
2007, with permission from Elsevier.)
Physical agents, such as radiation, can also damage the lens and produce
cataracts. Another cause of cataract is an enzymatic deficiency—congenital
galactosemia. These cataracts are not present at birth, but may appear as early as
the second week after birth. Because of the enzyme deficiency, large amounts of
galactose from milk accumulate in the infant’s blood and tissues, causing injury
to the lens and resulting in cataract formation.

Development of Cornea
The cornea is induced by the lens vesicle. The inductive influence results in
transformation of the surface ectoderm into the transparent, multilayered
avascular cornea. The cornea is formed from three sources, the: • External
corneal epithelium, derived from surface ectoderm
• Mesenchyme, derived from mesoderm, which is continuous with the
developing sclera • Neural crest cells that migrate from the optic cup and
differentiate into the corneal endothelium
Edema of Optic Disc The relationship of the sheaths of the optic nerve to the
meninges of the brain and the subarachnoid space is important clinically. An
increase in CSF pressure (often resulting from increased intracranial pressure)
slows venous return from the retina, causing papilledema (fluid accumulation)
of the optic disc. This occurs because the retinal vessels are covered by pia mater
and lie in the extension of the subarachnoid space that surrounds the optic nerve.

Development of Choroid and Sclera
The mesenchyme surrounding the optic cup (largely of neural crest origin) reacts
to the inductive influence of the retinal pigment epithelium by differentiating
into an inner vascular layer, the choroid, and an outer fibrous layer, the sclera
(Fig. 18-9C and D). The sclera develops from a condensation of mesenchyme
external to the choroid and is continuous with the stroma (supporting tissue) of
the cornea. Toward the rim of the optic cup, the choroid becomes modified to
form the cores (central masses) of the ciliary processes (Fig. 18-9D), consisting
chiefly of capillaries supported by delicate connective tissue. The first choroidal
blood vessels appear during the 15th week; by the 23rd week, arteries and veins
can be easily distinguished.

Development of Eyelids
The eyelids develop during the sixth week from mesenchyme derived from
neural crest cells, and from two cutaneous folds of the surface ectoderm that
grow over the cornea (Fig. 18-9B and C). The eyelids begin to adhere to one
another during the eighth week and remain adherent until the 26th to the 28th
week (Fig. 18-9C). While the eyelids are adherent, there is a closed conjunctival
sac anterior to the cornea. As the eyelids open, the bulbar conjunctiva is
reflected over the anterior part of the sclera and the surface epithelium of the
cornea (Fig. 18-9D). The palpebral conjunctiva lines the inner surface of the
eyelids.
The eyelashes and glands in the eyelids are derived from the surface ectoderm
in a manner similar to that described for other parts of the integument (see
Chapter 19). The connective tissue and tarsal plates (fibrous plates in the
eyelids) develop from mesenchyme in the developing eyelids. The orbicularis
oculi muscle is derived from mesenchyme in the second pharyngeal arch (see
Chapter 9) and is supplied by its nerve (CN VII).
Congenital Ptosis of Eyelid Drooping of the superior (upper) eyelids at birth is
relatively common (Fig. 18-14). Ptosis (blepharoptosis) may result from failure
of normal development of the levator palpebrae superioris muscle. Congenital
ptosis may result from prenatal injury or dystrophy (defective nutrition) of the
superior division of the oculomotor nerve (CN III), which supplies this muscle.
If ptosis is associated with inability to move the eyeball superiorly, there is also
failure of the superior rectus muscle of the eyeball to develop normally.
Congenital ptosis may be transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Vision can
be affected if the margin of the eyelid partially or completely covers the pupil;
early surgical correction would be indicated.


FIGURE 18–14 A child with congenital bilateral ptosis. Drooping of the superior
eyelids usually results from abnormal development or failure of development of
the levator palpebrae superioris, the muscle that elevates the eyelids. The infant
is contracting the frontalis muscle of the forehead in an attempt to raise the
eyelids.
(From Avery ME, Taeusch HW Jr: Schaffer’s Diseases of the Newborn, 5th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1984.)
Coloboma of Eyelid
Large defects of the eyelid (palpebral colobomas) are uncommon. A coloboma
is usually characterized by a small notch in the superior eyelid, but the defect
may involve almost the entire lid. Palpebral colobomas appear to result from
local developmental disturbances in the formation and growth of the eyelids.
Drying and ulceration of the cornea can result from lower eyelid coloboma.
Cryptophthalmos
Cryptophthalmos, a rare disorder, results from congenital absence of the eyelids;
as a result, skin covers the eyes. The eyeball is small and defective and the
cornea and conjunctiva usually do not develop. Fundamentally, the defect means
absence of the palpebral fissure (slit) between eyelids; usually there is varying
absence of eyelashes and eyebrows and other eye defects. Cryptophthalmos is an
autosomal recessive condition that is usually part of the cryptophthalmos
syndrome that includes urogenital anomalies.

Development of Lacrimal Glands
At the superolateral angles of the orbits, the lacrimal glands develop from a
number of solid buds from the surface ectoderm. The lacrimal ducts drain into
the lacrimal sac and eventually into nasolacrimal duct. The glands are small at
birth and do not function fully until approximately 6 weeks; hence, neonates do
not produce tears when they cry. Tears are often not present with crying until 1
to 3 months.

Development of Ears
The ears are composed of three anatomic parts:
• External ear, consisting of the auricle (pinnae), external acoustic meatus
(passage), and the external layer of the tympanic membrane (eardrum) • Middle
ear, consisting of three small auditory ossicles (ear bones), and the internal layer
of the tympanic membranes, which are connected to the oval windows of the
internal ears by the ossicles • Internal ear, consisting of the vestibulocochlear
organ, which is concerned with hearing and balance
The external and middle parts of the ears are concerned with the transference of
sound waves to the internal ears, which convert the waves into nerve impulses
and registers changes in equilibrium.

Development of Internal Ear
The internal ears are the first of the three parts of the ears to develop. Early in
the fourth week, a thickening of surface ectoderm, the otic placode, appears on
each side of the myelencephalon, the caudal part of the hindbrain (Fig. 18-15A
and B). Inductive signals from the paraxial mesoderm and notochord stimulate
the surface ectoderm to form the placodes (see Chapter 4; Fig. 4-9). Each otic
placode soon invaginates and sinks deep to the surface ectoderm into the
underlying mesenchyme. In so doing, it forms an otic pit (Fig. 18-15C and D).
The edges of the pit soon come together and fuse to form an otic vesicle—the
primordium of the membranous labyrinth (Figs. 18-15E to G and 18-16). The
otic vesicle soon loses its connection with the surface ectoderm, and a
diverticulum grows from the vesicle and elongates to form the endolymphatic
duct and sac (Fig. 18-17A to E).

FIGURE 18–15 Drawings illustrating early development of the internal ear. A,
Dorsal view of an embryo at approximately 22 days, showing the otic placodes.
B, D, F, and G, Schematic coronal sections illustrating successive stages in the
development of otic vesicles. C and E, Lateral views of the cranial region of
embryos, at approximately 24 and 28 days, respectively.
FIGURE 18–16 Left, Photomicrograph of a transverse section of an embryo
(x55) at approximately 26 days. Observe the otic vesicles, the primordia of the
membranous labyrinths, which give rise to the internal ears. Right, Higher
magnification of the right otic vesicle (x120). Note the ectodermal stalk, which
is still attached to the remnant of the otic placode. The otic vesicle will soon lose
its connection with the surface ectoderm.
(From Nishimura H [ed]: Atlas of Human Prenatal Histology. Tokyo, Igaku-
Shoin, 1983.)

FIGURE 18–17 Drawings of the otic vesicles showing the development of the
membranous and bony labyrinths of the internal ear. A to E, Lateral views
showing successive stages in the development of the otic vesicle into the
membranous labyrinth from the fifth to eighth weeks. A to D, Diagrammatic
sketches illustrating the development of a semicircular duct. F to I, Sections
through the cochlear duct showing successive stages in the development of the
spiral organ and the perilymphatic space from the 8th to the 20th weeks.
Two regions of the otic vesicles are recognizable:
• Dorsal utricular parts, from which the small endolymphatic ducts, utricles,
and semicircular ducts arise
• Ventral saccular parts, which give rise to the saccules and cochlear ducts
Three disc-like diverticula grow out from the utricular parts of the primordial
membranous labyrinths. Soon the central parts of these diverticula fuse and
disappear (Fig. 18-17B to E). The peripheral unfused parts of the diverticula
become the semicircular ducts, which are attached to the utricle and are later

enclosed in the semicircular canals of the bony labyrinth. Localized dilatations,
the ampullae, develop at one end of each semicircular duct. Specialized receptor
areas—cristae ampullares—differentiate in the ampullae and the utricle and
saccule (maculae utriculi and sacculi).
From the ventral saccular part of the otic vesicle, a tubular diverticulum—the
cochlear duct—grows and coils to form the membranous cochlea (Fig. 18-17C
to E). Tbx1 expression in the mesenchyme surrounding the otic vesicle regulates
the formation of the cochlear duct by controlling retinoic acid activity. A
connection of the cochlea with the saccule, the ductus reuniens, soon forms.
The spiral organ (of Corti) differentiates from cells in the wall of the cochlear
duct (Fig. 18-17F to I). Ganglion cells of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial
nerve [CN] VIII) migrate along the coils of the membranous cochlea and form
the spiral ganglion (of cochlea). Nerve processes extend from this ganglion to
the spiral organ, where they terminate on the hair cells. The cells in the spiral
ganglion retain their embryonic bipolar condition.
Inductive influences from the otic vesicle stimulate the mesenchyme around the
otic vesicle to condense and differentiate into a cartilaginous otic capsule (Fig.
18-17F). Recent studies indicate that the Pax2 gene is required for formation of
the spiral organ of Corti and the spiral ganglion. Transforming growth factor β1
may play a role in modulating epithelial-mesenchymal interaction in the internal
ear and in directing the formation of the otic capsule or bony labyrinth.
As the membranous labyrinth enlarges, vacuoles appear in the cartilaginous
otic capsule and soon coalesce to form the perilymphatic space. The
membranous labyrinth is now suspended in perilymph (fluid in the
perilymphatic space). The perilymphatic space, related to the cochlear duct,
develops two divisions, the scala tympani and scala vestibuli (Fig. 18-17H and
I). The cartilaginous otic capsule later ossifies to form the bony labyrinth of the
internal ear. The internal ear reaches its adult size and shape by the middle of the
fetal period (20–22 weeks).

Development of Middle Ear
Development of the tubotympanic recess (Fig. 18-18B) from the first
pharyngeal pouch is described in Chapter 9. The proximal part of the
tubotympanic recess forms the pharyngotympanic tube (auditory tube). The
distal part of the recess expands and becomes the tympanic cavity (Fig. 18-
18C), which gradually envelops the small bones of the middle ear—auditory
ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes), their tendons and ligaments, and the chorda
tympani nerve. Development of the ossicles is described in Chapter 9. These
structures receive a more or less complete epithelial investment. It has been
suggested that, in addition to apoptosis (programmed cell death) in the middle
ear, an epithelium-type organizer located at the tip of the tubotympanic recess
probably plays a role in the early development of the middle ear and tympanic
membrane.
FIGURE 18–18 Schematic drawings illustrating development of the external and
middle parts of the ear. Observe the relationship of these parts of the ear to the

otic vesicle, the primordium of the internal ear. A, At 4 weeks, illustrating the
relation of the otic vesicle to the pharyngeal apparatus. B, At 5 weeks, showing
the tubotympanic recess and pharyngeal arch cartilages. C, Later stage, showing
the tubotympanic recess (future tympanic cavity and mastoid antrum) beginning
to envelop the ossicles. D, Final stage of ear development showing the
relationship of the middle ear to the perilymphatic space and the external
acoustic meatus. Note that the tympanic membrane develops from three germ
layers: surface ectoderm, mesenchyme, and endoderm of the tubotympanic
recess.
During the late fetal period, expansion of the tympanic cavity gives rise to the
mastoid antrum, located in the petromastoid part of the temporal bone. The
mastoid antrum is almost adult size at birth; however, no mastoid cells are
present in neonates. By 2 years of age, the mastoid cells are well developed and
produce conical projections of the temporal bones, the mastoid processes. The
middle ear continues to grow through puberty. The tensor tympani muscle,
attached to the malleus, is derived from mesenchyme in the first pharyngeal arch
and is innervated by trigeminal nerve (CN V), the nerve of this arch. The
stapedius muscle is derived from the second pharyngeal arch and is supplied by
facial nerve (CN VII), the nerve of this arch. The signaling molecules FGF-8,
endothelin-1, and Tbx1 are involved in middle ear development.

Development of External Ear
The external acoustic meatus, the passage of the external ear leading to the
tympanic membrane, develops from the dorsal part of the first pharyngeal
groove. The ectodermal cells at the bottom of this funnel-shaped tube proliferate
to form a solid epithelial plate, the meatal plug (Fig. 18-18C). Late in the fetal
period, the central cells of this plug degenerate, forming a cavity that becomes
the internal part of the external acoustic meatus (Fig. 18-18D). The meatus,
relatively short at birth, attains its adult length in approximately the ninth year.
The primordium of the tympanic membrane is the first pharyngeal
membrane, which forms the external surface of the tympanic membrane. In the
embryo, the pharyngeal membrane separates the first pharyngeal groove from
the first pharyngeal pouch (Fig. 18-18A). As development proceeds,
mesenchyme grows between the two parts of the pharyngeal membrane and
differentiates into the collagenic fibers in the tympanic membrane.
To summarize, the tympanic membrane develops from three sources:
• Ectoderm of the first pharyngeal groove
• Endoderm of the tubotympanic recess, a derivative of the first pharyngeal
pouch
• Mesenchyme of the first and second pharyngeal arches
The auricle (pinna), which projects from the side of the head, develops from
mesenchymal proliferations in the first and second pharyngeal arches
—auricular hillocks—surrounding the first pharyngeal groove (Fig. 18-19A).
As the auricle grows, the contribution by the first arch is reduced. The lobule
(earlobe) of the auricle is the last part of the auricle to develop. The auricles
begin to develop at the base of the neck (Fig. 18-19A and B). As the mandible
develops, the auricles assume their normal position at the side of the head (Fig.
18-23).

FIGURE 18–19 Illustration of the development of the auricle, the part of the
external ear that is not within the head. A, At 6 weeks. Note that three auricular
hillocks are located on the first pharyngeal arch and three on the second arch. B,
Photograph of a 7-week embryo. Note the developing external ear.
(B, Courtesy of Dr. Brad Smith, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.)
The parts of the auricle derived from the first pharyngeal arch are supplied by its
nerve, the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve; the parts derived from the
second arch are supplied by cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus, especially
the lesser occipital and greater auricular nerves. The nerve of the second
pharyngeal arch, the facial nerve, has few cutaneous branches; some of its fibers
contribute to the sensory innervation of the skin in the mastoid region and
probably in small areas on both aspects of the auricle.
Congenital Deafness
Because formation of the internal ear is independent of development of the
middle and external ears, congenital impairment of hearing may be the result of
maldevelopment of the sound-conducting apparatus of the middle and external
ears, or of the neurosensory structures of the internal ear. Approximately 3 in
every 1000 newborns have significant hearing loss, of which there are many
subtypes.
Most types of congenital deafness are caused by genetic factors and many of the
genes responsible have been identified. Mutations in the GJB2 gene are
responsible for approximately 50% of nonsyndromic recessive hearing loss.
Congenital deafness may be associated with several other head and neck defects

as a part of the first arch syndrome (see Chapter 9). Abnormalities of the malleus
and incus are often associated with this syndrome. A rubella infection during
the critical period of development of the internal ear, particularly the seventh and
eighth weeks, can cause defects of the spiral organ and deafness. Congenital
fixation of the stapes results in conductive deafness in an otherwise normal ear.
Failure of differentiation of the annular ligament, which attaches the base of the
stapes to the oval window (fenestra vestibuli), results in fixation of the stapes to
the bony labyrinth.
Auricular Abnormalities
Severe defects of the external ear are rare, but minor deformities are common.
There is a wide variation in the shape of the auricle. Almost any minor auricular
defect may occasionally be found as a usual feature in a particular family. Minor
defects of the auricles may serve as indicators of a specific pattern of congenital
anomalies. For example, the auricles are often abnormal in shape and low-set in
infants with chromosomal syndromes (Fig. 18-20) such as trisomy 18 and in
infants affected by maternal ingestion of certain drugs (e.g., trimethadione).


FIGURE 18–20 Low-set slanted ear. This designation is made when the margin
of the auricle or helix (arrow) meets the cranium at a level inferior to the
horizontal plane through the corner of the eye.
(From Jones KL: Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 5th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996.)
Auricular Appendages
Auricular appendages (skin tags) are common and may result from the
development of accessory auricular hillocks (Fig. 18-21). The appendages
usually appear anterior to the auricle, more often unilaterally than bilaterally.
The appendages, often with narrow pedicles, consist of skin but may contain
some cartilage.

FIGURE 18–21 A child with a preauricular tag or skin tag.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Children’s Hospital,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

Absence of the Auricle
Anotia (absence of the auricle) is rare but is commonly associated with the first
pharyngeal arch syndrome (see Chapter 9). Anotia results from failure of
mesenchymal proliferation.
Microtia
Microtia (a small or rudimentary auricle) results from suppressed mesenchymal
proliferation (Fig. 18-22). This defect often serves as an indicator of associated
birth defects, such as an atresia of the external acoustic meatus (80% of cases)
and middle ear anomalies. The cause can be both genetic and environmental.


FIGURE 18–22 A child with a rudimentary auricle (microtia). She also has
several other birth defects.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Preauricular Sinuses and Fistulas
Pit-like cutaneous depressions or shallow sinuses are occasionally located in a
triangular area anterior to the auricle (Fig. 18-23). The sinuses are usually
narrow tubes or shallow pits that have pinpoint external openings. Some sinuses
contain a vestigial cartilaginous mass.


FIGURE 18–23 A child with an auricular fistula relating to the first pharyngeal
arch. Note the external orifice of the fistula below the auricle and the upward
direction of the catheter (in sinus tract) toward the external acoustic meatus.
(Courtesy of Dr. Pierre Soucy, Division of Paediatric General Surgery,
Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.)
Preauricular sinuses may be associated with internal anomalies, such as
deafness and kidney malformations. The embryologic basis of auricular sinuses
is uncertain but it may relate to incomplete fusion of the auricular hillocks or to
abnormal mesenchymal proliferation and defective closure of the dorsal part of
the first pharyngeal groove. Most of this pharyngeal groove normally disappears
as the external acoustic meatus forms. Other auricular sinuses appear to
represent ectodermal folds that are sequestered during formation of the auricle.
Bilateral preauricular sinuses are typically familial. The majority of sinuses are
asymptomatic and have only minor cosmetic importance; however, they can
become infected. Auricular fistulas (narrow canals) connecting the preauricular
skin with the tympanic cavity or the tonsillar fossa (see Fig. 9-10F ) are
extremely rare.
Atresia of External Acoustic Meatus
Atresia (blockage) of this canal results from failure of the meatal plug to
canalize (Fig. 18-18C and Fig. 18-25). Usually the deep part of the meatus is
open, but the superficial part is blocked by bone or fibrous tissue. Most cases are
associated with the first arch syndrome (see Chapter 9). Often abnormal
development of both the first and second pharyngeal arches is involved. The
auricle is also severely affected and defects of the middle and/or internal ear are
sometimes present. Atresia of the external acoustic meatus can occur bilaterally
or unilaterally and usually results from autosomal dominant inheritance.
Absence of External Acoustic Meatus
Absence of the external acoustic meatus is rare; usually the auricle is normal
(Fig. 18-24). This defect results from failure of inward expansion of the first
pharyngeal groove and failure of the meatal plug to disappear (Fig. 18-18C ).


FIGURE 18–24 A child with no external acoustic meatus; however, the auricle is
normal. Observe the absence of the opening of the external acoustic meatus. A
computed tomography scan revealed normal middle and internal ear structures.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Congenital Cholesteatoma
This is a fragment of keratinized epithelial cells that is retained after birth. The
“rest” appears as a white cyst-like structure medial to and behind the tympanic
membrane. It may be that the rest consists of cells from the meatal plug that was
displaced during its canalization (Fig. 18-18C ). It has been suggested that
congenital cholesteatoma may originate from an epidermoid formation that
normally involutes by 33 weeks gestation. Choleseatomas can exhibit growth
and invasion of neighboring bone.
FIGURE 18–25 CT image of a 9-month-old infant with atresia of the external
acoustic meatus (external auditory canal) (*). Observe the osseous atresia plate
(black arrow) and the middle ear cavity (white arrow).

(Courtesy of Dr. Gerald S. Smyser, Altru Health System, Grand Forks, North
Dakota.)

Summary of Development of Eyes
The first indication of the eyes is the optic grooves in the neural folds at the
cranial end of the embryo; the grooves form at the beginning of the fourth week.
The grooves deepen to form hollow optic vesicles that project from the
forebrain. The optic vesicles contact the surface ectoderm and induce
development of the lens placodes.
• As the lens placode thickens to form a lens pit and lens vesicle, the optic
vesicle invaginates to form the optic cup. The retina forms from the two layers
of the optic cup.
• The retina, optic nerve fibers, muscles of the iris, and epithelium of the iris and
ciliary body are derived from the neuroectoderm of the forebrain. The sphincter
and dilator muscles of the iris develop from the ectoderm at the rim of the optic
cup. The surface ectoderm gives rise to the lens and the epithelium of the
lacrimal glands, eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea. The mesenchyme gives rise to
the eye muscles, except those of the iris, and to all connective and vascular
tissues of the cornea, iris, ciliary body, choroid, and sclera.
• The eye is sensitive to the teratogenic effects of infectious agents (e.g.,
cytomegalovirus); see Chapter 20. Defects of sight may result from infection of
tissues and organs by certain microorganisms during the fetal period (e.g.,
rubella virus and Treponema pallidum, the microorganism that causes syphilis).
Most ocular defects are caused by defective closure of the retinal fissure during
the sixth week (e.g., coloboma of the iris). Congenital cataract and glaucoma
may result from intrauterine infections, but most congenital cataracts are
inherited.

Summary of Development of Ears
• The otic vesicle develops from the surface ectoderm during the fourth week.
The vesicle develops into the membranous labyrinth of the internal ear.
• The otic vesicle divides into a dorsal utricular part, which gives rise to the
utricle, semicircular ducts, and endolymphatic duct, and a ventral saccular
part, which gives rise to the saccule and cochlear duct. The cochlear duct gives
rise to the spiral organ.
• The bony labyrinth develops from the mesenchyme adjacent to the
membranous labyrinth. The epithelium lining the tympanic cavity, mastoid
antrum, and pharyngotympanic tube is derived from the endoderm of the
tubotympanic recess, which develops from the first pharyngeal pouch.
• The auditory ossicles develop from the dorsal ends of the cartilages in the first
two pharyngeal arches. The epithelium of the external acoustic meatus
develops from the ectoderm of the first pharyngeal groove.
• The tympanic membrane is derived from three sources: endoderm of the first
pharyngeal pouch, ectoderm of the first pharyngeal groove, and mesenchyme
between the above layers.
• The auricle develops from the fusion of six auricular hillocks, which form
from mesenchymal prominences around the margins of the first pharyngeal
groove.
• Congenital deafness may result from abnormal development of the
membranous labyrinth and/or bony labyrinth, as well as from abnormalities of
the auditory ossicles. Recessive inheritance is the most common cause of
congenital deafness, but a rubella virus infection near the end of the embryonic
period is a major environmental factor known to cause abnormal development of
the spiral organ and defective hearing.
• There are many minor anomalies of the auricle; however, some of them may
alert the clinician to the possible presence of associated major anomalies (e.g.,
defects of middle ear). Low-set, severely malformed ears are often associated
with chromosomal abnormalities, particularly trisomy 13 and trisomy 18.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 18–1
An infant was born blind and deaf with congenital heart disease. The mother had
a severe viral infection early in her pregnancy.
• Considering the birth defects present, name the virus that was probably
involved.
• What is the common congenital cardiovascular lesion found in infants whose
mothers have this infection early in pregnancy?
• Is the history of a rash during the first trimester an essential factor in the
development of embryonic disease (embryopathy)?

Case 18–2
An infant was born with bilateral ptosis.
• What is the probable embryologic basis of this condition?
• Are hereditary factors involved?
• Injury to what nerve could also cause congenital ptosis?

Case 18–3
An infant was born with small, multiple calcifications in the brain, microcephaly,
and microphthalmia. The mother was known to consume very rare meat.
• What protozoon might be involved?
• What is the embryologic basis of the infant’s birth defects?
• What advice might the doctor give the mother concerning future pregnancies?

Case 18–4
A mentally deficient female infant had low-set, malformed ears; a prominent
occiput; and rocker-bottom feet. A chromosomal abnormality was suspected.
• What type of chromosomal aberration was probably present?
• What is the usual cause of this abnormality?
• How long would the infant likely survive?

Case 18–5
An infant was born with partial detachment of the retina in one eye. The eye was
microphthalmic, and there was persistence of the distal end of the hyaloid artery.
• What is the embryologic basis of congenital detachment of the retina?
• What is the usual fate of the hyaloid artery?
Discussion of problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Artunduaga MA. A classic twin study of external ear malformations, including
microtia. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1216.
Barishak YR. Embryology of the Eye and Its Adnexa, ed 2. Basel, Switzerland:
Karger; 2001.
Bauer PW, MacDonald CB, Melhem ER. Congenital inner ear malformation. Am
J Otol. 1998;19:669.
Box J, Chang W, Wu DK. Patterning and morphogenesis of the vertebrate ear.
Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51:521.
Braunstein EM, Monks DC, Aggarwal VS, et al. Tbx1 and Brn4 regulate
retinoic acid metabolic genes during cochlear morphogenesis. BMC Dev Biol.
2009;9:31.
Carlson BM. Human Embryology and Developmental Biology, ed 4. St. Louis:
Mosby-Year Book; 2009.
Davis N, Mor E, Ashley-Padan R. Roles for Dicer1 in the patterning and
differentiation of the optic cup neuroepithelium. Development. 2011;138:127.
FitzPatrick DR, van Heyningen V. Developmental eye disorders. Curr Opin
Genet Dev. 2005;15:348.
Graw J. Eye development. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:343.

Haddad JJr. The ear. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, editors: Nelson
Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders, 2004.
Jason R, Guercio BS, Martyn LJ. Congenital malformations of the eye and orbit.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2007;40:113.
Jones KL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, ed 6.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2005.
Kozmik Z. Pax genes in eye development and evolution. Curr Opin Genet Dev.
2005;15:430.
Litsiou A, Hanson S, Streit A. A balance of FGF, BMP and WNT signalling
positions the future placode territory in the head. Development. 2005;132:4051.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Olitsky SE, Nelson LB. Disorders of the eye. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM,
Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia:
Elsevier/Saunders, 2004.
O’Rahilly R. The early development of the otic vesicle in staged human
embryos. J Embryol Exp Morphol. 1963;11:741.
O’Rahilly R. The prenatal development of the human eye. Exp Eye Res.
1975;21:93.
Paquette LB, Jackson HA, Yavare CJ, et al. In utero eye development
documented by fetal MR imaging. Am J Neuroradiol. 2009;30:1787.
Porter CJW, Tan SW. Congenital auricular anomalies: Topographic anatomy,
embryology, classification, and treatment strategies. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2005;115:1701.
Rodriguez-Vázquez JF. Development of the stapes and associated structures in
human embryos. J Anat. 2005;207:165.
Sellheyer K. Development of the choroid and related structures. Eye.
1990;4:255.

Smith AN, Radice G, Lang RA. Which FGF ligands are involved in lens
induction? Dev Biol. 2010;337:195.
Toriello HV, Reardon W, Gorlin RJ. Hereditary Hearing Loss and Its Syndromes,
ed 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004.
Wilson E, Saunders R, Trivedi R. Pediatric Ophthalmology: Current Thought
and a Practical Guide. New York: Springer; 2008.

Chapter 19 Integumentary System
Development of Skin and Appendages 451
   Epidermis 452
   Dermis 454
   Development of Glands 454
   Development of Hairs 459
   Development of Nails 460
   Development of Teeth 460
Summary of Integumentary System 468
Clinically Oriented Problems 468
The integumentary system consists of the skin and its appendages: sweat glands,
nails, hairs, sebaceous glands, arrector muscles of hairs (arrector pili muscles),
mammary glands, and teeth.

Development of Skin and Appendages
The skin, the outer protective covering of the body, is a complex organ system
and is the body’s largest organ. The skin consists of two layers (Fig. 19-1): • The
epidermis is a superficial epithelial tissue that is derived from surface
embryonic ectoderm.
• The dermis, underlining the epidermis, is a deep layer composed of dense,
irregularly arranged connective tissue that is derived from mesenchyme.

FIGURE 19–1 Illustrations of the successive stages of skin development. A, At 4
weeks. B, At 7 weeks. C, At 11 weeks. D, Neonate. Note the melanocytes in the
basal layer of the epidermis and the way their processes extend between the
epidermal cells to supply them with melanin.
Ectodermal (epidermal)/mesenchymal (dermal) interactions involve mutual
inductive mechanisms that are mediated by a conserved set of signaling
molecules of the Wnt, FGF, TGFβ, and Hedgehog pathways.
Skin structures vary from one part of the body to another. For example, the skin

of the eyelids is thin and soft and has fine hairs, whereas the skin of the
eyebrows is thick and has coarse hairs. The embryonic skin at 4 to 5 weeks
consists of a single layer of surface ectoderm overlying the mesoderm (Fig. 19-
1A).

Epidermis
Epidermal growth occurs in stages and results in an increase in epidermal
thickness. The primordium of the epidermis is a single layer of surface
ectodermal cells (Fig. 19-1A). These cells proliferate and form a layer of
squamous epithelium, the periderm, and a basal layer (Fig. 19-1B and C). The
cells of the periderm continually undergo keratinization (formation of a horny
layer) and desquamation (shedding of the cuticle in scales), and are replaced by
cells arising from the basal layer. The exfoliated peridermal cells form part of a
white greasy substance—vernix caseosa—that covers the fetal skin. Later, the
vernix contains sebum, a secretion from sebaceous glands (see Fig. 19-3). The
vernix protects the developing skin from constant exposure to amniotic fluid,
with its high content of urine, bile salts, and sloughed cells, during the fetal
period. In addition, the greasy vernix facilitates birth of the fetus.
The basal layer of the epidermis becomes the stratum germinativum (Fig. 19-
1D), which produces new cells that are displaced into the more superficial
layers. By 11 weeks, cells from the stratum germinativum have formed an
intermediate layer (Fig. 19-1C). Replacement of peridermal cells continues
until approximately the 21st week; thereafter, the periderm disappears and the
stratum corneum forms from the stratum lucidum (Fig. 19-1D).
Proliferation of cells in the stratum germinativum also forms epidermal ridges,
which extend into the developing dermis (Fig. 19-2). These ridges begin to
appear in embryos at 10 weeks and are permanently established by 19 weeks;
those of the hand appear approximately one week earlier than in the feet. The
epidermal ridges produce grooves on the surface of the palms and soles,
including the digits (fingers and toes). The type of pattern that develops is
determined genetically and constitutes the basis for examining fingerprints in
criminal investigations and medical genetics. Abnormal chromosome
complements affect the development of ridge patterns; for instance, infants with
Down syndrome have distinctive patterns on their hands and feet that are of
diagnostic value.

FIGURE 19–2 Light micrograph of thick skin (x132). Observe the epidermis and
dermis as well as the dermal papilla interdigitating with the epidermal ridges.
(From Gartner LP, Hiatt JL: Color Textbook of Histology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2001.)
Late in the embryonic period, neural crest cells migrate into the mesenchyme of
the developing dermis and differentiate into melanoblasts. Later these cells
migrate to the dermoepidermal junction and differentiate into melanocytes
(Fig. 19-1D). The differentiation of melanoblasts into melanocytes involves the
formation of pigment granules. Wnt signaling regulates this process.
Melanocytes appear in the developing skin at 40 to 50 days, immediately after
the migration of neural crest cells. In Caucasians, the cell bodies of melanocytes
are usually confined to basal layers of the epidermis; however, their dendritic
processes extend between the epidermal cells (Fig. 19-1C).
Only a few melanin-containing cells are normally present in the dermis (Fig. 19-
1D). The melanocytes begin producing melanin before birth and distribute it to
the epidermal cells. Pigment formation can be observed prenatally in the
epidermis of dark-skinned races; however, there is little evidence of such activity
in light-skinned fetuses. The relative content of melanin inside the melanocytes
accounts for the different colors of skin.

The transformation of the surface ectoderm into the multilayered definitive
epidermis results from continuing inductive interactions with the dermis. Skin is
classified as thick or thin based on the thickness of the epidermis.
• Thick skin covers the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet; it lacks hair
follicles, arrector muscles of hairs, and sebaceous glands, but it has sweat glands.
• Thin skin covers most of the rest of the body; it contains hair follicles, arrector
muscles of hairs, sebaceous glands, and sweat glands (Fig. 19-3).
FIGURE 19–3 Drawing of the successive stages in the development of hairs,
sebaceous glands, and arrector muscles of hair. Note that the sebaceous gland

develops as an outgrowth from the side of the hair follicle.

Dermis
The dermis develops from mesenchyme, which is derived from the mesoderm
underlying the surface ectoderm (Fig. 19-1A and B). Most of the mesenchyme
that differentiates into the connective tissue of the dermis originates from the
somatic layer of lateral mesoderm; however, some of it is derived from the
dermatomes of the somites (see Chapter 14). By 11 weeks, the mesenchymal
cells have begun to produce collagenous and elastic connective tissue fibers
(Figs. 19-1D and 19-3).
As the epidermal ridges form, the dermis projects into the epidermis, forming
dermal papillae, which interdigitate with the epidermal ridges (Fig. 19-2).
Capillary loops of blood vessels develop in some of these papillae and provide
nourishment for the epidermis (Fig. 19-3); sensory nerve endings form in other
papillae. The developing afferent nerve fibers apparently play an important role
in the spatial and temporal sequence of dermal ridge formation. The
development of the dermatomal pattern of innervation of the skin is described in
Chapter 16.
The blood vessels in the dermis begin as simple, endothelium-lined structures
that differentiate from mesenchyme. As the skin grows, new capillaries grow out
from the primordial vessels (angiogenesis). Such capillary-like vessels have
been observed in the dermis at the end of the fifth week. Some capillaries
acquire muscular coats through differentiation of myoblasts developing in the
surrounding mesenchyme and become arterioles and arteries. Other capillaries,
through which a return flow of blood is established, acquire muscular coats and
become venules and veins. As new blood vessels form, some transitory ones
disappear. By the end of the first trimester, the major vascular organization of the
fetal dermis is established.

Development of Glands
The glands of the skin include eccrine and apocrine sweat glands, sebaceous
glands, and mammary glands. They are derived from the epidermis and grow
into the dermis.
Sebaceous Glands
Sebaceous glands are derived from the epidermis. Cellular buds develop from
the sides of the developing epithelial root sheaths of hair follicles (Fig. 19-3).
The buds invade the surrounding dermal connective tissue and branch to form
the primordia of several alveoli (hollow sacs) and their associated ducts. The
central cells of the alveoli break down, forming an oily substance—sebrum—
that protects the skin against friction and dehydration. This secretion is released
into the hair follicle and passes to the surface of the skin, where it mixes with
desquamated peridermal cells to form vernix caseosa, a greasy, cheese-like
substance, which protects the delicate fetal skin from abrasions and hardening
that result from exposure to the amniotic fluid. Sebaceous glands, independent of
hair follicles (e.g., in the glans of the penis and labia minora), develop as cellular
buds from the epidermis that invade the dermis.
Sweat Glands
Coiled, tubular eccrine sweat glands are located in the skin throughout most of
the body. They develop as cellular buds from the epidermis that grow into the
underlying mesenchyme (Fig. 19-3). As the buds elongate, their ends coil to
form the bodies of the secretory parts of the glands (Fig. 19-4A to D). The
epithelial attachments of the developing glands to the epidermis form the
primordia of the sweat ducts. The central cells of these ducts degenerate,
forming lumina. The peripheral cells of the secretory parts of the glands
differentiate into myoepithelial and secretory cells (Fig. 19-4D). The
myoepithelial cells are thought to be specialized smooth muscle cells that assist
in expelling sweat from the glands. Eccrine sweat glands begin to function
shortly after birth.

FIGURE 19–4 Illustrations of the successive stages of the development of a
sweat gland. A and B, The cellular buds of the glands develop at approximately
20 weeks as a solid growth of epidermal cells into the mesenchyme. C, Its
terminal part coils and forms the body of the gland. The central cells degenerate
to form the lumen of the gland. D, The peripheral cells differentiate into
secretory cells and contractile myoepithelial cells.
The distribution of the large sudoriferous (producing sweat) apocrine sweat
glands is mostly confined to the axillary, pubic and perineal regions, and the
areolae (circular pigmented areas) surrounding the nipples. The glands develop
from downgrowths of the stratum germinativum of the epidermis (Fig. 19-3). As
a result, the ducts of these glands open, not onto the skin surface, as do eccrine
sweat glands, but into the canals of the hair follicles superficial to the entry of
the sebaceous gland ducts. Secretion by apocrine sweat glands is influenced by
hormones and does not begin until puberty.
Disorders of Keratinization
Ichthyosis is a general term that is applied to a group of skin disorders resulting
from excessive keratinization—formation of horny layers of skin (Fig. 19-5B).
The skin is characterized by dryness and scaling, which may involve the entire
body surface.

 
FIGURE 19–5 A, A child with congenital hypertrichosis and hyperpigmentation.
Note the excessive hairiness on the shoulders and back. B, A child with severe
keratinization of the skin (ichthyosis) from the time of birth.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. Mario Joao Branco Ferreira, Servico de Dermatologia,
Hospital de Desterro, Lisbon, Portugal. B, Courtesy of Dr. Joao Carlos
Fernandes Rodrigues, Servico de Dermatologia, Hospital de Desterro, Lisbon,
Portugal.)
A harlequin fetus results from a rare keratinizing disorder that is inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait with a mutation on the ABCA12 gene. The skin is
markedly thickened, ridged, and cracked. Most affected neonates die during the
first week of life.
A collodion infant is covered by a thick, taut membrane that resembles
collodion (a protective film) or parchment. The membranous skin cracks with
the first respiratory efforts and begins to fall off in large sheets. Deficiency of
transglutaminase-1 is the most common cause. Complete shedding may take
several weeks, occasionally leaving normal-appearing skin.
Lamellar ichthyosis is an autosomal recessive disorder. A neonate with this
condition may at first appear to be a collodion baby; however, the scaling
persists. Growth of hair may be curtailed and development of sweat glands is

often impeded. Affected infants usually suffer severely in hot weather because of
their inability to sweat.
Congenital Ectodermal Dysplasia
This skin condition represents a group of rare hereditary disorders involving
tissues that are ectodermal in origin. The teeth are completely or partially absent
and often the hairs and nails are affected. Ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-
clefting syndrome is a congenital skin condition that is inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait. It involves both ectodermal and mesodermal tissues,
consisting of ectodermal dysplasia associated with hypopigmentation of skin
and hair, scanty hair and eyebrows, absence of eyelashes, nail dystrophy,
hypodontia and microdontia, ectrodactyly, and cleft lip and palate. This appears
to be caused by a defect in the P63 gene coding for a transcription factor.
Angiomas of Skin
These vascular anomalies are developmental defects in which some transitory
and/or surplus primitive blood or lymphatic vessels persist. Those composed of
blood vessels may be mainly arterial, venous, or cavernous angiomas, but they
are often of a mixed type. Angiomas composed of lymphatics are called cystic
lymphangiomas or cystic hygromas (see Chapter 13). True angiomas are
benign tumors of endothelial cells, usually composed of solid or hollow cords;
the hollow cords contain blood.
Nevus flammeus denotes a flat, pink or red, flame-like blotch that often appears
on the posterior surface of the neck. A port-wine stain hemangioma is a larger
and darker angioma than a nevus flammeus and is nearly always anterior or
lateral on the face and/or neck (Fig. 19-6). It is sharply demarcated when it is
near the median plane, whereas the common angioma (pinkish-red blotch) may
cross the median plane. A port-wine stain in the area of distribution of the
trigeminal nerve is sometimes associated with a similar type of angioma of the
meninges of the brain and seizures at birth (Sturge-Weber syndrome).
Hemangiomas are among the most common benign neoplasms found in infants
and children.

FIGURE 19–6 Hemangioma (port-wine stain) in an infant.
(From Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 30th ed. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 2003.)
Albinism
In generalized albinism, an autosomal recessive trait, the skin, hairs, and retina
lack pigment; however, the iris usually shows some pigmentation. Albinism
occurs when the melanocytes fail to produce melanin because of the lack of the
enzyme tyrosinase or other pigment enzymes. In localized albinism
—piebaldism—an autosomal dominant trait, there is a lack of melanin in
patches of skin and/or hair.

Mammary Glands
Mammary glands are modified and highly specialized types of sweat glands.
Development of these glands is similar in male and female embryos. The first
evidence of mammary development appears in the fourth week when mammary
crests (ridges) develop along each side of the ventral surface of the embryo.
These crests extend from the axillary region to the inguinal region (Fig. 19-7A).
The crests usually disappear except for the parts at the site of the future breasts
(Fig. 19-7B). Involution of the remaining mammary crests in the fifth week
produces the primary mammary buds (Fig. 19-7C). These buds are downgrowths
of the epidermis into the underlying mesenchyme. The changes occur in
response to an inductive influence from the mesenchyme. Each primary
mammary bud soon gives rise to several secondary mammary buds, which
develop into lactiferous ducts and their branches (Fig. 19-7D to E).
Canalization (formation of canals) of these buds is induced by placental sex
hormones entering the fetal circulation. This process continues until the late fetal
period; by term, 15 to 19 lactiferous ducts are formed. The fibrous connective
tissue and fat of the mammary glands develop from the surrounding
mesenchyme.

FIGURE 19–7 Development of mammary glands. A, Ventral view of an embryo
of approximately 28 days showing the mammary crests. B, Similar view at 6
weeks showing the remains of these crests. C, Transverse section of a mammary
crest at the site of a developing mammary gland. D to F, Similar sections
showing successive stages of breast development between the 12th week and
birth.
During the late fetal period, the epidermis at the site of origin of the mammary
gland becomes depressed, forming a shallow mammary pit (Fig. 19-7E). The
nipples are poorly formed and depressed in neonates. Soon after birth, the
nipples usually rise from the mammary pits because of proliferation of the
surrounding connective tissue of the areola, the circular area of pigmented skin
around the nipples. The smooth muscle fibers of the nipple and areola
differentiate from surrounding mesenchymal cells.

The rudimentary mammary glands of newborn males and females are
identical and are often enlarged. Some secretion, often called “witch’s milk”
(galactorrhea), may be produced. These transitory changes are caused by
maternal hormones passing through the placental membrane into the fetal
circulation. The breasts of neonates contain lactiferous ducts but no alveoli
(secretory parts of glands).
In females, the breasts enlarge rapidly during puberty (Fig. 19-8), mainly
because of development of the mammary glands and the accumulation of the
fibrous stroma and fat associated with them. Full development occurs at
approximately 19 years (Fig. 19-8E). Normally, the lactiferous ducts of males
remain rudimentary throughout life.
FIGURE 19–8 Sketches of progressive stages in the postnatal development of
the female breasts. A, Neonate. B, Child. C, Early puberty. D, Late puberty. E,
Young adult. F, Pregnant female. Note that the nipple is inverted at birth (A). At
puberty (12–15 years), the breasts of females enlarge because of development of
the mammary glands and the increased deposition of fat.
Several transcription factors, including the oncogene c-Myc, a basic-helix-loop-
helix transcription factor, are essential for the formation of the lactiferous ducts
and function of the female breast.
Gynecomastia
The rudimentary lactiferous ducts in males normally undergo no postnatal
development. Gynecomastia refers to the development of the rudimentary
lactiferous ducts in the male mammary tissue. During midpuberty, approximately
two thirds of boys develop varying degrees of hyperplasia of the breasts. This
subareolar hyperplasia may persist for a few months to 2 years. A decreased ratio
of testosterone to estradiol is found in boys with gynecomastia. Approximately

80% of males with Klinefelter syndrome have gynecomastia (see Chapter 20),
which is associated with an XXY chromosome complement.
Absence of Nipples (Athelia) or Breasts (Amastia)
These rare birth defects may occur bilaterally or unilaterally. They result from
failure of development or disappearance of the mammary crests. These
conditions may also result from failure of mammary buds to form. More
common is hypoplasia of the breast, often found in association with gonadal
agenesis and Turner syndrome (see Chapter 20). Poland syndrome is associated
with hypoplasia or absence of the breast or nipple.
Aplasia of Breast
The breasts of postpubertal females often differ somewhat in size. Marked
differences are regarded as anomalies because both glands are exposed to the
same hormones at puberty. In these cases, there is often associated rudimentary
development of muscles of the thoracic wall, usually the pectoralis major (see
Chapter 15).
Supernumerary Breasts and Nipples
An extra breast (polymastia) or nipple (polythelia) occurs in approximately 1%
of the female population (Fig. 19-9); it is an inheritable condition. An extra
breast or nipple usually develops just inferior to the normal breast.
Supernumerary nipples are also relatively common in males; often they are
mistaken for moles (Fig. 19-10). Less commonly, supernumerary breasts or
nipples appear in the axillary or abdominal regions of females. In these
positions, the nipples or breasts develop from extra mammary buds that develop
from remnants of the mammary crests. They usually become more obvious in
women when they are pregnant. Approximately one third of affected persons
have two extra nipples or breasts. Supernumerary mammary tissue very rarely
occurs in a location other than along the course of the mammary crests. It
probably develops from tissue that was displaced from these crests.

FIGURE 19–9 Female infant with an extra nipple (polythelia) on the left side.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital and University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)

FIGURE 19–10 A man with polythelia (extra nipples) in the axillary and thigh
regions. Insets are enlargements of the nipples (arrowheads). The broken line

indicates the original position of the left mammary crests.
(Courtesy of Dr. Kunwar Bhatnagar, Professor of Anatomy, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.)
Inverted Nipples
Sometimes the nipples fail to elevate above the skin surface after birth or during
puberty, that is, they remain in their prenatal location (Figs. 19-7F and 19-8A).
Inverted nipples may make breast-feeding of an infant difficult; however, a
number of breast-feeding techniques can be used to reduce this difficulty.

Development of Hairs
Hairs begin to develop early in the fetal period (weeks 9–12), but they do not
become easily recognizable until approximately the 20th week (Fig. 19-3). Hairs
are first recognizable on the eyebrows, upper lip, and chin. The hair follicles
begin as proliferations of the stratum germinativum of the epidermis, and extend
into the underlying dermis. The hair buds soon become club shaped, forming
hair bulbs (Fig. 19-3). The epithelial cells of the hair bulbs constitute the
germinal matrix, which later produces the hair shafts.
The hair bulbs (primordia of hair roots) are soon invaginated by small
mesenchymal hair papillae (Figs. 19-3 and 19-11). The peripheral cells of the
developing hair follicles form the epithelial root sheaths, and the surrounding
mesenchymal cells differentiate into the dermal root sheaths. As cells in the
germinal matrix proliferate, they are pushed toward the surface, where they
become keratinized to form hair shafts (Fig. 19-3). The hairs grow through the
epidermis on the eyebrows and upper lip by the end of the 12th week.

FIGURE 19–11 Light micrograph of a longitudinal section of a hair follicle with
its hair root (R) and papilla (P) (x132).
(From Gartner LP, Hiatt JL: Color Textbook of Histology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2001.)
The first hairs to appear—lanugo (downy hair)—are fine, soft, and lightly
pigmented. Lanugo begins to appear toward the end of week 12 and is plentiful
by 17 to 20 weeks. These hairs help to hold the vernix caseosa on the skin.
Lanugo is replaced by coarser hairs during the perinatal period. This hair persists
over most of the body, except in the axillary and pubic regions, where it is
replaced at puberty by even coarser terminal hairs. In males, similar coarse hairs
also appear on the face and often on the chest (anterior wall of thorax).
Melanoblasts migrate into the hair bulbs and differentiate into melanocytes.
The melanin produced by these cells is transferred to the hair-forming cells in

the germinal matrix several weeks before birth. The relative content of melanin
accounts for different hair colors.
Arrector muscles of hairs, small bundles of smooth muscle fibers, differentiate
from the mesenchyme surrounding the hair follicles and attach to the dermal
root sheaths of the hair follicles and the papillary layer of the dermis, which
interdigitates with the epidermis (Figs. 19-1D and 19-3). Contractions of the
arrector muscles depress the skin over their attachment and elevate the skin
around the hair shafts, causing the hairs to stand up (“goose bumps”). The
arrector muscles are poorly developed in the hairs of the axillary region and in
certain parts of the face. The hairs forming the eyebrows and the cilia forming
the eyelashes have no arrector muscles.
Alopecia
Absence or loss of scalp hairs may occur alone or with other defects of the skin
and its derivatives. Congenital alopecia (hair loss) may be caused by failure of
hair follicles to develop, or it may result from follicles producing poor-quality
hairs.
Hypertrichosis
Excessive hairiness results from the development of supernumerary hair
follicles, or from the persistence of lanugo hairs that normally disappear during
the perinatal period. It may be localized (e.g., on the shoulders and back) or
diffuse (Fig. 19-5A). Localized hypertrichosis is often associated with spina
bifida occulta (see Chapter 17, Fig. 17-14).
Pili Torti
In this familial disorder, the hairs are twisted and bent (Latin tortus, twisted).
Other ectodermal defects (e.g., distorted nails) may be associated with this
condition. Pili torti is usually first recognized at 2 to 3 years of age.

Development of Nails
Toenails and fingernails begin to develop at the tips of the digits at
approximately 10 weeks (Fig. 19-12). Development of fingernails precedes that
of toenails by approximately 4 weeks (see Chapter 6). The primordia of nails
appear as thickened areas or nail fields of the epidermis at the tip of each digit
(Fig. 19-12A). Later these fields migrate onto the dorsal surfaces of the nails,
carrying their innervation from the ventral surface. The nail fields are
surrounded laterally and proximally by folds of epidermis, the nail folds (Fig.
19-12B). Cells from the proximal nail fold grow over the nail field and become
keratinized to form the nail plate (Fig. 19-12C).
FIGURE 19–12 Successive stages in the development of a fingernail. A, The
first indication of a nail is a thickening of the epidermis, the nail field, at the tip
of the finger. B, As the nail plate develops, it slowly grows toward the tip of the
finger. C, The fingernail reaches the end of the finger by 32 weeks.
At first, the developing nail is covered by a narrow band of epidermis, the
eponychium (corneal layer of epidermis). This later degenerates, exposing the
nail, except at its base, where it persists as the cuticle. The skin under the free
margin of the nail is the hyponychium (Fig. 19-12C). The fingernails reach the
fingertips by approximately 32 weeks; the toenails reach the toetips by
approximately 36 weeks. Nails that have not reached the tips of the digits at birth
indicate prematurity.
Aplastic Anonychia
Congenital absence of nails at birth is extremely rare. Anonychia results from
failure of nail fields to form or from failure of the proximal nail folds to form
nail plates. The abnormality is permanent. Aplastic anonychia (defective

development or absence of nails) may be associated with extremely poor
development of hairs and with defects of the teeth. Anonychia may be restricted
to one or more nails of the digits of the hands and/or feet.

Development of Teeth
Two sets of teeth normally develop: the primary dentition or deciduous teeth
and the secondary dentition or permanent teeth. Teeth develop from the oral
ectoderm, mesenchyme, and neural crest cells. The enamel is derived from
ectoderm of the oral cavity; all other tissues differentiate from the surrounding
mesenchyme and neural crest cells. Neural crest cells are imprinted with
morphogenetic information before, or shortly after, they migrate from the neural
crest. The molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways involve the expression
and effects of FGF, BMP, Shh, and Wnt. As the mandible and maxilla grow to
accommodate the developing teeth, the shape of the face changes.
Odontogenesis (tooth development) is a property of the oral epithelium. The
development is a continuous process involving reciprocal induction between
neural crest mesenchyme and the overlying oral epithelium. It is usually divided
into stages for descriptive purposes based on the appearance of the developing
tooth. The first tooth buds appear in the anterior mandibular region (see Fig.19-
14B); later, tooth development occurs in the anterior maxillary region and then
progresses posteriorly in both jaws.
Tooth development continues for years after birth (Table 19-1). The first
indication of tooth development occurs early in the sixth week of embryonic
development as a thickening of the oral epithelium. These U-shaped bands
—dental laminae—follow the curves of the primitive jaws (Figs. 19-13A and
19-14A).
Table 19–1 Order and Usual Time of Eruption of Teeth and Time of Shedding of
Deciduous Teeth
TOOTH
USUAL ERUPTION TIME
SHEDDING TIME
Deciduous
Medial incisor
6–8 mo
6–7 yr
Lateral incisor
8–10 mo
7–8 yr
Canine
16–20 mo
10–12 yr
First molar
12–16 mo
9–11 yr
Second molar
20–24 mo
10–12 yr

Permanent*
Medial incisor
7–8 yr
 
Lateral incisor
8–9 yr
 
Canine
10–12 yr
 
First premolar
10–11 yr
 
Second premolar
11–12 yr
 
First molar
6–7 yr
 
Second molar
12 yr
 
Third molar
13–25 yr
 
* The permanent teeth are not shed.
Data from Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR: Clinically Oriented Anatomy, 6th
ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
FIGURE 19–13 Sketches of sagittal sections through the developing jaws
illustrating early development of the teeth. A, Early in the sixth week, showing
the dental laminae. B, Later in the sixth week, showing tooth buds arising from
the laminae.

FIGURE 19–14 Schematic drawings of sagittal sections illustrating successive
stages in the development and eruption of an incisor tooth. A, At 6 weeks,
showing the dental lamina. B, At 7 weeks, showing the tooth bud developing
from the dental lamina. C, At 8 weeks, showing the cap stage of tooth
development. D, At 10 weeks, showing the early bell stage of a deciduous tooth
and the bud stage of a permanent tooth. E, At 14 weeks, showing the advanced
bell stage of tooth development. Note that the connection (dental lamina) of the
tooth to the oral epithelium is degenerating. F, At 28 weeks, showing the enamel
and dentine layers. G, At 6 months postnatally, showing early stage of tooth
eruption. H, At 18 months postnatally, showing a fully erupted deciduous incisor
tooth. The permanent incisor tooth now has a well-developed crown. I, Section
through a developing tooth showing ameloblasts (enamel producers) and
odontoblasts (dentine producers).

Bud Stage of Tooth Development
Each dental lamina develops 10 centers of proliferation from which swellings
—tooth buds—grow into the underlying mesenchyme (Figs. 19-13B and 19-
14B). These buds develop into the deciduous teeth (Table 19-1). The tooth buds
for permanent teeth that have deciduous predecessors begin to appear at
approximately 10 weeks from deep continuations of the dental lamina (Fig. 19-
14D). They develop lingual (toward the tongue) to the deciduous tooth buds.
The permanent molars have no deciduous predecessors and develop as buds
from posterior extensions of the dental laminae (horizontal bands). The tooth
buds for the permanent teeth appear at different times, mostly during the fetal
period. The buds for the second and third permanent molars develop after birth.
The deciduous teeth have well-developed crowns at birth (Fig. 19-14H), whereas
the permanent teeth remain as tooth buds.
Cap Stage of Tooth Development
As each tooth bud is invaginated by mesenchyme—the primordium of the
dental papilla and dental follicle—the buds become cap shaped (Fig. 19-15).
The ectodermal part of the developing tooth, the enamel organ, eventually
produces enamel. The internal part of each cap-shaped tooth, the dental papilla,
is the primordium of dentin and dental pulp. Together, the dental papilla and
enamel organ form the tooth bud. The outer cell layer of the enamel organ is the
outer enamel epithelium, and the inner cell layer lining the papilla is the inner
enamel epithelium (Fig. 19-14D).

FIGURE 19–15 Photomicrograph of the primordium of a lower incisor tooth. A,
A 12-week-old fetus (early bell stage). A cap-like enamel organ is formed and
the dental papilla is developing beneath it. B, Primordium of a lower incisor
tooth in a 15-week-old fetus (late bell stage). Observe the inner and outer enamel
layers, the dental papilla, and bud of the permanent tooth.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
The central core of loosely arranged cells between the layers of enamel
epithelium is the enamel reticulum (stellate reticulum). As the enamel organ
and dental papilla develop, the mesenchyme surrounding the developing tooth
condenses to form the dental sac (dental follicle), a vascularized capsular
structure (Fig. 19-14E). The dental sac is the primordium of the cement and
periodontal ligament. The cement is the bone-like, mineralized connective
tissue covering the root of the tooth. The periodontal ligament, derived from
neural crest cells, is a specialized vascular connective tissue that surrounds the
root of the tooth, attaching it to the alveolar bone (Fig. 19-14G).
Bell Stage of Tooth Development
As the enamel organ differentiates, the developing tooth assumes the shape of a
bell (Figs. 19-14D and E and 19-15). The mesenchymal cells in the dental
papilla adjacent to the internal enamel epithelium differentiate into
odontoblasts, which produce predentine and deposit it adjacent to the

epithelium. Later, the predentine calcifies and becomes dentine, the second
hardest tissue in the body.
As the dentine thickens, the odontoblasts regress toward the center of the dental
papilla; however, their finger-like cytoplasmic processes—odontoblastic
processes—remain embedded in the dentine (Fig. 19-14F and I).
Cells of the inner enamel epithelium differentiate into ameloblasts under the
influence of the odontoblasts, which produce enamel in the form of prisms (rods)
over the dentine. As the enamel increases, the ameloblasts migrate toward the
outer enamel epithelium. Enamel is the hardest tissue in the body. It overlies
and protects the dentine from being fractured (Fig. 19-16). The color of the
translucent enamel is based on the thickness and color of the underlying dentine.
Enamel and dentine formation begins at the cusp (tip) of the tooth and
progresses toward the future root.

FIGURE 19–16 Photomicrograph of a section of the crown and neck of a tooth
(x17). Observe the enamel (E), dentine (D), dental pulp (P), and odontoblasts
(O).
(From Gartner LR, Hiatt JL: Color Textbook of Histology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
WB Saunders, 2001.)
The root of the tooth begins to develop after dentine and enamel formation are
well advanced (Figs. 19-14H and 19-17). The inner and outer enamel epithelia
come together at the neck of the tooth (cementoenamel junction), where they
form a fold, the epithelial root sheath (Fig. 19-14F). This sheath grows into the
mesenchyme and initiates root formation.

FIGURE 19–17 Photomicrograph of a section of a lower incisor tooth in a term
fetus. The enamel and dentine layers and the pulp are clearly demarcated.
(From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Shiota K: Color Atlas of Clinical Embryology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000.)
The odontoblasts adjacent to the epithelial root sheath form dentine that is
continuous with that of the crown. As the dentine increases, it reduces the pulp
cavity to a narrow root canal through which the vessels and nerves pass (Fig.
19-14H). The inner cells of the dental sac differentiate into cementoblasts,
which produce cement that is restricted to the root. Cement is deposited over the
dentine of the root and meets the enamel at the neck of the tooth.
As the teeth develop and the jaws ossify, the outer cells of the dental sac also
become active in bone formation. Each tooth soon becomes surrounded by bone,
except over its crown. The tooth is held in its alveolus (bony socket) by the
strong periodontal ligament, a derivative of the dental sac (Fig. 19-14G and H).

Some fibers of this ligament are embedded in the cement of the root; other fibers
are embedded in the bony wall of the alveolus.
Tooth Eruption
As the deciduous teeth develop, they begin a continuous slow movement
toward the oral cavity (Fig. 19-14G). This process (eruption) results in the
emergence of the tooth from the dental follicle in the jaw to its functional
position in the mouth. The mandibular teeth usually erupt before the maxillary
teeth, and girls’ teeth usually erupt sooner than boys’ teeth. The child’s dentition
contains 20 deciduous teeth. As the root of the tooth grows, its crown gradually
erupts through the oral epithelium. The part of the oral mucosa around the
erupted crown becomes the gingiva (gum).
Usually eruption of the deciduous teeth occurs between the 6th and 24th months
after birth (Table 19-1). The mandibular medial or central incisor teeth
typically erupt 6 to 8 months after birth, but this process may not begin until 12
or 13 months in some children. Despite this, all 20 deciduous teeth are usually
present by the end of the second year in healthy children. Delayed eruption of all
teeth may indicate a systemic or nutritional disturbance such as hypopituitarism
or hypothyroidism.
The complete permanent dentition consists of 32 teeth. The permanent teeth
develop in a manner similar to that described for deciduous teeth. As a
permanent tooth grows, the root of the corresponding deciduous tooth is
gradually resorbed by osteoclasts (odontoclasts). Consequently, when the
deciduous tooth is shed, it consists only of the crown and the uppermost part of
the root. The permanent teeth usually begin to erupt during the sixth year and
continue to appear until early adulthood (Fig. 19-18, Table 19-1).


FIGURE 19–18 A 4-year-old child’s cranium. Bone has been removed from the
mandible and maxilla to expose the relationship of the developing permanent
teeth to the erupted deciduous teeth.
The shape of the face is affected by the development of the paranasal sinuses and
the growth of the maxilla and mandible to accommodate the teeth (see Chapter
9). It is the lengthening of the alveolar processes (bony sockets supporting the
teeth) that results in the increase in the depth of the face during childhood.
Natal Teeth
Natal teeth are erupted at birth. There are usually two in the position of the
mandibular incisors. Natal teeth are observed in approximately one in 2000
newborn infants. Natal teeth may produce maternal discomfort during breast-
feeding. In addition, the infant’s tongue may be lacerated or the teeth may detach
and be aspirated; for these reasons, natal teeth are sometimes extracted. Because
these are prematurely erupting decidual teeth, spacers may be required to prevent
overcrowding of the other teeth.
Enamel Hypoplasia
Defective enamel formation causes pits and/or fissures in the enamel of teeth
(Figs. 19-19 and 19-20A). These defects result from temporary disturbances of
enamel formation. Various factors may injure ameloblasts, the enamel builders
(e.g., nutritional deficiency, tetracycline therapy, and infectious diseases such as
measles). Rickets occurring during the critical in utero period of tooth
development (6–12 weeks) is a common cause of enamel hypoplasia. Rickets, a
disease in children who are deficient in vitamin D, is characterized by
disturbance of ossification of the epiphysial cartilages and disorientation of cells
at the metaphysis (see Chapter 14).

 
 
 
 
 

 
FIGURE 19–19 Some common birth defects of teeth. A, Enamel pearl (furcation
of a permanent maxillary third molar). B, Gemination and tetracyline staining
(maxillary third molar). C, Fusion (permanent mandibular central and lateral
incisors). D, Abnormally short root (microdont permanent maxillary central
incisor). E, Dens invaginatus (talon cusps on the lingual surface of the
permanent maxillary central incisor). F, Taurodont tooth (radiograph of the
mesial surface of the permanent maxillary second molar). G, Fusion (primary
mandibular central and lateral incisors).
(Courtesy of Dr. Blaine Cleghorn, Faculty of Dentistry, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.)

FIGURE 19–20 More common birth defects of teeth. A, Amelogenesis
imperfecta. B, Extra root (mandibular molar). C, Extra root (mandibular canine).
D, Accessory root (maxillary lateral incisor). Extra roots present challenges for
root canal therapy and extraction. E, Tetracycline staining (root of maxillary
third molar). F, A midline supernumerary tooth (M, mesiodens) located near the
apex of the central incisor. The prevalence of supernumerary teeth is 1% to 3%
in the general population
(A to E, Courtesy of Dr. Blaine Cleghorn, Faculty of Dentistry, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. F, Courtesy of Dr. Steve Ahing,
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Variations of Tooth Shape
Abnormally shaped teeth are relatively common (Figs. 19-19A to G and 19-20A
to E). Occasionally there is a spherical mass of enamel—enamel pearl—on the
root of a tooth that is separate from the enamel of the crown (Fig. 19-19A). The
pearl is formed by aberrant groups of ameloblasts. In other cases, the
maxillary lateral incisor teeth may have a slender, tapering shape (peg-shaped

incisors).
Congenital syphilis affects the differentiation of the permanent teeth, resulting
in incisors with central notches in their incisive edges. The molars are also
affected and are called mulberry molars because of their characteristic features.
Numerical Abnormalities
One or more supernumerary teeth (mesiodens) may develop, or the normal
number of teeth may fail to form (Fig. 19-20F). Many studies report a higher
prevalence in females. Supernumerary teeth usually develop in the area of the
maxillary incisors and can disrupt the position and eruption of normal teeth. The
extra teeth commonly erupt posterior to the normal ones (or remain unerupted)
and are asymptomatic in most cases. In partial anodontia, one or more teeth are
absent; this is often a familial trait. In total anodontia, no teeth develop; this is
an extremely rare condition. It is usually associated with congenital ectodermal
dysplasia.
Occasionally a tooth bud either partially or completely divides into two separate
teeth. A partially divided tooth germ is called gemination. The result is a
macrodontia (large teeth) with a common root canal system. Small teeth
(microdontia) also occur. If the tooth germ completely divides into two separate
teeth, the result is twinning with one additional tooth in the dentition. Fusion of
two teeth results in one fewer tooth in the dentition. This condition can be
differentiated radiographically from gemination by two separate root canal
systems found with fusion.
Dentigerous Cyst
A cyst may develop in a mandible, maxilla, or maxillary sinus that contains an
unerupted tooth. The dentigerous (tooth-bearing) cyst develops because of cystic
degeneration of the enamel reticulum of the enamel organ of an unerupted tooth.
Most cysts are deeply situated in the jaw and are associated with misplaced or
malformed secondary teeth that have failed to erupt.

Amelogenesis Imperfecta
Amelogenesis imperfecta is a complex group of at least 14 different clinical
entities that involve developmental aberrations in enamel formation in the
absence of any systemic disorder. This is a inherited ectodermal birth defect
that primarily affects the enamel only. The enamel may be hypoplastic,
hypocalcified, or hypomature. Depending on the type of amelogenesis
imperfecta, the enamel may be hard or soft, pitted or smooth, and thin or normal
in thickness. The incidence of amelogenesis imperfecta ranges from 1 in 700 to 1
in 8000, depending on the population studied. Multiple modes of inheritance
patterns are involved. Classification of this condition is based on clinical and
radiographic findings, as well as mode of inheritance.
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta
The teeth are brown to gray-blue with an opalescent sheen because the
odontoblasts fail to differentiate normally and poorly calcified dentine results.
Both deciduous and permanent teeth are usually involved. The enamel tends to
wear down rapidly, exposing the dentine. This anomaly is inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait with the genetic defect in most cases localized on
chromosome 4q and this condition is relatively common in Caucasian children
(Fig. 19-21).

FIGURE 19–21 The teeth of a child with dentinogenesis imperfecta.
(From Thompson MW: Genetics in Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB

Saunders, 1986.)
Discolored Teeth
Foreign substances incorporated into the developing enamel and dentine discolor
the teeth. The hemolysis associated with erythroblastosis fetalis or hemolytic
disease of the newborn (see Chapter 7) may produce blue to black discoloration
of the teeth. All tetracyclines are extensively incorporated into the teeth. The
critical period at risk is from approximately 14 weeks of fetal life to the 10th
postnatal month for deciduous teeth, and from approximately 14 weeks of fetal
life to the eighth postnatal year for permanent teeth.
Tetracycline staining affects both enamel and dentine because it binds to
hydroxyapatite. The brownish-yellow discoloration (mottling) of the teeth,
produced by tetracycline, is due to the conversion of tetracycline to a colored by-
product under the action of light. The dentine is probably affected more than the
enamel because it is more permeable than enamel after tooth mineralization is
complete. The enamel is completely formed on all but the third molars by
approximately 8 years of age. For this reason, tetracyclines should not be
administered to pregnant women or children younger than 8 years of age.

Summary of Integumentary System
• The skin and its appendages develop from ectoderm, mesenchyme, and neural
crest cells. The epidermis is derived from surface ectoderm and the dermis is
derived from mesenchyme. Melanocytes are derived from neural crest cells
that migrate into the epidermis.
• Cast-off cells from the epidermis mix with secretions of sebaceous glands to
form the vernix caseosa, a whitish, greasy coating of the skin, which protects
the epidermis.
• Hairs develop from downgrowths of the epidermis into the dermis. By
approximately 20 weeks, the fetus is completely covered with fine, downy hairs
—lanugo. These hairs are shed before birth or shortly thereafter and are replaced
by coarser hairs.
• Most sebaceous glands develop as outgrowths from the sides of hair follicles;
however, some glands develop as downgrowths of the epidermis into the dermis.
Sweat glands also develop from epidermal downgrowths into the dermis.
Mammary glands develop in a similar manner.
• Birth defects of the skin are mainly disorders of keratinization (ichthyosis) and
pigmentation (albinism). Abnormal blood vessel development results in various
types of angioma.
• Nails may be absent or malformed. Hair may be absent or excessive. Absence
of mammary glands is extremely rare, but supernumerary breasts (polymastia)
and nipples (polythelia) are relatively common.
• Teeth develop from ectoderm, mesoderm, and neural crest cells. The enamel is
produced by ameloblasts, which are derived from the oral ectoderm; all other
dental tissues develop from mesenchyme, derived from mesoderm and neural
crest cells.
• Common birth defects of teeth are defective formation of enamel and dentine,
abnormalities in shape, and variations in number and position.
• Tetracyclines are extensively incorporated into the enamel and dentine of
developing teeth, producing brownish-yellow discoloration and hypoplasia of
the enamel. They should not be prescribed for pregnant women or children
younger than 8 years of age.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 19–1
A neonate had two erupted mandibular incisor teeth.
• What are these teeth called?
• How common is this anomaly?
• Are they supernumerary teeth?
• What problems and/or danger might be associated with the presence of teeth at
birth?

Case 19–2
The deciduous teeth of an infant had a brownish-yellow color and some
hypoplasia of the enamel. The mother recalled that she had been given
antibiotics during the second trimester of her pregnancy.
• What is the probable cause of the infant’s tooth discoloration?
• Dysfunction of what cells would cause the enamel hypoplasia?
• Would the secondary dentition be discolored?

Case 19–3
An infant was born with a small, irregularly shaped, light-red blotch on the
posterior surface of the neck. It was level with the surrounding skin and
blanched when light pressure was applied.
• Name this birth defect.
• What do these observations probably indicate?
• Is this condition common?
• Are there other names for this skin defect?

Case 19–4
A neonate had a tuft of hair in the lumbosacral region of the back.
• What does this tuft of hair probably indicate?
• Is this condition common?
• Is this birth defect clinically important?

Case 19–5
The skin of a neonate had a collodion type of covering that fissured and
exfoliated shortly after birth. Later, lamellar ichthyosis developed.
• Briefly describe this condition.
• Is it common?
• How is it inherited?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Berkovitz BKB, Holland GR, Moxham BJ. Oral Anatomy, Histology, and
Embryology, ed 4. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2009.
Buss PW, Hughes HE, Clarke A. Twenty-four cases of the EEC syndrome:
Clinical presentation and management. J Med Genet. 1995;32:716.
Caton J, Tucker AS. Current knowledge of tooth development: Patterning and
mineralization of the murine dentition. J Anat. 2009;214:407.
Coletta RD, McCoy EL, Burns V, et al. Characterization of the Six 1 homeobox
gene in normal mammary gland morphogenesis. BMC Dev Biol. 2010;10:4.
Darmstadt GL, Sidbury R. The skin. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB,
editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed 17, Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders,
2004.
Lee K, Gjorevski N, Boghaert E, et al. Snail1, Snail2, and E47 promote
mammary epithelial branching morphogenesis. EMBO J. 2011;30:2662.
McDermottt KM, Liu BY, Tisty TD, et al. Primary cilia regulate branching
morphogenesis during mammary gland development. Curr Biol. 2010;20:731.
Moore KL, Dalley AF, Agur AMR. Clinically Oriented Anatomy, ed 6.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Moore SJ, Munger BL. The early ontogeny of the afferent nerves and papillary

ridges in human digital glabrous skin. Dev Brain Res. 1989;48:119.
Müller M, Jasmin JR, Monteil RA, et al. Embryology of the hair follicle. Early
Hum Dev. 1999;26:59.
Nanci A. Ten Cate’s Oral Histology. Development, Structure, and Function, ed 7.
St. Louis: CV Mosby; 2008.
Narendran V, Hoath SB. The skin. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC,
editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the
Fetus and Infant, ed 8, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Osborne MP. Breast anatomy and development. In Harris JR, editor: Diseases of
the Breast, ed 2, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology: A Textbook of
Skin Disorders of Childhood and Adolescence, ed 3. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
2006.
Rudel RA, Fenton SE, Ackerman JM, et al. Environmental exposures and
mammary gland development: state of the science, public health implications,
and research recommendations. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:1053.
Smolinski KN. Hemangiomas of infancy: Clinical and biological characteristics.
Clin Pediatr. 2005;44:747.
Tompkins K. Molecular mechanisms of cytodifferentiation in mammalian tooth
development. Connect Tissue Res. 2006;47:111.
Watts A, Addy MA. Tooth discolouration and staining: A review of the
literature. Br Dent J. 2001;190:309.
Winter GB. Anomalies of tooth formation and eruption. In Welbury RR, editor:
Paediatric Dentistry, ed 2, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Chapter 20 Human Birth Defects
Classification of Birth Defects 471
Teratology: Study of Abnormal Development 472
Birth Defects Caused by Genetic Factors 472
   Numerical Chromosomal Abnormalities 473
   Structural Chromosomal Abnormalities 481
   Birth Defects Caused by Mutant Genes 484
   Developmental Signaling Pathways 486
Birth Defects Caused by Environmental Factors 487
   Principles of Teratogenesis 487
   Critical Periods of Human Development 487
   Human Teratogens 491
Birth Defects Caused by Multifactorial Inheritance 499
Summary of Human Birth Defects 499
Clinically Oriented Problems 500
We ought not to set them aside with idle thoughts or idle words about
“curiosities” or “chances.” Not one of them is without meaning; not one that
might not become the beginning of excellent knowledge, if only we could answer
the question—why is it rare, or being rare, why did it in this instance happen?
– James Paget, Lancet 2:1017, 1882
Birth defects (congenital anomalies) are developmental disorders present at
birth. Birth defects are the leading cause of infant mortality and may be
structural, functional, metabolic, behavioral, or hereditary.

Classification of Birth Defects
The most widely used reference guide for classifying birth defects is the
International Classification of Diseases; however, no single classification has
universal appeal. Each is limited, having been designed for a particular purpose.
Attempts to classify human birth defects, especially those that result from errors
of morphogenesis (development of form), reveal the frustration and obvious
difficulties in the formulation of concrete proposals that could be used in
medical practice. A practical classification system for birth defects that takes into
consideration the time at onset of the injury, possible etiology, and pathogenesis
is now widely accepted among clinicians.

Teratology: Study of Abnormal
Development
Teratology is the branch of science that studies the causes, mechanisms, and
patterns of abnormal development. A fundamental concept in teratology is that
certain stages of embryonic development are more vulnerable to disruption than
others. Until the 1940s, it was generally believed that human embryos were
protected from environmental agents, such as drugs, viruses and chemicals by
their extraembryonic/fetal membranes (amnion and chorion) and their mothers’
uterine and abdominal walls.
In 1941, the first well-documented cases were reported that an environmental
agent (rubella virus) could produce severe birth defects, such as cataracts,
cardiac defects, and deafness, if the rubella infection was present during the
critical period of development of the eyes, heart, and ears. In the 1950s, severe
limb defects and other developmental disruptions were found in infants of
mothers who had consumed a sedative called thalidomide during early
pregnancy. These discoveries, more than six decades ago, focused worldwide
attention on the role of drugs and viruses in the etiology (causes) of human birth
defects. It is estimated that 7% to 10% of human birth defects result from the
disruptive actions of drugs, viruses, and environmental toxins.
More than 20% of infant deaths in North America are attributed to birth defects.
Major structural defects; for example, spina bifida cystica, a severe type of
vertebral defect in which part of the neural tube fails to fuse (see Chapter 17,
Fig. 17-15), are observed in approximately 3% of neonates. Additional birth
defects can be detected after birth; thus, the incidence reaches approximately 6%
in 2-year-olds and 8% in 5-year-olds.
The causes of birth defects are often divided into:
• Genetic factors such as chromosome abnormalities
• Environmental factors such as drugs and viruses
• Multifactorial inheritance (genetic and environmental factors acting together)
For 50% to 60% of birth defects, the etiology is unknown (Fig. 20-1). The

defects may be single or multiple and of major or minor clinical significance.
Single minor defects are present in approximately 14% of neonates. Defects of
the external ears, for example, are of no serious medical significance, but they
may indicate the possible presence of associated major defects. For example, the
presence of a single umbilical artery alerts the clinician to the possible presence
of cardiovascular and renal anomalies. Ninety percent of infants with three or
more minor defects also have one or more major defects. Of the 3% born with
clinically significant defects, 0.7% have multiple major defects; most of these
infants die during infancy. Major developmental defects are much more common
in early embryos (10%–15%); however, most of them abort spontaneously
during the first 6 weeks. Chromosome abnormalities are present in 50% to 60%
of early, spontaneously aborted embryos.
FIGURE 20–1 Graphic illustration of the causes of human birth defects. Note
that the causes of most defects are unknown and that 20% to 25% of them are
caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors (multifactorial
inheritance).

Birth Defects Caused by Genetic
Factors*
Numerically, genetic factors are the most important causes of birth defects. It has
been estimated that they cause approximately one third of all defects (Fig. 20-1).
Nearly 85% of all defects have no known causes. Any mechanism as complex as
mitosis or meiosis may occasionally malfunction. Chromosomal abnormalities
or aberrations are present in 6% to 7% of zygotes (single-cell embryos).
Many of these early abnormal embryos never undergo normal cleavage and
become blastocysts. In vitro studies of cleaving zygotes less than 5 days old have
revealed a high incidence of abnormalities. More than 60% of day 2 cleaving
zygotes were found to be abnormal. Many defective zygotes, blastocysts, and 3-
week-old embryos abort spontaneously, and the overall frequency of
chromosome abnormalities in these embryos is at least 50%.
Two kinds of changes occur in chromosome complements: numerical and
structural. The changes may affect the sex chromosomes and/or the autosomes
(chromosomes other than sex chromosomes). In some instances, both kinds of
chromosomes are affected. Persons with chromosome abnormalities usually have
characteristic phenotypes (morphologic characteristics), such as the physical
characteristics of infants with Down syndrome (see Fig. 20-6). They often look
more like other persons with the same chromosome abnormality than their own
siblings (brothers or sisters). This characteristic appearance results from genetic
imbalance. Genetic factors initiate defects by biochemical or other means at the
subcellular, cellular, or tissue level. The abnormal mechanisms initiated by the
genetic factors may be identical or similar to the causal mechanisms initiated by
a teratogen (e.g., a drug).

Numerical Chromosomal Abnormalities
In the United States, approximately one in 120 live-born infants has a
chromosomal abnormality. Numerical aberrations of chromosomes usually result
from nondisjunction, an error in cell division in which there is failure of a
chromosomal pair or two chromatids of a chromosome to disjoin during mitosis
or meiosis. As a result, the chromosomal pair or chromatids pass to one daughter
cell and the other daughter cell receives neither (Fig. 20-2). Nondisjunction may
occur during maternal or paternal gametogenesis (see Chapter 2). The
chromosomes in somatic cells are normally paired; they are called homologous
chromosomes (homologs). Normal human females have 22 pairs of autosomes
plus two X chromosomes, whereas normal males have 22 pairs of autosomes
plus one X chromosome and one Y chromosome.

FIGURE 20–2 Diagram showing nondisjunction of chromosomes during the
first meiotic division of a primary oocyte resulting in an abnormal oocyte with
24 chromosomes. Subsequent fertilization by a normal sperm produces a zygote
with 47 chromosomes—aneuploidy—deviation from the human diploid number
of 46.
Glossary of Teratologic Terms
A birth defect is a structural abnormality of any type; however, not all variations

of development are anomalies. Anatomic variations are common; for example,
bones vary among themselves, not only in their basic shape, but in lesser details
of surface structure. There are four clinically significant types of birth defect:
malformation, disruption, deformation, and dysplasia.
• Malformation: A morphologic defect of an organ, part of an organ, or larger
region of the body that results from an intrinsically abnormal developmental
process. Intrinsic implies that the developmental potential of the primordium of
an organ is abnormal from the beginning, such as a chromosomal abnormality of
a gamete (oocyte or sperm) at fertilization. Most malformations are considered
to be a defect of a morphogenetic or developmental field that responds as a
coordinated unit to embryonic interaction, and results in complex or multiple
malformations.
• Disruption: A morphologic defect of an organ, part of an organ, or a larger
region of the body that results from the extrinsic breakdown of, or an
interference with, an originally normal developmental process. Thus,
morphologic alterations after exposure to teratogens—agents such as drugs and
viruses—should be considered as disruptions. A disruption cannot be inherited,
but inherited factors can predispose to and influence the development of a
disruption.
• Deformation: An abnormal form, shape, or position of a part of the body that
results from mechanical forces. Intrauterine compression in utero that results
from oligohydramnios—insufficient amount of amniotic fluid—may produce an
equinovarus foot or clubfoot (see Chapter 16). Some central nervous system
neural tube defects, such as meningomyelocele—a severe type of spina bifida—
produce intrinsic functional disturbances that also cause fetal deformation.
• Dysplasia: An abnormal organization of cells in tissue(s) and its morphologic
result(s). Dysplasia is the process and the consequence of dyshistogenesis
(abnormal tissue formation). All abnormalities relating to histogenesis are
therefore classified as dysplasias, such as congenital ectodermal dysplasia (see
Chapter 19). Dysplasia is causally nonspecific and often affects several organs
because of the nature of the underlying cellular disturbances.
Other descriptive terms are used to describe infants with multiple defects and
terms have evolved to express causation and pathogenesis.
• A polytopic field defect is a pattern of defects derived from the disturbance of a
single developmental field.
• A sequence is a pattern of multiple defects derived from a single known or

presumed structural defect or mechanical factor.
• A syndrome is a pattern of multiple defects thought to be pathogenetically
related and not known to represent a single sequence or a polytopic field defect.
• An association is a nonrandom occurrence in two or more individuals of
multiple defects not known to be a polytopic field defect, sequence, or
syndrome.
Whereas a sequence is a pathogenetic and not a causal concept, a syndrome
often implies a single cause, such as trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). In both
cases, however, the pattern of defects is known or considered to be
pathogenetically related. In the case of a sequence, the primary initiating factor
and cascade of secondary developmental complications are known. For example,
the Potter sequence, attributed to oligohydramnios, results from either renal
agenesis or leakage of amniotic fluid. An association, in contrast, refers to
statistically, not pathogenetically or causally related defects. One or more
sequences, syndromes, or field defects may very well constitute an association.
Dysmorphology is an area of clinical genetics that is concerned with the
diagnosis and interpretation of patterns of structural defects. Recurrent patterns
of birth defects are the hallmarks of syndrome recognition. Identifying these
patterns in individuals has resulted in improved understanding of the etiology
and pathogenesis of these conditions.
Inactivation of Genes
During embryogenesis, one of the two X chromosomes in female somatic cells is
randomly inactivated and appears as a mass of sex chromatin (see Chapter 6).
Inactivation of genes on one X chromosome in somatic cells of female embryos
occurs during implantation. X inactivation is important clinically because it
means that each cell from a carrier of an X-linked disease has the mutant gene
causing the disease, either on the active X chromosome or on the inactivated X
chromosome that is represented by sex chromatin. Uneven X inactivation in
monozygotic (identical twins) twins is one reason given for discordance for a
variety of birth defects. The genetic basis for discordance is that one twin
preferentially expresses the paternal X and the other the maternal X.

Aneuploidy and Polyploidy
Changes in chromosome number represent either aneuploidy or polyploidy.
Aneuploidy is any deviation from the human diploid number of 46
chromosomes. An aneuploid is an individual who has a chromosome number
that is not an exact multiple of the haploid number of 23 (e.g., 45 or 47). A
polyploid is an individual who has a chromosome number that is a multiple of
the haploid number of 23 other than the diploid number (e.g., 69; see Fig. 20-
10).
The principal cause of aneuploidy is nondisjunction during cell division (Fig. 20-
2), resulting in an unequal distribution of one pair of homologous chromosomes
to the daughter cells. One cell has two chromosomes and the other has neither
chromosome of the pair. As a result, the embryo’s cells may be hypodiploid (45,
X0 as in Turner syndrome [Figs. 20-3 to 20-5]), or hyperdiploid (usually 47, as
in trisomy 21 or Down syndrome [Fig. 20-6]). Embryos with monosomy—
missing a chromosome—usually die. Approximately 99% of embryos lacking a
sex chromosome (45, X0 as in Turner syndrome) abort spontaneously (Fig. 20-
5).
 

 
 
FIGURE 20–3 Female infant with Turner syndrome (45, X0). A, Face of the
infant with Turner syndrome. B, Lateral view of infant’s head and neck showing
a short webbed neck, prominent ears. These infants have defective gonadal
development (and gonadal dysgenesis). C, Infant’s feet showing the
characteristic lymphedema (puffiness and swelling), a useful diagnostic sign. D,

Lymphedema of toes, a condition that usually leads to nail underdevelopment
(hypoplasia).
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)


FIGURE 20–4 Turner syndrome in a 14-year-old girl. Note the features of the
syndrome: short stature, webbed neck, absence of sexual maturation, broad
shield-like chest with widely spaced nipples, and lymphedema of the hands and
feet.
(Courtesy of Dr. F. Antoniazzi and Dr. V. Fanos, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.)


FIGURE 20–5 Female fetus (16 weeks) with Turner syndrome. Note the
excessive accumulation of watery fluid (hydrops) and the large cystic hygroma
(lymphangioma) in the posterior head and cervical region. The hygroma causes
the loose neck skin and webbing seen postnatally (see Fig. 20-3B).
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
 
 

 
FIGURE 20–6 A, Anterior view of a female fetus (16.5 weeks) with Down
syndrome. B, Hand of fetus. Note the single, transverse palmar flexion crease
(simian crease, arrow) and the clinodactyly (incurving) of the fifth digit. C,
Anterior view of the faces of dizygotic male twins that are discordant for Down
syndrome (trisomy 21). The one on the right is smaller than the unaffected twin.
The twin on the right developed from a zygote that contained an extra 21
chromosome. Note the characteristic facial features of Down syndrome in this
infant: upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, and flat nasal bridge. D, A
2- -year-old girl with Down syndrome.

(A and B, Courtesy of Dr. D.K. Kalousek, Department of Pathology, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; C and D, Courtesy
of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of
Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
Turner Syndrome
Approximately 1% of monosomy X female embryos survive; the incidence of 45,
X0 (Turner syndrome) in female neonates is approximately 1 in 8000 live births.
Half of the affected individuals have 45, X0; the other half have a variety of
abnormalities of a sex chromosome. The phenotype of Turner syndrome is
female (Figs. 20-3 and 20-4). Secondary sexual characteristics do not develop in
90% of affected females, and hormone replacement is required.
Phenotype refers to the morphologic characteristics of an individual as
determined by the genotype and the environment in which it is expressed. The
monosomy X chromosome abnormality is the most common cytogenetic
abnormality observed in fetuses that abort spontaneously (Fig. 20-5); it accounts
for approximately 18% of all abortions caused by chromosome abnormalities.
The error in gametogenesis (nondisjunction) that causes monosomy X (Turner
syndrome), when it can be traced, is in the paternal gamete (sperm) in
approximately 75% of cases; that is, it is the paternal X chromosome that is
usually missing. The most frequent chromosome constitution in Turner
syndrome is 45, X0; however, nearly 50% of these people have other
karyotypes (the chromosome characteristics of an individual cell or a cell line).
Trisomy of Autosomes
The presence of three chromosome copies in a given chromosome pair is called
trisomy. Trisomies are the most common abnormalities of chromosome number.
The usual cause of this numerical error is meiotic nondisjunction of
chromosomes (Fig. 20-2), resulting in a gamete with 24 instead of 23
chromosomes and subsequently in a zygote with 47 chromosomes.
Trisomy of the autosomes is associated with three main syndromes (Table 20-1):
• Trisomy 21 or Down syndrome (Fig. 20-6)

• Trisomy 18 or Edwards syndrome (Fig. 20-7)
• Trisomy 13 or Patau syndrome (Fig. 20-8)
Table 20–1 Trisomy of Autosomes
CHROMOSOMAL
ABERRATION/SYNDROME INCIDENCE USUAL CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)*
(see Fig. 20-6)
1 : 800
Mental deficiency;
brachycephaly, flat nasal
bridge; upward slant to
palpebral fissures; protruding
tongue; transverse palmar
flexion crease; clinodactyly of
fifth digit; congenital heart
defects; gastrointestinal tract
abnormalities
Trisomy 18 syndrome
(Edwards syndrome)†
(see Fig.20-7)
1 : 8000
Mental deficiency; growth
retardation; prominent occiput;
short sternum; ventricular
septal defect; micrognathia;
low-set malformed ears, flexed
digits, hypoplastic nails;
rocker-bottom feet
Trisomy 13 syndrome (Patau
syndrome)†
(see Fig. 20-8)
1 : 12,000
Mental deficiency; severe
central nervous system
malformations; sloping
forehead; malformed ears,
scalp defects; microphthalmia;
bilateral cleft lip and/or palate;
polydactyly; posterior
prominence of the heels
* The importance of this disorder in the overall problem of mental deficiency is
indicated by the fact that persons with Down syndrome represent 10% to 15% of
institutionalized mental defectives. The incidence of trisomy 21 at fertilization is
greater than at birth; however, 75% of embryos are spontaneously aborted and at
least 20% are stillborn.

† Infants with this syndrome rarely survive beyond 6 months.


FIGURE 20–7 Female neonate with trisomy 18. Note the growth retardation,
clenched fists with characteristic positioning of the fingers (second and fifth
ones overlapping the third and fourth ones), short sternum, and narrow pelvis.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)


FIGURE 20–8 Female neonate with trisomy 13. Note the bilateral cleft lip, low-
set malformed left ear, and polydactyly (extra digits). A small omphalocele
(herniation of viscera into umbilical cord) is also present.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
Infants with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 are severely malformed and mentally
deficient; they usually die early in infancy. More than half of trisomic embryos
spontaneously abort early. Trisomy of the autosomes occurs with increasing
frequency as maternal age increases. For example, trisomy 21 occurs once in
approximately 1400 births in mothers ages 20 to 24 years, but once in
approximately 25 births in mothers 45 years and older (Table 20-2). Trisomy 13
is the most common chromosomal abnormality in neonates.
Table 20–2 Incidence of Down Syndrome in Neonates
MATERNAL AGE (YEARS)
INCIDENCE
20–24
1 : 1400
25–29
1 : 1100
30–34
1 : 700
35
1 : 350
37
1 : 225
39
1 : 140
41
1 : 85
43
1 : 50
45+
1 : 30
Errors in meiosis occur with increasing maternal age and the most common
aneuploidy seen in older mothers is trisomy 21. Because of the current trend of
increasing maternal age, it has been estimated that by the end of this decade,
children born to women older than 34 years will account for 39% of infants with
trisomy 21. Translocation or mosaicism occurs in approximately 5% of the
affected children. Mosaicism, two or more cell types containing different
numbers of chromosomes (normal and abnormal), leads to a less severe

phenotype and the IQ of the child may be nearly normal.
Trisomy of Sex Chromosomes
This type of trisomy is a common disorder (Table 20-3); however, because there
are no characteristic physical findings in infants or children, this disorder is not
usually detected until puberty (Fig. 20-9). Sex chromatin studies were useful in
the past for detecting some types of trisomy of the sex chromosomes because
two masses of sex chromatin are present in nuclei of XXX females (trisomy X),
and nuclei of XXY males (Klinefelter syndrome) contain a mass of sex
chromatin (see Chapter 6). Today, diagnosis is best achieved by chromosome
analysis or other molecular cytogenetic techniques.
Table 20–3 Trisomy of Chromosomes


FIGURE 20–9 Adolescent male with Klinefelter syndrome (XXY trisomy). Note
the presence of breasts; approximately 40% of males with this syndrome have
gynecomastia (development of breasts) and small testes.
(Courtesy of Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Tetrasomy and Pentasomy
Tetrasomy and pentasomy of the sex chromosomes also occur. Persons with
these abnormalities have four or five sex chromosomes, respectively; the
following chromosome complexes have been reported in females: 48, XXXX
and 49, XXXXX; and in males: 48, XXXY, 48, XXYY, 49, XXXYY, and 49,
XXXXY. The extra sex chromosomes do not accentuate sexual characteristics;
however, usually the greater the number of sex chromosomes present, the greater
the severity of mental deficiency and physical impairment.
Mosaicism
A person who has at least two cell lines with two or more different genotypes
(genetic constitutions) is a mosaic. Either the autosomes or sex chromosomes
may be involved. Usually the defects are less serious than in persons with
monosomy or trisomy; for instance, the features of Turner syndrome are not as
evident in 45, X/46, XX mosaic females as in the usual 45, X females.
Mosaicism usually results from nondisjunction during early cleavage of the
zygote (see Chapter 2). Mosaicism resulting from loss of a chromosome by
anaphase lagging also occurs; the chromosomes separate normally but one of
them is delayed in its migration and is eventually lost.
Triploidy
The most common type of polyploidy is triploidy (69 chromosomes). Triploid
fetuses have severe intrauterine growth retardation with severe head-body
disproportion (Fig. 20-10). Although triploid fetuses can be live-born, they do
not survive very long. Triploidy most frequently results from fertilization of an

oocyte by two sperms (dispermy). Failure of one of the meiotic divisions (see
Chapter 2), resulting in a diploid oocyte or sperm, could also account for some
cases. Triploid fetuses account for approximately 20% of chromosomally
abnormal spontaneous abortions.


FIGURE 20–10 Triploid fetus (69 chromosomes) illustrating severe head-to-
body disproportion. Triploid fetuses account for nearly 20% of chromosomally
abnormal miscarriages.
(From Crane JP: Ultrasound evaluation of fetal chromosome disorders. In
Callen PW [ed]: Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1994.)
Tetraploidy
Doubling of the diploid chromosome number from 46 to 92 (tetraploidy)
probably occurs during the first cleavage division of the zygote (see Chapter 2).
Division of this abnormal zygote subsequently results in an embryo with cells
containing 92 chromosomes. Tetraploid embryos abort very early and often all
that is recovered is an empty chorionic sac (once called a “blighted embryo”).

Structural Chromosomal Abnormalities
Most structural chromosomal abnormalities result from chromosome breakage,
followed by reconstitution in an abnormal combination (Fig. 20-11).
Chromosome breakage may be induced by various environmental factors, such
as ionizing radiation, viral infections, drugs, and chemicals. The type of
structural chromosome abnormality depends on what happens to the broken
pieces. The only two aberrations of chromosome structure that are likely to be
transmitted from a parent to an embryo are structural rearrangements, such as
inversion and translocation. Overall, structural abnormalities of chromosomes
are present in about 1 in 375 neonates.

FIGURE 20–11 Diagrams illustrating various structural chromosomal
abnormalities. A, Reciprocal translocation. B, Terminal deletion. C, Ring
chromosome. D, Duplication. E, Paracentric inversion. F, Isochromosome. G,
Robertsonian translocation. Arrows indicate how the structural abnormalities are
produced.
(Modified from Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HE: Thompson and

Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2004)
Translocation
This abnormality is the transfer of a piece of one chromosome to a
nonhomologous chromosome. If two nonhomologous chromosomes exchange
pieces, it is called a reciprocal translocation (Fig. 20-11A and G).
Translocation does not necessarily cause abnormal development. Persons with a
translocation between a number 21 chromosome and a number 14 chromosome,
for example (Fig. 20-11G), are phenotypically normal. Such persons are called
balanced translocation carriers; they have a tendency, independent of age, to
produce germ cells with an abnormal translocation chromosome. Three to 4% of
infants with Down syndrome have translocation trisomies, that is, the extra 21
chromosome is attached to another chromosome.
Deletion
When a chromosome breaks, part of it may be lost (Fig. 20-11B). A partial
terminal deletion from the short arm of chromosome 5 causes the cri du chat
syndrome (Fig. 20-12). Affected infants have a weak cat-like cry, microcephaly
(small neurocranium), severe mental deficiency, and congenital heart disease. A
ring chromosome is a type of deletion chromosome from which both ends have
been lost, and the broken ends have rejoined to form a ring-shaped chromosome
(Fig. 20-11C). Ring chromosomes are rare but they have been found for all
chromosomes. These abnormal chromosomes have been described in persons
with 45, X (Turner syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome), and other
structural chromosomal abnormalities.

FIGURE 20–12 A, Male child with cri du chat syndrome (cat-like cry). Note
microcephaly (small neurocranium) and hypertelorism (increased distance
between orbits). B, Partial karyotype of this child showing a terminal deletion of
the short arm (end) of chromosome number 5. The arrow indicates the site of the
deletion.
(A, From Gardner EJ: Principles of Genetics, 5th ed. New York, John Wiley &
Sons, 1975. B, Courtesy of the late Dr. M. Ray, Department of Human Genetics,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Microdeletions and Microduplication
High-resolution banding techniques have allowed detection of very small
interstitial and terminal deletions in a number of chromosomal disorders. An
acceptable resolution of chromosome banding on a routine analysis reveals 550
bands per haploid set, whereas high-resolution chromosome banding reveals up
to 1300 bands per haploid set. Because the deletions span several contiguous
genes, these disorders, as well as those with microduplications, are referred to as
contiguous gene syndromes (Table 20-4). Two examples are:
• Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), a sporadically occurring disorder associated
with short stature, mild mental deficiency, obesity, hyperphagia (overeating), and
hypogonadism (inadequate gonadal function).
• Angelman syndrome (AS), characterized by severe mental deficiency,
microcephaly (small neurocranium), brachycephaly (shortness of head), seizures,

and ataxic (jerky) movements of the limbs and trunk.
Table 20–4 Examples of Contiguous Gene Syndromes (Microdeletion or
Microduplication Syndromes)
PWS and AS are often associated with a visible deletion of band q12 on
chromosome 15. The clinical phenotype is determined by the parental origin of
the deleted chromosome 15. If the deletion arises in the mother, AS occurs; if
passed on by the father, the child exhibits the PWS phenotype. This suggests that
the phenomenon of genetic imprinting, whereby differential expression of
genetic material is dependent on the sex of the transmitting parent.
Molecular Cytogenetics
Several new methods for merging classic cytogenetics with DNA technology
have facilitated a more precise definition of chromosome abnormalities,
location, or origins, including unbalanced translocations, accessory or marker
chromosomes, and gene mapping. One new approach to chromosome
identification is based on fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), whereby

chromosome-specific DNA probes can adhere to complementary regions located
on specific chromosomes. This allows improved identification of chromosome
location and number in metaphase spreads or even in interphase cells. FISH
techniques using interphase cells may soon obviate the need to culture cells for
specific chromosome analysis, such as in the case of prenatal diagnosis of fetal
trisomies.
Studies using subtelomeric FISH probes in individuals with mental deficiency
of unknown etiology, with or without birth defects, have identified
submicroscopic chromosome deletions or duplications in 5% to 10% of these
individuals. Alterations in DNA sequence copy number are present in solid
tumors, and are found in association with developmental abnormalities and/or
mental deficiency.
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) can detect and map these changes
in specific regions of the genome. Microarray-based CGH (array comparative
genomic hybridization) is now being used to identify genomic rearrangements in
individuals who had been previously considered to have mental deficiency or
multiple birth defects of unknown etiology, despite normal test results from
traditional chromosome or gene analysis. Thus, these investigations have
become important in the routine evaluation of patients with previously
unexplained mental deficiency, autism, and multiple congenital anomalies.
Duplications
These abnormalities may be represented as a duplicated part of a chromosome,
within a chromosome (Fig. 20-11D), attached to a chromosome or as a separate
fragment. Duplications are more common than deletions and are less harmful
because there is no loss of genetic material. However, there is often a resulting
clinical effect on the phenotype leading to either mental impairment or birth
defects in individuals with chromosome duplication. Duplication may involve
part of a gene, a whole gene, or a series of genes.
Inversion
This is a chromosomal aberration in which a segment of a chromosome is

reversed. Paracentric inversion is confined to a single arm of the chromosome
(Fig. 20-11E), whereas pericentric inversion involves both arms and includes the
centromere. Carriers of pericentric inversions are at risk of having offspring with
abnormalities because of unequal crossing over and malsegregation at meiosis.
Isochromosomes
The abnormality resulting in isochromosomes occurs when the centromere
divides transversely instead of longitudinally (Fig. 20-11E). An isochromosome
is a chromosome in which one arm is missing and the other is duplicated. An
isochromosome appears to be the most common structural abnormality of the X
chromosome. Persons with this abnormality are often short in stature and have
other stigmata of Turner syndrome. These characteristics are related to the loss
of an arm of an X chromosome.

Birth Defects Caused by Mutant Genes
Seven to 8% of birth defects are caused by gene defects (Fig. 20-1). A mutation,
usually involving a loss or change in the function of a gene, is any permanent,
heritable change in the sequence of genomic DNA. Because a random change is
unlikely to lead to an improvement in development, most mutations are
deleterious and some are lethal.
The mutation rate can be increased by a number of environmental agents, such
as large doses of ionizing radiation. Defects resulting from gene mutations are
inherited according to mendelian laws; consequently, predictions can be made
about the probability of their occurrence in the affected person’s children and
other relatives. An example of a dominantly inherited birth defect
—achondroplasia (Fig. 20-13)—results from a G-to-A transition mutation at
nucleotide 1138 of the cDNA in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene on
chromosome 4p. Other defects, such as congenital suprarenal hyperplasia (see
Fig. 20-18) and microcephaly, are attributed to autosomal recessive inheritance.
Autosomal recessive genes manifest themselves only when homozygous; as a
consequence, many carriers of these genes (heterozygous persons) remain
undetected.


FIGURE 20–13 A young boy with achondroplasia showing short stature, short
limbs and fingers, normal length of trunk, bowed legs, a relatively large head,
prominent forehead, and depressed nasal bridge.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
Fragile X syndrome is the most commonly inherited cause of moderate mental
deficiency (Fig. 20-14). It is one of more than 200 X-linked disorders associated
with mental impairment. The fragile X syndrome has a frequency of 1 in 1500
male births and may account for much of the excess of males in the mentally
deficient population. Diagnosis of this syndrome can be confirmed by
chromosome analysis demonstrating the fragile X chromosome at Xq27.3, or by
DNA studies showing an expansion of CGG nucleotides in a specific region of
the FMR-1 gene.
FIGURE 20–14 Siblings with fragile X syndrome. A, An 8-year-old mentally
deficient boy exhibiting a relatively normal appearance with a long face and
prominent ears. B, His 6-year-old sister who also has this syndrome. She has a
mild learning disability and similar features of long face and prominent ears.
Note the strabismus (crossed right eye). Although an X-linked disorder,

sometimes female carriers have expression of the disease.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
Several genetic disorders have been confirmed to be caused by expansion of
trinucleotides in specific genes. Other examples include myotonic dystrophy,
Huntington chorea, spinobulbar atrophy (Kennedy syndrome), Friedreich ataxia,
and others. X-linked recessive genes are usually manifest in affected
(hemizygous) males, and occasionally in carrier (heterozygous) females, for
example, fragile X syndrome (Fig. 20-14).
The human genome comprises an estimated 20,000 to 25,000 genes per haploid
set or 3 billion base pairs. Because of the Human Genome Project and
international research collaboration, many disease-and birth defect–causing
mutations in genes have been and will continue to be identified. Most genes will
be sequenced and their specific function determined.
Understanding the cause of birth defects will require a better understanding of
gene expression during early development. The majority of genes that are
expressed in a cell are expressed in a wide variety of cells and are involved in
basic cellular metabolic functions, such as nucleic acid and protein synthesis,
cytoskeleton and organelle biogenesis, and nutrient transport and other cellular
mechanisms. These genes are referred to as housekeeping genes. The specialty
genes are expressed at specific times in specific cells and define the hundreds of
different cell types that make up the human organism. An essential aspect of
developmental biology is regulation of gene expression. Regulation is often
achieved by transcription factors that bind to regulatory or promoter elements of
specific genes.
Epigenetic regulation refers to changes in phenotype (appearance) or gene
expression caused by mechanisms other than changes in the underlying DNA
sequence. The mechanisms of epigenetic change are not entirely clear, but it is
believed that modifying transcriptional factors, DNA methylation, or histone
modification may also be key in altering developmental events. Several birth
defects may be the result of altered gene expression due to environmental
factors, such as stress or altered nutrition rather than due to changes in DNA
sequences.

Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic process whereby the female and male
germ lines confer a sex-specific mark on a chromosome subregion, so that only
the paternal or maternal allele of a gene is active in the offspring. In other words,
the sex of the transmitting parent will influence expression or nonexpression of
certain genes in the offspring (Table 20-4). This is the reason for PWS and AS,
in which case the phenotype is determined by whether the microdeletion is
transmitted by the father (PWS) or the mother (AS). In a substantial number of
cases of PWS and AS, as well as several other genetic disorders, the condition
arises from a phenomenon referred to as uniparental disomy. In the situation
with PWS and AS, both chromosomes 15s originate from only one parent. PWS
occurs when both chromosomes 15s are derived from the mother, and AS occurs
when both are paternally derived. The mechanism for this is believed to begin
with a trisomic conceptus, followed by a loss of the extra chromosome in an
early postzygotic cell division. This results in a “rescued” cell, in which both
chromosomes have been derived from one parent.
Uniparental disomy has involved several chromosome pairs. Some are
associated with adverse clinical outcomes involving chromosome pairs 6
(transient neonatal diabetes mellitus), 7 (Silver-Russel syndrome), and 15 (PWS
and AS), whereas others (1 and 22) are not associated with any abnormal
phenotypic effect.
Homeobox genes are a group of genes found in all vertebrates. They have
highly conserved sequences and order. They are involved in early embryonic
development and specify identity and spatial arrangements of body segments.
Protein products of these genes bind to DNA and form transcriptional factors
that regulate gene expression. Disorders associated with some homeobox
mutations are described in Table 20-5.
Table 20–5 Examples of Disorders in Humans Associated with Homeobox
Mutations
NAME
CLINICAL FEATURES
GENE
Waardenburg
syndrome (type I)
White forelock, lateral displacement of
medial canthi of the eyes, cochlear
deafness, heterochromia, tendency to
facial clefting, autosomal dominant
inheritance
HuP2 gene in
humans,
homologous to
mouse Pax3 gene

Synpolydactyly
(type II
syndactyly)
Webbing and duplication of fingers,
supernumerary metacarpal, autosomal
dominant inheritance
HOX D 13
mutation
Holoprosencephaly
(one form)
Incomplete separation of lateral
cerebral ventricles, anophthalmia or
cyclopia, midline facial hypoplasia or
clefts, single maxillary central incisors,
hypotelorism, autosomal dominant
inheritance with widely variable
expression
HPE 3 (sonic
hedgehog)
mutation gene that
is homologous to
the Drosophila
segment polarity
gene hedgehog
Schizencephaly
(type II)
Full-thickness cleft within the cerebral
ventricles often leading to seizures,
spasticity, and mental deficiency
Germline mutation
in the EMX2
homeobox gene,
homologous to the
mouse EMX2

Developmental Signaling Pathways
Normal embryogenesis is regulated by several complex signaling cascades (see
Chapter 21). Mutations or alterations in any of these signaling pathways can
lead to birth defects. Many pathways are cell autonomous and only alter the
differentiation of that particular cell, as seen in proteins produced by HOX A and
HOX D gene clusters (in which mutations lead to a variety of limb defects).
Other transcriptional factors act by influencing the pattern of gene expression
of adjacent cells. These short-range signal controls can act as simple on-off
switches (paracrine signals); others, termed morphogens, elicit many responses
depending on their level of expression with other cells.
One such developmental signaling pathway is initiated by the secreted protein
called sonic hedgehog (Shh) that sets off a chain of events in target cells,
resulting in activation and repression of target cells by transcription factors in the
Gli family. Perturbations (disturbances) in the regulation of the Shh-Patched-Gli
(Shh-Ptch-Gli) pathway lead to several human diseases, including some cancers
and birth defects.
Shh is expressed in the notochord, the floor plate of the neural tube, the brain,
and other regions, such as the zone of polarizing activity of the developing
limbs, and the gut. Sporadic and inherited mutations in the human Shh gene
leads to holoprosencephaly (see Chapter 17, Fig. 17-40), a midline defect of
variable severity involving abnormal central nervous system (CNS) septation,
facial clefting, single central incisor, hypotelorism, or a single cyclopic eye (see
Chapter 18, Fig. 18-6). Shh protein needs to be processed to an active form and
is modified by the addition of a cholesterol moiety. Defects in cholesterol
biosynthesis, such as in the autosomal recessively inherited disorder Smith-
Lemli-Opitz syndrome, share many features, particularly brain and limb defects
reminiscent of Shh-pathway diseases. This suggests that Shh signaling may play
a key role in several genetic disorders.
The three Gli genes identified as transcriptional factors are in the Shh-Ptch-Gli
pathway. Mutations in the Gli3 gene have been implicated in several autosomal
dominantly inherited disorders, including Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
syndrome (deletions or point mutations); Pallister-Hall syndrome with
hypothalamic hamartomas, central or postaxial polydactyly, among other defects
of the face, brain, and limbs (frameshift or nonsense mutations); simple familial

postaxial polydactyly type A and B, as well as preaxial polydactyly type IV
(nonsense, missense, and frameshift mutations).
A comprehensive, authoritative, and daily updated listing of all known human
genetic disorders and gene loci can be found on the Internet (Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man [OMIM]): McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University [Baltimore, MD], and National Center for
Biotechnology information, National Library of Medicine [Bethesda, MD],
2006; www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/).

Birth Defects Caused By
Environmental Factors
Although the human embryo is well protected in the uterus, many environmental
agents known as teratogens cause developmental disruptions after maternal
exposure to them (Table 20-6). A teratogen is any agent that can produce a birth
defect (congenital anomaly) or increase the incidence of a defect in the
population. Environmental factors, such as infections and drugs, may simulate
genetic conditions (e.g., when two or more children of normal parents are
affected).
Table 20–6 Some Teratogens Known to Cause Human Congenital Anomalies or
Birth Defects
AGENTS
MOST COMMON BIRTH DEFECTS
Drugs
 
Alcohol
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS): intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR), mental deficiency, microcephaly, ocular anomalies,
joint abnormalities, short palpebral fissures
Androgens and
high doses of
progestogens
Varying degrees of masculinization of female fetuses:
ambiguous external genitalia resulting in labial fusion and
clitoral hypertrophy
Aminopterin
IUGR; skeletal defects; malformations of the central nervous
system (CNS), notably meroencephaly (most of the brain is
absent)
Cocaine
IUGR, prematurity, microcephaly, cerebral infarction,
urogenital defects, neurobehavioral disturbances
Diethystilbestrol Abnormalities of uterus and vagina, cervical erosion and
ridges
Isotretinoin (13-
cis-retinoic acid)
Craniofacial abnormalities; neural tube defects (NTDs), such
as spina bifida cystica; cardiovascular defects; cleft palate;
thymic aplasia
Lithium

carbonate
Various defects, usually involving the heart and great vessels
Methotrexate
Multiple defects, especially skeletal, involving the face,
cranium, limbs, and vertebral column
Misoprostol
Limb abnormalities, ocular and cranial nerve defects, autism
spectrum disorder
Phenytoin
Fetal hydantoin syndrome: IUGR, microcephaly, mental
deficiency, ridged frontal suture, inner epicanthal folds,
eyelid ptosis, broad depressed nasal bridge, phalangeal
hypoplasia
Tetracycline
Stained teeth, hypoplasia of enamel
Thalidomide
Abnormal development of limbs, e.g., meromelia (partial
absence) and amelia (complete absence); facial defects;
systemic anomalies, e.g., cardiac, kidney, and ocular defects
Trimethadione
Development delay, V-shaped eyebrows, low-set ears, cleft
lip and/or palate
Valproic acid
Craniofacial anomalies, NTDs, cognitive abnormalities, often
hydrocephalus, heart and skeletal defects
Warfarin
Nasal hypoplasia, stippled epiphyses, hypoplastic phalanges,
eye anomalies, mental deficiency
Chemicals
 
Methylmercury
Cerebral atrophy, spasticity, seizures, mental deficiency
Polychlorinated
biphenyls
IUGR, skin discolorization
Infections
 
Cytomegalovirus
Microcephaly, chorioretinitis, sensorineural hearing loss,
delayed psychomotor/mental development,
hepatosplenomegaly, hydrocephaly, cerebral palsy, brain
(periventricular) calcification
Herpes simplex
virus
Skin vesicles and scarring, chorioretinitis, hepatomegaly,
thrombocytopenia, petechiae, hemolytic anemia,
hydranencephaly
Human
parvovirus B19
Fetal anemia, nonimmune hydrops fetalis, fetal death
IUGR, postnatal growth retardation, cardiac and great vessel

Rubella virus
abnormalities, microcephaly, sensorineural deafness, cataract,
microphthalmos, glaucoma, pigmented retinopathy, mental
deficiency, neonate bleeding, hepatosplenomegaly,
osteopathy, tooth defects
Toxoplasma
gondii
Microcephaly, mental deficiency, microphthalmia,
hydrocephaly, chorioretinitis, cerebral calcifications, hearing
loss, neurologic disturbance
Treponema
pallidum
Hydrocephalus, congenital deafness, mental deficiency,
abnormal teeth and bones
Venezuelan
equine
encephalitis
virus
Microcephaly, microphthalmia, cerebral agenesis, CNS
necrosis, hydrocephalus
Varicella virus
Cutaneous scars (dermatome distribution), neurologic defects
(limb paresis [incomplete paralysis]),
hydrocephaly, seizures, etc.), cataracts, microphthalmia,
Horner syndrome, optic atrophy, nystagmus, chorioretinitis,
microcephaly, mental deficiency, skeletal anomalies
(hypoplasia of limbs, fingers, and toes, etc.), urogenital
anomalies
Radiation
 
High levels of
ionizing
radiation
Microcephaly, mental deficiency, skeletal anomalies, growth
retardation, cataracts
The important principle is that “not everything that is familial is genetic.” The
organs and parts of an embryo are most sensitive to teratogenic agents during
periods of rapid differentiation (Fig. 20-15). Environmental factors cause 7% to
10% of birth defects (Fig. 20-1). Because biochemical differentiation precedes
morphologic differentiation, the period during which structures are sensitive to
interference by teratogens often precedes the stage of their visible development
by a few days.

FIGURE 20–15 Schematic illustration of critical periods in human prenatal
development. During the first 2 weeks of development, the embryo is usually not
susceptible to teratogens; a teratogen either damages all or most of the cells,
resulting in death of the embryo, or damages only a few cells, allowing the
conceptus to recover and the embryo to develop without birth defects. Mauve
denotes highly sensitive periods when major birth defects may be produced (e.g.,
amelia, absence of limbs, neural tube defects, spina bifida cystica). Green
indicates stages that are less sensitive to teratogens when minor defects may be
induced (e.g., hypoplastic thumbs).
Teratogens do not appear to be effective in causing defects until cellular
differentiation has begun; however, their early actions (e.g., during the first 2
weeks) may cause death of the embryo. The exact mechanisms by which drugs,
chemicals, and other environmental factors disrupt embryonic development and
induce abnormalities still remain obscure. Even thalidomide’s mechanisms of
action on the embryo are a “mystery,” and more than 20 hypotheses have been
postulated to explain how this hypnotic agent disrupts embryonic development.
Many studies have shown that certain hereditary and environmental influences
may adversely affect embryonic development by altering fundamental processes,
such as the intracellular compartment, surface of the cell, extracellular matrix,
and fetal environment. It has been suggested that the initial cellular response

may take more than one form (genetic, molecular, biochemical, or biophysical),
resulting in different sequences of cellular changes (cell death, faulty cellular
interaction-induction, reduced biosynthesis of substrates, impaired
morphogenetic movements, and mechanical disruption). Eventually, these
different types of pathologic lesion could possibly lead to the final defect
(intrauterine death, developmental defects, fetal growth retardation, or functional
disturbances) through a common pathway.
Rapid progress in molecular biology is providing more information on the
genetic control of differentiation, as well as the cascade of events involved in the
expression of homeobox genes and pattern formation. It is reasonable to
speculate that disruption of gene activity at any critical stage could lead to a
developmental defect. This view is supported by recent experimental studies that
showed that exposure of mouse and amphibian embryos to the teratogen retinoic
acid (Vitamin A) altered the domain of gene expression and disrupted normal
morphogenesis. Retinoic acid is now known to be a highly teratogenic.
Researchers are now directing increasing attention to the molecular mechanisms
of abnormal development in an attempt to understand better the pathogenesis of
birth defects.

Principles of Teratogenesis
When considering the possible teratogenicity of an agent, such as a drug or
chemical, three important principles must be considered:
• Critical periods of development
• Dose of the drug or chemical
• Genotype (genetic constitution) of the embryo

Critical Periods of Human Development
The stage of development of an embryo when an agent, such as a drug or virus,
is present determines its susceptibility to a teratogen (Fig. 20-15). The most
critical period in development is when cell division, cell differentiation, and
morphogenesis are at their peak. Table 20-7 indicates the relative frequencies of
birth defects for certain organs.
Table 20–7 Incidence of Major Defects in Human Organs at Birth*
ORGAN
INCIDENCE
Brain
10 : 1000
Heart
8 : 1000
Kidneys
4 : 1000
Limbs
2 : 1000
All other
6 : 1000
Total
30 : 1000
* Data from Connor JM, Ferguson-Smith MA: Essential Medical Genetics, 2nd
ed. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1987.
The critical period for brain development is from 3 to 16 weeks, but its
development may be disrupted after this because the brain is differentiating and
growing rapidly at birth. Teratogens may produce mental deficiency during the
embryonic and fetal periods (Fig. 20-15).
Tooth development continues long after birth (see Chapter 19); hence,
development of permanent teeth may be disrupted by tetracyclines from 18
weeks (prenatal) to 16 years (see Fig. 19-20E).
The skeletal system also has a prolonged critical period of development
extending into childhood; hence, the growth of skeletal tissues provides a good
gauge of general growth.
Environmental disturbances during the first 2 weeks after fertilization may
interfere with cleavage of the zygote and implantation of the blastocyst, and/or

cause early death and spontaneous abortion of the embryo; however,
disturbances during the first 2 weeks are not known to cause birth defects (Fig.
20-15). Teratogens acting during the first 2 weeks either kill the embryo, or their
disruptive effects are compensated for by powerful regulatory properties of the
early embryo. Most development during the first 2 weeks is concerned with the
formation of extraembryonic structures such as the amnion, umbilical vesicle,
and chorionic sac (see Chapters 2 and 3).
Development of the embryo is most easily disrupted when the tissues and organs
are forming (Figs. 20-15 and 20-16). During this organogenetic period (fourth
to eighth weeks; see Chapter 5), teratogens may induce major birth defects.
Physiologic defects, for example, minor morphologic defects of the external
ears, and functional disturbances such as mental deficiency are likely to result
from disruption of development during the fetal period. Some
microorganisms, such as Toxoplasma gondii, are known to cause serious birth
defects, particularly of the brain and eyes, when they infect the fetus (see Figs.
20-22 and 20-23 and Table 20-6).
FIGURE 20–16 Schematic illustration showing the increasing risk of birth
defects developing during organogenesis.
Each tissue, organ, and system of an embryo has a critical period during which

its development may be disrupted (Fig. 20-15). The type of birth defect produced
depends on which parts, tissues, and organs are most susceptible at the time the
teratogen is active. The following examples illustrate that teratogens may affect
different organ systems that are developing at the same time:
• High levels of ionizing radiation produce defects of the CNS (brain and spinal
cord) and eyes.
• Rubella virus infection causes eye defects (glaucoma and cataracts), deafness,
and cardiac defects.
• Drugs such as thalidomide induce limb defects and other anomalies, such as
cardiac and kidney defects.
Early in the critical period of limb development, thalidomide causes severe
defects such as meromelia, absence of part of the upper and/or lower limbs (see
Fig. 20-20). Later in the sensitive period, thalidomide causes mild to moderate
limb defects, such as hypoplasia of radius and ulna.
Embryologic timetables, such as shown in Figure 20-15, are helpful when
considering the cause of a human birth defect; however, it is wrong to assume
that defects always result from a single event occurring during the critical
period, or that one can determine from these tables the day on which the defect
was produced. All one can state is that the teratogen would have had to disrupt
development before the end of the most critical period of the tissue, part, or
organ concerned. For example, the critical period for limb development is 24 to
36 days after fertilization.
Dose of the Drug or Chemical
Animal research has shown that there is a dose-response relationship for
teratogens; however, the dose used in animals to produce defects is often at
levels much higher than human exposures. Consequently, animal studies are not
readily applicable to human pregnancies. For a drug to be considered a human
teratogen, a dose-response relationship has to be observed, that is, the greater the
exposure during pregnancy, the more severe the phenotypic effect.
Genotype (Genetic Constitution) of the Embryo
There are numerous examples in experimental animals and several suspected
cases in humans that show that there are genetic differences in response to a

teratogen. Phenytoin, for example, is a well-known human teratogen (Table 20-
6). Five to 10% of embryos exposed to this anticonvulsant medication develop
the fetal hydantoin syndrome (see Fig. 20-19). Approximately one third of
exposed embryos, however, have only some of the birth defects, and more than
half of the embryos are unaffected. It appears, therefore, that the genotype of the
embryo determines whether a teratogenic agent will disrupt its development.

Human Teratogens
Awareness that certain agents can disrupt prenatal development offers the
opportunity to prevent some birth defects; for example, if women are aware of
the harmful effects of drugs such as alcohol, environmental chemicals (e.g.,
polychlorinated biphenyls), and some viruses, most of them will not expose their
embryos to these teratogenic agents.
The general objective of teratogenicity testing of drugs, chemicals, food
additives, and pesticides is to identify agents that may be teratogenic during
human development, and to alert physicians and pregnant women of their
possible danger to their embryos/fetuses.
Proof of Teratogenicity
To prove that an agent is a teratogen, it must be shown that the frequency of
defects is increased above the spontaneous rate in pregnancies in which the
mother is exposed to the agent (prospective approach), or that malformed
infants have a history of maternal exposure to the agent more often than normal
children (retrospective approach). Both types of data are difficult to obtain in
an unbiased form. Case reports are not convincing unless both the agent and type
of defect are so uncommon that their association in several cases can be judged
not coincidental.
Drug Testing in Animals
Although testing of drugs in pregnant animals is important, the results are of
limited value for predicting drug effects in human embryos. Animal experiments
can suggest only that similar effects may occur in humans. If a drug or chemical
produces teratogenic effects in two or more species, the probability of potential
human hazard must be considered to be high; however, the dose of the drug has
also to be considered.
Drugs as Teratogens

Drugs vary considerably in their teratogenicity. Some teratogens (e.g.,
thalidomide) cause severe disruption of development if administered during the
organogenetic period, the fourth to eighth weeks. Other teratogens cause mental
and growth restriction and other defects if used excessively throughout
development (e.g., alcohol).
The use of prescription and nonprescription drugs during pregnancy is
surprisingly high. Forty to 90% of women consume at least one drug during
pregnancy. Several studies have indicated that some pregnant women take an
average of four drugs, excluding nutritional supplements, and approximately half
of these women take them during the highly sensitive period (Fig. 20-15). Drug
consumption also tends to be higher during the critical period of development
among heavy smokers and drinkers. Despite this, less than 2% of birth defects
are caused by drugs and chemicals. Only a few drugs have been positively
implicated as human teratogenic agents (Table 20-6).
Although only 7% to 10% of defects are caused by recognizable teratogens (Fig.
20-1), new agents continue to be identified. It is best for women to avoid using
all medication during the first trimester, unless there is a strong medical reason
for its use, and then only if it is recognized as reasonably safe for the human
embryo. The reason for this caution is that, even though well-controlled studies
of certain drugs (e.g., marijuana) have failed to demonstrate a teratogenic risk to
human embryos, they affect the embryo (e.g., fetal decreased length and birth
weight).
Cigarette Smoking
Maternal smoking during pregnancy is a well-established cause of intrauterine
growth restriction (IUGR). Despite warnings that cigarette smoking is harmful
to the embryo/fetus, some women continue to smoke during their pregnancies. In
heavy cigarette smokers, premature delivery is twice as frequent as in mothers
who do not smoke, and their infants weigh less than normal (see Chapter 6, Fig.
6-11). Low birth weight (<2000 g) is the chief predictor of infant death.
In a case–control study, there was a modest increase in the incidence of infants
with conotruncal heart defects and limb deficiencies associated with both
maternal and paternal smoking. Moreover, there is some evidence that maternal
smoking may cause urinary tract anomalies, behavioral problems, and decreased
physical growth. Nicotine constricts uterine blood vessels, causing a decrease in

uterine blood flow, lowering the supply of oxygen and nutrients available to the
embryo/fetus from the maternal blood in the intervillous space of the placenta.
The resulting deficiency impairs cell growth and may have an adverse effect on
mental development. High levels of carboxyhemoglobin, resulting from cigarette
smoking, appear in the maternal and fetal blood and may alter the capacity of the
blood to transport oxygen. As a result, chronic fetal hypoxia (low oxygen
levels) may occur and affect fetal growth and development. Maternal smoking is
also associated with smaller brain volumes in preterm infants.
Alcohol
Alcoholism affects 1% to 2% of women of childbearing age. Both moderate and
high levels of alcohol intake during early pregnancy may result in alterations in
growth and morphogenesis of the embryo/fetus. Infants born to chronic alcoholic
mothers exhibit a specific pattern of defects, including prenatal and postnatal
growth deficiency, mental deficiency, and other defects (Fig. 20-17 and Table
20-6).


FIGURE 20–17 Fetal alcohol syndrome in an infant. Note the thin upper lip,
elongated and poorly formed philtrum (vertical groove in medial part of upper
lip), short palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge, and short nose.
(Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.)
Microcephaly (small neurocranium), short palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds,
maxillary hypoplasia, short nose, thin upper lip, abnormal palmar creases, joint
defects, and congenital heart disease are also present in most infants. This
pattern of defects—fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)—is detected in 1 to 2 infants
per 1000 live births.
The incidence of FAS is related to the population studied. Clinical experience is
often necessary to make an accurate diagnosis of FAS because the physical
defects in affected children are nonspecific. Nonetheless, the overall pattern of
clinical features present is unique, but may vary from subtle to severe.
Maternal alcohol abuse is now thought to be the most common cause of mental
deficiency. Moderate maternal alcohol consumption (1–2 oz of alcohol per day)
can result in cognitive impairment and behavioral problems. The term fetal
alcohol effects (FAE) was introduced after recognition that many children
exposed to alcohol in utero had no external dysmorphic features, but had
neurodevelopmental impairments.
The preferred term for the whole range of prenatal alcohol effects is fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). It is estimated that the general population
prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder may be as high as 1%. The
susceptible period of brain development spans the major part of gestation (Fig.
20-15); therefore, the safest advice is total abstinence from alcohol during
pregnancy.
Androgens and Progestogens
The terms progestogens and progestins are used for substances, natural or
synthetic, that induce some or all the biologic changes produced by
progesterone, a hormone secreted by the corpus luteum of the ovaries that

promotes and maintains a gravid endometrium (see Chapter 7). Some of these
substances have androgenic (masculinizing) properties that may affect the
female fetus, producing masculinization of the external genitalia (Fig. 20-18).
The incidence of birth defects varies with the hormone and the dose.
Preparations that should be avoided are the progestins, ethisterone, and
norethisterone. From a practical standpoint, the teratogenic risk of these
hormones is low. Progestin exposure during the critical period of development is
also associated with an increased prevalence of cardiovascular defects, and
exposure of male fetuses during this period may double the incidence of
hypospadias (see Chapter 12, Fig. 12-42).
FIGURE 20–18 Masculinized external genitalia of a 46, XX female infant.
Observe the enlarged clitoris and fused labia majora. The virilization was caused
by excessive androgens produced by the suprarenal glands during the fetal
period (congenital adrenal hyperplasia). The arrow indicates the opening of the
urogenital sinus.
(Courtesy of Dr. Heather Dean, Department of Pediatrics and Child Health,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.)
Many women use contraceptive hormones—birth control pills. Oral
contraceptives containing progestogens and estrogens, taken during the early

stages of an unrecognized pregnancy, are suspected of being teratogenic agents,
but the results of several epidemiologic studies are conflicting. The infants of 13
of 19 mothers who had taken progestogen-estrogen birth control pills during the
critical period of development exhibited the VACTERL syndrome. The
acronym VACTERL stands for Vertebral, Anal, Cardiac, Tracheal, Esophageal,
Renal, and Limb anomalies. As a precaution, use of oral contraceptives should
be stopped as soon as pregnancy is suspected or detected because of these
possible teratogenic effects.
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a human teratogen. Both gross and microscopic
congenital abnormalities of the uterus and vagina have been detected in women
who were exposed to DES in utero. Three types of lesions were observed:
vaginal adenosis, cervical erosions, and transverse vaginal ridges. A number of
young women ages 16 to 22 years have developed adenocarcinoma of the
vagina after a common history of exposure to this synthetic estrogen in utero.
However, the probability of cancers developing at this early age in females
exposed to DES in utero now appears to be low. The risk of cancer from DES
exposure in utero is estimated to be less than 1 in 1000.
Males who were exposed to DES in utero, after maternal treatment before the
11th week of gestation, had a higher incidence of genital tract anomalies,
including epididymal cysts and hypoplastic (underdeveloped) testes. However,
fertility in the men exposed to DES in utero seems to be unaffected. Expression
of the homeobox gene HOXA10 is altered following in utero exposure to DES.
Antibiotics
Tetracyclines cross the placental membrane and are deposited in the embryo’s
bones and teeth at sites of active calcification. As little as 1 g/day of tetracycline
during the third trimester of pregnancy can produce yellow staining of the
deciduous and/or permanent teeth (see Chapter 19, Fig. 19-20E). Tetracycline
therapy during the fourth to ninth months of pregnancy may also cause tooth
defects (e.g., enamel hypoplasia), yellow to brown discoloration of the teeth, and
diminished growth of long bones. Calcification of the permanent teeth begins at
birth and, except for the third molars, is complete by 7 to 8 years of age; hence,
long-term tetracycline therapy during childhood can affect the permanent teeth.
Deafness has been reported in infants of mothers who have been treated with
high doses of streptomycin and dihydrostreptomycin as antituberculosis

agents. More than 30 cases of hearing deficit and eighth cranial nerve damage
have been reported in infants exposed to streptomycin derivatives in utero.
Penicillin has been used extensively during pregnancy and appears to be
harmless to the human embryo and fetus.
Anticoagulants
All anticoagulants except heparin cross the placental membrane and may cause
hemorrhage in the embryo or fetus. Warfarin and other coumarin derivatives
are antagonists of vitamin K. Warfarin is used for the treatment of
thromboembolitic disease and in patients with artificial heart valves. Warfarin is
definitely a teratogen; there are reports of infants with hypoplasia of the nasal
cartilage, stippled epiphyses, and various CNS defects whose mothers took this
anticoagulant during the critical period of their embryo’s development. The
period of greatest sensitivity is between 6 and 12 weeks after fertilization.
Second-and third-trimester exposure may result in mental deficiency, optic
atrophy, and microcephaly. Heparin is not a teratogen; furthermore, it does not
cross the placental membrane (see Chapter 7, Fig. 7-7).
Anticonvulsants
Approximately 1 in 200 pregnant women is epileptic and requires treatment with
an anticonvulsant. Of the anticonvulsant drugs available, there is strong evidence
that trimethadione is a teratogen. The main features of the fetal trimethadione
syndrome are prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, developmental delay,
V-shaped eyebrows, low-set ears, cleft lip and/or palate, and cardiac,
genitourinary, and limb defects. Use of this drug is contraindicated during
pregnancy.
Phenytoin is definitely a teratogen (Fig. 20-19). Fetal hydantoin syndrome
occurs in 5% to 10% of children born to mothers treated with phenytoins or
hydantoin anticonvulsants. The usual pattern of defects consists of IUGR,
microcephaly, mental deficiency, ridged frontal suture, inner epicanthal folds,
eyelid ptosis, broad depressed nasal bridge, nail and/or distal phalangeal
hypoplasia, and hernias.

FIGURE 20–19 Fetal hydantoin syndrome in a young girl. A, She has a learning
disability due to microcephaly and mental deficiency. Note the large ears, wide
space between the eyes (hypertelorism), epicanthal folds, and short nose. Her
mother has epilepsy and ingested Dilantin throughout her pregnancy. B, Right
hand of the girl with severe digital hypoplasia (short fingers) born to a mother
who took Dilantin throughout her pregnancy.
(A, Courtesy of Dr. A.E. Chudley, Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Children’s Hospital, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada. B, From Chodirker BN, Chudley AE, Reed MH, Persaud
TVN; Am J Med Genet 27:373,
Valproic acid has been the drug of choice for the management of different types
of epilepsy; however, use of it in pregnant women has led to a pattern birth
defects consisting of craniofacial, heart, limb defects, and postnatal cognitive
developmental delay. There is also an increased risk of neural tube defects
(e.g., spina bifida cystica; Chapter 17, Fig. 17-15). Phenobarbital is considered
to be a safe antiepileptic drug for use during pregnancy. Magnesium sulfate and
diazepam are also widely used for seizure prophylaxis.
Antineoplastic Agents

With the exception of the folic acid antagonist aminopterin, few well-
documented reports of teratogenic effects are available for assessment. Because
the data available on the possible teratogenicity of antineoplastic drugs are
inadequate, it is recommended that they should be avoided, especially during the
first trimester of pregnancy.
Tumor-inhibiting chemicals are highly teratogenic because these agents inhibit
mitosis in rapidly dividing cells. The use of aminopterin during the embryonic
period often results in intrauterine death of the embryos, but the 20% to 30% of
those that survive are severely malformed. Busulfan and 6-mercaptopurine
administered in alternating courses throughout pregnancy have produced
multiple severe abnormalities, but neither drug alone appears to cause major
defects (Table 20-6).
Methotrexate, a folic acid antagonist and a derivative of aminopterin, is a potent
teratogen that produces major birth defects. It is most often used as a single
agent or in combination therapy for neoplastic diseases; however, it may also be
indicated in patients with severe rheumatic diseases including rheumatoid
arthritis. Multiple skeletal and other birth defects were found in an infant born to
a mother who attempted to terminate her pregnancy by taking methotrexate.
Corticosteroids
Low doses of corticosteroids, including cortisone and hydrocortisone, do not
induce cleft palate or any other defect in human embryos. Because of the risks of
fetal bleeding and premature closure of the ductus arteriosus, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs should not be taken during the last few weeks of pregnancy.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Exposure of the fetus to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors as
antihypertensive agents causes oligohydramnios, fetal death, hypoplasia of the
bones of the calvaria, IUGR, and renal dysfunction. During early pregnancy, the
risk to the embryo is apparently less and there is no indication to terminate a
pregnancy. Because of the high incidence of serious perinatal complications, it is
recommended that angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors not be prescribed
during pregnancy.

Insulin and Hypoglycemic Drugs
Insulin is not teratogenic in human embryos except possibly in maternal insulin
coma therapy. Hypoglycemic drugs (e.g., tolbutamide) have been implicated, but
evidence of their teratogenicity is weak; there is no convincing evidence that oral
hypoglycemic agents (particularly sulfonylureas) are teratogenic in human
embryos.
The incidence of birth defects (e.g., sacral agenesis) is increased two to three
times in the offspring of diabetic mothers; approximately 40% of all perinatal
deaths of diabetic infants are the result of birth defects. Women with insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus may significantly decrease their risk of having
infants with birth defects by achieving good control of their disease before
conception.
Retinoic Acid (Vitamin A)
Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid), used for treating severe cystic acne, is a
known human teratogen. The critical period for exposure appears to be from the
third week to the fifth week. The risk of spontaneous abortion and birth defects
after exposure is high. The most common major defects observed are
craniofacial dysmorphism (microtia, micrognathia), cleft palate and/or thymic
aplasia, cardiovascular defects, and neural tube defects. Postnatal longitudinal
follow-up of children exposed in utero to isotretinoin revealed significant
neuropsychological impairment.
Vitamin A is a valuable and necessary nutrient during pregnancy, but long-term
exposure to large doses is unwise. Pregnant women should avoid high levels of
vitamin A because an increased risk of birth defects among the offspring of
women who took more than 10,000 IU of vitamin A daily has been reported.
Analgesics
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid or ASA) and acetaminophen are commonly used
during pregnancy for the relief of fever or pain. Clinical trials suggest that large
doses are potentially harmful to the embryo or fetus. The use of single-ingredient
acetaminophen during the first trimester does not appear to increase the risk of
major birth defects. Although epidemiologic studies indicate that aspirin is not a

teratogenic agent, large doses should be avoided, especially during the first
trimester.
Thyroid Drugs
Potassium iodide in cough mixtures and large doses of radioactive iodine may
cause congenital goiter. Iodides readily cross the placental membrane and
interfere with thyroxin production. They may also cause thyroid enlargement and
cretinism (arrested physical and mental development and dystrophy of bones
and soft parts).
Maternal iodine deficiency may also cause congenital cretinism. Pregnant
women have been advised to avoid douches or creams containing povidone-
iodine because it is absorbed by the vagina, enters the maternal blood, and may
be teratogenic. Propylthiouracil interferes with thyroxin formation in the fetus
and may cause goiter. The administration of antithyroid substances for the
treatment of maternal thyroid disorders may cause congenital goiter if the
mother is given the substances in excess of the amount required to control the
disease.
Tranquilizers
Thalidomide is a potent teratogen and it has been estimated that nearly 12,000
infants were born with defects caused by this drug. The characteristic presenting
feature is meromelia, but the defects ranged from amelia (absence of limbs)
through intermediate stages of development (rudimentary limbs) to micromelia
(abnormally small and/or short limbs). Phocomelia (“seal limbs”), a type of
meromelia, is present in some of these individuals (e.g., see Fig. 20-20).


FIGURE 20–20 Neonate male infant showing typically malformed limbs
(meromelia—limb reduction) caused by thalidomide ingested by his mother
during the critical period of limb development.
(From Moore KL: Manit Med Rev 43:306, 1963.)
Thalidomide also caused anomalies of other organs, for example, absence of the
external and internal ears, hemangioma on the forehead, heart defects, and
anomalies of the urinary and alimentary systems. It is well established clinically
that the period when thalidomide caused congenital anomalies was 20 to 36 days
after fertilization. This sensitive period coincides with the critical periods for the
development of the affected parts and organs (Figs. 20-15 and 20-16).
Thalidomide is currently used for the treatment of leprosy and several
autoimmune diseases. It is absolutely contraindicated in women of childbearing
age.
Psychotropic Drugs
Lithium is the drug of choice for the long-term maintenance of patients with
bipolar disorders; however, it has caused birth defects, mainly of the heart and
great vessels, in infants born to mothers given the drug early in pregnancy.
Although lithium carbonate is a known human teratogen, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration has stated that the agent may be used during pregnancy if
“in the opinion of the physician the potential benefits outweigh the possible
hazards.”
Benzodiazepines, such as diazepam and oxazepam, are frequently prescribed
for pregnant women. These drugs readily cross the placental membrane and their
use during the first trimester of pregnancy is associated with craniofacial
anomalies in neonates. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are
used to treat depression during pregnancy. Recent reports warn of an increased
risk of atrial and ventricular septal defects, persistent pulmonary hypertension,
and neurobehavioral disturbances in infants exposed to SSRIs in utero. The
mechanism is believed to be SSRIs blocking catecholamine transport, which
affects placental blood flow.
Illicit Drugs

Several currently popular “street drugs” are used for their hallucinogenic
properties. There is no evidence that marijuana is a human teratogen; however,
there is an indication that marijuana use during the first 2 months of pregnancy
affects fetal length and birth weight. In addition, sleep and
electroencephalographic patterns in neonates exposed prenatally to marijuana
were altered.
Second only to marijuana, cocaine is the most widely used illicit drug among
women of childbearing age. Reports dealing with the prenatal effects of cocaine
include spontaneous abortion, prematurity, IUGR, microcephaly, cerebral
infarction, urogenital anomalies, neurobehavioral disturbances, and neurologic
abnormalities.
Methadone, used for the treatment of heroin addiction, is considered to be a
“behavioral teratogen,” as is heroin. Infants born to narcotic-dependent women
maintained on methadone therapy were found to have CNS dysfunction, lower
birth weights, and smaller head circumferences than nonexposed infants. There
is also concern about the long-term postnatal developmental effects of
methadone. The problem, however, is difficult to resolve because other drugs are
often used in combination with methadone, and heavy use of alcohol and
cigarettes is prevalent among narcotic-dependent women.
Maternal use of methamphetamine, a sympathetic nervous system stimulant,
results in small for gestational age fetuses with neurobehavioral changes.
Environmental Chemicals as Teratogens
There is increasing concern about the possible teratogenicity of environmental
chemicals, including industrial and agricultural chemicals, pollutants, and food
additives. Most of these chemicals have not been positively implicated as
teratogens in humans.
Organic Mercury
Infants of mothers whose main diet during pregnancy consists of fish containing
abnormally high levels of organic mercury acquire fetal Minamata disease—
neurologic and behavioral disturbances resembling cerebral palsy. Severe brain
damage, mental deficiency, and blindness have been detected in infants of
mothers who received methylmercury in their food.

Similar observations have been made in infants whose mothers ate pork that
became contaminated when the pigs ate corn grown from seeds sprayed with a
mercury-containing fungicide. Methylmercury is a teratogen that causes cerebral
atrophy, spasticity, seizures, and mental deficiency.
Lead
Abundantly present in the workplace and environment, lead passes through the
placental membrane and accumulates in embryonic and fetal tissues. Prenatal
exposure to lead is associated with increased abortions, fetal defects, IUGR, and
functional deficits. Several reports have indicated that children born to mothers
who were exposed to subclinical levels of lead revealed neurobehavioral and
psychomotor disturbances.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
These teratogenic chemicals produce IUGR and skin discoloration. The main
dietary source of polychlorinated biphenyls in North America is probably sport
fish caught in contaminated waters. In Japan and Taiwan, the teratogenic
chemical was detected in contaminated cooking oil.
Infectious Agents as Teratogens
Throughout prenatal life, the embryo and fetus are endangered by a variety of
microorganisms. In most cases, the assault is resisted; however, in some cases,
abortion or stillbirth occurs.
In others, the infants are born with IUGR, birth defects, or neonatal diseases
(Table 20-6). The microorganisms cross the placental membrane and enter the
embryonic and fetal bloodstream. Because there is a propensity for the CNS to
be affected, the fetal blood–brain barrier also apparently offers little resistance to
microorganisms.
Rubella (German Measles)
The virus that causes rubella, a communicable disease, is the prime example of
an infective teratogen. In cases of primary maternal infection during the first
trimester of pregnancy, the overall risk of embryonic/fetal infection is

approximately 20%. The rubella virus crosses the placental membrane and
infects the embryo/fetus. The clinical features of congenital rubella syndrome
are cataracts (see Chapter 18, Fig. 18-13), cardiac defects, and deafness;
however, the following abnormalities are occasionally observed: mental
deficiency, chorioretinitis, glaucoma (see Chapter 18, Fig. 18-12),
microphthalmia, and tooth defects. The earlier in pregnancy the maternal rubella
infection occurs, the greater is the danger that the embryo will be malformed.
Most infants have birth defects if the disease occurs during the first 4 to 5 weeks
after fertilization. This period includes the most susceptible organogenetic
periods of the eyes, internal ears, heart, and brain (Fig. 20-15). The risk of
defects from a rubella infection during the second and third trimesters is low
(approximately 10%), but functional defects of the CNS (mental deficiency) and
internal ears (hearing loss) may result if infection occurs during the late fetal
period. There is no evidence of fetal defects after the fifth gestational month;
however, infections may produce chronic disease and dysfunction of the eyes,
ears, and CNS. Because of widespread immunization against rubella virus, fewer
infants are affected.
Cytomegalovirus
Infection with cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common viral infection of
the fetus, occurring in approximately 1% of neonates. Most pregnancies end in
spontaneous abortion when the infection occurs during the first trimester. It is
the leading cause of congenital infection with morbidity at birth. Neonates
infected during the early fetal period usually show no clinical signs and are
identified through screening programs. CMV infection later in pregnancy may
result in severe birth defects: IUGR, microphthalmia, chorioretinitis, blindness,
microcephaly, cerebral calcification, mental deficiency, deafness, cerebral palsy,
and hepatosplenomegaly. Of particular concern are cases of asymptomatic CMV
infection, which are often associated with audiologic, neurologic, and
neurobehavioral disturbances in infancy.
Herpes Simplex Virus
Maternal infection with herpes simplex virus in early pregnancy increases the
abortion rate by threefold, and infection after the 20th week is associated with a
higher rate of prematurity. Infection of the fetus with this virus usually occurs

very late in pregnancy, probably most often during delivery. The congenital
defects that have been observed in newborns include cutaneous lesions,
microcephaly, microphthalmia, spasticity, retinal dysplasia, and deficiency.
Varicella (Chickenpox)
Varicella and herpes zoster (shingles) are caused by the same virus, varicella-
zoster virus, which is highly infectious. Maternal varicella infection during the
first two trimesters of pregnancy causes the following birth defects: skin
scarring, muscle atrophy, hypoplasia of limbs, rudimentary digits, eye and brain
damage, and mental deficiency. There is a 20% chance of these or other defects
when the infection occurs during the critical period of development (Fig. 20-15).
After 20 weeks of gestation, there is no proven teratogenic risk.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
This retrovirus causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). There is
conflicting information on the fetal effects of in utero infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Some of the birth defects reported are growth failure,
microcephaly, and specific craniofacial features. Most cases of transmission of
the virus from mother to fetus probably occur at the time of delivery. Breast-
feeding increases the risk of transmitting the virus to the neonate. Preventing the
transmission of the virus to women and their infants is of obvious importance
because of the potential effects.
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular parasite, was named after the gondi, a North
African rodent in which the organism was first detected. This parasite may be
found in the bloodstream, tissues, or reticuloendothelial cells, leukocytes, and
epithelial cells.
Maternal infection is usually acquired by:
• Eating raw or poorly cooked meat (usually pork or lamb) containing
Toxoplasma cysts
• Close contact with infected domestic animals (usually cats) or infected soil

It is thought that the soil and garden vegetables may become contaminated with
infected animal feces carrying oocysts (encapsulated zygote in the life cycle of
sporozoan protozoa). Oocysts can also be transported to food by flies and
cockroaches.
The T. gondii organism crosses the placental membrane and infects the fetus
(Figs. 20-21 and 20-22), causing destructive changes in the brain (intracranial
calcifications) and eyes (chorioretinitis) that result in mental deficiency,
microcephaly, microphthalmia, and hydrocephaly. Fetal death may follow
infection, especially during the early stages of pregnancy.

FIGURE 20–21 Chorioretinitis of congenital ocular toxoplasmosis induced by
Toxoplasma infection. A, Necrotizing cicatricial lesion of macula (arrow). B,
Satellite lesion around and adjacent to necrotizing cicatricial main lesion
(arrows). C, Recrudescent lesion adjacent to large necrotizing cicatricial main
lesion (arrows).

(From Yokota K: Congenital anomalies and toxoplasmosis. Congenit Anom
(Kyoto) 35:151, 1995.)
FIGURE 20–22 Congenital cerebral defectsinduced by Toxoplasma infection.
The diagnostic images were obtained at 2 years and 9 months of age. A, Plain
CT (computed tomography) scan. The lateral ventricles are moderately dilated.
Multiple calcified foci are apparent in the brain parenchyma (arrows 1), and
along the ventricular wall (arrow 2). B, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), T1
WI (400/22, 0.5 T). The cortical gyri are widened on the left side and the cortex
is thickened in the left frontal lobe (arrow) compared with corresponding
structure on the right. C, MRI, T2 WI (2,500/120, 0.5 T). The left frontal lobe
shows abnormal hypointensity (arrow).
(From Yokota K: Congenital anomalies and toxoplasmosis, Congenit Anom
(Kyoto) 35:151, 1995.)
Mothers of congenitally defective infants are often unaware of having had
toxoplasmosis, the disease caused by the parasitic organism. Because animals
(cats, dogs, rabbits, and other domestic and wild animals) may be infected with
this parasite, pregnant women should avoid them and the eating of raw or poorly
cooked meat from them (e.g., rabbits). In addition, unpasteurized milk should be
avoided.
Congenital Syphilis
The incidence of congenital syphilis is steadily increasing with more cases now
than in any of the past 2 decades. One in 10,000 live-born infants in the United

States is infected. Treponema pallidum, the small, spiral microorganism that
causes syphilis, rapidly crosses the placental membrane as early as 6 to 8 weeks
of development. The fetus can become infected at any stage of the disease or at
any stage of pregnancy.
Primary maternal infections (acquired during pregnancy) nearly always cause
serious fetal infection and birth defects; however, adequate treatment of the
mother kills the microorganisms, thereby preventing them from crossing the
placental membrane and infecting the fetus.
Secondary maternal infections (acquired before pregnancy) seldom result in
fetal disease and birth defects. If the mother is untreated, stillbirths occur in
approximately one fourth of cases. Only 20% of all untreated pregnant women
will deliver a normal infant at term.
Early fetal manifestations of untreated maternal syphilis are congenital
deafness, abnormal teeth and bones, hydrocephalus, and mental deficiency. Late
fetal manifestations of untreated congenital syphilis are destructive lesions of
the palate and nasal septum, dental abnormalities (centrally notched, widely
spaced peg-shaped upper central incisors, known as Hutchinson teeth), and
facial defects (frontal bossing, including protuberance or swelling, saddle nose,
and poorly developed maxilla).
Radiation as a Teratogen
Exposure to high levels of ionizing radiation may injure embryonic cells,
resulting in cell death, chromosome injury, mental deficiency, and deficient
physical growth. The severity of the embryonic damage is related to the
absorbed dose of radiation, the dose rate, and the stage of embryonic or fetal
development when the exposure to radiation occurs.
In the past, large amounts of ionizing radiation (hundreds to several thousand
rads) were given inadvertently to embryos and fetuses of pregnant women who
had cancer of the cervix. In all cases, their embryos were severely malformed or
killed. Growth retardation, microcephaly, spina bifida cystica (see Chapter 17,
Fig. 17-15), pigment changes in the retina, cataracts, cleft palate, skeletal and
visceral abnormalities, and mental deficiency have been observed in infants who
survived after receiving high levels of ionizing radiation. Development of the
CNS was nearly always affected.

Observations of Japanese atomic bomb survivors and their children suggest that
8 to 16 weeks after fertilization is the period of greatest sensitivity for radiation
damage to the brain, resulting in severe mental deficiency. By the end of the 16th
week, most neuronal proliferation is completed, after which the risk of mental
deficiency decreases. It is generally accepted that large doses of radiation
(>25,000 mrad) are harmful to the developing CNS. There is no conclusive proof
that human birth defects have been caused by diagnostic levels of radiation.
Scattered radiation from a radiographic examination of a region of the body that
is not near the uterus (e.g., thorax, sinuses, teeth) produces a dose of only a few
millirads, which is not teratogenic to the embryo. For example, a pelvic CT in
the third trimester of pregnancy results in a whole-body dose to her fetus of
approximately 1 to 5 rads. If the embryonic radiation exposure is 5 rads or less,
the radiation risks to the embryo are minuscule; however, it is prudent to be
cautious during diagnostic examinations of the pelvic region in pregnant women
(radiographic examinations and medical diagnostic tests using radioisotopes)
because they result in exposure of the embryo to 0.3 to 2 rads. The
recommended limit of maternal exposure of the whole body to radiation from all
sources is 500 mrad (0.005 Gy) for the entire gestational period.
Ultrasonic Waves
Ultrasonography is widely used during pregnancy for embryonic/fetal diagnosis
and prenatal care. A review of the safety of obstetric ultrasonography indicates
that there are no confirmed harmful effects on the fetus from the use of routine
diagnostic ultrasound examination.
Maternal Factors as Teratogens
Approximately 4% of pregnant women have diabetes. Poorly controlled
diabetes mellitus in the mother, particularly during embryogenesis, is associated
with an increased rate of spontaneous miscarriages and a two-to threefold higher
incidence of birth defects. Neonates of diabetic mothers are usually large
(macrosomia), with prominent fat pads over the upper back and lower jaw.
These infants are at an increased risk for brain anomalies, skeletal defects, sacral
agenesis, and congenital heart defects, in addition to neonatal metabolic
complications, respiratory distress syndrome, and neurodevelopmental
abnormalities.

Phenylketonuria (autosomal recessive inherited inborn error of metabolism)
occurs in one per 10,000 infants born in the United States. If untreated, women
who are homozygous for phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency—
phenylketonuria—and those with hyperphenylalaninemia are at a higher risk of
having an offspring with microcephaly, cardiac defects, mental deficiency, and
IUGR. The brain damage and mental deficiency can be prevented if the
phenylketonuric mother is placed on a phenylalanine-restricted diet before and
during pregnancy.
The risk of neural tube defects (see Chapter 17, Fig. 17-17) is greater in the
offspring of mothers with low levels of folic acid and vitamin B12.
Mechanical Factors as Teratogens
Amniotic fluid absorbs mechanical pressures, thereby protecting the embryo
from most external trauma. A significantly reduced quantity of amniotic fluid
(oligohydramnios) may result in mechanically induced deformation of the limbs
(see Chapter 7); for example, hyperextension of the knee. Congenital dislocation
of the hip and clubfoot may be caused by mechanical forces, particularly in a
malformed uterus. Such deformations may be caused by any factor that restricts
the mobility of the fetus, thereby causing prolonged compression in an abnormal
posture. Intrauterine amputations or other anomalies caused by local constriction
during fetal growth may result from amniotic bands—rings formed as a result
of rupture of the amnion during early pregnancy (see Chapter 7, Fig. 7-21).

Birth Defects Caused By
Multifactorial Inheritance
Common birth defects (e.g., cleft lip with or without cleft palate) have familial
distributions consistent with multifactorial inheritance (see Fig. 20-1).
Multifactorial inheritance may be represented by a model in which “liability” to
a disorder is a continuous variable determined by a combination of genetic and
environmental factors, with a developmental threshold dividing individuals with
the defect from those without it (Fig. 20-23).
FIGURE 20–23 Multifactorial threshold model. Liability to a trait is distributed
normally with a threshold dividing the population into unaffected and affected
classes.
(From Thompson MW, McInnes RR, Willard HF: Thompson & Thompson
Genetics in Medicine, 5th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991.)
Multifactorial traits are often single major defects, such as cleft lip, isolated cleft
palate, neural tube defects (e.g., meroencephaly, spina bifida cystica), pyloric
stenosis, and congenital dislocation of the hips. Some of these defects may also
occur as part of the phenotype in syndromes determined by single-gene
inheritance, chromosome abnormality, or an environmental teratogen.
The recurrence risks used for genetic counseling of families having birth defects,

determined by multifactorial inheritance, are empirical risks based on the
frequency of the defect in the general population and in different categories of
relatives. In individual families, such estimates may be inaccurate because they
are usually averages for the population rather than precise probabilities for the
individual family.

Summary of Human Birth Defects
• A birth defect is a structural abnormality of any type that is present at birth. It
may be macroscopic or microscopic, on the surface or within the body. There are
four clinically significant types of birth defect: malformation, disruption,
deformation, and dysplasia.
• Approximately 3% of live-born neonates have an obvious major defect.
Additional defects are detected after birth; thus, the incidence is approximately
6% in 2-year-olds and 8% in 5-year-olds. Other defects (approximately 2%) are
detected later (e.g., during surgery, dissection, or autopsy).
• Birth defects may be single or multiple and of minor or major clinical
significance. Single minor defects are present in approximately 14% of neonates.
These defects are of no serious medical consequence; however, they alert
clinicians to the possible presence of an associated major defect.
• Ninety percent of infants with multiple minor defects have one or more
associated major defects. Of the 3% of infants born with a major birth defect,
0.7% have multiple major anomalies. Major defects are more common in early
embryos (up to 15%) than they are in neonates (up to 3%).
• Some birth defects are caused by genetic factors (chromosome abnormalities
and mutant genes). A few defects are caused by environmental factors
(infectious agents, environmental chemicals, and drugs); however, most common
defects result from a complex interaction between genetic and environmental
factors. The cause of most birth defects is unknown.
• During the first 2 weeks of development, teratogenic agents usually kill the
embryo or have no effects. During the organogenetic period, teratogenic agents
disrupt development and may cause major congenital anomalies. During the fetal
period, teratogens may produce morphologic and functional abnormalities,
particularly of the brain and eyes.

Clinically Oriented Problems

Case 20–1
A physician was concerned about the drugs a woman said she was taking when
she first sought medical advice during her pregnancy.
• What percentage of birth defects is caused by drugs, environmental chemicals,
and infectious agents?
• Why may it be difficult for physicians to attribute specific birth defects to
specific drugs?
• What should pregnant women know about the use of drugs during pregnancy?

Case 20–2
During a pelvic examination, a 38-year-old woman learned that she was
pregnant. The physician was concerned about her age inasmuch as it was her
first pregnancy.
• Do women older than the age of 35 have an increased risk of bearing fetuses
with birth defects?
• If a 38-year-old woman becomes pregnant, what prenatal diagnostic tests
would likely be performed?
• What genetic abnormality might be detected?
• Can a 44-year-old woman have a normal baby?

Case 20–3
A pregnant woman asked her physician whether there are any drugs considered
safe during early pregnancy.
• Can you name some commonly prescribed drugs that are safe to use?
• What commonly used drugs should be avoided during pregnancy?

Case 20–4
A 10-year-old girl contracted a rubella infection (German measles) and her
mother was worried that the child might develop cataracts and heart defects.
• What would the physician likely tell the mother?

Case 20–5
A pregnant woman who has two cats that often “spent the night out” was told by
a friend that she should avoid close contact with her cats during her pregnancy.
She was also told to avoid flies and cockroaches.
• When she consulted her physician, what would she likely be told?
Discussion of these problems appears at the back of the book.
References and Suggested Reading
Bale JFJr. Fetal infections and brain development. Clin Perinatol. 2009;36:639.
Baley JE, Toltzis P. Viral infections. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC,
editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the
Fetus and Infant, 8th ed, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Berry RJ, Bailey L, Mulinarae J, et al. Fortification of flour with folic acid. Food
Nutr Bull. 2010;31(Suppl 1):S22.
Biencowe H, Cousens S, Modell B, et al. Folic acid to reduce neonatal mortality
from neural tube disorders. Int J Epidemiol. 2010;39(Suppl 1):i110.
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaffe SJ. Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 8th ed.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2008.
Callen PW, editor. Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 5th ed,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2008.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Improved national prevalence
estimates for selected major birth defects—United States, 1999–2001 (MMWR
54:1301, 2006). JAMA. 2006;295:618.
Chudley AE, Hagerman RJ. The fragile X syndrome. J Pediatr. 1987;110:821.
Drugan A, Isada NB, Evans MI. Prenatal diagnosis in the molecular age—
indications, procedures, and laboratory techniques. In MacDonald MG, Seshia
MMK, Mullett MD, editors: Avery’s Neonatology, Pathophysiology &

Management of the Newborn, 6th ed, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2005.
Einfeld SL, Brown R. Down syndrome—new prospects for an ancient disorder.
JAMA. 2010;303:2525.
Frey KA. Male reproductive health and infertility. Prim Care. 2010;37:643.
Gianicolo EA, Cresci M, Ait-Ait L, et al. Smoking and congenital heart disease:
The epidemiological and biological link. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16:2572.
Hales B. DNA repair disorders causing malformations. Curr Opin Genet Dev.
2005;15:234.
Hall JG. Chromosomal clinical abnormalities. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM,
Jenson HB, editors: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 17th ed, Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2004.
Hampton T. Researchers discover a range of factors undermine sperm quality,
male fertility. JAMA. 2005;294:2829.
Hudgins L, Cassidy SB. Congenital anomalies. In Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA,
Walsh MC, editors: Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal–Perinatal Medicine:
Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, 8th ed, Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006.
Jones KL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005.
Kriebs JM. Changing the paradigm. HIV in pregnancy. J Perinat Neonat Nurs.
2006;20:71.
Malik S, Cleves MA, Honein MA, et al. Maternal smoking and congenital heart
defects. Pediatr. 2008;121:e81.
Medicode, Inc. Medicode’s Hospital and Payer: International Classification of
Diseases, Clinical Modification, ICD-9-CM 2006, vols 1–3. Salt Lake City:
Medicode; 2006.
Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in
Medicine [rev rep], 6th ed. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004.

Persaud TVN. Environmental Causes of Human Birth Defects. Springfield, IL:
Charles C Thomas; 1990.
Rajaraman P, Simpson J, Neta G, et al. Early life exposure to diagnostic
radiation and ultrasound scans and risk of childhood cancer: case control study.
BMJ. 2011:342. d472 doi:10.1136/bmj.d472 (online) Rasmussen SA, Erickson
JD, Reef SE, et al. Principles and practice of teratology for the obstetrician. Clin
Obstet Gynecol. 2009;51:106.
Reef SE, Strebel P, Dabbagh A, et al. Progress toward control of rubella and
prevention of congenital rubella syndrome—worldwide, 2009. J Infect Dis.
2011;204(Suppl 1):S24-S27.
Richardson GA, Goldschmidt L, Willford J. Continued effects of prenatal
cocaine use: preschool development. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2009;31:325.
Sackett C, Weller RA, Weller EB. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor use
during pregnancy and possible neonatal complications. Curr Psychiatry Rep.
2009;11:253.
Schwarz EB, Maselli J, Norton M, et al. Prescription and teratogenic
medications in United States ambulatory practices. Am J Med. 2005;118:1240.
Shiota K, Uwabe C, Nishimura H. High prevalence of defective human embryos
at the early postimplantation period. Teratology. 1987;35:309.
Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. Alcohol use in
pregnancy consensus clinical guidelines. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2010;32(Suppl
3):S1.
Spranger J, Benirschke K, Hall JG, et al. Errors of morphogenesis, concepts and
terms. J Pediatr. 1982;100:160.
Weindling AM. Offspring of diabetic pregnancy: Short-term outcomes. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009;14:101.
Weiner CP. Drugs for Pregnant and Lactating Women, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2009.
Yolton K, Khoury J, Xu Y, et al. Low-level prenatal exposure to nicotine and

infant neurobehavior. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2009;31:356.
* The authors are grateful to A.E. Chudley, MD, FRCPC, FCCMG, Professor of
Pediatrics and Child Health and Head, Section of Genetics and Metabolism,
Children’s Hospital, Health Sciences Centre, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada, for assistance with the preparation of this section.

Chapter 21 Common Signaling Pathways Used During Development
Jeffrey T. Wigle, David D. Eisenstat
Intercellular Communication 504
   Gap Junctions 504
   Cell Adhesion Molecules 505
Morphogens 506
   Retinoic Acid 506
   Transforming Growth Factor β/Bone Morphogenetic Protein 506
   Hedgehog 507
   Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway 507
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases 509
   Common Features 509
   Regulation of Angiogenesis by Receptor Tyrosine Kinases 510
Notch-Delta Pathway 510
Transcription Factors 511
   Hox/Homeobox Proteins 511
   Pax Genes 511
   Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors 512
Epigenetics 512
   Histone Acetylation 512
   DNA Methylation 512
Stem Cells: Differentiation versus Pluripotency 513
Summary of Common Signaling Pathways Used During Development 514
During the process of embryonic development, undifferentiated precursor cells
differentiate and organize into the complex structures found in functional adult
tissues. This intricate process requires cells to integrate many different cues, both
intrinsic and extrinsic, for development to occur properly. These cues control the
proliferation, differentiation, and migration of cells to determine the final size
and shape of the developing organs. Disruption of these signaling pathways can
result in human developmental disorders and birth defects. These key
developmental signaling pathways are also frequently co-opted in the adult by
diseases such as cancer.
Given the diverse changes that occur during embryogenesis, it may appear that
there should also be a correspondingly diverse set of signaling pathways that

regulate these processes. In contrast, the differentiation of many different cell
types is regulated through a relatively restricted set of molecular signaling
pathways:
• Intercellular communication: Development involves the interaction of a cell
with its neighboring cell either directly (gap junctions) or indirectly (cell
adhesion molecules).
• Morphogens: These are diffusible molecules that specify which cell type will
be generated at a specific anatomic location and direct the migration of cells and
their processes to their final destination. These morphogens include retinoic acid,
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)/bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs),
and the hedgehog and the Wnt protein families (see Table 21-1 for gene and
protein nomenclature).
• Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs): Many growth factors signal by binding to
and activating membrane-bound RTKs. These kinases are essential for the
regulation of cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and migration, as well as processes
such as the growth of new blood vessels and axonal processes in the nervous
system.
• Notch/Delta: This pathway often specifies which cell fate the precursor cells
will adopt.
• Transcription factors: This set of evolutionarily conserved proteins activates
or represses downstream genes that are essential for many different cellular
processes. Many transcription factors are members of the homeobox or helix-
loop-helix (HLH) families. Their activity can be regulated by all of the other
pathways described in this chapter.
Table 21–1 International Nomenclature Standards for Genes and Proteins
Epigenetics: These are heritable changes in gene function that do no result from
a change in DNA sequence. Examples of epigenetic modifications are histone
acetylation and DNA methylation.
Stem cells: Stem cells in the embryo can give rise to all cells and tissues in the
developing organism. Adult stem cells maintain tissues in the mature organism.

These types of stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) are potential
sources of cells for regeneration and/or repair of injured or degenerating cells
and organs.

Intercellular Communication
During embryonic development, cells receive signals from their external
environment and communicate with neighboring cells. This communication
directs the cell to undergo different processes such as proliferation,
differentiation, and migration. Two classes of proteins required for intercellular
communication are discussed: gap junctions and cell adhesion molecules.

Gap Junctions
Gap junctions are a means for cells to directly communicate with one another;
this is known as gap junction intercellular communication (GJIC). Although the
pore size of the channels vary, only small molecules (e.g., second messengers,
ions such as calcium, and ATP) less than 1 kiloDalton (kDa) can pass through, so
most proteins and nucleic acids are excluded. In the nervous and cardiac
systems, gap junctions help to establish electrical cell coupling (“electrical”
synapse).
Although the function of gap junctions is quite straightforward, the structure of
these intercellular channels is complex and highly regulated throughout
development (Fig. 21-1). Each gap junction is composed of two hemichannels
known as connexons. Each connexon is hexameric and, as such, is made up of
six individual connexin subunits. An individual connexin (Cx) molecule consists
of four transmembrane domains. There are more than 20 different connexin
molecules in vertebrates. Cellular and tissue functional diversity of gap junctions
results from whether individual connexons are the same (homotypic) or different
(heterotypic) and if each connexon is made from the same or different connexin
molecules (homomeric or heteromeric), respectively.
FIGURE 21–1 Gap junction intercellular communication. A, The connexin

molecule consists of four transmembrane domains, two extracellular domains
and its N-and C-termini are cytoplasmic. B, Connexons, or hemichannels, are
hexameric structures consisting of 6 connexin subunits. A gap junction can be
formed from two homophilic or heterophilic connexons. Small molecules
(including ions and ATP) less than 1 kDa can pass through an open gap junction.
Early in development, GJIC is important in the distribution of ions and other
molecules essential for regionalization prior to the establishment of distinct
boundaries and compartments. Their importance has been demonstrated in the
developing chick hindbrain (rhombencephalon) by dye transfer and electrical
coupling studies.
Some of the better characterized connexins include Cx43 (heart, brain), Cx45
(heart, pancreas), Cx32 (myelin), and Cx36 (pancreas, brain). In this
nomenclature system, the number following Cx refers to the molecular weight in
kDa. Mutations in Cx genes have been described and result in diseases such as
the hereditary peripheral neuropathy X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(Cx32).

Cell Adhesion Molecules
Cell adhesion molecules have large extracellular domains which interact with
extracellular matrix (ECM) components or adhesion molecules on neighboring
cells. These molecules often contain a transmembrane segment and a short
cytoplasmic domain, which regulates intracellular signaling cascades. Two
classes of molecules that have important roles during embryonic development
are discussed: cadherins and members of the Immunoglobulin superfamily
(IgSF) of cell adhesion molecules.
Cadherins
Cadherins are critical for embryonic morphogenesis as they regulate the
separation of cell layers (endothelial and epidermal), cell migration, cell sorting,
establishment of well-defined boundaries, synaptic connections, and in the
growth cones of neurons. These properties result from cadherins mediating the
interaction between the cell and its extracellular milieu (neighboring cells and
extracellular matrix [ECM]). Cadherins were originally classified by their site of
expression. For example, E-cadherin (Epithelial cadherin) is highly expressed in
epithelial cells whereas N-cadherin (Neural cadherin) is highly expressed in
neural cells. Cadherins mediate homophilic, calcium-dependent binding. A
typical cadherin molecule has a large extracellular domain, a transmembrane
domain and an intracellular tail (Fig. 21-2). The extracellular domain contains
five extracellular repeats (EC repeats) and has four Ca2+-binding sites. Cadherins
form dimers that interact with cadherin dimers in adjacent cells. These
complexes are found clustered in adherens junctions, which result in the
formation of a tight barrier between epithelial or endothelial cells. Via its
intracellular domain, cadherins bind to p120-catenin, β-catenin, and α-catenin.
These proteins connect cadherin to the cytoskeleton. E-cadherin expression is
lost as epithelial cells transition to mesenchymal cells (this is known as the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition [EMT]). EMT is required for the formation
of neural crest cells during development and the same process also occurs during
tumor development.
Immunoglobulin Superfamily
There are over 700 members of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF) of cell

adhesion molecules in the human genome. This large family of proteins is
involved in a wide variety of cellular processes. One member of this class,
Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM), is an abundant protein in the brain
and has three isoforms that result from alternative splicing. It has a large
extracellular domain that contains five immunoglobulin (Ig) repeats and two
fibronectin domains as well (Fig. 21-2). This region mediates the calcium
independent homophilic binding of NCAM to itself and heterophilic binding to
other cell adhesion molecules (L1 and TAG-1), receptor tyrosine kinases
(Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor) or the ECM. Ligand binding induces
intracellular signaling via the Fyn and FAK intracellular kinases. NCAM
undergoes a unique post-translational modification, polysialylation (PSA). PSA-
NCAM is abundant early in neural development and becomes restricted to areas
of neural plasticity and migration in the adult. It is believed that polysialylation
decreases the adhesiveness of NCAM and thus facilitates migration. NCAM
regulates neurite outgrowth, axonal path finding, survival, and plasticity.

FIGURE 21–2 Structure of cadherin and neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM). A, The cadherin extracellular domain contains four calcium-binding
sites and five repeated domains called extracellular cadherin domains (ECD).
Each cadherin molecule forms a homodimer. On the intracellular domain,
cadherin bind directly to p120 catenin and to β-catenin, which binds to α-
catenin. This complex links the cadherin molecules to the actin cytoskeleton. B,
Extracellularly, NCAM contains five immunoglobulin (Ig) repeats and two
fibronectin-III domains. The fifth Ig repeat is modified by polysialyation, which
decreases the adhesiveness of the NCAM molecule. Intracellular signaling is
transmitted by the Fyn and Fak kinases.

Morphogens
Extrinsic signals guide the differentiation and migration of cells during
development and thereby dictate the morphology and function of developing
tissues (see Chapter 5). Many of these morphogens are found in concentration
gradients in the embryo, and different morphogens can be expressed in opposing
gradients in the dorsal/ventral, anterior/posterior, and medial/lateral axes. The
fate of a specific cell can be determined by its location along these gradients.
Cells can be attracted or repelled by morphogens depending on the set of
receptors expressed on their surface.

Retinoic Acid
The anterior (rostral, head)/posterior (caudal, tail), or anteroposterior (AP) axis
of the embryo is crucial for determining the correct location for structures such
as limbs and for the patterning of the nervous system. For decades, it has been
clinically evident that alterations in the level of vitamin A (retinol) in the diet
(excessive or insufficient amounts) can lead to the development of congenital
malformations (see Chapters 17 and 20). The bioactive form of vitamin A is
retinoic acid that is formed by the oxidation of retinol to retinal by retinol
dehydrogenases and the subsequent oxidation of retinal by retinal aldehyde
dehydrogenase. Free levels of retinoic acid can be further modulated by cellular
retinoic acid–binding proteins that sequester retinoic acid. As well, retinoic acid
can be actively degraded into inactive metabolites by enzymes such as CYP26
(Fig. 21-3). Normally, retinoic acid acts to “posteriorize” the body plan.
Therefore, either excessive retinoic acid or inhibition of its degradation leads to
a truncated body axis where structures have a more posterior nature. In contrast,
insufficient retinoic acid or defects in the enzymes such as retinal aldehyde
dehydrogenase will lead to a more anteriorized structure. At a molecular level,
retinoic acid binds to its receptors inside the cell and activates them. Retinoic
acid receptors are transcription factors, and therefore their activation will
regulate the expression of downstream genes. Crucial targets of retinoic acid
receptors in development are the Hox genes. Due to their profound influence on
early development, retinoids are powerful teratogens, especially during the first
trimester.

FIGURE 21–3 Regulation of retinoic acid metabolism and signaling. Dietary
retinol (vitamin A) is converted to retinal via the action of retinol
dehydrogenases. The concentration of free retinal is controlled by the action of
cellular retinal–binding proteins. Similarly, retinal is converted to retinoic acid
by retinal dehydrogenases, and its free level is modulated by sequestration by
cellular retinoic acid–binding proteins and degradation by CYP26. The bioactive
form of retinoic acid is all-trans retinoic acid.

Transforming Growth Factor β/Bone Morphogenetic
Protein
Members of the TGF-β superfamily include TGF-β, BMPs, activin, and nodal.
These molecules contribute to the establishment of dorsoventral patterning, cell
fate decisions, and formation of specific organs, including the nervous system,
kidneys, skeleton, and blood (see Chapters 5, 16, and 17). In humans, there are
three TGF-β isoforms (TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β3). Binding of these ligands
to heterotetrameric (four subunit) complexes, consisting of specific type I
(inactive kinase domain) and type II TGFβ receptor subunit (TβR-II)
(constitutively active) transmembrane serine-threonine kinase receptors, results
in intracellular signaling events (Fig. 21-4). When TGF-β ligands bind to their
respective membrane-bound type II receptor, a type I receptor is recruited and
transphorylated, and its kinase domain is activated, subsequently
phosphorylating intracellular receptor-associated Smad proteins (R-Smads). The
Smad proteins are a large family of intercellular proteins that are divided into
three classes: receptor-activated (R-Smads, Smads 1–3, 5, 8), common-partner
(co-Smads, Smad4), and inhibitory Smads (I-Smads, Smad6, Smad7). R-
Smad/Smad4 complexes translocate to the nucleus and regulate target gene
transcription by interacting with other proteins or as transcription factors by
directly binding to DNA. TβR-I activation is a highly regulated process that
involves membrane-anchored coreceptors and other receptor-like molecules that
can sequester ligands and prevent their binding to respective TβR-II receptors.
Dominant negative forms of TβR-II have inactive kinase domains and cannot
transphosphorylate TβR-I, thereby blocking downstream signaling events. The
diversity of TGF-β ligand, TβR-I and TβR-II, coreceptor, ligand trap, and R-
Smad combinations contributes to particular developmental and cell-specific
processes, often in combination with other signaling pathways.

FIGURE 21–4 Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)/Smad signaling pathway.
A, The type II TGF-β receptor subunit (TβR-II) is constitutively active. B, Upon
binding of ligand to TβR-II, a type I receptor subunit is recruited to form a
heterodimeric receptor complex and the TβR-I kinase domain is
transphosphorylated (-P). Signaling from the activated receptor complex
phosphorylates R-Smads, which then bind to a co-Smad, translocate from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus, and activate gene transcription with cofactor(s) (X).

Hedgehog
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) was the identified first mammalian ortholog of the
Drosophila gene hedgehog. Shh and other related proteins, desert hedgehog and
Indian hedgehog, are secreted morphogens critical to early patterning, cell
migration, and differentiation of many cell types and organ systems (see Chapter
5). Cells have variable thresholds for response to the secreted Shh signal. The
primary receptor for Shh is Patched (PTCH in human, PTC family in mouse), a
12-transmembrane domain protein that, in the absence of Shh, inhibits
Smoothened (Smo), a seven-transmembrane domain G protein–linked protein,
and downstream signaling to the nucleus. However, in the presence of Shh, Ptc
inhibition is blocked and downstream events follow, including nuclear
translocation of Gli (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3), with transcriptional activation of target
genes, such as Ptc-1, Engrailed, and others (Fig. 21-5).
FIGURE 21–5 Sonic hedgehog/Patched signaling pathway. A, The Patched (Ptc)
receptor inhibits signaling from the Smoothened (Smo) receptor. In a complex
with Costal-2 (Cos2) and Fused (Fu), Gli is modified to become a transcriptional
repressor, Gli-R. B, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is cleaved and cholesterol is added to
its N-terminus. This modified Shh ligand inhibits the Ptc receptor, permitting
Smo signaling, and ultimately activated Gli (Gli-A) translocates to the nucleus to

activate target genes with CBP. In vertebrates, Shh signaling takes place in
primary cilia (inset). CBP, cyclic AMP–binding protein; CKI, casein kinase I;
GSK-3, glycogen synthase kinase-3; P, phosphate group; PKA, protein kinase A;
SuFu, suppressor of Fused.
The Shh protein is modified post-translationally by the addition of cholesterol
and palmitate moieties to the N-and C-termini, respectively. These lipid
modifications affect Shh’s association with the cell membrane, formation of Shh
multimers, and, of significance, affect the movement of Shh, altering its tissue
distribution and concentration gradients. One of the best explained activities of
Shh activity in vertebrate development is the role of Shh in patterning the ventral
neural tube (see Chapters 4 and 17). Shh is secreted at high levels by the
notochord. The concentration of Shh is highest in the floor plate of the neural
tube and lowest in the roof plate, where members of the TGF-β family are highly
expressed. The cell fates of four ventral interneuron classes and motor neurons
are determined by relative Shh concentrations and by a combinatorial code of
homeobox and basic HLH (bHLH) genes.
The requirement of Shh pathway signaling for many developmental processes is
underscored by the discovery of human mutations of members of the Shh
pathway and the corresponding phenotypes of genetically modified mice, in
which members of the Shh pathway are either inactivated (loss of
function/knockout) or over-expressed (gain of function). Mutations of SHH and
PTCH have been associated with holoprosencephaly, a congenital brain defect
resulting in the fusion of the two cerebral hemispheres, anophthalmia or cyclopia
(see Chapter 18) and dorsalization of forebrain structures; in sheep, this defect
can also result from exposure to the teratogen cyclopamine, which disrupts Shh
signaling (see Fig. 21-5). Of interest, some patients with severe forms of the
inborn error of cholesterol synthesis, the autosomal recessive Smith-Lemli-Opitz
syndrome, have holoprosencephaly (see Chapter 20). GLI3 mutations are
associated with autosomal dominant polydactyly syndromes (see Chapter 16),
such as Greig’s and Pallister-Hall syndromes. Gorlin’s syndrome, often due to
germline PTCH mutations, is a constellation of congenital malformations mostly
affecting the epidermis, craniofacial structures (see Chapter 9), and the nervous
system. These patients are significantly predisposed to basal cell carcinomas,
especially after radiation therapy, and a smaller proportion will develop
malignant brain tumors (medulloblastomas) during childhood. Somatic
mutations of PTCH, SUFU, and SMO have also been identified in patients with
sporadic medulloblastomas not associated with Gorlin’s syndrome.

In vertebrates, the Shh pathway is linked to primary cilia (inset, Fig. 21-5) and
their constituent intraflagellar transport (IFT) and basal body proteins. IFT
proteins act upstream of the GLI activator (GLI-A) and repressor (GLI-R)
proteins and are necessary for their production. Mutations involving genes
encoding basal body proteins, such as Talpid3 and oral-facial-digital syndrome 1
(Ofd1), affect Shh signaling in knockout mice. A group of human cilia-related
diseases called the ciliopathies, includes rare genetic diseases as well as more
common disorders such as autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease.

Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway
The Wnt-secreted glycoproteins are vertebrate orthologs of the Drosophila gene
Wingless. Similar to the other morphogens previously discussed, the 19 Wnt
family members control several processes during development, including
establishment of cell polarity, proliferation, apoptosis, cell fate specification, and
migration. Wnt signaling is very complex and three signaling pathways have
been elucidated to date—the classic or “canonical” β-catenin-dependent pathway
is discussed here (Fig. 21-6). Specific Wnts bind to one of 10 Frizzled (Fzd)
seven transmembrane domain cell surface receptors, and with low-density
lipoprotein receptor–related-protein (LRP5/LRP6) coreceptors, thereby
activating downstream intracellular signaling events. β-catenin plays an integral
role in canonical Wnt signaling. In the absence of Wnt binding, in a protein
complex with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and axin, cytoplasmic β-
catenin is phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3) and targeted for
degradation. In the presence of Wnts, GSK-3 is itself phosphorylated by
Dishevelled (Dvl), and thus inactivated; it cannot phosphorylate β-catenin. β-
catenin is stabilized, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the
nucleus where it activates target gene transcription, in a complex with T-cell
factor (TCF) transcription factors. The many β-catenin/TCF target genes include
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), c-myc, and matrix
metalloproteinases.

FIGURE 21–6 Wnt/β-catenin canonical signaling pathway. A, In the absence of
Wnt ligand binding to Frizzled (Fzd) receptor, β-catenin is phosphorylated (-P)
by a multiprotein complex and targeted for degradation. Target gene expression
is repressed by T-cell factor (TCF). B, When Wnt binds to the Fzd receptor, LRP
coreceptors are recruited, Dishevelled (DVL) is phosphorylated, and β-catenin
then accumulates in the cytoplasm. Some β-catenin enters the nucleus to activate
target gene transcription. APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; GSK-3, glycogen
synthase kinase-3; LRP, lipoprotein receptor–related-protein.
There are several noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways; some share Frizzled
receptors. However, all of these pathways are distinguished from the canonical
Wnt pathway by not involving β-catenin stabilization, degradation, and/or
nuclear translocation. One of the best-studied noncanonical Wnt signaling
pathways is known as the Wnt-cGMP/Ca2+ pathway and acts through
phospholipase C (PLC) to increase intracellular calcium concentrations, thereby
activating protein kinase C (PKC) and/or calmodulin-dependent kinase II
(CamKII), resulting in a myriad of downstream effects.
Dysregulated Wnt signaling is a prominent feature in many developmental
disorders and cancer. A Frizzled (FZD9) gene is present in the Williams-Beuren

syndrome deletion region. LRP5 mutations are found in the osteoporosis-
pseudoglioma syndrome. Dvl2 knockout mice have malformations of the cardiac
outflow tract, abnormal somite segmentation, and neural tube defects. Similar to
the Shh pathway, canonical Wnt pathway mutations (in β-catenin, APC, and
axin1 genes) have been described in children with medulloblastoma. Moreover,
somatic APC mutations are common (~50%) in adults with sporadic colorectal
carcinomas and germline APC mutations are a feature of familial adenomatous
polyposis and Turcot’s syndrome (multiple colorectal adenomas and increased
frequency of primary brain tumors).

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases

Common Features
Growth factors, such as insulin, epidermal growth factor, nerve growth factor
and other neurotrophins, and members of the platelet-derived growth factor
family, bind to cell surface transmembrane receptors found on target cells. These
receptors, members of the RTK superfamily, have three domains: (1) an
extracellular ligand binding domain, (2) a transmembrane domain, and (3) an
intracellular kinase domain (Fig. 21-7). These receptors are found as monomers
in the quiescent or unbound state, but upon ligand binding, these receptor units
dimerize. This process of dimerization brings the two intracellular kinase
domains into close proximity such that one kinase domain can phosphorylate
and activate the other receptor (transphosphorylation). Transphosphorylation is
required to fully activate the receptors, which then initiate a series of
intracellular signaling cascades. The mechanism of transphosphorylation
requires both receptor subunits within a dimer to have functional kinase domains
for signal transduction to occur. If there is an inactivating mutation of one
receptor subunit’s kinase domain, the functional consequence will be to abolish
signaling through a heterodimer resulting from the combination of wild-type and
mutant receptor subunits (a dominant negative mode of action). Such a mutation
in the kinase domain of the VEGF receptor 3 (VEGFR-3) results in the
autosomal dominantly inherited lymphatic disorder called Milroy disease.

FIGURE 21–7 Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling. A, In the absence of
ligand, the receptors are monomers and are inactive. B, Upon binding of ligand,
the receptors dimerize and transphosphorylation occurs, which activates
downstream signaling cascades. P, phosphorylated.

Regulation of Angiogenesis by Receptor Tyrosine
Kinases
Growth factors generally promote cellular proliferation, migration, and survival
(i.e., are antiapoptotic). Dysregulation of RTKs or their downstream signaling
components are frequently found in human cancers. During embryogenesis,
signaling through RTKs is crucial for normal development and affects many
different processes such as the growth of new blood vessels (see Chapter 4),
cellular migration, and neuronal axonal guidance.
Endothelial cells are derived from a progenitor cell (the hemangioblast) that can
give rise to both the hematopoietic cell lineage and endothelial cells. The early
endothelial cells proliferate and eventually coalesce to form the first primitive
blood vessels. This process is termed vasculogenesis. After the first blood
vessels are formed, they undergo intensive remodeling and maturation into the
mature blood vessels in a process called angiogenesis. This maturation process
involves the recruitment of vascular smooth muscle cells to the vessels that
stabilize them. Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis are both dependent on the
function of two distinct RTK classes, members of the VEGF and Tie receptor
families. VEGF-A is essential for endothelial and blood cell development.
VEGF-A knockout mice fail to develop blood or endothelial cells and die at
early embryonic stages. The heterozygous VEGF-A mice have severe defects in
their vasculature demonstrating that VEGF-A gene dose is important
(haploinsufficiency). A related molecule, VEGF-C, was shown to be crucial for
the development of lymphatic endothelial cells. VEGF-A signals through two
receptors, VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2, which are expressed by endothelial cells.
VEGF-A signals predominantly through VEGFR-2 in order for vasculogenesis
to properly occur in the embryo.
The process of angiogenic refinement depends on the function of the
angiopoietin/Tie2 signaling pathway. Tie2 is a RTK that is specifically expressed
by endothelial cells and angiopoietin 1 and angiopoietin 2 are its ligands that are
expressed by the surrounding vascular smooth muscle cells. This represents a
paracrine signaling system where receptor and ligand are expressed in adjacent
cells. Both the VEGF/VEGFR-2 and angiopoietin/Tie2 signaling pathways are
co-opted by tumors to stimulate growth of new blood vessels, which stimulates
their growth and metastasis. This demonstrates how normal signaling pathways

in the developing human can be reused for disease processes, such as cancer, in
the adult.

Notch-Delta Pathway
The Notch signaling pathway is integral for cell fate determination, including
maintenance of stem-cell niches, proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation.
These processes are essential for all aspects of organ development through
regulation of lateral and inductive cell–cell signaling. Notch proteins are single
transmembrane receptors (Notch 1–4) that interact with membrane-bound Notch
(see Chapter 5) ligands (Delta-like ligands, Dll-1, Dll-3, Dll-4) and Serrate-like
ligands, Jagged-1, Jagged-2) on adjacent cells (Fig. 21-8). Ligand-receptor
binding triggers proteolytic events, some mediated by secretases, leading to the
release of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). When the NICD translocates
to the nucleus, a series of intranuclear events culminates in the induction of
expression of hairy enhancer of split (Hes), an HLH transcription factor that
maintains the progenitor state by repressing proneural basic HLH genes.
FIGURE 21–8 Notch/Delta signaling pathway. In progenitor cells (right),
activation of Notch signaling leads to cleavage of the Notch intracellular domain
(NICD). Proteases such as γ-secretase mediate this cleavage event. NICD

translocates to the nucleus, binds to a transcriptional complex, and activates
target genes, such as Hes1, that inhibit differentiation. In differentiating cells
(left), Notch signaling is not active.
The process of lateral inhibition ensures that in a population of cells with
equivalent developmental potential, there are the correct numbers of two distinct
cell types. In the initial cell-cell interaction, the progenitor cell responding to the
Notch-ligand Delta, through a negative feedback mechanism, reduces its own
expression of Delta, with Notch receptor signaling maintaining the cell as an
uncommitted progenitor. However, the adjacent cell maintains Delta expression
levels with reduced Notch signaling and differentiation, mediated by, for
example, proneural HLH genes. Inductive signaling with other surrounding cells
expressing morphogens may overcome the cell’s commitment to a neural cell
fate (default state) to an alternative glial cell fate. Understanding the function of
the Notch-Delta signaling pathway in mammalian development has been assisted
by loss-of-function studies in the mouse. Evidence of JAGGED1 or NOTCH-2
mutations in Alagille syndrome (arteriohepatic dysplasia), with liver, kidney,
cardiovascular, ocular, and skeletal malformations, and NOTCH-3 gene
mutations in the CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) adult vascular degenerative
disease, with a tendency to early-age onset of stroke-like events, support the
importance of the Notch signaling pathway in embryonic and postnatal
development, respectively.
Pharmacological manipulation of the Notch signaling pathway may be a means
to treat human diseases. For example, gamma secretase inhibitors (GSI) are in
the midst of clinical trials for such diverse disorders as Alzheimer disease,
pulmonary hypertension and cancer. For the former, gamma secretase is also a
protease required for the production of amyloid-β protein in the brain. Some of
the GSI under development are non-selective, whereas others spare the Notch
signaling pathway.

Transcription Factors
Transcription factors belong to a large class of proteins that regulate the
expression of many target genes, either through activation or repression
mechanisms. Typically, a transcription factor will bind to specific nucleotide
sequences in the promoter/enhancer regions of target genes and regulate the rate
of transcription of its target genes via interacting with accessory proteins.
Recently, it was demonstrated that transcription factors can both activate or
repress target gene transcription depending on the cell in which they are
expressed, the specific promoter, the chromatin context, and the developmental
stage. In addition, some transcription factors do not need to bind to DNA to
regulate transcription, but may bind to other transcription factors already bound
to the promoter DNA thereby regulating transcription. Also, they may bind and
sequester other transcription factors from their target genes, thus repressing their
transcription. The transcription factor superfamily is composed of many different
classes of proteins. Three examples of this diverse family of proteins are
discussed: Hox/Homeobox, Pax, and bHLH transcription factors.

Hox/Homeobox Proteins
The Hox genes were first discovered in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
Mutations in these genes of the HOM-C complex lead to dramatic phenotypes
(homeotic transformation) such as the Antennapedia gene in which legs instead
of antennae sprout from the head. The order of the Hox genes along the AP axis
is faithfully reproduced in their organization at the level of the chromosome. In
humans, the order of the Hox genes along the AP axis and chromosomal location
is conserved as well. Defects in HOXA1 have been shown to impair human
neural development, and mutations in HOXA13 and HOXD13 result in limb
malformations (see Chapter 16).
All the HOX genes contain a 180-base pair sequence, the homeobox, which
encodes a 60–amino-acid homeodomain composed of three α helices. The third
(recognition) helix binds to DNA sites that contain one or more TAAT/ATTA
tetranucleotide-binding motifs in the promoters of their target genes. The
homeodomain is the most conserved region of the protein and is highly
conserved across evolution, whereas other regions of the protein are not as well
conserved. Mutations in the DNA binding region of the homeobox gene NKX2.5
are associated with cardiac atrial-septal defects and mutations in ARX are
associated with the central nervous system malformation syndrome
lissencephaly (see Chapter 17).

Pax Genes
All the Pax genes contain conserved bipartite DNA-binding motifs called the
Pax (or paired) domain, and most Pax family members also contain a
homeodomain. PAX proteins have been shown to both activate and repress
transcription of target genes. The D. melanogaster ortholog of Pax6, eyeless,
was shown to be essential for eye development because the homozygous mutant
flies had no eyes. In gain-of-function experiments, ectopic expression of eyeless
led to the formation of additional eyes. In fruit flies, eyeless is clearly a master
regulator of eye development. Eyeless shares a high degree of sequence
conservation with its human ortholog PAX6. PAX6 was shown to be associated
with ocular malformations such as aniridia (absence of the iris) and Peter’s
anomaly. In human eye diseases, the level of PAX6 expression seems to be
crucial as patients with only one functional copy (haploinsufficiency) have
ocular defects and patients without PAX6 function are anophthalmic (see
Chapter 18). This concept of haploinsufficiency is a recurring theme for many
different transcription factors and corresponding human malformations.
PAX3 and PAX7 encode both homeodomain and Pax DNA-binding domains.
The human childhood cancer alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma results from a
translocation that results in the formation of a chimeric protein wherein PAX3 or
PAX7 (including both DNA domains) is fused to the strong activating domains
of the Forkhead family transcription factor FOXO1A. The autosomal dominant
human disease Waardenburg’s syndrome type I has been demonstrated to result
from mutations in the PAX3 gene. Patients with this syndrome have hearing
deficits, ocular defects (dystopia canthorum), and pigmentation abnormalities
best typified by a white forelock.

Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors
The bHLH genes are a class of transcription factors that regulate cell fate
determination and differentiation in many different tissues during development.
At a molecular level, bHLH proteins contain a basic (positively charged) DNA-
binding region that is followed by two α helices that are separated by a loop. The
α helices have a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic side (amphipathic). The
hydrophobic side of the helix is a motif for protein-protein interactions between
different members of the bHLH family. This domain is the most conserved
region of the bHLH proteins across different species. bHLH proteins often bind
other bHLHs (heterodimerize) to regulate transcription. These heterodimers are
composed of tissue-specific bHLH proteins bound to ubiquitously expressed
bHLH proteins. The powerful prodifferentiation effect of bHLH genes can be
repressed by several different mechanisms. For example, inhibitors of
differentiation (Id) proteins are HLH proteins that lack the basic DNA-binding
motif. When Id proteins heterodimerize with specific bHLH proteins, they
prevent binding of these bHLH proteins to their target gene promoter sequences
(called E-boxes). Growth factors, which tend to inhibit differentiation, increase
the level of Id proteins that sequester bHLH proteins from their target promoters.
As well, growth factors can stimulate the phosphorylation of the DNA-binding
domain of bHLH proteins, which inhibits their ability to bind to DNA. bHLH
genes are crucial for the development of tissues such as muscle
(MyoD/Myogenin) and neurons (NeuroD/Neurogenin) in humans (see Chapter
15). MyoD expression was shown to be sufficient to transdifferentiate several
different cell lines into muscle cells, demonstrating that it is a master regulator of
muscle differentiation. Studies of knockout mice confirmed that MyoD and
another bHLH Myf5 are crucial for the differentiation of precursor cells into
primitive muscle cells (myoblasts). The differentiation of these myoblasts into
fully differentiated muscle cells is controlled by myogenin. Similarly, Mash1
(ASCL1) and Neurogenin1 (NEUROD3) are proneural genes that regulate the
formation of neuroblasts from the neuroepithelium (see Chapter 17). Mouse
models have shown that these genes are crucial for the specification of different
subpopulations of precursors in the developing central nervous system. For
example, Mash1 knockout mice had defects in forebrain development, whereas
Neurogenin1 knockout mice had defects in cranial sensory ganglia and ventral
spinal cord neurons. Specification of these neuroblasts is regulated by other
proneural genes known as NeuroD and Math5 (ATOH7). Muscle and neuronal

differentiation (see Chapters 15 and 17) are controlled by a cascade of bHLH
genes that function at early and at late stages of cellular differentiation. As well,
both differentiation pathways are inhibited via signaling through the Notch
pathway.

Epigenetics
Our understanding of the role of epigenetic modifications in regulating
embryonic development has greatly expanded in recent years. Epigenetics
differs from genetics in that it represents the study of heritable changes in the
function of genes that cannot be explained by any underlying changes in DNA
sequence. This classic definition of epigenetics has now expanded to also
include the study of modifications such as histone acetylation and
phosphorylation, in which although gene expression is impacted, these
modifications are not necessarily inherited. In this chapter, two powerful
mechanisms of epigenetic regulation, histone acetylation and DNA methylation
are discussed. Disorders of chromatin remodeling include Rett, Rubinstein-
Taybi, alpha-thalassemia/X-linked mental retardation syndromes, and various
cancers.

Histone Acetylation
Histones are the positively charged nuclear proteins around which genomic
DNA is coiled to tightly pack it within the nucleus. Modification of these
proteins is a common pathway by which transcription factors regulate the
activity of their target promoters. One such modification is acetylation. DNA is
less tightly bound to acetylated histones, thus allowing for more open access of
transcription factors and other proteins to the promoters of their target genes.
Histone acetylation status is controlled by genes such as histone acetyl
transferases, which add acetyl groups, and histone deacetylases, which remove
acetyl groups. Transcription factors can modify histone acetylation by either
recruiting histone acetyl transferases or by recruiting histone deacetylases (Fig.
21-9). Phosphorylation of histones also leads to an opening of the chromatin
structure and activation of gene transcription.
FIGURE 21–9 Epigenetic modifications alter transcriptional properties of
chromatin. A, In areas of transcriptionally inactive chromatin, the DNA is tightly
bound to the histone cores. The histones are not acetylated or phosphorylated.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are active, whereas histone acetyl transferases

(HATs) and histone kinases are inactive. DNA is highly methylated (Me). B, In
areas of transcriptionally active chromatin, the DNA is not as tightly bound to
the histone cores and the DNA in unmethylated. The histone proteins are
acetylated (Ac) and phosphorylated (-P). HDACs are inactive, whereas HATs
and histone kinases are active.

DNA Methylation
In contrast to the dynamic mechanism of histone modifications, DNA
methylation is used for the long-term repression of genes. Cytosine residues are
rapidly methylated at GC dinucleotides following embryo implantation by
enzymes called DNA methyltransferases. During embryonic development,
pluripotency genes, which are expressed in embryonic stem cells, are repressed
as the cells differentiate. This repression is maintained via methylation of these
loci in differentiated cells. This methylation state is only erased in the primordial
germ cells to enable re-expression in stem cells. DNA methylation is also used
by the body for effective repression of viral genomes that are integrated into our
own. These repressive marks are not reset in the primordial germ cells and
inherited by the progeny. In cancer, tumor suppressor genes are frequently
inactivated by DNA methylation that allows for uncontrolled cellular growth.

Stem Cells: Differentiation Versus
Pluripotency
Stem cells (Fig. 21-10) have the property of self-renewal through symmetric
(vertical) or asymmetric (horizontal) cell divisions, and under specific conditions
in the embryo and adult, can give rise to all of the differentiated cell types in the
body (totipotent or pluripotent). Several types of stem cell populations have been
characterized: embryonic stem cells (ESCs), adult stem cells, and cancer stem
cells. ESCs, derived from the inner cell mass of the blastula, are pluripotent and
can give rise to all differentiated cell types from the ectoderm, endoderm, and
mesoderm, the primary germ layers, but do not contribute to extra-embryonic
tissues. ESCs express several transcription factors, such as Sox2 and Oct-4, that
repress differentiation.

FIGURE 21–10 Neural stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells. A, Adult
or embryonic stem cells can either divide symmetrically, giving rise to two
equivalent daughter stem cells, (“vertical” cell division; the plane of mitosis is
perpendicular to the ventricular surface) or asymmetrically, giving rise to a
daughter stem cell and a nervous system progenitor cell (“horizontal” cell
division: the plane of mitosis is parallel to the ventricular surface). In this
example, the progenitor cell does not retain the nuclear or cytoplasmic factors
(colored shapes) that remain in the stem cell; however, the progenitor cell
expresses new proteins (e.g. receptor tyrosine kinases) in its plasma membrane.
B, Stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) have the capacity for self-
renewal, cell death and/or to become progenitors. Progenitor cells have a more
limited capacity for self-renewal, but also can differentiate into various cell types
or undergo cell death. Adult, differentiated somatic cells, such as skin
fibroblasts, can be reprogrammed into iPS with the introduction of the master

transcription factors SOX2, Oct-3/4, or KLF4.
Adult stem cells are found in relative abundance in differentiated tissues and
organs that undergo rapid regeneration, such as the bone marrow, hair follicles,
and the intestinal mucosal epithelium. However, there are “nests” of adult stem
cells in many other tissues, including those that have been previously considered
nonregenerative, such as the central nervous system and retina; these stem cell
populations are small and located in the subventricular zone and ciliary margins,
respectively. Hematopoietic stem cells derived from bone marrow, peripheral
blood, and umbilical cord sources are now routinely used to treat primary
immunodeficiencies, various inherited metabolic disorders and as a “rescue”
strategy following myeloablative cancer treatments.
Cancer stem cells (CSC) are under intense study since it has become evident
through the study of leukemias and solid tumors (e.g. colorectal cancer,
malignant gliomas) that a small population of these cells, identified by various
cell surface markers (such as CD133 in solid tumors), are often resistant to
cancer treatments such as radiation or chemotherapy. Investigators are focusing
their efforts on eradicating the CSC population in addition to standard therapies
to result in higher cure rates.
One can harness the power of stem cells to repair degenerative disorders such as
Parkinson’s disease and tissues severely damaged by ischemia (stroke) and
trauma (spinal cord injury). However, researchers have been limited by the
available sources of stem cells from the embryo or adult. Hence, there has been
tremendous interest in de-differentiating somatic cells such as epithelial cells and
fibroblasts from adults into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS). Recent studies
have identified several key master transcription factors (Fig. 21-10, panel B),
such as Oct4, Sox2, and KLF4, or Nanog, that can reprogram differentiated cells
into pluripotent cells. These iPS cells can be manipulated using nonviral means
of gene delivery and have the potential to treat the majority of human diseases
where cell regeneration may restore structure and/or function.

Summary of Common Signaling
Pathways Used During Development
• There are marked differences between the various signaling pathways, but they
share many common features: ligands, membrane-bound receptors and
coreceptors, intracellular signaling domains, adapters, and effector molecules.
• Signaling pathways are co-opted at various times during development for stem-
cell renewal, cell proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and differentiation.
• Pathways have “default” settings that result in generation or maintenance of
one cell fate rather than another.
• Many genes and signaling pathways are highly conserved throughout
evolution. Orthologs of genes critical for invertebrate development (the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruit fly D. melanogaster) are found in
vertebrates, including the zebrafish, mouse, and human, often as members of
multigene families.
• Knowledge of gene function has been acquired by reverse genetics using model
systems with loss-or gain-of-function transgenic approaches and by forward
genetics beginning with the description of abnormal phenotypes arising
spontaneously in mouse and humans and then subsequent identification of the
mutant gene.
• There is evidence of cross-talk among pathways. This communication among
various signaling pathways facilitates our understanding of the far-reaching
consequences of single gene mutations that result in malformation syndromes
affecting the development of multiple organ systems or in cancers.
References and Suggested Reading
Abate-Shen C. Deregulated homeobox gene expression in cancer: Cause or
consequence? Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:777.
Appel B, Eisen JS. Retinoids run rampant: Multiple roles during spinal cord and
motor neuron development. Neuron. 2003;40:461.
Ausio J, Levin DB, De Amorim GV, et al. Syndromes of disordered chromatin
remodeling. Clin Genet. 2003;64:83.

Cavallaro U, Christofori G. Cell adhesion and signalling by cadherins and Ig-
CAMs in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:118-132.
Charron F, Tessier-Lavigne M. Novel brain wiring functions for classical
morphogens: A role as graded positional cues in axon guidance. Development.
2005;132:2251.
Chizhikov VV, Millen KJ. Roof plate–dependent patterning of the vertebrate
dorsal central nervous system. Dev Biol. 2005;277:287.
Coultas L, Chawengsaksophak K, Rossant J. Endothelial cells and VEGF in
vascular development. Nature. 2006;438:937.
Dellovade T, Romer JT, Curran T, et al. The hedgehog pathway and neurological
disorders. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2006;29:539.
De Strooper B, Vassar R, Golde T. The secretases: enzymes with therapeutic
potential in Alzheimer Disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010;6:99.
Eisenberg LM, Eisenberg CA. Wnt signal transduction and the formation of the
myocardium. Dev Biol. 2006;293:305.
Feinberg AP. Phenotypic plasticity and the epigenetics of human disease. Nature.
2007;447:433.
Goetz SC, Anderson KV. The primary cilium: a signaling centre during
vertebrate development. Nat Rev Genet. 2010;11:331.
Gumbiner BM. Regulation of Cadherin-mediated adhesion in morphogenesis.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:622.
Hooper JE, Scott MP. Communicating with hedgehogs. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2005;6:306.
Kageyama R, Ohtsuka T, Hatakeyama J, et al. Roles of bHLH genes in neural
stem cell differentiation. Exp Cell Res. 2005;306:343.
Kaufman DS. Toward clinical therapies using hematopoietic cells derived from
human pluripotent stem cells. Blood. 2009;114:3513.

Kopan R, Ilagan MX. The canonical Notch signaling pathway: unfolding the
activation mechanism. Cell. 2009;137:216.
Laird DW. The gap junction proteome and its relationship to disease. Trends Cell
Biol. 2009;20:92.
Larsson J, Karlsson S. The role of Smad signaling in hematopoiesis. Oncogene.
2005;24:5676.
Lee JE. Basic helix-loop-helix genes in neural development. Curr Opin
Neurobiol. 1997;7:13.
Li F, Chong ZZ, Maiese K. Winding through the WNT pathway during cellular
development and demise. Histol Histopathol. 2006;21:103.
Li Z, Wang H, Eyler CE, et al. Turning cancer stem cells inside out: An
exploration of glioma stem cell signaling pathways. J Biol Chem.
2009;284:16705.
Lohela M, Bry M, Tammela T, et al. VEGFs and receptors involved in
angiogenesis versus lymphangiogenesis. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2009;2:154.
Louvi A, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Notch signaling in vertebrate neural
development. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7:93.
Lupo G, Harris WA, Lewis KE. Mechanisms of ventral patterning in the
vertebrate nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7:103.
Marino S. Medulloblastoma: Developmental mechanisms out of control. Trends
Mol Med. 2005;11:17.
Marlétaz F, Holland L, Laudet V, et al. Retinoic acid signaling and the evolution
of chordates. Int J Biol Sci. 2006;2:38.
Park CB, Dufort D, Elsevier Trophoblast Research Award Lecture. The
multifaceted role of nodal signaling during mammalian reproduction. Placenta
32 (supplement B). 2011;25:S125.
Parker MH, Seale P, Rudnicki MA. Looking back to the embryo: Defining
transcriptional networks in adult myogenesis. Nat Rev Genet. 2003;4:497.

Pearson JC, Lemons D, McGinnis W. Modulating Hox gene functions during
animal body patterning. Nat Rev Genet. 2005;6:893.
Robson EJ, He SJ, Eccles MR. A PANorama of PAX genes in cancer and
development. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;6:52.
Reik W. Stability and flexibility of epigenetic gene regulation in mammalian
development. Nature. 2007;447:425.
Sahni V, Kessler JA. Stem cell therapies for spinal cord injury. Nat Rev Neurol.
2010;6:363.
Staal FJT, Clevers HC. Wnt signaling and haematopoiesis: A Wnt–Wnt situation.
Nat Rev Immunol. 2005;5:21.
Stecca B, Ruiz i Altaba A. Brain as a paradigm of organ growth: Hedgehog-Gli
signaling in neural stem cells and brain tumors. J Neurobiol. 2005;64:476.
Sylvie J, Ellen C, Kris V. The role of Wnt in cell signaling and cell adhesion
during early vertebrate development. Front Biosci. 2011;17:2352.
Tian T, Meng AM. Nodal signals pattern vertebrate embryos. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2006;63:672.
Villavicencio EH, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone PM. The sonic hedgehog-
Patched-Gli pathway in human development and disease. Am J Hum Genet.
2000;67:1047.
Wan M, Cao X. BMP signaling in skeletal development. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2005;328:651.
Wigle JT, Eisenstat DD. Homeobox genes in vertebrate forebrain development
and disease. Clin Genet. 2008;73:212.
Yoon K, Gaiano N. Notch signaling in the mammalian central nervous system:
Insights from mouse mutants. Nat Neurosci. 2005;8:709.
Zhu AJ, Scott MP. Incredible journey: How do developmental signals travel
through tissue? Genes Dev. 2004;18:2985.

Appendix
Discussion of Clinically Oriented Problems

Chapter 1
1 At the beginning of its development, a human embryo is called a zygote.
2 The term conceptus refers to all structures that develop from the zygote (e.g.,
the embryo, amnion, and chorionic sac). The terms, therefore, are not
synonymous. The term conceptus is used when referring to an embryo and its
extraembryonic membranes, that is, the products of conception. The term
abortus refers to any product or all products of an abortion; that is, the embryo
or fetus and its membranes, including the placenta. An abortus, therefore, is an
aborted conceptus.
3 The development of secondary sexual characteristics occurs, reproductive
functions begin, and sexual dimorphism becomes more obvious; consequently,
the pubertal changes are not the same in males and females. The ages of
presumptive puberty are about 12 years in girls and 14 years in boys; however,
variations occur.
4 Embryology refers to the study of embryonic development; clinically, it refers
to embryonic and fetal development; that is, the study of prenatal development.
Teratology refers to the study of abnormal embryonic and fetal development. It
is the branch of embryology concerned with birth defects and their causes.
Embryologic and teratologic studies are applicable to clinical studies because
they indicate vulnerable prenatal periods of development.

Chapter 2
1 Numerical changes in chromosomes arise chiefly from nondisjunction during
a mitotic or meiotic cell division. Most clinically important abnormalities in
chromosome number occur during the first meiotic division. Nondisjunction is
the failure of double chromatid chromosomes to dissociate during anaphase of
cell division. As a result, both chromosomes pass to the same daughter cell and
trisomy results. Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) is the most common numerical
chromosomal disorder resulting in birth defects. This syndrome occurs
approximately once in every 700 births in women 30 to 34 years of age;
however, it is more common in older mothers.
2 A morula with an extra set of chromosomes in its cells is called a triploid
embryo. This chromosome abnormality usually results from fertilization of an
oocyte by two sperms (dispermy). A fetus could develop from a triploid morula
and be born alive; however, this is unusual. Most triploid fetuses abort
spontaneously; if born alive, triploid neonates die within a few days.
3 Blockage of the uterine tubes resulting from infection is a major cause of
infertility in women. Because occlusion prevents the oocyte from coming into
contact with sperms, fertilization cannot occur. Infertility in men usually results
from defects in spermatogenesis. Nondescent of the testes is one cause of
aspermatogenesis (failure of sperm formation); however, normally positioned
testes may not produce adequate numbers of actively motile sperms.
4 Mosaicism results from nondisjunction of double chromatid chromosomes
during early cleavage of a zygote rather than during gametogenesis. As a
consequence, the embryo has two cell lines with different chromosome numbers.
Persons who develop from these chromosomally abnormal embryos are mosaics.
Approximately 1% of persons with Down syndrome are mosaics. They have
relatively mild stigmata of the syndrome and are less mentally deficient than
usual. Mosaicism can be detected before birth by cytogenetic studies after
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (see Chapter 6).
5 Postcoital birth control pills (“morning-after pills”) may be prescribed in an
emergency (e.g., after sexual abuse). Ovarian hormones (estrogen) taken in large
doses within 72 hours after sexual intercourse usually prevent implantation of
the blastocyst, probably by altering tubal motility, interfering with corpus luteum
function, or causing abnormal changes in the endometrium. These hormones
prevent implantation, not fertilization; consequently, they should not be called

contraceptive pills. Conception occurs, but the blastocyst does not implant. It
would be more appropriate to call them “contraimplantation pills.” Because the
term abortion refers to a premature stoppage of a pregnancy, the term abortion
could be applied to such an early termination of pregnancy.
6 Many early embryos are spontaneously aborted; the overall early spontaneous
abortion rate is approximately 45%. The common cause of early spontaneous
abortion is the presence of chromosomal abnormalities, such as those resulting
from nondisjunction, failure of one or more pairs of chromosomes to separate.
7 It is estimated that between 12% and 25% of couples in North America are
infertile. One third to one half of these cases are due to male infertility. Male
infertility may result from endocrine disorders, abnormal spermatogenesis, or
blockage of a genital duct. First, Jerry’s semen should be evaluated (sperm
analysis). The total number, motility, and morphology of the sperms in the
ejaculate are assessed in cases of male infertility. A man with fewer than 10
million sperms per milliliter of semen is likely to be sterile, especially when the
specimen of semen contains immotile and morphologically abnormal sperms.

Chapter 3
1 Yes, a chest radiograph could be taken because the patient’s uterus and ovaries
are not directly in the x-ray beam. The only radiation that the ovaries receive
would be a negligible amount from scattering. Furthermore, this small amount of
radiation would be highly unlikely to damage the products of conception if the
patient happened to be pregnant.
2 Implantation is regulated by a delicate balance between estrogen and
progesterone. The large doses of estrogen would upset this balance. Progesterone
makes the endometrium grow thicker and vascular so that the blastocyst may
become embedded and nourished adequately. When the media refer to the
“abortion pill,” they are usually referring to RU486 (mifepristone). This drug
interferes with implantation of the blastocyst by blocking the production of
progesterone by the corpus luteum. A pregnancy can be detected at the end of
the second week after fertilization using highly sensitive pregnancy tests. Most
tests depend on the presence of an early pregnancy factor in the maternal serum.
Early pregnancy can also be detected by ultrasonography.
3 More than 95% of ectopic pregnancies are in the uterine tube, and 60% of
them are in the ampulla of the tube. Endovaginal sonography is often used to
detect ectopic tubal pregnancies. The surgeon would likely perform a
laparoscopic operation to remove the uterine tube containing the ectopic
conceptus.
4 No, the surgery could not have produced the defect of the brain. Exposure of
an embryo during the second week of development to the slight trauma that
might be associated with abdominal surgery would not cause a birth defect.
Furthermore, the anesthetics used during the operation would not induce a defect
of the brain. Maternal exposure to teratogens during the first 2 weeks of
development will not induce birth defects, but the conceptus may abort.
5 Women older than 40 years of age are more likely to have a baby with birth
defects, such as the Down syndrome; however, women older than 40 may have
normal children. Prenatal diagnosis (e.g., using chorionic villi sampling [CVS]
or amniocentesis) will tell whether the embryo has severe chromosomal
abnormalities (e.g., trisomy 13) that would cause its death shortly after birth.
Ultrasound examination of the embryo may also be performed for the detection
of certain morphologic anomalies (e.g., defects of the limbs and central nervous
system). In most cases, the embryo is normal and the pregnancy continues to full

term.

Chapter 4
1 The hormones in contraceptive pills prevent ovulation and development of the
luteal (secretory) stage of the menstrual cycle. Severe chromosomal
abnormalities may have caused the spontaneous abortion. The incidence of
chromosomal abnormalities in early abortions is high in women who become
pregnant shortly after discontinuing the use of birth control pills. A pronounced
increase in polyploidy (cells containing three or more times the haploid number
of chromosomes) has been observed in embryos expelled during spontaneous
abortions when conception occurred within 2 months after discontinuing oral
contraception. Polyploidy is fatal to the developing embryo. This information
suggests that it is wise to use some other type of contraception for one or two
menstrual cycles before attempting pregnancy. In the present case, the physician
probably told the patient that her abortion was a natural screening process, and
that it was probably the spontaneous expulsion of an embryo that could not have
survived because it likely had severe chromosomal abnormalities. Some women
have become pregnant one month after discontinuing the use of contraceptive
pills and have given birth to normal babies.
2 A highly sensitive radioimmune test would likely indicate that the woman was
pregnant. The presence of embryonic and/or chorionic tissue in the endometrial
remnants would be an absolute sign of pregnancy. By 5 days after the expected
menses (approximately 5 weeks after the last normal menstrual period [LNMP]),
the embryo would be in the third week of its development. The embryo would be
approximately 2 mm in diameter and could be detected with current transvaginal
ultrasound techniques.
3 The central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) begins to develop during
the third embryonic week. Meroencephaly, in which most of the brain and
calvaria are absent, may result from environmental teratogens acting during the
third week of development. This severe defect of the brain occurs because of
failure of the cranial part of the neural tube to develop normally, which usually
results from nonclosure of the rostral neuropore.
4 Sacrococcygeal teratomas arise from remnants of the primitive streak.
Because cells from the primitive streak are pluripotent, the tumors contain
various types of tissue derived from all three germ layers. There is a clear-cut
difference in the incidence of these tumors with regard to sex; they are three to
four times more frequent in girls than in boys.

5 Endovaginal sonography is an important technique for assessing pregnancy
during the third week because the conceptus can be visualized. It is, therefore,
possible to determine whether the embryo is developing normally. A negative
pregnancy test in the third week does not rule out an ectopic pregnancy because
ectopic pregnancies produce human chorionic gonadotrophin at a slower rate
than intrauterine pregnancies. This hormone is the basis of pregnancy tests.

Chapter 5
1 The physician would likely tell the patient that her embryo was undergoing a
critical stage of its development, and that it would be best for her baby if she
were to stop smoking. She would likely ask her to avoid taking any unprescribed
medication throughout her pregnancy. The physician would also likely tell her
that heavy cigarette smoking is known to cause intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR) and underweight babies, and that the incidence of prematurity increases
with the number of cigarettes smoked. The physician would also recommend
that she not consume alcohol during her pregnancy because of its known
teratogenic effects.
2 The embryonic period is the most critical period of development because all
the main tissues and organs are forming. It is the time when the embryo is most
vulnerable to the injurious effects of environmental agents (e.g., large doses of
ionizing radiation, drugs, and certain viruses).
3 One cannot predict how a drug will affect the human embryo because human
and animal embryos may differ in their response to a drug; for example,
thalidomide is extremely teratogenic to human embryos, but has very little effect
on some experimental animals, such as rats and mice. However, drugs known to
be strong teratogens in animals should not be used during human pregnancy,
especially during the embryonic period. The germ layers form during
gastrulation. All tissues and organs of the embryo develop from the three germ
layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. Formation of the primitive streak
and notochord are important events during morphogenesis.
4 Information about the starting date of a pregnancy may be unreliable because it
depends on the patient’s remembering an event (last menses) that occurred 2 or 3
months earlier. In addition, she may have had (breakthrough bleeding) at the
time of her LNMP and may have thought that it was a light menses.
Endovaginal sonography is reliable for estimating the probable starting date of
a pregnancy and embryonic age.
5 No! To cause severe limb defects, a known teratogenic drug would have to act
during the critical period of limb development (24–36 days after fertilization).
Teratogens interfere with differentiation of tissues and organs, often disrupting
or arresting their development.

Chapter 6
1 Physicians cannot always rely on information about the time of the LNMP
provided by their patients, especially in cases in which determination of
fertilization age is extremely important; for example, in high-risk pregnancies in
which one might wish to induce labor as soon as possible. One can determine
with reasonable accuracy the estimated date of confinement, or expected date of
delivery using diagnostic ultrasonography to estimate the size of the fetal head
and abdomen. Normally labor would be induced after 36 to 37 weeks, using
hormones (e.g., prostaglandins and oxytocin), unless there is a good reason to do
so earlier.
2 CVS (chorionic villus sampling) would likely be performed for study of the
fetus’s chromosomes. The most common chromosomal disorder detected in
fetuses of women older than 40 years of age is trisomy 21. If the chromosomes
of the fetus were normal, but birth defects of the brain or limbs were suspected,
ultrasonography would likely be performed. These methods allow one to look
for morphologic abnormalities while scanning the entire fetus. The sex of the
fetus could be determined by examining the sex chromosomes in cells obtained
by CVS. One can often determine fetal sex using ultrasonography.
3 There is considerable danger when uncontrolled drugs (over-the-counter drugs)
such as aspirin and cough medicines are consumed excessively or
indiscriminately by pregnant women. Withdrawal seizures have been reported in
infants born to mothers who are heavy drinkers, and fetal alcohol syndrome is
present in some of these infants (see Chapter 20). The physician would likely tell
the patient not to take any drugs that are not prescribed. Drugs that are most
detrimental to her fetus are under legal control and are dispensed with great care.
4 Many factors (fetal, maternal, and environmental) may reduce the rate of fetal
growth (IUGR). Examples of such factors are intrauterine infections, multiple
pregnancies, and chromosomal abnormalities. Cigarette smoking, narcotic
addiction, and consumption of large amounts of alcohol are also well-established
causes of IUGR. A mother interested in the growth and general well-being of her
fetus consults her doctor frequently, eats a good-quality diet, and does not use
illicit drugs, smoke, or drink alcohol.
5 Amniocentesis is relatively devoid of risk. The chance of inducing an abortion
is estimated to be approximately 0.5%. CVS can also be used for obtaining cells
for chromosome study. PUBS refers to percutaneous umbilical cord blood

sampling. The needle is inserted into the umbilical vein with the guidance of
ultrasonography. Chromosome and hormone studies can be performed on this
blood.
6 Neural tube defects are indicated by high levels of alpha fetoprotein (AFP).
Diagnostic studies would be done monitoring the levels of AFP. Further studies
would be done using ultrasonography. Low levels of AFP may indicate Down
syndrome. Chromosome studies maybe done to check the chromosome
complement of the fetal cells.

Chapter 7
1 The usual method of estimating the expected date of delivery is to count back
3 months from the first day of the LNMP and then add 1 year and 7 days (Nägele
rule; see Chapter 6). The biparietal diameter of the fetal head could be measured
by ultrasonography in a high-risk obstetric patient because this measurement
correlates well with fetal age. Foot measurements are also very helpful.
2 Polyhydramnios is the accumulation of an excessive amount of amniotic
fluid. When it occurs over the course of a few days, there is an associated high
risk of severe fetal birth defects, especially of the central nervous system (e.g.,
meroencephaly and spina bifida cystica). Fetuses with gross brain defects do not
drink the usual amounts of amniotic fluid; hence, the amount of liquid increases.
Atresia (blockage) of the esophagus is almost always accompanied by
polyhydramnios because the fetus cannot swallow and absorb amniotic fluid.
Twinning is also a predisposing cause of polyhydramnios.
3 There is a tendency for twins to “run in families.” It appears unlikely that there
is a genetic factor in monozygotic (MZ) twinning, but a disposition to dizygotic
(DZ) twinning is genetically determined. The frequency of DZ twinning
increases sharply with maternal age up to 35 years and then decreases; however,
the frequency of MZ twinning is affected very little by the age of the mother.
Determination of twin zygosity can usually be made by examining the placenta
and fetal membranes. One can later determine zygosity by looking for
genetically determined similarities and differences in a twin pair. Differences in
DNA studies prove that twins are DZ.
4 A single umbilical artery occurs in approximately 1 of every 200 umbilical
cords. This abnormality is accompanied by a 15% to 20% incidence of
cardiovascular abnormalities.
5 Two zygotes were fertilized. The resulting blastocysts implanted close together
and the placentas fused. The sample of chorionic villi was obtained from the
chorionic sac of the female twin. If two chorionic sacs had been observed during
ultrasonography, DZ twinning would have been suspected.
6 Amniotic bands form when the amnion tears during pregnancy. The bands
surround parts of the embryo’s body and produce defects such as absence of a
hand or deep grooves in a limb; this constitutes the amniotic band syndrome or
the amniotic band disruption complex.

Chapter 8
1 A diagnosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is most likely. The
birth defect in the diaphragm that produces this hernia usually results from the
failure of the left pericardioperitoneal canal to close during the sixth week of
development; consequently, herniation of abdominal organs into the thorax
occurs. This compresses the lungs, especially the left one, and results in
respiratory distress. The diagnosis can usually be established by a radiographic
or sonographic examination of the chest. The defect can also be detected
prenatally using ultrasonography. Characteristically, there are air-and/or fluid-
filled loops of intestine in the left hemithorax of a neonate afflicted with CDH.
2 In retrosternal hernia, a rare birth defect, the intestine may herniate into the
pericardial sac or, conversely, the heart may be displaced into the superior part of
the peritoneal cavity. Herniation of the intestine through the sternocostal hiatus
causes this condition.
3 CDH occurs approximately once in every 2200 births. A neonate diagnosed
with CDH would immediately be positioned with the head and thorax higher
than the abdomen to facilitate the inferior displacement of the abdominal organs
from the thorax. After a period of preoperative stabilization, an operation is
performed with reduction of the abdominal viscera and closure of the
diaphragmatic defect. Newborns with CDH may die because of severe
respiratory distress from poor development of the lungs. However, most infants
with this condition survive as a result of improvements in ventilator care.
4 Gastroschisis and epigastric hernias occur in the median plane of the epigastric
region; these hernias are uncommon. The defect through which herniation occurs
results from failure of the lateral body folds to fuse in this region during the
fourth week.

Chapter 9
1 The most likely diagnosis is a branchial sinus. When the sinus is infected, an
intermittent discharge of mucoid material occurs. The discharge was probably
from an external branchial sinus, a remnant of the second pharyngeal groove
and/or cervical sinus. Normally, this groove and sinus disappear as the neck
forms.
2 The position of the inferior parathyroid glands is variable. They develop in
close association with the thymus and are carried caudally with it during its
descent through the neck. If the thymus fails to descend to its usual position in
the superior mediastinum, one or both inferior parathyroid glands may be located
near the bifurcation of the common carotid artery. If an inferior parathyroid
gland does not separate from the thymus, it may be carried into the superior
mediastinum with the thymus.
3 The patient very likely has a thyroglossal duct cyst that arose from a small
remnant of the embryonic thyroglossal duct. When complete degeneration of this
duct does not occur, a cyst may form from it anywhere along the median plane of
the neck between the foramen cecum of the tongue and the jugular notch in the
manubrium of the sternum. A thyroglossal duct cyst may be confused with an
ectopic thyroid gland, such as one that has not descended to its normal position
in the neck.
4 Unilateral cleft lip results from failure of the maxillary prominence on the
affected side to fuse with the merged medial nasal prominences. Clefting of the
maxilla anterior to the incisive fossa results from failure of the lateral palatine
process to fuse with the median palatine process (primary palate).
Approximately 60% to 80% of persons who have a cleft lip, with or without cleft
palate, are males. When both parents are normal and have had one child with a
cleft lip, the chance that the next infant will have the same lip anomaly is
approximately 4%.
5 There is substantial evidence that anticonvulsant drugs, such as phenytoin or
diphenylhydantoin, when given to epileptic women during pregnancy, increase
by two-to threefold the incidence of cleft lip and cleft palate when compared
with the general population. Cleft lip with cleft palate is caused by many factors,
some genetic and others environmental; therefore, this condition has a
multifactorial etiology.

Chapter 10
1 Inability to pass a catheter through the esophagus into the stomach indicates
esophageal atresia. Because this defect is commonly associated with
tracheoesophageal fistula, the pediatrician would suspect this anomaly. A
radiographic or sonographic examination would demonstrate the atresia. The
presence of this defect would be confirmed by imaging the nasogastric tube
arrested in the proximal esophageal pouch. If necessary, a small amount of air
would be injected to highlight the image. When a certain type of
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is present, there would also be air in the
stomach that passed to it from a connection between the esophagus and the
trachea. A combined radiographic, endoscopic, and surgical approach would
usually be used to detect and remove a TEF.
2 An infant with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) or hyaline membrane
disease tries to overcome the ventilatory problem by increasing the rate and
depth of respiration. Intercostal, subcostal, sternal retractions and nasal flaring
are prominent signs of respiratory distress. Hyaline membrane disease is a
leading cause of RDS and death in live-born, premature infants. A deficiency of
pulmonary surfactant is associated with RDS. Glucocorticoid treatment may be
given during pregnancy to accelerate fetal lung development and surfactant
production.
3 The most common type of TEF connects the trachea with the inferior part of
the esophagus. This defect is associated with atresia of the esophagus superior to
the fistula. A TEF results from incomplete division of the foregut by the
tracheoesophageal septum into the esophagus and trachea.
4 In most types of TEF, air passes from the trachea through the TEF into the
esophagus and stomach. Pneumonitis (pneumonia) resulting from the aspiration
of oral and nasal secretions into the lungs is a serious complication of this defect.
Giving the baby water or food by mouth is obviously contraindicated in such
cases.

Chapter 11
1 Complete absence of a lumen (duodenal atresia) may involve the second
(descending) and third (horizontal) parts of the duodenum. The obstruction
usually results from incomplete vacuolization of the lumen of the duodenum
during the eighth week. The obstruction causes distention of the stomach and
proximal duodenum because the fetus swallows amniotic fluid, and the neonate
swallows air, mucus, and milk. Duodenal atresia is common in infants with
Down syndrome, as are other severe birth defects such as annular pancreas,
cardiovascular abnormalities, malrotation of the midgut, and anorectal
anomalies. Polyhydramnios occurs because the duodenal atresia prevents
normal absorption of amniotic fluid from the fetal intestine distal to the
obstruction. The fetus swallows amniotic fluid before birth; however, because of
duodenal atresia, this fluid cannot pass along the bowel, be absorbed into the
fetal circulation, and be transferred across the placental membrane into the
mother’s circulation from which it enters her urine.
2 The omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk) normally undergoes complete
involution by the 10th week of development, at which time the intestines return
to the abdomen. In 2% to 4% of people, a remnant of the omphaloenteric duct
persists as an ileal diverticulum (often called a Meckel diverticulum); however,
only a small number of these defects ever become symptomatic. In the present
case, the entire omphaloenteric duct persisted so that the diverticulum was
connected to the anterior abdominal wall and umbilicus by a sinus tract. This
defect is rare, and its external opening may be confused with a granuloma
(inflammatory lesion) of the stump of the umbilical cord.
3 The fistula was likely connected to the blind end of the rectum. The defect
—imperforate anus with a rectovaginal fistula—results from failure of the
urorectal septum to form a complete separation of the anterior and posterior parts
of the urogenital sinus. Because the inferior one third of the vagina forms from
the anterior part of the urogenital sinus, it joins the rectum, which forms from the
posterior part of the sinus.
4 This defect is an omphalocele (exomphalos). A small omphalocele, like the
one described here, is sometimes erroneously called an umbilical cord hernia;
however, it should not be confused with an umbilical hernia that occurs after
birth and is covered by skin. The thin membrane covering the mass in the
present case would be composed of peritoneum and amnion. The hernia would

be composed of small intestinal loops. Omphalocele occurs when the intestinal
loops fail to return to the abdominal cavity from the umbilical cord during the
10th week of fetal life. In the present case, because the hernia is relatively small,
the intestine may have entered the abdominal cavity and then herniated later
when the rectus muscles did not approach each other close enough to occlude the
circular defect in the anterior abdominal wall.
5 The ileum was probably obstructed—ileal atresia. Congenital atresia of the
small intestine involves the ileum most frequently; the next most frequently
affected region is the duodenum. The jejunum is involved least often. Some
meconium (fetal feces) is formed from exfoliated fetal epithelium and mucus in
the intestinal lumen, and is located distal to the obstructed area (atretic segment).
At operation, the atretic ileum would probably appear as a narrow segment
connecting the proximal and distal segments of the small bowel. Atresia of the
ileum could result from failure of recanalization of the lumen; more likely, the
ileal atresia occurred because of a prenatal interruption of the blood supply to the
ileum. Sometimes a loop of small bowel becomes twisted, interrupting its blood
supply and causing necrosis (death) of the affected segment. The atretic section
of bowel usually becomes a fibrous cord connecting the proximal and distal
segments of bowel.

Chapter 12
1 Double renal pelves and ureters result from the formation of two ureteric buds
on one side of the embryo. Subsequently, the primordia of these structures fuse.
Both ureters usually open into the urinary bladder. Occasionally, the extra ureter
opens into the urogenital tract inferior to the bladder. This occurs when the
accessory ureter is not incorporated into the base of the bladder with the other
ureter; instead, the extra ureter is carried caudally with the mesonephric duct and
opens with it into the caudal part of the urogenital sinus. Because this part of the
urogenital sinus gives rise to the urethra and epithelium of the vagina, the
ectopic (abnormally placed) ureteric orifice may be located in either of these
structures, which accounts for the continual dribbling of urine into the vagina.
An ectopic ureteral orifice that opens inferior to the bladder results in urinary
incontinence because there is no urinary bladder or urethral sphincter between it
and the exterior. Normally, the oblique passage of the ureter through the wall of
the bladder allows the contraction of the bladder musculature to act like a
sphincter for the ureter, controlling the flow of urine from it.
2 Accessory renal arteries are common. Approximately 25% of kidneys receive
two or more branches directly from the aorta; however, more than two is
exceptional. Supernumerary arteries enter either through the renal sinus or at the
poles of the kidney, usually the inferior pole. Accessory renal arteries, more
common on the left side, represent persistent fetal renal arteries that grow out in
sequence from the aorta as the kidneys “ascend” from the pelvis to the abdomen.
Usually, the inferior vessels degenerate as new ones develop. Supernumerary
arteries are approximately twice as common as supernumerary veins. They
usually arise at the level of the kidney. The presence of a supernumerary artery is
of clinical importance in other circumstances because it may cross the
ureteropelvic junction and hinder urine outflow, leading to dilation of the calices
and pelvis on the same side (hydronephrosis). Hydronephrotic kidneys
frequently become infected (pyelonephritis); infection may lead to destruction
of the kidneys.
3 Rudimentary horn pregnancies are very rare; they are clinically important,
however, because it is difficult to distinguish between this type of pregnancy and
a tubal pregnancy. In the present case, the uterine anomaly was the result of
retarded growth of the right paramesonephric duct and incomplete fusion of this
duct with its partner during development of the uterus. Most defects resulting

from incomplete fusion of the paramesonephric ducts do not cause clinical
problems; however, a rudimentary horn that does not communicate with the
main part of the uterus may cause pain during the menstrual period because of
distention of the horn by blood. Because most rudimentary uterine horns are
thicker than uterine tubes, a rudimentary horn pregnancy is likely to rupture
much later than a tubal pregnancy.
4 Hypospadias of the glans of penis is the term applied to an anomaly in which
the urethral orifice is on the ventral surface of the penis near the glans of penis.
The ventral curving of the penis is called chordee. Hypospadias of the glans of
penis results from failure of the urogenital folds on the ventral surface of the
developing penis to fuse completely and establish communication with the
terminal part of the spongy urethra within the glans of penis. Hypospadias may
be associated with an inadequate production of androgens by the fetal testes, or
there may be resistance to the hormones at the cellular level in the urogenital
folds. Hypospadias is thought to have a multifactorial etiology because close
relatives of patients with hypospadias are more likely to have the defect than the
general population. Glanular hypospadias, a common anomaly of the
urogenital tract, occurs in approximately one in every 300 male infants.
5 This young woman is female, even though she has a 46, XY chromosome
complement and small, nonfunctional testes. She has androgen insensitivity
syndrome. Failure of masculinization to occur in these individuals results from a
resistance to the action of testosterone at the cellular level in genitalia.
6 The embryologic basis of indirect inguinal hernia is persistence of the
processus vaginalis, a fetal outpouching of peritoneum. This finger-like pouch
evaginates the anterior abdominal wall and forms the inguinal canal. A persistent
processus vaginalis predisposes to indirect inguinal hernia by creating a
weakness in the anterior abdominal wall, and a hernial sac into which abdominal
contents may herniate if the intra-abdominal pressure becomes very high (as
occurs during straining). The hernial sac would be covered by internal spermatic
fascia, cremaster muscle, and cremasteric fascia.

Chapter 13
1 Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common cardiac defect. It occurs
in approximately 25% of children with congenital heart disease. Most patients
with a large VSD have a massive left-to-right shunt of blood, which causes
cyanosis and congestive heart failure.
2 Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the most common cardiovascular anomaly
associated with maternal rubella infection during early pregnancy. When the
ductus arteriosus is patent in an infant, aortic blood is shunted into the
pulmonary artery. One half to two thirds of the left ventricular output may be
shunted through the PDA. This extra work for the heart results in cardiac
enlargement.
3 The tetrad of cardiac abnormalities present in the tetralogy of Fallot is
pulmonary stenosis, VSD, overriding aorta, and right ventricular hypertrophy.
Angiocardiography or ultrasonography could be used to reveal the
malpositioned aorta (straddling the VSD) and the degree of pulmonary stenosis.
Cyanosis occurs because of the shunting of unsaturated blood; however, it may
not be present at birth. The main aim of therapy is to improve the oxygenation of
the blood in the infant, usually by surgical correction of the pulmonary stenosis
and closure of the VSD.
4 Cardiac catheterization and ultrasonography would probably be performed to
confirm the diagnosis of transposition of the great arteries. If this defect is
present, a bolus (large quantity) of contrast material injected into the right
ventricle would enter the aorta, whereas contrast material injected into the left
ventricle would enter the pulmonary circulation. The infant was able to survive
after birth because the ductus arteriosus remains open in these infants, allowing
some mixing of blood between the two circulations. In other cases, there is also
an atrial septal defect (ASD) or VSD that permits intermixing of blood.
Complete transposition of the great arteries is incompatible with life if there are
no associated septal defects or a PDA.
5 This would probably be a secundum type of ASD. It would be located in the
region of the oval fossa because this is the most common type of clinically
significant ASD. Large defects, as in the present case, often extend toward the
inferior vena cava. The pulmonary artery and its major branches are dilated
because of the increased blood flow through the lungs and the increased pressure
within the pulmonary circulation. In these cases, a considerable shunt of

oxygenated blood flows from the left atrium to the right atrium. This blood,
along with the normal venous return to the right atrium, enters the right ventricle
and is pumped to the lungs. Large ASDs may be tolerated for a long time, as in
the present case, but progressive dilation of the right ventricle often leads to
heart failure.

Chapter 14
1 The common birth defect of the vertebral column is spina bifida occulta. This
defect of the vertebral arch of the first sacral and/or last lumbar vertebra is
present in approximately 10% of people. The defect also occurs in cervical and
thoracic vertebrae. The spinal cord and nerves are usually normal and neurologic
symptoms are usually absent. Spina bifida occulta does not cause back problems
in most people.
2 A rib associated with the seventh cervical vertebra is of clinical importance
because it may compress the subclavian artery and/or brachial plexus, producing
symptoms of artery and nerve compression. In most cases, cervical ribs produce
no symptoms. These ribs develop from the costal processes of the seventh
cervical vertebra. Cervical ribs are present in 0.5% to 1% of people.
3 A hemivertebra can produce a lateral curvature of the vertebral column
(scoliosis). This defect of the vertebral column is composed of one half of a
body, a pedicle, and a lamina. This anomaly results when the mesenchymal cells
from the sclerotomes on one side fail to form the primordium of half of a
vertebra. As a result, there are more growth centers on the one side of the
vertebral column; this imbalance causes the vertebral column to bend laterally.
4 Craniosynostosis indicates premature closure of one or more of the cranial
sutures. This developmental abnormality results in malformations of the
cranium. Scaphocephaly, a long narrow cranium, results from premature closure
of the sagittal suture. This type of craniosynostosis accounts for approximately
50% of the cases. Brain development is normal in these infants.
5 The features of Klippel-Feil syndrome are short neck, low hairline, and
restricted neck movements. In most cases, the number of cervical vertebral
bodies is less than normal.

Chapter 15
1 Absence of the sternocostal portion of the left pectoralis major muscle is the
cause of the abnormal surface features observed. The costal heads of the
pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles are usually present. Despite its
numerous and important actions, absence of all or part of the pectoralis major
muscle usually causes no disability; however, the abnormality caused by absence
of the anterior axillary fold is striking, as is the inferior location of the nipple.
The actions of other muscles associated with the shoulder joint compensate for
the absence of part of the pectoralis major.
2 Approximately 13% of people lack a palmaris longus muscle on one or both
sides. Its absence causes no disability.
3 It would be the left sternocleidomastoid muscle that was prominent when
tensed. The left one is the unaffected muscle, and it does not pull the child’s head
to the right side. It is the short, contracted right sternocleidomastoid muscle that
tethers the right mastoid process to the right clavicle and sternum; hence,
continued growth of the left side of the neck results in tilting and rotation of the
head. This relatively common condition—congenital torticollis (wry neck)—
may occur because of injury to the muscle during birth. Tearing of some muscle
fibers may have occurred, resulting in bleeding into the muscle. Over several
weeks, necrosis of some fibers would have occurred, and the blood was replaced
by fibrous tissue. This could result in shortening of the muscle and in pulling of
the child’s head to the side.
4 Absence of striated musculature in the median plane of the anterior abdominal
wall of the embryo is associated with exstrophy of the urinary bladder. This
severe defect is caused by incomplete midline closure of the inferior part of the
anterior abdominal wall, and failure of mesenchymal cells to migrate from the
somatic mesoderm between the surface ectoderm and the urogenital sinus during
the fourth week of development. The absence of mesenchymal cells in the
median plane results in failure of striated muscles to develop.

Chapter 16
1 The number of female infants with dislocation of the hip is approximately
eight times that of male infants. The hip joint is not usually dislocated at birth;
however, the acetabulum is underdeveloped. Dislocation of the hip may not
become obvious until the infant attempts to stand approximately 12 months after
birth. This condition is probably caused by deforming forces acting directly on
the hip joint of the fetus.
2 Severe defects of the limbs (amelia and meromelia), similar to those produced
by thalidomide, are rare and usually have a genetic basis. The thalidomide
syndrome consisted of absence of limbs (amelia), gross defects of the limbs
(meromelia) such as the hands and feet attached to the trunk by small, irregularly
shaped bones, intestinal atresia, and cardiac defects.
3 The most common type of clubfoot is talipes equinovarus, occurring in
approximately one of every 1000 newborn infants. In this deformation, the soles
of the feet are turned medially and the feet are sharply plantar flexed. The feet
are fixed in the tiptoe position, resembling the foot of a horse.
4 Syndactyly (fusion of digits) is the most common type of limb defect. It varies
from cutaneous webbing of the digits to synostosis (union of phalanges).
Syndactyly is more common in the foot than in the hand. This defect occurs
when separate digital rays fail to form in the fifth week, or the webbing between
the developing digits fails to break down between the sixth and eighth weeks. As
a consequence, separation of the digits does not occur.

Chapter 17
1 Ultrasound scanning of the fetus can detect absence of the neurocranium
(acrania) as early as 14 weeks (Fig. 17–35). Fetuses with meroencephaly
(absence of part of brain) do not drink the usual amounts of amniotic fluid,
presumably because of impairment of the neuromuscular mechanism that
controls swallowing. Because fetal urine is excreted into the amniotic fluid at the
usual rate, the amount of amniotic fluid increases. Normally, the fetus swallows
amniotic fluid, which is absorbed by its intestines and passed to the placenta for
elimination through the mother’s blood and kidneys. Meroencephaly, often
inaccurately called anencephaly (absence of the brain), can be detected by a
plain radiograph; however, radiographs of the fetus are not usually obtained.
Instead, this severe defect is diagnosed by ultrasonography or amniocentesis. An
elevated level of alpha fetoprotein in the amniotic fluid indicates an open neural
tube defect, such as acrania with meroencephaly or spina bifida with
myeloschisis.
2 A neurologic defect is associated with meningomyelocele because the spinal
cord and/or nerve roots are often incorporated into the wall of the protruding sac.
This damages the nerves supplying various structures. Paralysis of the lower
limbs often occurs, and there may be incontinence of urine and feces resulting
from paralysis of the sphincters of the anus and urinary bladder.
3 The condition is called obstructive hydrocephalus. The block would most
likely be in the cerebral aqueduct of the midbrain. Obstruction at this site
(stenosis or atresia) interferes with or prevents passage of ventricular fluid from
the lateral and third ventricles to the fourth ventricle. Hydrocephalus is
sometimes recognized before birth; however, most cases are diagnosed in the
first few weeks or months after birth. Hydrocephalus can be recognized using
ultrasonography of the mother’s abdomen during the last trimester. Surgical
treatment of hydrocephalus usually consists of shunting the excess ventricular
fluid through a plastic tube to another part of the body (e.g., into the bloodstream
or peritoneal cavity), from which it will subsequently be excreted by the infant’s
kidneys.
4 Hydrocephalus is not synonymous with a large head because a large brain
(macroencephalon), a subdural hygroma, or a large hematoma can also cause
enlargement of the head. Hydrocephalus may or may not enlarge the head.
Hydrocephalus ex vacuo causes enlargement of the ventricles resulting from

brain destruction; however, the head is not enlarged. Microencephaly (small
brain) is usually associated with microcephaly (small calvaria). Because growth
of the cranium is largely dependent on growth of the brain, arrest of brain
development can cause microcephaly. During the fetal period, environmental
exposure to agents such as cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma gondii, herpes simplex
virus, and high-level radiation is known to induce microencephaly and
microcephaly. Severe mental deficiency may occur as a result of exposure of the
embryo/fetus to high levels of radiation during the 8-to 16-week period of
development.
5 Agenesis of the corpus callosum, partial or complete, is frequently associated
with low intelligence in 70% of cases and seizures in 50% of patients. Some
people are asymptomatic and lead normal lives. Agenesis of the corpus callosum
may occur as an isolated defect; however, it is often associated with other central
nervous system anomalies, such as holoprosencephalies—defects resulting from
failure of cleavage of the prosencephalon (forebrain). As in the present case, a
large third ventricle may be associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum. The
large ventricle exists because it is able to rise superior to the roofs of the lateral
ventricles when the corpus callosum is absent. The lateral ventricles are usually
moderately enlarged.

Chapter 18
1 The mother had certainly contracted rubella (German measles) during early
pregnancy because her infant had the characteristic triad of defects resulting
from infection of an embryo by the rubella virus. Cataract is common when
severe infections occur during the first 6 weeks of pregnancy because the lens
vesicle is forming. Congenital cataract is believed to result from invasion of the
developing lens by the rubella virus. The most common cardiovascular lesion in
infants whose mothers had rubella early in pregnancy is patent ductus
arteriosus. Although a history of a rash during the first trimester of pregnancy is
helpful for diagnosing the congenital rubella syndrome, embryopathy
(embryonic disease) can occur after a subclinical maternal rubella infection (i.e.,
without a rash).
2 Congenital ptosis (drooping of superior eyelid) is usually caused by abnormal
development or failure of development of the levator palpebrae superioris
muscle. Congenital ptosis is usually transmitted by autosomal dominant
inheritance; however, injury to the superior branch of the oculomotor nerve
(cranial nerve III), which supplies the levator palpebrae superioris muscle, would
also cause drooping of the upper eyelid.
3 The protozoon involved was Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular parasite. The
birth defects result from invasion of the fetal bloodstream and developing organs
by Toxoplasma parasites. These parasites disrupt development of the central
nervous system, including the eyes, which develop from outgrowths of the brain
(optic vesicles). The physician would certainly tell the woman about Toxoplasma
cysts in meat and advise the woman to cook her meat well, especially if she
decided to have more children. The physician would tell the woman that
Toxoplasma oocysts are often found in cat feces and that it is important to wash
her hands carefully after handling a cat or its litter box.
4 The infant had trisomy 18 because the characteristic phenotype of this type of
trisomy is present. Low-set, malformed ears associated with severe mental
deficiency, prominent occiput, congenital heart defect, and failure to thrive are
all suggestive of the trisomy 18 syndrome. This numerical chromosomal
abnormality results from nondisjunction of the number 18 chromosome pair
during gametogenesis. Its incidence is approximately 1 in 8000 neonates. Almost
all of trisomy 18 fetuses abort spontaneously. Postnatal survival of these infants
is poor, with 30% dying within a month of birth; the mean survival time is only 2

months. Less than 10% of these infants survive more than a year.
5 Detachment of the retina is a separation of the two embryonic retinal layers:
the neural pigment epithelium derived from the outer layer of the optic cup, and
the neural retina derived from the inner layer of the cup. The intraretinal space,
representing the cavity of the optic vesicle, normally disappears as the retina
forms. The proximal part of the hyaloid artery normally persists as the central
artery of the retina; however, the distal part of this vessel normally degenerates.

Chapter 19
1 Natal teeth occur in approximately 1 in every 2000 neonates. There are
usually two teeth in the position of the mandibular medial incisors. Natal teeth
may be supernumerary ones; however, they are often prematurely erupted
primary teeth. If it is established radiographically that they are supernumerary
teeth, they would probably be removed so that they would not interfere with the
subsequent eruption of the normal primary teeth. Natal teeth may cause maternal
discomfort resulting from abrasion or biting of the nipple during nursing. They
may also injure the infant’s tongue, which, because the mandible is relatively
small at birth, lies between the alveolar processes of the jaws.
2 The discoloration of the infant’s teeth was likely caused by the administration
of tetracycline to the mother during her pregnancy. Tetracyclines become
incorporated into the developing enamel and dentine of the teeth and cause
discoloration. Dysfunction of ameloblasts resulting from tetracycline therapy
causes hypoplasia of the enamel (e.g., pitting). Most likely the secondary
dentition would also be affected because enamel formation begins in the
permanent teeth before birth (approximately 20 weeks in the incisors).
3 This is an angiomatous defect of the skin—a capillary angioma or
hemangioma. It is formed by an overgrowth of small blood vessels consisting
mostly of capillaries; however, there are also some arterioles and venules in it.
The blotch is red because oxygen is not taken from the blood passing through it.
This type of angioma is quite common, and the mother should be assured that
this anomaly is of no significance and requires no treatment. It will fade in a few
years. Formerly this type of angioma was called a nevus flammeus (flame-like
birthmark); however, these names are sometimes applied to other types of
angiomas. To avoid confusion, it is better not to use them. Nevus is not a good
term because it is derived from a Latin word meaning a mole or birthmark,
which may or may not be an angioma.
4 A tuft of hair in the median plane of the back in the lumbosacral region usually
indicates the presence of spina bifida occulta. This is the most common
developmental anomaly of the vertebrae, and is present in L5 and/or L1 in
approximately 10% of otherwise normal people. Spina bifida occulta is usually
of no clinical significance; however, some infants with this vertebral defect may
also have a developmental defect of the underlying spinal cord and nerve roots.
5 The superficial layers of the epidermis of infants with lamellar ichthyosis,

resulting from excessive keratinization, consist of fish-like, grayish-brown scales
that are adherent in the center and raised at the edges. Fortunately, the condition
is very rare; it is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

Chapter 20
1 Seven to 10% of congenital defects are caused by environmental factors such
as drugs and chemicals. It is difficult for clinicians to assign specific defects to
specific drugs for the following reasons: • The drug may be administered as
therapy for an illness that itself may cause the defect.
   • The fetal defect may cause maternal symptoms that are treated with a drug.
   • The drug may prevent the spontaneous abortion of an already malformed
fetus.
   • The drug may be used with another drug that causes the defect.
Women should know that several drugs, for example, cocaine, cause severe
defects if taken during pregnancy, and that these drugs should be avoided.
2 Women older than the age of 35 years are more likely to have a child with
Down syndrome or some other chromosomal disorder than are younger women
(25–30 years). Nevertheless, most women older than the age of 35 have normal
children. The physician caring for a pregnant 40-year-old woman would
certainly recommend chorionic villi sampling and/or amniocentesis to determine
whether the infant had a chromosomal disorder such as trisomy 21 or trisomy 13.
A 44-year-old woman can have a normal baby; however, the chances of having a
child with Down syndrome are 1 in 25.
3 Penicillin has been widely used during pregnancy for more than 30 years
without any suggestion of teratogenicity. Small doses of aspirin and other
salicylates are ingested by most pregnant women, and when they are consumed
as directed by a physician, the teratogenic risk is very low. Chronic consumption
of large doses of aspirin during early pregnancy may be harmful. Alcohol and
social drugs, such as cocaine, should be avoided.
4 The physician would certainly tell the mother that there was no danger that her
child would develop cataracts and cardiac defects because she has German
measles. The physician would undoubtedly explain that cataracts often develop
in embryos whose mothers contract the disease early in pregnancy. They occur
because of the damaging effect the rubella virus has on the developing lens. The
physician might say that it is not all bad for a girl to contract German measles
before her childbearing years because this attack would probably confer
permanent immunity to rubella.

5 Cats may be infected with the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Therefore, it is
prudent to avoid contact with cats and their litter during pregnancy. Oocysts of
these parasites appear in the feces of cats and can be ingested if one is careless in
handling cat litter. If the woman is pregnant, the parasite can cause severe fetal
defects of the central nervous system, such as mental deficiency and blindness.

Index
Page numbers followed by b, f, or t denote figures and tables, respectively.

A
abdominal circumference, fetal, 95, 97f, 99–100
abdominal pregnancy, 48b, 49f
abdominal wall defects, 230b, 232b, 233f
ventral, alpha-fetoprotein assay for detection of, 103b
abducent nerve, formation of, 424
abortion
accidental, definition of, 1
complete, definition of, 5
definition of, 5
habitual, definition of, 5
induced, definition of, 5
legally induced, 5
missed, definition of, 5
spontaneous
abnormal embryos and, 36b
definition of, 5
early, 50b
of embryos, 50b, 112f–113f, 129f
multiple pregnancy and, 25b
sporadic and recurrent, 50b
threatened, definition of, 5
abortus, definition of, 5
accessory auricular hillocks, 445, 446f
accessory diaphragm, 157b
accessory hepatic ducts, 223b
accessory lung, 210b
accessory muscles, 369b
accessory nerve, formation of, 424f, 425
accessory pancreatic tissue, 236f
accessory placenta, 123, 126f
accessory renal arteries and veins, 253b, 253f
accessory ribs, 354b
accessory spleen, 227b
accessory thymic tissue, 173b, 173f

accessory thyroid tissue, 176f
accidental abortion, definition of, 1
ACE inhibitors, as teratogens, 494
acetabulum, abnormal development of, 386
acetylsalicylic acid, fetal effects of, 494
achondroplasia, 359f, 485f
acini, 179, 225
acoustic meatus, external, 77, 85f, 169, 182, 444, 444f–445f
absence of, 446, 447f
atresia of, 446
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), fetal effects of, 496–497
acrania, 355f, 356b, 417b, 418f
acromegaly, 359b
acrosin, and fertilization, 28, 30
acrosome, 18, 18f, 28, 29f
acrosome reaction, 28, 29f
ACTH (adrenocorticotropin)
and adrenal hyperplasia, 265b
and labor, 121
active transport, placental, 116–118
activin(s)
as common signaling pathway, 506
and digestive system development, 213
and pancreatic development, 225
activin-receptor-like kinase ChALK2, and cardiovascular development, 300
adenocarcinoma, diethylstilbestrol exposure and, 484
adenohypophysis, 409f, 410, 410t, 426
adenoids See Pharyngeal tonsils
adipose tissue, fetal, 99, 101b
adrenal hyperplasia, congenital (CAH), 265b, 265f, 277f, 286, 492f
adrenal (suprarenal) glands, development of, 247f–248f, 251f, 264–265
adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
and adrenal hyperplasia, 265b
and labor, 121
adrenogenital syndrome, 265b
adulthood, definition of, 5
AER See Apical ectodermal ridge
AFP See Alpha-fetoprotein assay
Africanus, Constantinus, of Salerno, 6

afterbirth, 110, 121, 124f–125f
aganglionic megacolon, congenital, 240b, 241f
age
bone, 357b, 359b
conceptional, 89b
embryonic, 89b
estimation of, 78t, 89
fertilization, 89b
fetal, estimation of, 94t, 95, 100f
gestational, 95
estimation of, 89b
ultrasound assessment of, 89b
maternal
and chromosomal abnormalities, 19, 103, 478, 479t
dizygotic twins and, 133–134
ideal, 20b
AIDS, fetal effects of, 496–497
ala orbitalis, 351, 352f
alar plate, 393, 394f, 396f, 405, 405f, 408f
ala temporalis, 352f
albinism, 456b
generalized, 456b
localized, 456b
alcohol use
and congenital anomalies, 420b, 488t, 492
and fetal growth, 101, 492
and mental retardation, 423b, 426
allantoic cysts, 60b, 133b, 134f
allantois, 58–60, 59f–60f, 72, 73f, 132, 134f
cysts, 133b, 134f
development of, 133f
fate of, 133f
allograft, placenta as, 119–120
alopecia, 459b
alpha-fetoprotein
and fetal anomalies, 103b
and meroencephaly, 401b
alpha-fetoprotein assay, 103
maternal serum, 401b

for neural tube defect detection, 131, 401b
alveolar cells, type II, 209b
alveolar ducts, 206, 207f
alveolar period, of lung maturation, 205f, 206–208, 207f
alveolar processes, of teeth, 464
alveolar sacs, 206
alveolocapillary membrane, 205f, 206
alveolus (alveoli), pulmonary
definition of, 206
development of, 205f, 206–208, 207f
alveolus of teeth, 463
amastia, 458b
ambiguous genitalia, 276b
amelia, 382–383, 382f, 383b, 488t, 489f
ameloblasts, 461f, 463, 465b, 466, 468
amelogenesis imperfecta, 466f, 467b
amino acids
in fetal metabolism and growth, 101
transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
aminopterin, as teratogen, 488t, 493
amnioblasts, 43
amniocentesis
diagnostic, 102–103, 103b
illustration of, 103f
serum AFP levels and, 401b
amniochorionic membrane, 111f, 113, 114f
rupture of, 131b–132b
amnion, 42f, 43, 44f–45f, 47f, 55f, 127–131, 130f
number in twin pregnancies, 134t
rupture of, 132b, 132f
amniotic band syndrome, 132b, 132f
amniotic cavity, 42f, 51, 55f, 66f
formation of, 43–44
amniotic fluid, 127–131
circulation of, 131
composition of, 131
disorders of, 131b See also Oligohydramnios See also Polyhydramnios
fetal swallowing of, 131
significance of, 131

volume of, 131
amniotic sac, 79f, 89, 96f, 127
ampullae of semicircular duct, 441
ampulla of uterine tube, 21f, 24f
fertilization in, 30
anal agenesis, 241, 242f
with fistula, 241, 242f
anal canal, development of, 240, 240f
analgesics, fetal effects of, 494
anal membrane, 241, 242f, 274f
anal pit, 213, 214f, 238, 239f, 240, 242f
anal stenosis, 241, 242f
anaphase lagging, 480b
anastomosis, of placental blood vessels, 134b
anatomical position, 9f, 10
anchoring villi, 65–66, 115f, 120
androgen(s)
and masculinization of female fetus, 276
as teratogen, 488t, 492–493
androgen insensiuvity syndrome, 277b, 278f
androstenedione, 267
anencephaly, 61b, 131b, 356b, 391b, 400f, 403f, 417b
aneuploidy, 473f, 475b
Angelman’s syndrome, 483, 484t
angioblastic cords, 290, 290f
angioblasts, 64
angiogenesis, 64, 65f, 290–295, 510
angiogenesis factor, 24
angiomas of skin, 456b, 468
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, as teratogens, 494
animal experiments, 491b
aniridia, congenital, 437b
ankyloglossia, 178b, 179f
annular epiphyses, 350, 350f
annular ligament, failed differentiation of, 445b
annular pancreas, 225b, 225f, 243
anocutaneous (white) line, 240
anodontia
partial, 466b

total, 466b
anomalies, congenital See Congenital anomalies
anonychia, aplastic, 460b
anoperineal fistula, 241, 242f
anophthalmia, 434, 435f
primary, 434
secondary, 434
anorectal agenesis, 241, 242f
with fistula, 241, 242f
anorectal anomalies, 241b, 241f–242f
anovulation, 25b
anovulatory menstrual cycle, 26b
anoxia, fetal, umbilical cord true knots and, 126–127, 128f
anterior, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
anterior commissure, 412, 413f
antibiotics, as teratogens, 493
antibodies, maternal, transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
anticoagulants, as teratogens, 493
anticonvulsants, as teratogens, 402b, 491, 493
antimüllerian hormone (AMH), 267
antineoplastic agents, as teratogens, 493
antithyroid drugs, as teratogens, 495
antituberculosis agents, as teratogens, 493
antrum, 23f, 24
anulus fibrosus, 348, 349f
anus
agenesis of, 241, 242f
ectopic, 241, 242f
imperforate, 241, 242f
membranous atresia of, 241, 242f
aorta, 381f
coarctation of, 327b, 329f
juxtaductal, 327b
postductal, 327b, 329f
preductal, 327b, 329f
dorsal, 295, 315f, 325
persistent, 330b, 331f
transformation and adult derivatives of, 31f
semilunar valves of, 312, 312f, 324f

aortic arches
circulation through, 299f–300f
derivatives of, 326f
fourth pair of, derivatives of, 326f
sixth pair of, derivatives of, 326f, 328f
third pair of, derivatives of, 326f
aortic atresia, 308f, 324b
aorticopulmonary septal defect, 319b
aorticopulmonary septum, 307, 308f, 311f, 319b
aorticopulmonary window defect, 319b
aorticoventricular junction, 312f
aortic sac, 291f, 295, 299f–300f, 324, 326f
transformation and adult derivatives of, 326f
aortic stenosis, 324b, 324f
aortic vestibule, 308f, 310, 311f
aortic window, 319b
aphakia, congenital, 438b
aphonia, with laryngotracheal cleft, 203b
apical ectodermal ridge, 371
apocrine sweat glands, 454
apoptosis
and cardiovascular development, 304
endometrial, and implantation, 41–42
apoptosis-inducing ligands, and placental immunoprotection, 119
appendicular skeleton, development of, 357, 358f–359f
appendix
development of, 230, 230f
subhepatic, 233b, 234f
appendix of epipidymis, 248t, 270f, 272b
appendix vesiculosa, 248t, 270f, 272b
applied embryology, 5
aqueductal stenosis, congenital, 419b, 421f
aqueous chambers of eye, development of, 438–439, 438f
arachnoid mater, 394–395
arachnoid trabeculae, 394–395
arachnoid villi, 407, 419b
arched collecting tubule, 250, 250f–251f
archicerebellum, 406
Aristotle (Aristotle of Stagira), 6

Arnheim, Johan Ham van, 7
Arnold-Chiari malformation, 422b, 422f
arrector muscles of hair (arrector pili muscle), 453f, 459
arteriocapillary networks, 65
artery (arteries)
aorta See Aorta; Aortic arches
axial, primary, 381f, 382
brachial, 381f, 382
brachiocephalic, 326f
carotid
common, 325, 326f, 328f
external, 324, 326f, 328f
internal, 325, 326f, 328f
celiac trunk, 147f, 214f, 216f, 223f, 295
central, of retina, 431, 432f, 436f
chorionic, 114
deep, of thigh (profunda fermoris), 381f, 382
endometrial, 43, 113–114, 114f–115f
femoral, 381f
fibular, 381f
foregut, 147f, 216f
great, transposition of, 319b, 320f
hyaloid, 430f, 431, 433f
persistence of, 438b
iliac, 381f
common, 252, 295, 381f
external, 381f
intercostal, 295, 329f, 348
internal, 295, 305f, 334f–335f
interosseous, 381f
common, 381f
intersegmental, 315f, 326f, 332f, 348, 381f
dorsal, 66f, 291f, 348
ischiadic, 381f
lumbar, 295
maxillary, 324
median, 381f
mesenteric
inferior, 214f, 216f, 223f, 238

superior, 148–149, 214f, 216f, 223f, 238
pharyngeal arch, 163f
congenital anomalies of, 327
derivatives of, 324–327
double, 315f, 327b
first, 324
second, 324
third, 325
fourth, 325
fifth, 325
sixth, 327
plantar, 381f
popliteal, 381f
pulmonary
left, 311f, 320f, 326f, 327, 328f
right, 326f, 327
radial, 381f, 382
rectal, 240
inferior, 240
superior, 240
renal, 252, 253f
accessory, 253b, 253f
sacral, lateral, 295
spiral endometrial, 43, 113, 114f–115f
splenic, 225–227, 226f
stapedial, 324
subclavian, 325, 326f, 328f–329f, 331f
right, 315f, 325, 326f, 328f
anomalous, 330b
tibial, 381f, 382
ulnar, 381f
umbilical, 115f, 134f, 305f, 381f
and abdominal ligaments, 337
absence of (SUA), 127b, 129f
adult derivatives of, 334f
Doppler velocimetry of, 127b, 128f
fate of, 295
vertebral, 295, 333f
vesical, superior, 295, 335f, 337

vitelline, 66f, 214f, 236f, 381f
fate of, 295
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, 367b, 368f
arytenoid cartilage, formation of, 165t
arytenoid swellings, 200, 201f
asphyxia, intrauterine, and surfactant production, 209b
aspirin, fetal effects of, 494
assimilation of atlas, 357b
assisted in vitro fertilization, 32b
assisted in vivo fertilization, 32
association, definition of, 474
astroblasts, histogenesis of, 392–393, 395f
astrocytes, histogenesis of, 392–393, 395f
atlantoaxial dislocation, 357b
atlas, assimilation of, 357b
atomic bomb survivors, birth defect studies in, 498
atrial septal defects, 314b, 315f–318f
atrioventricular bundle, 312f
atrioventricular canal
circulation through, 298, 299f–301f
development of, 298, 299f–303f
partitioning of, 300–304, 301f–303f
atrioventricular node, 309f, 312f
atrioventricular septal defect, 317f, 319f
atrioventricular septum, 302f–303f
atrioventricular valves, 309f, 312f
atrium (atria)
common, 314b
left, formation of, 306, 309f
primordial, 81f, 294f, 296f, 299f–303f, 300, 308f–309f
partitioning of, 300–304, 302f–303f
attractants, for sperm, 30
auditory ossicles, 165f, 441, 444f, 448
auditory (pharyngotympanic) tube, 74, 166, 168f–169f, 196
Auerbach plexus, 240b
auricle (cardiac), 305f–306f, 306, 308f–309f
auricle (ear), 379f, 444–445, 445f
absence of, 445
congenital anomalies of, 445b–446b, 447f

auricular appendages, 445
auricular cysts, congenital, 437f
auricular fistulas, 446, 447f
auricular hillocks, 77, 85f, 184f, 444–445, 448
accessory, 445, 446f
auricularis muscle, 166f
auricular sinuses, congenital, 437f, 446
autonomic ganglia, 72–74, 240b, 423
autonomic nervous system, 389, 425–426
development of, 425–426
autosomes, trisomy of, 473f, 478, 478t
axial artery, primary, 381f, 382
axial dysraphic disorders, 355b
axial plane, 9f, 10
axial skeleton
congenital anomalies of, 354b–356b
development of, 348–352, 349f
azygos vein, 292, 293f–294f
lobe of, 209b

B
balanced translocation carriers, 481
basal body temperature, ovulation and, 25b
basal layer, of endometrium, 20, 21f
basal plate, 351, 393, 394f, 396f, 405f
basic helix-loop (bHLH) transcription factor, 512
basilar invagination, 357b
basipharyngeal canal, 410b
battledore placenta, 124f–125f, 126
Bcl-2 proteins, and spermatogenesis, 18–19
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 484t
bell stage, of tooth development, 461f, 463
benzodiazepine derivatives, as teratogens, 495
betamethasone, and fetal lung maturity, 209b
bicornuate uterus, 280b, 280f–281f
with rudimentary horn, 280b, 280f–281f
bidiscoid placenta, 116–118
bifid nose, 192b
bifid penis, 279b
bifid ureter, 254, 256f
bilaminar embryonic disc, 42f, 45f, 55f
formation of, 43–44
bile duct, 219f, 222
bile formation, 222
biliary apparatus, development of, 219f, 221–223
biliary atresia, 223b
bilious emesis, 232b
bilirubin, transplacental transport of, 117f, 119
biparental inheritance, 30–31
biparietal diameter (BPD), 95, 102
birth(s)
multiple, 133–141 See also Twin(s)
process of, 121–131, 122f–123f
birth defects, 471 See also Congenital anomalies
causes of, 471, 472f

chromosomal abnormalities and, 472f
classification of, 471
developmental signaling pathways and, 503
environmental factors in, 472, 472f, 487–499
genetic factors in, 472–487, 472f
multifactorial inheritance and, 472f, 499
neurulation abnormalities and, 61b
from rubella virus, 119
Toxoplasma gondii and, 419b, 488t, 497
birthmarks, 456b, 456f
birth weight
cigarette smoking and, 101, 491
extremely low, 95b
low, 95b, 101b
bladder See Gallbladder; Urinary bladder
blastocyst(s)
embedded, 42f, 44f
formation of, 35–37
implantation of, 27, 42f, 48–50
completion of, 41–43
inhibition of, 50b
sites of, 43f, 48, 49f
blastocystic cavity, 34f, 36f–37f
blastocyst(s), 2f–4f
blastoderm, 7–8
blastogenesis, 27, 35–36
blastomeres, 32–35, 34f
“blighted embryo”, 480b
blink-startle response, 98–99
blood, development of, 64, 65f
blood-air barrier, 206
blood cells, development of, 64, 65f
blood flow See Circulation of blood
blood islands, 64, 65f, 290f
blood vessels
anastomosis of fetal, 134b
development of, 64, 65f, 290–295, 293f–294f, 324–327, 331f–332f
BMP See Bone morphogenetic protein
body cavities See also specific body cavities

development of, 145
embryonic, 149–150
division of, 148f, 149–150
bone(s)
development of, 343–346, 345f
intracartilaginous ossification and, 346, 347f
intramembranous ossification and, 343–346, 345f
molecular control of, 345
histogenesis of, 345
shaft of, formation of, 346
bone age, 357b, 359b
bone marrow, development of, 346
bone matrix, 345
bone morphogenetic protein, 506
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), 506
and cardiovascular development, 300
and gastrulation, 54
and limb development, 375
bony labyrinth of internal ear, 442f, 443, 444f
Boveri, Theodor, 8–9
BPD (biparietal diameter), 95, 102
brachial artery, 381f
brachiocephalic artery, 326f
brachiocephalic vein, left, 291–292, 293f–294f, 304
brachycephaly, 356b, 478t
brachydactyly, 383b
bradykinin, and ductus arteriosus closure, 337
brain
congenital anomalies of, 414, 414b, 417b, 419b–420b, 422b–423b
development of, 404–414, 404f–409f, 411f–415f
critical period of, 487
brain flexures, 393f, 404, 405f
brain stem developmental anomaly, and sudden infant death syndrome, 313b
brain vesicles
cerebral, 2f–4f, 78t, 395–398, 409f, 411f–412f
primary, 393f, 404
secondary, 393f, 404
branchial sinuses, 169b
external, 169b, 170f

internal, 169b, 170f
branchial vestiges, 172b, 172f
branching morphogenesis, 208, 252
branch villi, 65–66, 114, 115f–116f
breasts
absence of (amastia), 458b
congenital anomalies of, 458b
development of, 456–458, 457f
supernumerary, 458b
breathing movements, fetal, 208, 208f
breech position, 106f
Brevicollis, 354b
broad ligaments, 271, 273f
bronchi
development of, 204–208, 204f
main, 204
secondary, 204–205
segmental, 205
bronchial buds, 149, 149f, 201f, 204, 204f, 210, 248f
bronchioles, 205–206, 205f, 207f
bronchopulmonary segment, 205, 210
bronchus, tracheal, 204b
Brown, Louise, 8
brown fat, fetal, 98
buccinator muscle, 166f
bud stage, of tooth development, 461f, 462
bulbar conjunctiva, 440
bulbar ridges, 307, 308f, 311f–312f
bulbourethral gland, 27, 27f, 248t, 270f, 271
bulboventricular groove, 299f
bulboventricular loop, 297f, 299f
bulbus cordis, 294f, 296, 296f, 299f
circulation through, 296, 299f–301f
partitioning of, 307–310, 308f, 311f
bundle branches, 312f, 313
busulfan, as teratogen, 488t, 493

C
cadherins, 505, 505f
CAH See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
calcium, and bone development, 169
calices
development of, 248t, 250
major, 250, 250f
minor, 250, 250f
calvaria, 351–352
defects of, 356b
canalicular period, of lung maturation, 205f, 206, 207f
canal of Nuck, 284
cancer
signaling pathways and, 508, 510
treatment of, teratogens in, 493, 498
capacitation of sperm, 28, 29f
cap stage, of tooth development, 462–463
capsulin, and spleen development, 225
carbon dioxide, transplacental transport of, 117f
carbon monoxide, transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
carboxyhemoglobin, cigarette smoking and, 491
cardiac jelly, 295, 296f–297f, 299f–300f, 300
cardiac muscle, development of, 367
cardiac muscle fibers, 367
cardiac myoblasts, 367
cardiac skeleton, 313
cardiac valves, development of, 309f, 312, 312f
cardinal veins, 299f–300f, 381f
anterior, 291–292, 292b, 293f–294f, 299f, 304, 305f
common, 148f, 290–292, 293f–294f, 295, 296f, 299f
development of, 291–292, 293f–294f
posterior, 66f, 249f, 291f, 292, 293f–294f, 299f
cardiogenic area, 57, 62f, 64
cardiovascular system See also specific cardiovascular structures
development of, 289–290

early, 64, 295–313
primordial, 64, 66f
Carnegie collection, 8
Carnegie Embryonic Staging System, 78t, 89
carotid arteries
common, 325, 326f, 328f
external, 324, 326f, 328f
internal, 325, 326f, 328f
carpus, 358f, 378f
cartilage
arytenoid, 165t
bone development in, 343–346, 347f
development of, 343–346
histogenesis of, 345
hypophysial, 351, 352f
parachordal, 351, 352f
pharyngeal arch, derivatives of, 162, 165f
cartilage matrix, 347f
cartilaginous joints, 348, 348f
cartilaginous neurocranium, 351, 352f
cartilaginous otic capsules, 441, 442f, 443, 444f
cartilaginous stage, of vertebral development, 349, 350f
cartilaginous viscerocranium, 351, 352f
cataracts, congenital, 439b, 439f
rubella virus and, 439b, 439f, 496
cauda equina, 395–398
caudal, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
caudal eminence, 10, 72, 73f, 75f, 76–77, 78t, 84f, 86, 89–90
caudal neuropore, 76, 78t, 79f–80f, 344f, 391, 392f
defect in closure of, 402b, 402f
caudal ridges, 149
caudate nucleus, 412, 413f–414f
caval system, 340
cavities, body See also specific body cavities
development of, 145
embryonic, division of, 149–150
C cells, 169, 196
CDH See Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH)
cecum

development of, 228f, 230, 230f
mobile, 235b
subhepatic, 233b, 234f
celiac trunk artery, 147f, 214f, 216f, 223f, 295
cell adhesion molecules, 505–506
and bone development, 42, 48, 345f
neural, 505–506, 505f
cell cultures, fetal, 104
cell death, programmed See Apoptosis
cell theory, 8
cement, dental, 463
cementoblasts, 463
cementoenamel junction, 463
cementum, 463
centers of growth, 182
central artery and vein of retina, 431, 432f, 436f
central canal of spinal cord, 392, 394f, 396f, 404f
central incisors, 464, 466f, 486
central nervous system, 389 See also Brain See also Spinal cord
central tendon of diaphragm
development of, 151, 151f
primordial, 72, 148f, 149, 151
centromere, 14, 16f, 484b
centrum, 348–349, 350f
cerebellar cortex, 405–406
cerebellum, 404–405, 407f
cerebral aqueduct, 406f, 407, 419b, 421f
cerebral commissures, 412–414
anterior, 412, 413f
hippocampal, 412, 413f
posterior, 412, 413f
cerebral cortex, abnormal histogenesis of, 414, 417f
cerebral hemispheres
congenital absence of, 420b, 421f
development of, 407, 409f, 410–412, 412f
cerebral palsy, 414, 496
cerebral peduncles, 407, 407f
cerebral vesicles, 2f–4f, 78t, 409f, 411f–412f
cerebrospinal fluid

excessive, in hydrocephalus, 420b, 422f
formation of, 394–395, 406–407
cervical (branchial) cysts, 170f–171f, 171b
cervical (branchial) fistula, 169b, 171f
cervical (branchial) vestiges, 170f
cervical canal, 19–20, 21f
cervical fistula, 170f
cervical flexure, 85f, 393f, 404, 405f
cervical myotomes, 364f, 365, 366f
cervical plexus, 445
cervical pregnancy, 49f
cervical ribs, 354b, 354f
cervical sinuses, 77, 84f, 162, 169b, 170f–171f
external, 169b, 170f
internal, 169b, 170f
cervical somites, 152, 247f
cervix, 19–20, 21f
CHAOS (congenital high airway obstruction syndrome), 200b
cheeks, development of, 186–187
chemicals, as teratogens, 488t
chickenpox, fetal effects of, 496
childbirth, 121–131, 122f–123f
childhood, 5–6
chimeric models, 10
chin, development of, 186
CHL See Crown-heel length (CHL)
choanae, 186, 187f
primordial, 186, 187f
cholesteatoma, congenital, 446
chondrification centers, 345, 349, 350f, 375
chondroblasts, 56, 345, 347f
chondrocranium, 351, 352f
chondrocyte, 346, 347f
chondrogenesis, 345
chordae tendineae, 307, 309f, 312f
chorda tympani nerve, 425, 443
chordee, 278b
chordomas, 58b, 349b
choriocarcinomas, 66b, 120, 123b

chorion, 45f, 46
smooth, 110, 111f, 113, 113f–114f
villous, 110, 111f, 113f, 115f, 123, 130f
chorionic arteries, 114
chorionic cavity, 46, 126f
chorionic plate, 110–114, 114f–115f
chorionic sac
development of, 44–48, 45f
diameter of, ultrasound measurement of, 46, 46f, 110b
fusion with decidua, 110
chorionic vessels, 112f, 123–126, 124f–125f, 128f
chorionic villi
branch (terminal), 65–66, 114, 115f–116f
development of, 65–66, 68f
primary, 44–46, 45f, 50, 65
secondary, 65, 67, 68f
stem (anchoring), 65–67, 110–113, 115f, 124f–125f
tertiary, 65, 66f
chorionic villi, development of, 65–66
chorionic villus sampling, 89b, 103f, 104
choroid, development of, 436f, 440
choroid fissure, 411f, 412, 414f
choroid plexus, 405f, 406, 411f, 412, 413f
and cerebrospinal fluid, 406–407
development of, 406
chromaffin cells, 397f, 423
chromaffin system, 423
chromatid, 14, 16f
chromatin patterns, 104
chromatophores, 437b
chromosomal abnormalities, 472f
detection of, 104, 131
in gametes, 20b
maternal age and, 19, 103, 478, 479t
numerical, 426, 473–478
parental age and, 19, 103, 478, 479t
and spontaneous abortion, 36b, 50b
structural, 481, 482f
chromosomal analysis, 104

chromosome(s)
breakage, 481, 482f
crossing over of, 30–31
deletion of, 481, 482f
double chromatid, 14, 16f
duplication of, 482f, 483b
haploid number of, 14
homologous, 14, 473
inversion of, 482f, 484b
microdeletions and microduplications of, 483b, 484t
nondisjunction of, 35b, 473, 473f
ring, 481, 482f
sex See Sex chromosomes
single chromatid, 14, 16f
translocation of, 475b, 481, 482f
chromosome studies, 10
chyle cistern, 339, 339f
cigarette smoking, fetal effects of, 101, 491
ciliary body, development of, 435, 436f
ciliary muscle, 441
ciliary processes, 440–441
circulation of amniotic fluid, 131
circulation of blood
fetal, 305f, 333–339, 334f
fetal-placental, 114
fetoplacental, 116f
impaired, and fetal growth, 102
umbilical cord Doppler velocimetry of, 127b
neonatal, 333–339, 334f
transitional, 333–337
placental, 113–114, 115f–116f
fetal, 114, 115f–116f
maternal, 114
through primordial heart, 299f–301f
uteroplacental
impaired, and fetal growth, 102
primordial, 43
umbilical cord Doppler velocimetry of, 127b
circumvallate papillae, 178f

cisterna chyli, 339, 339f
cleavage of zygote, 32–35, 34f
cleavage spindle, 30, 31f
cleft face, 192b, 192f, 196f
cleft foot, 383b, 384f
cleft hand, 384f
cleft lip and palate, 190f, 191b–192b, 192f–193f, 195f
cleft tongue, 179b
cleft uvula, 191b–192b, 193f
cleft vertebral column, 355b, 355f
climacteric, 26
clitoral urethra, 276
clitoris, development of, 274f–275f, 275
cloaca, 72, 76f, 216f, 238–240
partitioning of, 238–240, 239f
persistent, 242f
cloacal membrane, 57–58, 57f, 59f, 72, 76f, 240, 263f, 273
clomiphene citrate, for ovulation induction, 25b, 32
cloning, 10
closing plug, 2f–4f, 42f, 43, 44f
clubfoot, 386b, 386f, 499
c-met, and muscle development, 365f, 369
coarctation of aorta, 325f, 329f
juxtaductal, 327b
postductal, 327b, 329f
preductal, 327b, 329f
cocaine use
and birth defects, 101, 488t
and fetal growth, 495
cochlea, membranous, 441, 443f
cochlear duct, 441, 443f
cochlear nerve, 425
coelom See also specific body cavities
extraembryonic, 42f, 43–44, 44f–45f, 47f, 73f, 223f, 227
intraembryonic, 64, 75f, 145, 148f, 157, 182f, 223f
coelomic spaces, 42f, 43–44, 62f, 64
collecting tubules, 248t, 250, 250f–251f
collodion baby, 454b
coloboma

of eyelid, 441b
of iris, 434, 435f
colon
congenitally enlarged (megacolon), 240b, 241f
development of, 227–230, 228f
left-sided (nonrotation of midgut), 232b, 234f
color flow Doppler ultrasound, of umbilical cord, 126
commissures, cerebral, 412–414
anterior, 412, 413f
hippocampal, 412, 413f
posterior, 412, 413f
common atrium, 314b
common ventricle, 318b, 373f
compaction, 32–35
compact layer, of endometrium, 20, 26, 36, 44f
complement regulatory proteins, and placental immunoprotection, 120
complete abortion, definition of, 5
conal growth hypothesis, of transposition of great arteries, 319b
conceptional age, 89b
condensation, and bone development, 343–345
condensed mesenchyme, 346
conduction system of heart, 312f
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 265b, 265f, 277f, 286, 492f
congenital anomalies, 471
alcohol and, 420b, 488t, 492
of anus and rectum, 241b, 241f–242f
of bladder, 259b, 262f
of brain, 414, 414b, 417b, 419b–420b, 422b–423b
causes of, 471, 472f
chromosomal abnormalities and, 472f, 474b–475b, 480b
classification of, 471
of duodenum, 235b
of ear, 445b–446b
environmental factors in, 472f, 487–499
of esophagus, 214b–215b
of eye, 434b, 437b
of face, 188–190
genetic mutation and, 472–487
of genital system, 253b, 276b–279b

of head and neck, 354b, 355f, 356b
of heart, 313
of hindgut, 241b
incidence of major, 490t
of intestines, 220f
of kidneys and ureters, 254b–255b, 257f–258f
of larynx, 200b
of limbs, 383b, 385b–386b
of lip and palate, 191b–192b, 192f–193f
of liver, 223b
of lungs, 209b–210b, 209f
of lymphatic system, 340b
of mammary glands, 458b
of midgut, 232b–233b, 235b
of muscles, 367b–369b
of nails, 460b
of pancreas, 225b
of pericardium, 149b
of skeleton, 354b–356b
of skin, 454b, 456b
of spinal cord, 398
of spleen, 227b
study of (teratology), 5
of teeth, 460b, 465b–467b, 466f–467f
of tongue, 178b–179b
Toxoplasma gondii and, 488t, 497, 497f
urachal, 259b, 261f
of uterus, 280b, 280f–281f
of vagina, 280b
of vena cava, 292b
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), 153b, 155f–156f
and pulmonary hypoplasia, 210b
congenital ectodermal dysplasia, 456b
congenital epigastric hernia, 153b
congenital heart defects, 313
congenital hiatal hernia, 155b
congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS), 200b
congenital hypoparathyroidism, 173b
congenital megacolon, 240b, 241f

congenital rubella syndrome, 496
conjoined twins, 138b, 139f–141f
conjunctiva, 438–439
bulbar, 440
palpebral, 436f, 440
conjunctival sac, 436f, 440
connecting stalk, 2f–4f, 41, 43–44, 45f, 47f, 55f, 72
Constantinus Africanus of Salerno, 6
contiguous gene syndromes, 483b, 484t
contraceptives, oral
fetal effects of, 492–493
and ovulation, 19, 26b
conus arteriosus, 308f, 310, 311f, 319b
conus cordis, 83f
copula, 176, 178f
cornea, development of, 436f, 440
Corner, George W., 102
corniculate cartilage, formation of, 165t
coronal plane, 9f, 10
corona radiata, 15f, 17f, 18
passage of sperm through, 28
coronary sinus, 304–306, 305f, 308f–309f, 315f
persistent left superior vena cava and, 292b
corpora cavernosa clitoridis, 248t
corpora cavernosa penis, 248t, 275
corpus albicans, 26, 38f
corpus callosum, 411f, 412–414, 413f
agenesis of, 419b, 420f
corpus luteum, 22f, 25–26, 25f, 38f, 42
corpus spongiosum penis, 248t
corpus striatum, 411f, 412, 413f, 414
cortex
cerebral, abnormal histogenesis of, 414, 417f
ovarian, 248t, 268f
suprarenal, 248t
corticol, and labor, 121
corticosteroids, fetal effects of, 494
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), and labor, 121
cortisone, fetal effects of, 494

cor triloculare biatriatum, 318b
costal processes, 349, 350f
costodiaphragmatic recesses, 152, 152f
costovertebral joints, 350–351, 350f
cotyledons, 110–113
coxsackie virus, transplacental transport of, 119
cranial, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
cranial birth defects, 355b
cranial meningocele, 414b, 416f
cranial nerves, 424–425
formation of, 165t
somatic efferent, 424
special visceral afferent components of, 425
special visceral efferent (branchial) components of, 162
cranial ridges, 149
cranial vault (calvaria), 359f
craniofacial anomalies, benzodiazepine derivatives and, 495
craniolacunia, 402b
craniopharyngiomas, 410b, 411f
craniosynostosis, 356b
craniovertebral junction, anomalies at, 357b
cranium, development of, 351, 352f–353f
neonate’s cranium, 351–352
postnatal cranial growth, 352
cranium bifidum, 414b, 416f
cremasteric muscle and fascia, 283f, 284
cretinism, 359b, 495
CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone), and labor, 121
“crib death”, 313b
Crick, Francis, 9–10
cricoid cartilage, formation of, 165t
cricothyroid muscle, formation of, 162, 165t, 166f
cri du chat syndrome, 481, 482f
cristae ampullares, 441
crista terminalis, 301f, 305f, 306, 308f–309f
critical periods, of development, 487, 489f–490f
CRL See Crown-rump length (CRL)
crossed renal ectopia, 254, 256f–257f
crossing over, of chromosomes, 30–31

crown-heel length (CHL), 89, 90f, 96f
crown-rump length (CRL), 78t, 89, 90f
crura of diaphragm, 151f, 152
cryopreservation, of embryos, 32
cryptophthalmos syndrome, 441b
cryptorchidism, 278b, 284b, 286f
cumulus oophorus, 23f, 24
cuneate nuclei, 404
cuneiform cartilage, formation of, 165t
cutaneous nerve area, 378–380
cutaneous syndactyly, 385b, 385f
cuticle, 460
CVS (chorionic villus sampling), 89b, 103f, 104
cyanosis, 314b, 321b
cyanotic heart disease, 319b
cyclopia, 434, 435f
cyst(s)
allantoic, 60b, 133b, 134f
auricular, congenital, 437f
branchial, 171f
cervical (branchial), 170f–171f, 171b
dentigerous, 467b
Gartner duct, 270f, 272b
lingual, congenital, 178b
lung, congenital, 209b, 209f
meningeal, 399f, 401b, 401f
thyroglossal duct, 174, 175b, 175f–176f.
urachal, 259b, 261f
cystic duct, 222
cystic hygroma, 340b
cystic kidney disease, 255, 258f
cytomegalovirus, 496
as teratogen, 488t
transplacental transport of, 117f
cytotrophoblast, 2f–4f, 36, 41, 42f
cytotrophoblastic shell, 65, 68f, 110

D
Darwin, Charles, 8
da Vinci, Leonardo, 7, 7f
deafness, 445b
decidua, 110
decidua capsularis, 109, 113
decidual cells, 42–43
decidual reaction, 43
De Conceptu et Generatione Hominis (Rueff), 7f
deep artery of thigh, 381f
deformation, definition of, 474
deletion, chromosomal, 481, 482f
delivery
expected date of (EDD), 95t, 101
Nägele’s rule, 95t
dental sac, 463
dentigerous cyst, 467b
dentinogenesis imperfecta, 467b
dermal ridges, 454
dermal sinus, 400b
dermis, 451
development of, 454
dermomyotome, 343, 344f
descriptive terminology, 9f, 10
developmental anatomy, definition of, 5
developmental dysplasia of the hip, 386b
developmental periods, 1–5
developmental signaling pathways, 486–487
dextrocardia, 313b, 315f
diaphragm
accessory, 157b
central tendon of
development of, 151, 151f
primordial, 72, 148f, 149, 151
congenital absence of, 367b

crura of, 151f, 152
development of, 151–152
eventration of, 153b, 154f
innervation of, 152
positional changes of, 152
posterolateral defects of, 153b, 154f
primordial, 151–152
diaphragmatic hernia, congenital, 153b, 155f–156f
and pulmonary hypoplasia, 210b
diaphysis, 346
diazepam, use during pregnancy, 495
diencephalon, 409–410, 411f–412f, 415f
diethylstilbestrol, 493
as teratogen, 488t
differentiation, 72
and bone development, 343–345
stem cells, 513–514
digastric muscle, formation of, 165t
DiGeorge syndrome, 173b, 484t
digital rays, 77, 374
dihydrostreptomycin, as teratogen, 493
dilation, 121, 122f
dimertization, 509
disorders of sexual development, 276b
dispermy, 30b
disruption, definition of, 474
distal, as descriptive term, 10
distal tongue buds, 178f
diverticulum
hepatic, 225
hypophysial, 409f, 410
ileal, 235b, 236f
laryngotracheal, 199, 200f
metanephric, 248–250, 250f
neurohypophysial, 410
tracheal, 204b
dizygotic twins, 134, 134t, 135f, 140f
maternal age and, 133–134
DNA methylation, 512

Dolly (cloned sheep), 10
dorsal, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
dorsal horns, 393–394
dorsal mesentery of esophagus, diaphragm development from, 151f, 152
double chromatid chromosomes, 14, 16f
double penis, 279b
double uterus, 280b, 280f–281f
Down syndrome, 477f, 478t–479t
drug(s) See also specific drugs
and fetal growth, 101, 492
illicit drugs, fetal effects of, 495
as teratogens, 488t
testing, in animals, 491b
transplacental transport of, 117f, 119
duct(s)
alveolar, 206, 207f
bile, development of, 219f, 222
cystic, 222
ejaculatory, 248t
of epididymis, 269
Gartner, 248t
genital, 269
hepatic, accessory, 223b
lymph
development of, 339f
right, 339f
mesonephric, 247
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
remnants of, 272b
omphaloenteric, 227
pancreatic, 224
paramesonephric
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
development of, 269
remnants of, 272b–273b
semicircular, 441
submandibular, 179
thoracic, development of, 339f, 340
Ductuli efferentes, 248t

ductus arteriosus, 305f, 326f, 328f
adult derivatives of, 339f
closure/constriction, 337
and coarctation of aorta, 329f
and ligamentum arteriosum, 337–339
patent, 339b, 339f
ductus deferens, 14, 248t, 269
ductus reuniens, 441
ductus venosus, 291, 294f, 337
duodenal atresia, 220f, 221b
duodenal stenosis, 221b
duodenum
congenital anomalies of, 235b
development of, 219, 219f
duplex kidney, 258f
duplication, chromosomal, 483b
dura mater, 394–395
dyshistogenesis, 474
dysplasia, definition of, 474
dysplastic kidney disease, 255, 258f

E
ear
congenital anomalies of, 445b–446b
development of, 184f, 441–445, 442f, 444f
external, 184f, 444–445, 444f
internal, 441–443, 442f
middle, 443–444, 444f
development of, 165t
eccrine sweat glands, 454
ectoderm, embryonic, 54
derivatives of, 72–74, 77f
ectodermal dysplasia, congenital, 456b
ectopia cordis, 313b, 315f
ectopic anus, 241, 242f
ectopic kidney, 254, 256f
ectopic pancreas, 225b
ectopic parathyroid gland, 173b
ectopic pregnancies, 48b, 49f
ectopic testes, 285b, 285f
ectopic thyroid gland, 175b, 176f–177f
ectopic ureter, 254, 258f
ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndrome, 456b
Edwards, Robert G., 8
efferent ductules, 269
egg See Oocyte(s)
Egyptians, ancient views of embryology in, 6
eighth week, 86–90, 86f–88f
ejaculatory duct, 248t
elastic cartilage, 345
electrolytes, transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
eleventh week, 97f
embryo(s)
abnormal, and spontaneous abortion, 36b
blighted, 480b
12-day, 43

14-day, 46–48
16-day, 56f
21-day, 62f
development of See Embryonic development
folding of, 72, 73f–74f, 146f
and cardiovascular system, 298f
measurement of, 78t
spontaneous abortion of, 50b
ultrasound of, 89b
embryology
ancient views on, 6
applied, 5
definition of, 5
in Middle Ages, 6
in Renaissance, 7–8
significance of, 5–6
embryonic age, 89b
estimation of, 78t, 83f
embryonic body cavity, 145–150
division of, 149–150
mesenteries, 147f, 148–149
embryonic development See also specific anatomy and processes
control of, 74–76
phases of, 71–72
stages of, 1–5, 2f–4f
criteria for estimating, 78t
third week, 79f
fourth week, 76–77, 77f, 79f–83f
fifth week, 77–80, 84f
sixth week, 77–80, 85f
seventh week, 80, 85f, 88f
eighth week, 86–90, 86f–88f
nine to twelve weeks, 96–97, 96f–97f
thirteen to sixteen weeks, 96–100, 98f, 161f
seventeen to twenty weeks, 97f–98f, 98, 100f
twenty-one to twenty-five weeks, 98–99, 99f
twenty-six to twenty-nine weeks, 99, 99f, 102f
thirty to thirty-four weeks, 99
thirty-five to thirty-eight weeks, 99, 100f

embryonic disc, 57f
bilaminar, 42f, 45f, 55f
formation of, 43–44
trilaminar, 54, 55f
embryonic tissues, origin of, 46f
enamel, tooth, development of, 460
enamel epithelium, 462
enamel hypoplasia, 465b
enamel organ, 462
enamel pearls, 466f
encephalocele, 414b
endocardial cushions, 299f–300f, 300, 311f
defects of, 314b
endocardial heart tubes, 64, 296f–298f
endocardium, 295–296, 296f–297f
endochondral bone formation, 346, 347f
endocrine synthesis, in placenta, 119–120
endocrine system
pituitary gland, 409–410, 409f, 410t
glandular part of (adenohypophysis), 409f, 410, 410t, 426
suprarenal glands, development of, 247f–248f, 251f, 264–265
endoderm, embryonic, 54
derivatives of, 74, 74f
endometrial arteries, 43, 113–114, 114f–115f
endometrial veins, 113–114
endometrium
compact layer of, 20, 26, 36, 44f
gravid, 110
environmental chemicals, as teratogens, 488t, 495–496
environmental factors, and birth defects, 472, 472f, 487–499
epaxial division, of myotomes, 364f, 365, 452–453
epiblast, 42f, 43, 54
epicardium, 295–296, 296f–297f
epidermal ridges, 452
epidermis, 451
development of, 452–453
epididymis, 14, 248t, 272b
appendix of, 248t, 270f, 272b
development of, 269

epigastric hernia, congenital, 153b
epigenesis, 7–8
epigenetics, 512
epiglottis, development of, 200
epiphysial cartilage plates (growth plates), 346
epispadias, 259b, 279b
epithalamic sulcus, 409
epithalamus, 409
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation, 300, 363
eponychium, 460
epoophoron, 248t, 272b
duct of, 248t
equatorial zone of lens, 437
erythroblastosis fetalis (hemolytic disease of newborn)
intrauterine fetal transfusion for, 104
erythrocyte mosaicism, 134b
erythropoiesis, 99
esophageal atresia, 214b
esophageal muscles, formation of, 165t
esophageal stenosis, 215b
esophagus
congenital anomalies of, 214b–215b
development of, 214
dorsal mesentery of, diaphragm development from, 151f, 152
estrogens, and labor, 121
ethisterone, avoidance in pregnancy, 492
eventration, of diaphragm, 153b, 154f
excretory system See Urinary system
exocoelomic cavity, 43
exocoelomic membrane, 42f, 43
expected date of delivery (EDD), 101
expulsion stage of labor, 121, 122f–123f
exstrophy of bladder, 259b, 262f–263f
external acoustic meatus, 77, 85f, 169b, 182, 444, 444f–445f
absence of, 446, 447f
atresia of, 446
extraembryonic coelom, 42f, 43–44, 44f–45f, 47f, 73f, 223f, 227
extraembryonic coelomic space, 43–44
extraembryonic mesoderm, 43

extraembryonic somatic mesoderm, 46
extraembryonic splanchnic mesoderm, 46
extrahepatic biliary atresia, 223b
extrauterine implantation, 48b
extravillous trophoblast, 119
eye(s)
congenital anomalies of, 434b, 437b
development of, 75, 429–441, 430f, 436f
movement, fetal, 97
muscles, 366, 366f
eyelid(s)
coloboma of, 441b
development of, 440
opening of, in fetus, 99
ptosis of, 440b

F
Fabricius, Girolamo (Fabricius of Aquapendente), 7
face, 196
congenital anomalies of, 188–190
development of, 179–186, 180f–181f
facial clefts, 192b, 192f, 196f
facial expression, muscles of, 186–187
formation of, 165t
facial nerve, formation of, 162, 165t, 425
facial primordia, 179
facilitated diffusion, placental transport via, 116–118
falciform ligament, 223
fallopian tubes See Uterine tubes
fat, fetal
brown, 98
white, 99, 101b
female reproductive cycles, 20–23
femoral artery, 381f
fertilization, 30–31
fertilization age, 13, 89b
fetal age, estimation of, 94t, 95, 100f
fetal alcohol syndrome, 492
fetal breathing movements, 208
fetal growth, factors influencing, 100f, 101–102
fetal membranes
afterbirth, 110, 123, 124f–125f
development of, 111f
multiple pregnancies and, 133–141
premature rupture of, 132b, 132f
fetal period
embryo’s fevelopment during See Embryonic development
highlights of, 96–100
fetal-placental circulation, 114
fetal surgery, 5–6, 106f
fetoplacental circulation, 116f

impaired, and fetal growth, 102
umbilical cord Doppler velocimetry of, 127b
fetoscopy, 105
fetus
circulation in, 333, 334f
measurements and characteristics of, 95, 100f
monitoring of, 105
status of, assessment of, 102–105
viability of, 95b
fibroblast growth factor(s), and digestive system development, 213
fibrocartilage, 345
fibrous joints, 346, 348f
fibular artery, 381f
fifth week, 77–80, 84f
filiform papillae, 177
first arch syndrome, 172f
first meiotic division, 14
first pharengeal arch syndrome, 172b
fistula(s)
in anal agenesis, 241, 242f
anoperineal, 241, 242f
auricular, 446, 447f
cervial (branchial), 171f
cervical (branchial), 169b, 170f
lingual, 178b
omphaloenteric, 235b, 236f
preauricular, 446
tracheoesophageal, 202b, 203f, 210
urachal, 259b, 261f
Flemming, Walter, 8
flexures, brain, 393f, 404, 405f
floating ribs, 350–351
folding of embryo, 72, 73f–74f, 146f
and cardiovascular system, 298f
foliate papillae, 177
follicles, ovarian See Ovarian follicles
fontanelles, 351, 353f
foot
cleft, 383b, 384f

development of, 375f–376f
split hand foot formations, 383b
foramen cecum of tongue, 174, 174f, 178f
foramen of Morgagni, herniation through, 155b
foramen ovale See Oval foramen
foramen primum, 300–304, 301f–303f
fate of, 302f–303f
foramen secundum, 302f–303f
forebrain, 76–77, 408–414, 408f, 412f
foregut, 214–227
foregut artery, 147f, 216f
46 XX, DSD, 276
46 XY, DSD, 276
fourth week, 76–77, 77f, 79f–83f
fragile X syndrome, 484–485, 485f
frenulum of labia minora, 274f, 275
frontal plane, 9f, 10
frontal sinuses, 187
frontonasal prominence, 179–182, 180f–181f
fused ribs, 354b, 354f

G
galactosemia, congenital, 439b
Galen, Claudius, 6
gallbladder, development of, 222
gametes, 19
transport of, 27–28
viability of, 29–30
gametogenesis, 14
abnormal, 14b, 17f
ganglion (ganglia)
autonomic, 72–74, 240b, 423
preaortic, 425
spinal, 393f, 394
spinal, development of, 394
trigeminal, 424–425
gangrene, of intestine, 232b
gap junctions, 504–505
Garbha Upanishad, 6
Garrod, Archibald, 8–9
Gartner duct, 248t, 270f
Gartner duct cysts, 270f, 272b
gases, transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
gastroschisis, 153b, 232b, 233f
gastrulation, 54
gene(s)
inactivation of, 474b
international nomenclature standards for, 504t
gene mutation, 472f, 484–486, 486t
genetic(s)
and human development, 8–10
and intrauterine growth retardation, 102
genital ducts
development of, 269, 271f
female, 271
male, 269–271

vestigial structures derived from, 272
genital glands, auxiliary, in females, 271
genitalia
agenesis of, 279b, 279f
ambiguous, 276b
development of, 273–275, 274f
female, 274f, 275
male, 273–275, 277f
genital system
congenital anomalies of, 253b, 276b–279b
development of, 265–272
indifferent stage of, 265
genital tubercle, 273
genotype of embryo, and effects of teratogens, 491
germ cells, primordial, 266
germ cell tumors, 284b
germ layers
derivatives of, 72–74, 77f, 160f
formation of, 54
gestational age, 95
estimation of, 89b
ultrasound assessment of, 89b
gestational choriocarcinoma, 123b
gigantism, 359b
gingivae (gums), development of, 463
glans clitoris, 248t
glans penis, 248t, 275
glaucoma, congenital, 439b
glial-derived neurotrophic factor, and renal development, 252
glioblasts, histogenesis of, 392–393
glomerulus, 249f, 250
glossopharyngeal nerve, 162, 165t, 177, 425
glossoschisis, 179b
glottis, primordial, 200
glucose, in fetal metabolism and growth, 101
gonad(s) See also Ovaries See also Testes (testicles)
development of, 265–269
indifferent, 265–266
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t

gonadal cords, 265
gonadal dysgenesis, mixed, 277b
gonadal ridge, 265, 266f–267f
gonadal veins, 293f
Graaf, Regnier de, 7
gracile nuclei, 404
gravid endometrium, 110
gravid uterus, 114f
gray horns, 393–394
great arteries, transposition of, 319b, 320f
greater cornu, formation of, 165t
greater vestibular glands, development of, 248t
Greece, ancient view on embryology in, 6
Gregg, Norman, 10
growth, 71
fetal, factors influencing, 101–102
gubernaculum, 248t, 282
gubernaculum testis, 248t
gums, development of, 463
gut See also Foregut See also Hindgut See also Midgut
primordial, 213, 214f
gynecomastia, 458b

H
habitual abortion, definition of, 5
hair
development of, 453f, 459
lanugo, 98
hair bulb, 459
hand(s)
bifurcate, 383b
development of, 375f
split hand foot formations, 383b
hand plates, 77, 374
Hanhart syndrome, 178b
haploid nucleus, 18
haploid number, 14
harlequin fetus, 454b
Harvey, William, 7
haversian systems, 346
hCG See Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
head
circumference of fetal head, 95, 97f, 99–100
congenital anomalies of, 354b, 355f, 356b
enlargement of, 419b, 421f
head fold, 72, 74f–75f
and cardiovascular system, 298f
heart
conducting system of, 312–313, 312f
congenital anomalies of, 313
development of, 295–313
early, 290–295, 290f, 294f
later, 295–313
position of, head fold and, 298f
primordial
circulation through, 298, 299f–301f
partitioning of, 300–304, 301f–304f
three-chambered, 318b

veins associated with, development of, 290–295, 293f–294f
heart prominence, 77
heart rate, fetal, monitoring of, 105
heart tubes, 64, 296f–298f
hedgehog, 507, 508f
hematogenesis, 64, 65f
hematoma, 123
hematopoiesis, 222
hematopoietic center, 227
hematopoietic stem cells, 167
hemiazygos vein, 293f
hemimelia, 383
hemivertebra, 354f, 355b
hemolytic disease of newborn, 118b
intrauterine fetal transfusion for, 104
hemopoietic cells, of bone marrow, 346
heparin, use during pregnancy, 493
hepatic cords, 222
hepatic diverticulum, 221
hepatic ducts, accessory, 223b
hepatic portal system, 291
hepatic segment, of inferior vena cava, 285f, 292
hepatic sinusoids, 222, 291
hepatic veins, 293f, 333
hepatoduodenal ligament, 223
hepatogastric ligament, 223
hepatopancreatic ampulla, 221b
hermaphroditism, 278f
hernia
diaphragmatic, congenital, 153b, 155f–156f
and pulmonary hypoplasia, 210b
epigastric, congenital, 153b
hiatal, congenital, 155b
inguinal, congenital, 285b
internal, 234f, 235b
parasternal, 155b
retrosternal, 155b
sternocostal hiatus, herniation through, 155b
umbilical, 227, 229f, 232b

herpes simplex virus, 496
as teratogen, 488t
hiatal hernia, congenital, 155b
hilum of kidney, 252
hindbrain, 404–406
hindgut, 72
congenital anomalies of, 241b
derivatives of, 238–240
hip, developmental dysplasia of, 386b
hippocampal commissure, 412, 413f
Hippocrates of Cos, 6
His, Wilhelm, 8
histone acetylation, 512
HIV infection, fetal effects of, 496–497
HMD See Hyaline membrane disease
holoprosencephaly, 420b, 421f, 434, 486, 486t
homeobox (HOX) genes, 486
homeobox (HOX) proteins, 511
homologous chromosomes (homologs), 14, 473
hormones
masculinizing, 269
transplacental transport of, 117f, 118
horseshoe kidney, 254, 257f
housekeeping genes, 485
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 42–43
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, fetal effects of, 496–497
human parvovirus B19, as teratogen, 488t
hyaline cartilage, 345
hyaline membrane disease, 209b
hyaloid artery, 430f, 433f
persistence of, 438b
hydatidiform mole, 66b
hydatid (of Morgagni), 248t, 273b
hydranencephaly, 420b, 422f
hydrocele, 286f
testicular, 285b
hydrocephalus, 419b, 421f–422f
hydronephrosis, 253b
hygroma, cystic, 340b, 456b

hymen, 248t, 272, 280, 282f
hyoid bone, formation of, 165t
hypaxial division, of myotomes, 364f, 365
hyperdiploid, 475b
hypertrichosis, 455f, 460b
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, 215b, 218f
hypoblast, 42f, 43
hypobranchial eminence, 178f
hypodiploid, 475b
hypogastric vein, 293f
hypoglossal nerve, 177–178, 424
hypoglycemic drugs, fetal effects of, 494
hypoparathyroidism, congenital, 173b
hypopharyngeal eminence, 176, 178f, 200
hypophysial cartilage, 351, 352f
hypophysial diverticulum (Rathke pouch), 409f, 410
hypopituitarism, 359b
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, 324b, 324f
hypospadias, 278b, 278f
hypotelorism, 420b
hypothalamic sulcus, 409
hypothalamus, 409
hypothyroidism, 175b

I
ichthyosis, 454b, 455f
ileal diverticulum, 235b, 236f
iliac arteries, 381f
common, 252, 295, 381f
external, 381f
internal, 295, 334f–335f
iliac lymph sacs, 339f
iliac veins
common, 293f
external, 293f
internal, 293f
illicit drugs, fetal effects of, 495
immunogobulins, transplacental transport of, 117f
immunogobulin superfamily, 505–506
immunoprotection, of placenta, 119–120
imperforate anus, 241, 242f
implantation
of blastocyst, 27, 42f, 48–50
completion of, 41–43
inhibition of, 50b
sites of, 43f, 48, 49f
extrauterine, 48b
inactivation, of genes, 474b
incisive fossa, 188f, 190
incus, formation of, 162, 165t
India, ancient views of embryology in, 6
indifferent gonad, 265–266
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
indifferent stage of sex development, 265
indomethacin, and ductus arteriosus closure, 337
induced abortion, definition of, 5
inductions, 75
infancy, 5
infectious agents

as teratogens, 488t, 496–498
transplacental transport of, 117f, 119
inferior colliculi, 407
inferior mesenteric artery, 214f, 216f, 223f, 238
inferior vena cava, 305f, 307f, 315f–316f, 335f–336f, 338f–339f
development of, 292, 293f–294f
double, 295b
hepatic segment, 292, 293f
absence of, 295b
postrenal segment of, 292, 293f
prerenal segment of, 292, 293f
renal segment of, 293f
valve of, 308f–309f
infundibular stem, 410
infundibular stenosis, 321b
infundibulum, 410
inguinal canals
congenital anomalies of, 285b
development of, 282, 283f
inguinal hernia, congenital, 285b
insulin therapy, fetal effects of, 494
intercalated discs, 367
intercellular communication, 504–506
intercostal arteries, 295, 329f, 348
intermediate mesoderm, 63
intermediate zone, 392
intermediolateral cell column, 425–426
internal capsule, 412
internal hernia, 234f, 235b
international nomenclature standards for genes and proteins, 504t
interosseous artery, 381f
common, 381f
intersegmental arteries, 295, 315f, 326f, 332f, 348, 381f
dorsal, 66f, 291f, 348
interstitial cells (of Leydig), 267
interstitial ectopia, 285
interthalamic adhesion, 409
interventricular foramen, 307, 309f–311f
interventricular septum

membranous part of, 311f–312f
muscular part of, 307, 311f
primordial, 302f–303f
intervertebral disc, 348, 349f
intervillous space, 113, 113f
intestine(s)
atresia of, 235b
congenital anomalies of, 220f
duplication of, 235b, 238f
fixation of, 227, 229f
gangrene of, 232b
loops, retraction of, 227
midgut loop of, 227
rotation of, 228f
stenosis of, 235b
intracartilaginous ossification, 346, 347f
intracytoplasmic sperm injection, 32
intraembryonic coelom, 64, 75f, 145, 148f, 157, 182f, 223f
intraembryonic mesoderm, 343
intramembranous bone formation, 343–345
intramembranous ossification, 343–345
intraretinal space, 433
intrauterine fetal transfusion, 104
intrauterine growth retardation/restriction
cigarette smoking and, 491
fetus’s viability and, 95b
genetics and, 102
intrauterine period, 95
inversion, chromosomal, 482f, 484b
ionizing radiation, as teratogen, 488t, 498
iris
coloboma of, 434, 435f
color of, 437b
development of, 435
ischiadic artery, 381f
isochromosomes, 484b
isotretinoin, as teratogen, 488t
IUGR See Intrauterine growth retardation/restriction

J
Japanese atomic bomb survivors, birth defect studies in, 498
Jews, ancient views on embryology, 6
joint(s)
cartilaginous, 348, 348f
costovertebral, 350–351, 350f
development of, 346–348
fibrous, 346, 348f
synovial, 348, 348f
joint laxity, generalized, 386
jugular lymph sacs, 339f
jugular vein, 293f

K
keratinization, disorders of, 454b
kidney(s)
blood supply, changes in, 252
congenital anomalies of, 254b–255b, 257f–258f
cystic disease of, 255, 258f
development of, 75–76, 247–252, 249f, 253f
molecular studies of, 252f
duplex, 258f
ectopic, 254, 256f
hilum of, 252
horseshoe, 254, 257f
malrotation of, 254, 256f
pelvic, 254, 256f
positional changes of, 252, 253f
supernumerary, 254, 256f
Klinefelter syndrome, 479f
Klippel-Feil syndrome (Brevicollis), 354b

L
labial commissure, 274f, 275
labia majora, 248t, 274f, 275
labia minora, 248t, 274f, 275
labiogingival groove, 186
labiogingival lamina, 186
labioscrotal swellings, adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
labor, 121–131, 122f–123f
lacrimal glands, development of, 441
lacunae, 42–43, 42f
lacunar network, 43
lamellar ichthyosis, 454b
lamina terminalis, 412, 412f
lanugo, 98, 459
laryngeal atresia, 200b
laryngeal cartilages, 200
formation of, 165t
laryngeal inlet, 199–200
laryngeal muscles, 200
laryngeal nerves, 327
recurrent, 328f
laryngotracheal diverticulum, 199, 200f
laryngotracheal groove, 178f, 199
laryngotracheal tube, 199–200
laryngotracheoesophageal cleft, 203b
larynx
congenital anomalies of, 203b
development of, 200, 201f
intrinsic muscles of, formation of, 165t
last normal menstrual period (LNMP), 95
lateral, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
lateral inhibition, 511
lateral mesoderm, 63
lateral palatal process, 188, 188f
lead, as teratogen, 496

Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 7
legally induced abortion, 5
Lejeune, Jérôme Jean Louis, 10
lens, development of, 437–438
lens capsule, 437–438
lens epithelium, subcapsular, 437
lens pit, 431
lens placodes, 76–77, 431
lens vesicle, 431
Lenz, Widukind, 10
leptomeninges, 394–395
lesser cornu, formation of, 165t
lesser omentum, 223
lesser sac of peritoneum See Omental bursa
Levan, Albert, 9
levator palpebrae superioris muscle, abnormal development of, 440b
levator veli palatini, formation of, 165t
Leydig cells, 267
ligament(s)
annular, failed differentiation of, 445b
broad, 271, 273f
falciform, 223
hepatoduodenal, 223
hepatogastric, 223
of malleus, anterior, 165t
ovarian, 248t, 284
periodontal, 463
round
of liver, 335f, 337
of uterus, 248t, 284
sphenomandibular, 165t
splenorenal, 225–227
stylohyoid, formation of, 165t
umbilical, medial, 58, 259, 260f, 335f, 337
ligamentum arteriosum, 326f, 328f, 337–339, 339f
ligamentum teres, 335f
ligamentum venosum, 337, 338f
limb(s)
blood supply to, 380–382, 381f

congenital anomalies of, 382–383, 382f, 383b, 385b–386b
cutaneous innervation of, 375–380
development of, 78t, 372f–380f
early stages, 371–375
final stages, 375–382
muscles, 366
limb buds, 371, 372f
lower, 371
upper, 76–77, 371
limb plexuses, 378
lingual cysts and fistulas, congenital, 178b
lingual papillae, 177
lingual septum, 176
lingual swellings, 176
lingual thyroid tissue, 175b
lingual tonsil, 340
lip(s), cleft, 190f, 191b–192b, 192f–193f, 195f
lithium carbonate, as teratogen, 488t, 495
liver
congenital anomalies of, 223b
development of, 219f, 221–223, 223f
primordmm of, 222
round ligament of, 337
visceral peritoneum of, 223
LNMP See Last normal menstrual period (LNMP)
lobster-claw anomalies, 384f
lobule, 444–445
low-birth weight, 95b, 101b
lumbar arteries, 295
lumbar rib, 354b
lumbosacral meningomyelocele, 399f, 401b, 401f
lung(s)
accessory, 210b
agenesis of, 210b
congenital anomalies of, 209b–210b, 209f
cysts of, 209b, 209f
development of, 204–208
oligohydramnios and, 208b
hypoplasia, 210b

maturation of, 206–208
alveolar period (late fetal period to childhood) of, 205f, 206–208, 207f
canalicular period (16 to 25 weeks) of, 205f, 206, 207f
pseudoglandular stage (6 to 16 weeks) of, 205f, 206, 207f
terminal sac period (24 weeks to birth) of, 205f, 206
neonatal, 209b
lymphangioma, cystic, 456b
lymphatic nodules, 166
lymphatic system
congenital anomalies of, 340b
development of, 339–340, 339f
lymph ducts
development of, 339–340, 339f
right, 339f
lymphedema, 340b
lymph nodes, development of, 340
lymphocytes, development of, 167, 340
lymph sacs
development of, 339–340, 339f
iliac, 339f
jugular, 339f
retroperitoneal, 339f
lymph sinuses, 340

M
macroglossia, 179b
macrostomia, 192b
magnetic resonance imaging
for fetal assessment, 105, 105f
sagittal, of pregnant woman, 105f
major histocompatibility complexes, and placental immunoprotection, 119
male fertility, 28b
malformation, definition of, 474
Mall, Franklin P., 8
malleus
anterior ligament of, 162, 165t
formation of, 162, 165t
Malpighi, Marcello, 7
mamillary bodies, 409
mammary glands, 456–458
congenital anomalies of, 458b
mammary pit, 456–457
mandibular prominences, 164f
mandibular teeth, 463
marginal sinus, 380
masculinizing hormones, 269
mastication, muscles of, formation of, 162, 165t, 166f
mastoid antrum, 443–444
mastoid processes, 443–444
maternal age
and chromosomal abnormalities, 19, 103, 478, 479t
dizygotic twins and, 133–134
ideal, 20b
mature sperm, 18
maxillary prominences, 164f
maxillary sinuses, 187
maxillary teeth, 463
McBride, William, 10
meatal plug, 444

mechanical factors as teratogens, 499
Meckel cartilage, 162
meconium, 131, 241
medial, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
medial umbilical ligament, 58, 259, 260f, 335f, 337
median artery, 381f
median eminence, 410
median palatal process, 185f, 187f, 188
median plane, 9f, 10
median sulcus of tongue, 178f
median tongue bud, 178f
median umbilical ligament, 58
mediastinum, primordial, 150
medulla oblongata, development of, 404
medulla of suprarenal glands, 247, 248t, 264f
medullary cavity, 346
medullary center, 414
medullary cone, 395–398
megacolon, congenital, 240b, 241f
megacystis, congenital, 259b, 262f
meiosis, 14, 16f
meiotic division
first, 14
second, 14
in spermatogenesis, 14
melanoblast, 452–453, 459
melanocytes, 452–453, 459
membranes See Fetal membranes (and other specific membranes)
membranous atresia of anus, 241, 242f
membranous cochlea, 441, 443f
membranous labyrinth of internal ear, 441, 442f–443f, 443
membranous neurocranium, 351
membranous viscerocranium, 351
Mendel, Gregor, 8
meningeal cyst, 399f, 401b, 401f
meninges, 394–395
meningocele, 402b, 414b, 416f
spina bifida with, 399f, 401b
meningoencephalocele, 414b, 417f

meningohydroencephalocele, 414b
meningomyelocele, 402b
spina bifida with, 400f, 402b, 403f
menopause, 19
menstrual cycle, 26–27
mental retardation, 423b
mercury, as teratogen, 488t, 496
meroencephaly, 391b, 400f, 401b, 403f, 417b, 418f
meromelia, 382f, 383b, 495
mesencephalon See Midbrain
mesenchymal cells, 56
mesenchyme, 54
condensed, 346
and skeletal development, 343
mesenteric artery
inferior, 214f, 216f, 223f, 238
superior, 148–149, 214f, 216f, 223f, 227
mesentery (mesenteries), 147f
definition of, 148–149
development of, 148–149
of stomach, 215, 216f–217f
mesoblast, 54
mesocardium, 298
dorsal, 297f
mesoderm
embryonic, 54
derivatives of, 54, 77f
intermediate, 63
intraembryonic, 343
lateral, 63
paraxial, 63
derivatives of, 343, 344f
mesodermal cells, and skeletal development, 343
mesonephric ducts, 247
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
remnants, 272b
mesonephric tubules, 247
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
mesonephroi, 247, 247f, 249f

mesovarium, 269, 272b
metabolism, placental, 116
metanephric diverticulum, 248–250, 250f
metanephric vesicles, 250
metanephrogenic blastema, 248–250
metanephroi, 248–252
metencephalon, 404–406, 406f
methadone, fetal effects of, 495
methotrexate, as teratogen, 488t, 493
methylmercury, as teratogen, 488t, 496
microcephaly, 357b, 419b, 419f, 496–497
microdeletions, 483b, 484t
microduplications, 483b, 484t
microglial cells (microglia), histogenesis of, 393
microglossia, 179b
micromelia, 495
micropenis, 279b
microphthalmia, 434
microstomia, 192b
microtia, 445
midbrain, 407, 407f–408f
midbrain flexure, 404
Middle Ages, embryology in, 6
midgut, 72
congenital anomalies of, 232b–233b, 235b
derivatives of, 227–230, 228f
loop, herniation of, 227, 228f–229f
nonrotation of, 232b, 234f
return to abdomen, 228f
reversed rotation of, 233b
rotation of, 227, 228f
volvulus of, 232b
Miller-Dieker syndrome, 484t
Minamata disease, 496
miscarriage See also Spontaneous abortion
definition of, 5
missed abortion, definition of, 5
mitral valve, development of, 312f
mobile cecum, 235b

molecular biology, of human development, 10
molecular cytogenetics, 483b
molecular studies of bone development, 345
monosomy, 475b
monozygotic twins, 133–134, 134t, 136f–137f, 139f
conjoined, 138b, 140f
mons pubis, 274f, 275
morphogenesis, 54, 71–72
branching, 208, 252
morphogens, 371–373, 506–508
mosaicism, 35b, 276, 480b
erythrocyte, 134b
motor axons, 375–378
mouth
congenital anomalies of See Cleft lip and palate
primordium of, 72, 74f
multicystic dysplastic kidney disease, 255, 258f
multifactorial inheritance, 313, 472f, 499, 499f
multiple pregnancy See also Twin(s)
and fetal growth, 101
spontaneous abortion in, 25b
muscle(s) See also specific muscles
accessory, 369b
cardiac, development of, 367
congenital anomalies of, 367b–369b
ingrowth, from lateral body walls, 152
laryngeal, development of, 200
skeletal, development of, 363–366
smooth, development of, 366–367
variations in, 368b
myelencephalon, 399f, 401f, 404–405, 404f
myelination, of spinal nerve fibers, 398, 399f
myelin proteins, 398
myeloschisis, 402b, 402f
mylohoid muscle, formation of, 165t
myoblasts, 343, 344f, 363, 365
myocardium, 295–296
development of, 296f–297f
myofibrils, 364–365

myogenic precursor cells, 363
myotomes, 343, 344f, 364f, 365
myotubes, 363

N
Nägele’s rule, 95t
nail(s)
absence of, 460b
deformed, 460f
development of, 460
nail fields, 460
nail folds, 460
nasal cavities, development of, 183f, 186–187
nasal pits, 182, 183f, 186
nasal placode, 182
nasal prominences, 182, 184f
nasal sacs, primordial, 183f, 186
nasolacrimal duct, 185
atresia of, 186b
nasolacrimal groove, 182
nasopalatine canal, 190
natal teeth, 465b
natural killer cells, killer-inhibitory receptors in, and placental
immunoprotection, 119
neck, 196
congenital anomalies of, 354b, 355f, 356b
neocerebellum, 406
neonatal blood flow, 333–339
transitional, 333–337
neonatal circulation, 333–339, 334f
transitional, 333–337
neonatal lungs, 209b
nephrogenic cord, 245, 246f
nephron(s), development of, 250, 251f
nephron loop, 250
nerve(s)
abducent, formation of, 424
accessory, formation of, 424f, 425
chorda tympani, 425, 443

cochlear, 425
cranial, 424–425
formation of, 165t
somatic efferent, 424
special visceral afferent components of, 425
special visceral efferent (branchial) components of, 162
facial, formation of, 162, 165t, 425
glossopharyngeal, 162, 165t, 191, 425
hypoglossal, 191, 424
laryngeal, 327
recurrent, 328f
myelination, 398
oculomotor, 424, 440b
olfactory, 186, 425
optic, development of, 425
pharyngeal arch, 162, 167f, 424–425
derivatives of, 165t
special sensory, 425
spinal, 423–424
trigeminal, 162, 165t, 177, 424–425, 445
trochlear, formation of, 424
vagus, 425
formation of, 162, 165t
superior laryngeal branch of, formation of, 165t
vestibular, 425
vestibulocochlear, formation of, 425
nervous system See also Brain See also Spinal cord
autonomic, 425–426
cells in, histogenesis of, 395f
development of, 389–391
origin of, 389–391
parasympathetic, development of, 426
peripheral, development of, 423–425
sympathetic, development of, 425–426
neural canal, 391
neural crest
derivatives of, 397f
formation of, 61, 63f
neural crest cells, 61

and cardiovascular development, 307
derivatives of, 72–74, 77f
and limb development, 375–378
and skeletal development, 351
and spinal development, 394
and thymic development, 167
neural crest populations, 179–182
neural folds, 61, 63f, 392f
neural groove, 61, 63f
neural plate, 58, 60f, 61
formation of, 61
and origin of nervous system, 390f
neural retina, 433
neural tube, 61, 76, 390f–391f
development of, 61, 63f, 391
nonclosure of, 391b
nonfusion of, 391 See also Neural tube defects
neural tube defects, 61b, 398, 402b, 403f
neuroblasts, 405
neurocranium
cartilaginous, 351, 352f
membranous, 351
neuroectoderm, 77f, 429
neurohypophysial diverticulum, 410
neurohypophysis, 410
neurolemma (Schwann) cells, 398
neuropores, 76, 391, 392f
neurulation, 61, 391
abnormal, birth defects resulting from, 61b
nevus flammeus, 456b
Newton, Isaac, 6
nine to twelve weeks, 96–97, 96f–97f
nipples
absence of (athelia), 458b
development of, 456–457
inverted, 458b
supernumerary, 458b
nondisjunction of chromosomes, 473, 473f
nonrotation, of midgut, 232b, 234f

norethisterone, avoidance in pregnancy, 492
nose See also Entries at Nasal
bifid, 192b
development of, 183f, 186–187
nostril, single, 192b
notch-delta pathway, 504, 510–511, 510f
Notch signaling pathways, 295
notochord, 57–58
development of, 60f
remnant of, and chordoma, 58b
notochordal canal, 57
notochordal plate, 58
notochordal process, 57–58, 59f
NTDs See Neural tube defects
nuclear aggregations, 116
nucleus pulposus, 348, 349f
numerical chromosomal abnormalities, 473–478
nutrients
transfer to embryo, 118
transplacental transport of, 117f

O
oblique vein, 293f–294f
obstructive uropathy, 131b
ocular muscles, 366, 366f
oculomotor nerve, 424, 440b
odontoblastic processes, 463
odontoblasts, 463
olfactory bulb, 186, 425
olfactory epithelium, 186
olfactory nerve, 186, 425
oligodendrocytes, 392–393, 398
oligohydramnios, 131b, 208b
bilateral renal agenesis and, 255f–256f
olivary nucleus, 405, 405f
omental bursa, 215, 217f
omphalocele, 230b, 231f–232f
omphaloenteric duct, 72, 73f, 149, 227
omphaloenteric fistula, 235b, 236f
On the Formation of, the Foetus (Galen), 6
oocysts, in toxoplasmosis, 497
oocyte(s)
postnatal maturation of, 19
prenatal maturation of, 19
primary, 19, 269
transport of, 27
oocyte maturation inhibitor (OMI), 19
oogenesis, 15f
abnormal, 17f
oogonia, 19
optic chiasm, 414
optic cup, 431
optic disc, 431
edema of, 440b
optic groove, 431
optic nerve, development of, 425

optic stalk, 431
optic vesicle, 408, 431
oral contraceptives
fetal effects of, 492–493
and ovulation, 19, 26b
oral epithelial nuclei, 104f
oropharyngeal membrane, 57–58, 72, 74f, 213
ossification, 5
endochondral, 347f
intracartilaginous, 346, 347f
intramembranous, 343–345
primary centers of, 96, 346
secondary centers of, 346
osteoblasts, 345
osteoclasts, 346, 464
osteocytes, 345
osteogenesis, 343–345
of long bones, 375
osteoid tissue, 345
ostium secundum defect, 314b
otic capsules, cartilaginous, 441, 443, 443f–444f
otic pits, 76–77
otic vesicle, 442f–443f
oval foramen, 302f–306f, 314b, 337
closure at birth, 306f
patent, 314b, 316f–318f
oval fossa, 315f, 337
ovarian cortex, 248t, 268f
ovarian cycle, 23–26
ovarian follicles
development of, 23–24, 248t
primordial, 19
secondary, 19
ovarian ligament, 248t, 284
ovarian pregnancy, 49f
ovarian vein, 293f
ovaries, 20
descent of, 284
development of, 248t, 267–269, 268f, 273f

ovotesticular DSD, 276
ovulation, 24–25
oral contraceptives and, 19, 26b
ovum See Oocyte(s)
oxazepam, use during pregnancy, 495
oxygen, transplacental transport of, 117f
oxyphil cells, 167–169

P
palate
cleft, 190f, 191b–192b, 192f–193f, 195f
development of, 185f, 187f, 188–190
primary, 185f, 187f, 188
secondary, 188–190, 188f–190f
palatine tonsil, 340
paleocerebellum, 406
palpebral conjunctiva, 436f, 440
pancreas
accessory tissue of, 236f
annular, 225f, 230b, 243
congenital anomalies of, 225b
development of, 223–225, 224f, 226f
ectopic, 225b
head of, 224
histogenesis of, 225
pancreatic acini, 225
pancreatic buds, 223
pancreatic ducts, 224
pancreatic islets, 225
Pander, Heinrich Christian, 8
papilla (papillae)
circumvallate, 178f
of tongue, development of, 178f
papillary muscles, 307, 312f
papilledema of optic disc, 440b
parachordal cartilage, 351, 352f
paradidymis, 248t
parafollicular cells, 169
paralingual sulcus, 179
paralysis, sphincter, with spina bifida cystica, 401b
paramesonephric duct
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
development of, 269

and female genital system, 271
remnants, 272b–273b
parametrium, 271
paranasal sinuses, development of, 187, 187f–188f, 352
postnatal, 187b
paraoophoron, 272b
parasitic twin, 141f
parasternal hernia, 155b
parasympathetic nervous system, development of, 426
parathyroid glands
abnormal number of, 173b
congenital anomalies of, 173b
development of, 166–167, 168f
ectopic, 173b
histogenesis of, 167–169
paraurethral glands, 248t, 271
paraxial mesoderm, 63
derivatives of, 343, 344f
parietal pleura, 205–206
paroophoron, 248t
parotid glands, development of, 179
pars distalis, 410
pars intermedia, 410
pars nervosa, 410
pars tuberalis, 410
parturition, 121–131, 122f–123f
parvovirus B19, as teratogen, 488t
patent ductus arteriosus, 320f, 339b, 339f
patent foramen primum, 314b
patent oval foramen, 314b, 316f–318f
Pax genes, 511–512
pectinate line, 240
pelvic kidney, 254, 256f
pelvis, renal, development of, 248t
penile hypospadias, 278b
penile raphe, 273–275
penis
bifid, 279b
development of, 248t, 263f–264f, 273–275, 274f

double, 279b
penoscrotal hypospadias, 278b
Pentasomy, 480b
percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling (PUBS), 104
pericardial cavity, 152f, 298
development of, 296f–298f
pericardial defects, congenital, 149b
pericardial sinus, transverse, 297f, 298
pericardioperitoneal canals, 150–151, 151f
pericardium, visceral (endocardium), 296f–297f
perichondrium, 346
periderm, 452
perilymphatic space, 443
perinatology, 102
perineal hypospadias, 278b
periodontal ligament, 463
periosteum, 346
peripheral nervous system, 389, 423–425
peritoneum, lesser sac of See Omental bursa
phallus
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
primordial, 273
pharyngeal apparatus, 196
pharyngeal arches, 76–77, 159–162, 160f
arteries of, 163f See also Aortic arches
double, 315f, 327b
first, 324
second, 324
third, 325
fourth, 325
fifth, 325
sixth, 327
cartilages of, derivatives of, 162, 165f, 165t
components of, 161–162, 165t
fate of, 162
first, 161
arteries of, 324
cartilage, derivatives of, 162, 165f, 165t
muscles, derivatives of, 162, 165t, 166f

second, 161
arteries of, 324
cartilage, derivatives of, 162, 165f, 165t
muscles, derivatives of, 162, 165t, 166f
third
arteries of, 325
cartilage, derivatives of, 162, 165f, 165t
muscles, derivatives of, 162, 165t, 166f
fourth
arteries of, 325
cartilage, derivatives of, 162, 165f, 165t, 178f
muscles, derivatives of, 162, 165t, 166f
fifth, arteries of, 325
sixth
arteries of, 327
cartilage, derivatives of, 165t, 178f
muscles, derivatives of, 165t
muscles, 366
derivatives of, 162, 165t, 166f
nerves, 424–425
derivatives of, 162, 165t, 167f
and tongue development, 178f
pharyngeal grooves, 169
pharyngeal hypophysis, 410b
pharyngeal membranes, 162–166, 169, 444
pharyngeal pouches, 163f
derivatives of, 166–169
first, derivatives of, 166, 168f
second, derivatives of, 166, 168f
third, derivatives of, 166–167, 168f
fourth, derivatives of, 167, 168f
pharyngeal tonsils, 340
pharyngotympanic tube, 74, 166, 168f–169f, 196, 443
pharynx constrictor muscles, formation of, 165t
phenylketonuria (PKU), fetal effects of, 499
phenytoin, as teratogen, 488t, 491, 493
phocomelia, 383
phyaloid artery, 431
physiologic umbilical hernation, 227

piebaldism, 456b
Pierre Robin syndrome, 172, 189f, 193f
pigment granules, 452–453
pili torti, 460b
pineal gland (body), 409
pinocytosis, placental transport via, 116–118
piriform sinus fistula, 169b
pituitary gland, 409–410, 409f, 410t
glandular part of (adenohypophysis), 409f, 410, 410t, 426
placenta, 109–121
abnormalities of, 126b, 127f
accessory, 123, 126f
afterbirth, 110, 121, 124f–125f
as allograft, 119–120
battledore, 124f–125f, 126
bidiscoid, 123
development of, 110–113, 111f–112f
endocrine synthesis and secretion in, 119–120
fetal part of, 110
fetal surface of, 123–126, 124f–125f
functions and activities of, 116–119
immunoprotection of, 119
intervillous space of, 113, 113f
as invasive, tumor-like structure, 120
maternal part of, 110
maternal surface of, 123, 124f–125f
metabolism of, 116
shape of, 110–113
transport across, 116–118, 117f
of drugs and drug metabolites, 117f, 119
of electrolytes, 117f, 118
by facilitated diffusion, 116–118
of gases, 117f, 118
of hormones, 117f, 118
of infectious agents, 117f, 119
of maternal antibodies, 117f
of nutrients, 117f, 118
by pinocytosis, 116–118
by simple diffusion, 116–118

via red blood cells, 118b
of waste products, 117f, 119
placenta accreta, 126b, 127f
placental barrier See Placental membrane
placental circulation
fetal, 114, 115f–116f
maternal, 114
placental membrane, 114–116, 124f–128f
transfer across, 117f
placental septa, 110–113
placental stage, of labor, 121
placenta percreta, 126b, 127f
placenta previa, 50b, 126b, 127f
plagiocephaly, 356b
plantar artery, 381f
pleura
parietal, 205–206
visceral, 205–206
pleural cavities, 152, 152f
pleuropericardial membranes, 149f, 150
pleuroperitoneal membranes, 150–152, 150f–151f, 153b
pneumocytes, 206
pneumonitis, tracheoesophageal fistula and, 202b
Poland syndrome, 367b
polychlorinated biphenyls, as teratogens, 488t, 496
polydactyly, 383b, 385f
polyhydramnios, 131b, 153b
duodenal atresia and, 221b
esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula and, 202b, 214b
polyploidy, 475b
polysplenia, 227b
pons, development of, 404, 406, 406f
pontine flexure, 404
popliteal artery, 381f
portal system, hepatic, 291
portal vein, development of, 294f, 307f
port-wine stain, 456b
posterior, as descriptive term, 9f
posterolateral defects of diaphragm, 153b, 154f

postmaturity syndrome, 101b
postnatal period, 5
Potter syndrome, 254
Prader-Willi syndrome, 483, 484t
preaortic ganglia, 425
preauricular sinuses, 446
prechordal plate, 46–48, 57
preclampsia, 120, 120b
pregnancy
abdominal, 48b, 49f
cervical, 49f
ectopic, 48b, 49f
multiple, 133–141 See also Twin(s)
and fetal growth, 101
spontaneous abortion in, 25b
ovarian, 49f
preclampsia in, 120, 120b
prolonged (postmaturity syndrome), 101b
symptoms of, 54b
trimesters of, 95
tubal, 48b, 49f–50f
uterine growth in, 121, 121f
preimplantation genetic diagnosis, 36b
prenatal development, stages of, 1
prepubertal growth spurt, 5
preterm infants, 95b, 101b
primitive groove, 54
primitive node, 54
primitive pit, 54
primitive streak, 54–56
fate of, 56
primordial cardiovascular system, 64, 66f
primordial follicles, 19
primordial uteroplacental circulation, 43
probe patent oval foramen, 314b, 316f
processus vaginalis, 282
persistent, 285b, 286f
proctodeum, 213, 214f, 238, 239f, 242f
profunda fermoris artery, 381f

progenitor cells See Stem cells
progestogens/progestins, as teratogens, 488t, 492–493
pronephroi, 247, 250
prosencephalic organizing center, 179
prosencephalon See Forebrain
prostaglandin(s) and labor, 121
prostate gland, 272f
development of, 248t, 271
prostatic utricle, 248t, 272b
proteins, international nomenclature standards for, 504t
proximal, as descriptive term, 10
pseudoglandular stage, of lung maturation, 205f, 206, 207f
psychotropic drugs, fetal effects of, 495
ptosis, congenital, 440b, 440f
puberty
definition of, 5
oogenesis in, 19
PUBS (percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling), 104
pulmonary artery
left, 311f, 320f, 326f, 327, 328f
right, 326f, 327
pulmonary atelectasis, 367b
pulmonary trunk, 310, 311f, 321f
pulmonary valve stenosis, 321b
pulmonary vein, 305f–306f, 306
anomalous venous connections, 306b
primordial, 306, 309f
pupillary light reflex, 99
pupillary membrane, 437–438
persistent, 438b
Purkinje fibers, 367
pyloric stenosis, congenital hypertrophic, 218f
pyloric stenosis, hypertrophic, 215b
pyramids, 404

Q
quickening, 98
Quran, 6

R
rachischisis, 355b, 355f, 417b
radial artery, 381f, 382
radiation, as teratogen, 488t, 498
radius bone, congenital absence of, 383b
receptor tyrosine kinases, 504, 509–510, 509f
reciprocal induction, 250–252
rectal artery
inferior, 240
superior, 240
rectal atresia, 241, 242f
rectouterine pouch, 271
rectum
development of, 240, 240f
partitioning of, 239f
recurrent laryngeal nerve, 165t, 327, 328f
red blood cells, placental transport via, 118b
Renaissance, embryology in, 7–8
renal agenesis, 131b, 254, 255f
renal arteries, 252, 253f
accessory, 253b, 253f
renal calices, 247, 250f
renal ectopia, crossed, 254, 256f–257f
renal pelvis, development of, 248t
renal veins
accessory, 253b, 253f
development of, 293f
reproductive system See Genital system
respiratory bronchioles, 205
respiratory bud, 199, 201f, 210
respiratory distress syndrome, 209b
respiratory primordium, 199–200
rete ovarii, 248t, 267, 268f
rete testis, 248t, 267, 268f
retina

central artery and vein of, 431, 432f, 436f
detachment of, 434
development of, 431–433
retinal fissures, 431, 432f
retinoic acid, 506
endogenous, and embryonic development, 487
exogenous, as teratogen, 488t, 494
retroesophageal right subclavian artery, 330b
retroperitoneal lymph sacs, 339f
retrosternal hernia, 155b
rhombencephalon See Hindbrain
ribs
accessory, 354b
cervical, 354b
development of, 350–351, 350f
floating, 350–351
fused, 354b, 354f
lumbar, 354b
rickets, 346b
rima glottis, 178f
ring chromosome, 481, 482f
root canal, 463
rostral, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
rostral neuropore, 391
round ligament of liver, 335f, 337
round ligaments of uterus, 248t
Roux, Wilhelm, 8
rubella virus
birth defects from, 119, 490
congenital infection, 496
as teratogen, 488t, 496
in ear development, 445b
in eye development, 439b, 439f
transplacental transport of, 117f
Rueff, Jacob, 7f

S
sacral arteries, lateral, 295
sacral vein, median, 293f
sacrococcygeal teratoma, 57b, 58f
saddle anesthesia, with spina bifida cystica, 401b
sagittal plane, 9f
Saint Hilaire, Etienne, 8
Saint Hilaire, Isidore, 8
salivary glands, development of, 179
Samuel-el-Yehudi, 6
Sanskrit treatise on embryology, 6
satellite cells, 423
scalp vascular plexus, 86, 86f
scaphocephaly, 356b
schizencephaly, 486t
Schleiden, Mattias, 8
Schwann, Theodor, 8
Schwann cells, 398
sclera, development of, 440
sclerotomes, 343, 344f
scrotal hydrocele, 285b, 286f
scrotum, development of, 248t, 273–275
sebaceous glands, 453f, 454
sebum, 452
second meiotic division, 14
in spermatogenesis, 14
segmental bronchi, 205
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 495
semicircular ducts, 441
semilunar valves, 312, 312f, 324f
seminal colliculus, 248t
seminal glands, 271
seminiferous cords, 267, 269f
seminiferous tubules, 248t, 267, 268f–269f
sensory axons, 375–378

septate uterus, 280f–281f
septum pellucidum, 412–414
septum primum, 300–304, 302f–305f, 309f, 316f
septum secundum, 302f–304f, 304, 307f
septum transversum, 72, 74f, 151, 151f, 221, 222f, 298f
Sertoli cells, 14, 267
seventeen to twenty weeks, 97f–98f, 98, 100f
seventh week, 80, 85f, 88f
sex cells See Gametes
sex chromatin patterns, 104
sex chromosomes
disorders of, 282b
preselection of embryo’s sex, 32b
sex determination, 276b
sex determination, chrosomal basis of, 266–267
sexual development disorders, 276b
shaft of bone, formation of, 346
Shickel, Theophilus, 9
Shprintzen syndrome, 484t
signaling pathways
and bone development, 345
developmental, and birth defects, 486–487
simple diffusion, placental transport via, 116–118
single chromatid chromosomes, 14, 16f
single ventricle, 318b
sinovaginal bulbs, 271–272
sinuatrial node, 312, 312f
sinuatrial valve, 298, 299f–301f
sinus(es)
auricular, congenital, 437f, 446
branchial, 169b, 170f
external, 170f
internal, 170f
cervical See Cervical sinuses
coronary, 294f, 304–306, 305f, 308f–309f, 315f
persistent left superior vena cava and, 292b
dermal, 400b
frontal, 187
lymph, 340

marginal, 380
maxillary, 187
paranasal, development of, 187, 187f–188f, 352
pericardial, transverse, 297f, 298
preauricular, 446
spinal dermal, 400f
thyroglossal, 175b, 175f
urogenital, 259, 260f
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
sinusoids, 43
sinus tubercle, 269, 271–272
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
sinus venarum, 306, 308f–309f
sinus venosus, 291, 293f–294f, 296–298, 296f–297f, 299f–300f, 304–306, 381f
changes in, 304–312, 308f–309f
circulation in, 299f–300f
horns of, 294f, 299f–300f, 308f–309f
sinus venosus atrial septal defects, 314b, 315f–317f
sixth week, 77–80, 85f
skeletal muscle, development of, 363–366
skeletal system, development of, 344f
skeleton
appendicular, development of, 357, 358f–359f
axial
congenital anomalies of, 354b–356b
development of, 348–352, 349f
cardiac, 313
congenital anomalies of, 357b–359b
skin
angiomas of, 456b, 464f
congenital anomalies of, 454b, 456b
development of, 451–466, 452f
glands of, 454–458
skull See Cranium
skull cap (calvaria), 351
Smith-Magenis syndrome, 484t
smooth chorion, 110, 111f, 113, 113f–114f
smooth muscle, development of, 366–367
somatic efferent cranial nerves, 424

somatopleure, 64
somites
cervical, 152, 247f
development of, 62f, 63–64
estimation of embryonic age from number of, 78t
myotomes of, 343, 344f
and skeletal development, 343, 344f
Sonic hedgehog, 507, 508f
Spallanzani, Lazaro, 8
special sensory nerves, 425
spectrophotometric studies, 103
Spemann, Hans, 8
sperm
acrosome of, 18, 18f, 28, 29f
acrosome reaction of, 28, 29f
capacitation of, 28, 29f
components of, 18
head of, 18
maturation process, 28
mature, 13, 18
neck of, 18
tail of, 18
transport of, 27–28
spermatic cord, hydrocele of, 285b, 286f
spermatic vein, 293f
spermatids, 14
spermatogenesis, 14–19, 15f
abnormal, 17f
genetic and molecular factors in, 18–19
spermatogonia, 13
spermatozoon See Sperm
spermiogenesis, 14, 18f
sphenomandibular ligament, 165t
sphincter paralysis, with spina bifida cystica, 401b
sphincter pupillae muscle, 435
spina bifida, 354b, 355f, 398, 399f, 400b–401b, 401f–402f
with meningocele, 399f, 401b
with meningomyelocele, 400f, 402b, 403f
spinal cord

adult, 395–398
central canal of, 392, 394f, 396f, 404f
congenital anomalies of, 398
development of, 392–398, 393f–394f
in newborn, 395–398
positional changes of, 395–398
spinal dermal sinus, 400f
spinal ganglia, development of, 393f, 394
spinal meninges, 398f
spinal nerves, 423–424
spiral endometrial arteries, 43, 113, 114f–115f
splanchnic mesoderm, extraembryonic, 46
splanchnopleure, 64
spleen
accessory, 227b
development of, 225–227, 226f, 340
histogenesis of, 225–227
splenic artery, 225–227, 226f
splenorenal ligament, 225–227
spongy urethra, 273–275, 274f
spontaneous abortion
abnormal embryos and, 36b
definition of, 1
early, 50b
of embryos, 50b, 112f–113f, 129f
in multiple pregnancies, 25b
sporadic and recurrent, 50b
stapedial arteries, 324
stapedius muscle, formation of, 165t
stapes, formation of, 165t
stem cells
differentiation versus pluripotency, 513–514
lymphocytes from, 167
Steptoe, Patrick, 8
sternocostal hiatus, herniation through, 155b
sternum
anomalies of, 355b
development of, 351
stomach

development of, 215, 216f–217f, 226f
mesenteries of, 215, 216f–217f
rotation of, 215, 216f
stomodeum, 72, 74f, 179–182, 180f–181f, 213
stratum germinativum, 452
streptomycin, as teratogen, 493
stylohyoid ligament, formation of, 165t
stylohyoid muscle, formation of, 165t
styloid process, formation of, 165t
stylopharyngeus muscle, formation of, 162, 165t, 166f
subarachnoid space, 394–395
subcardinal veins, 292, 293f
subclavian arteries, 325, 326f, 328f–329f, 331f
right, 315f, 325, 326f, 328f
anomalous, 330b
subclavian veins, 293f
sublingual thyroid gland, 175b
submandibular duct, 179
submandibular glands, development of, 179
substantia nigra, 407
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 313b
sulci, cerebral, 415f
sulcus limitans, 393
sulcus terminalis, 308f–309f
superfecundation, 138b
superior, as descriptive term, 9f
superior colliculi, 407
superior laryngeal branch of vagus nerve, formation of, 165t
superior laryngeal nerve, formation of, 165t
superior vena cava, 305f, 307f
development of, 291–292, 294f
double, 292b
duplicated, 295f
left, 295b
persistent left, 292b
superior vesical arteries, 295, 307f, 335f, 337
supernumerary breasts and nipples, 458b
supernumerary digits, 383b, 385f
supernumerary kidney, 254, 256f

supracardinal veins, 292, 293f
suprarenal cortex, 265b, 266f, 268f
suprarenal glands, development of, 247f–248f, 251f, 264–265, 264f
suprarenal veins, development of, 293f
surfactant, 206
sustentacular cells, 267
Sutton, Walter, 8–9
sutures (cranial), 351, 353f
sweat glands, 454, 455f
apocrine, 454
Swiss cheese ventricular septal defects, 318b
sympathetic nervous system, development of, 425–426
sympathetic trunk, 425
syncytiotrophoblast, 36, 41–42, 42f
syndactyly, 385b, 385f
synostosis, cranial, 419b
synovial joints, 348, 348f
synovial membrane, 348
synpolydactyly, 486t
syphilis
and birth defects, 488t
congenital, 497–498

T
tail fold, 72, 76f
talipes equinovarus, 386b, 386f, 499
Talmud, 6
taste buds, development of, 177
tectum, 407
teeth
congenital anomalies of, 460b, 465b–467b, 466f–467f
development of, 460–466, 461f–462f
bell stage of, 461f, 463
bud stage of, 461f, 462
cap stage of, 462–463
discolored, 466f, 467b
eruption of, 462t, 463–466
natal, 465b
neck of, 463
root of, 463
supernumerary, 466b, 466f
variations in shape of, 466
tegmentum, 407
tela choroidea, 406
telencephalic vesicles, 408
telencephalon, 410–412
temporal bone, styloid process of, formation of, 165t
tendinous cords, 307, 309f, 312f
tensor tympani, 165t, 443–444
tensor veli palatini, formation of, 165t
teratogen(s), 488t
and critical periods of human development, 487, 489f
dose-response relationship for, 490
drugs as, 488t, 491–495
environmental chemicals as, 488t
infectious agents and, 488t
known human, 491–499
low birth weight and, 101b

maternal factors as, 498–499
mechanical factors as, 499
teratogenicity, proof of, 491b
teratology
definition of, 5, 472
terms in, 474b
terminal filum, 398
terminal sac period, of lung maturation, 205f, 206
terminal sulcus, of tongue, 177, 178f
terminology, descriptive, 9f, 10
testes (testicles)
descent of, 269f, 283f, 284
development of, 248t, 265–269, 268f
ectopic, 285b, 285f
rete, 267, 268f
undescended, 278b, 284b, 286f
vesicular appendix of, 272b
testicular feminization syndrome, 277b, 278f
testicular hydrocele, 285b, 286f
testosterone, 267
tetracycline, as teratogen, 467b, 488t, 493
tetralogy of Fallot, 321b
tetraploidy, 480b
tetrasomy, 480b
TGF-β, 506
thalamus, development of, 409
thalidomide, as teratogen, 382–383, 382f, 488t, 490, 495
third trimester, 95, 114–115
third week, 79f
thirteen to sixteen weeks, 96–100, 98f, 161f
thirty-five to thirty-eight weeks, 99, 100f
thirty to thirty-four weeks, 99
thoracic duct, development of, 339f, 340
threatened abortion, definition of, 5
three-chambered heart, 318b
thymic corpuscles, 167
thymus
accessory tissue of, 173b, 173f
histogenesis of, 167

thyroglossal duct cysts and sinuses, 175b, 175f
thyroid cartilage, formation of, 165t
thyroid follicles, 174
thyroid gland
accessory tissue of, 176f
agenesis of, 175b
congenital anomalies of, 175b
development of, 173–174, 174f
ectopic, 175b, 176f–177f
histogenesis of, 174
isthmus of, 173–174, 174f
lingual tissue of, 175b
sublingual, 175b
thyroid hypoplasia, 173b
tibial artery, 381f, 382
Tjio, Joe Hin, 9
toe buds, 376f
tongue
arch derivatives of, 178f
bifid or cleft, 179b
congenital anomalies of, 178b, 178f
development of, 176–178, 178f
distal buds of, 178f
median bud of, 178f
median sulcus of, 178f
muscles of, 366
nerve supply of, 177–178, 178f
papillae of, development of, 178f
posterior third (pharyngeal part) of, 178f
terminal sulcus of, 177, 178f
tongue-tie, 178b, 178f
tonsil(s)
development of, 340
lingual, 340
palatine, 340
pharyngeal, 340
tubal, 340
tonsillar crypts, 166
tooth See Teeth

torticollis, congenital, 368b, 368f
Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis)
as teratogen, 488t, 497, 497f
transmission across placenta, 117f
trabeculae carneae, 307, 312f
trachea
congenital anomalies of, 202b, 203f
development of, 202, 202f
tracheal atresia, 203b
tracheal bronchus, 204b
tracheal diverticulum (tracheal bronchus), 204b
tracheal stenosis, 203b
tracheobronchial tree, 199
tracheoesophageal fistula, 202b, 203f, 210, 214b
tracheoesophageal folds, 199–200, 202b
tracheoesophageal septum, 199–200, 201f, 202b, 214
tranquilizers, as teratogens, 495
transcription factors, 194f, 504, 511–512
and bone development, 343
and placental development, 110–113
transforming growth factor β, 506
transfusion, intrauterine fetal, 104
translocation, chromosomal, 475b, 481, 482f
transport, across placenta, 116–118, 117f
transposition of great arteries, 319b, 320f
transverse plane, 9f, 10
Treacher Collins syndrome, 172
Treponema pallidum, as teratogen, 488t
tricuspid valve, development of, 312f
trigeminal ganglion, 424–425
trigeminal nerve, 162, 165t, 177, 424–425, 445
trigone region of bladder, 259, 260f
trigonocephaly, 356b
trilaminar embryonic disc, 54, 55f
trimester(s), 95
definition of, 5
trimethadione, as teratogen, 488t, 493
triploidy, 30b, 480b, 481f
trisomy, 480t

of autosomes, 476f, 478, 478t
of sex chromosomes, 478, 480t
trisomy 13, 478t, 479f
trisomy 18, 478t, 479f
trisomy 21 See Down syndrome
trochlear nerve, formation of, 424
trophoblast See also Cytotrophoblast See also Syncytiotrophoblast
abnormal growth of, 66b
extravillous, 119
true knots, in umbilical cord, 126–127, 128f
truncus arteriosus, 294f, 296, 296f–297f, 299f
circulation through, 299f–301f
partitioning of, 307–310
persistent, 319b, 320f
transformation and adult derivatives of, 326f
unequal division of, 321b, 324f
tubal pregnancy, 48b, 49f–50f
tubal tonsils, 340
tubotympanic recess, 166, 443
tumor, placenta as, 120
tunica albuginea, 267
tunica vasculosa lentis, 437–438
Turner syndrome, 476f, 478
twenty-one to twenty-five weeks, 98–99, 99f
twenty-six to twenty-nine weeks, 99, 99f, 102f
twin(s)
conjoined, 138b, 139f–141f
dicephalic conjoined, 141f
dizygotic, 134, 134t, 135f, 140f
early death of single, 138b
and fetal membranes, 133–134
maternal age and, 133–134
monozygotic, 133–134, 134t, 136f–137f, 139f
conjoined, 138b, 140f
parasitic, 141f
zygosity of, 138b
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 105, 136f, 138b
tympanic cavity, 166, 443–444

U
ulnar artery, 381f
ultrasonic waves, fetal effects of, 498
ultrasound
for bone age determination, 357b
of chorionic sac, 110b
of embryos, 89b
for estimation of fetal/gestational age, 88f, 89b
for fetal assessment, 102
of heartbeat, 307b, 310f
of 3.5-week conceptus, 54f
of transvaginal embryos, 88f
umbilical artery(ies), 115f, 134f, 305f, 381f
and abdominal ligaments, 337
absence of (SUA), 127b, 129f
adult derivatives of, 334f
Doppler velocimetry of, 127b, 128f
fate of, 295
umbilical cord, 126–127
color flow Doppler ultrasound of, 126, 128f
prolapse of, 126
sampling of, 105
true knots in, 126–127, 128f
velamentous insertion of, 128f
umbilical hernia, 227, 232b
umbilical ligament, medial, 58, 259, 260f, 335f, 337
umbilical veins, 223, 290, 296f, 299f–300f, 305f, 333, 381f
adult derivatives of, 334f
development of, 291, 293f–294f
and round ligament of liver, 337
transformation of, 294f
umbilical vesicle
fate of, 132
formation of, 43–44, 132
primary, 43

secondary, 43–44, 67f
significance of, 132
uncinate process, 224
undescended testes, 278b, 284b, 286f
unicornuate uterus, 280b, 280f–281f
uniparental disomy, 486
urachus, 58, 259, 260f
congenital anomalies, 259b, 261f
cysts of, 259b, 261f
umbilical arteries, relation to, 261f
urinary bladder, relation to, 261f
urea, transplacental transport of, 117f
ureter(s)
bifid, 254, 256f
congenital anomalies of, 254b–255b, 257f–258f
development of, 247–252, 248t
ectopic, 254, 258f
ureteric ectopia, 254
ureterostomies, fetal, 106f
urethra
clitoral, 276
development of, 248t, 264, 264f
spongy, 273–275, 274f
urethral folds, 273, 273f
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
urethral glands, 271
urethral plate, 273–275
uretic bud, 248–250
uric acid, transplacental transport of, 117f
urinary bladder
congenital anomalies of, 259b, 262f
development of, 248t, 259, 260f
exstrophy of, 259b, 262f–263f
trigone of, 259, 260f
urinary system, development of, 247–264
urinary tract, duplications of, 254, 256f
urine formation, fetal, 97
uriniferous tubule, 250f
urogenital groove, 273

urogenital membrane, 239f, 273
urogenital ridge, 246f
urogenital sinus, 259, 260f
adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
vesical part of, 259, 260f
urogenital system
embryonic structures in, adult derivatives and vestigial remains of, 248t
uropathy, obstructive, 131b
urorectal septum, 238, 239f, 241b
uterine tubes, 20
ampulla of, 21f, 24f
fertilization in, 30
development of, 248t
uteroplacental circulation
impaired, and fetal growth, 102
primordial, 43
umbilical cord Doppler velocimetry of, 127b
uterovaginal primordium, 269, 271
uterus
absence of, 280
bicornuate, 280b, 280f–281f
with rudimentary horn, 280b, 280f–281f
congenital anomalies of, 280b, 280f–281f
development of, 248t, 273f
double, 280b, 280f–281f
gravid, 114f
growth in pregnancy, 121, 121f
round ligament of, 284
septate, 280f–281f
unicornuate, 280b, 280f–281f
utricle, 272b
uvula, 190
cleft, 191b–192b, 193f

V
vagina
absence of, 280
adenocarcinoma of, diethylstilbestrol exposure and, 493
congenital anomalies of, 280b
development of, 248t, 271–272
vaginal atresia, 280
vaginal plate, 271–272
vagus nerve, 425
formation of, 162, 165t
superior laryngeal branch of, formation of, 165t
vallate papillae, 177
valproic acid, as teratogen, 488t, 493
valve(s)
atrioventricular, development of, 309f, 312f
cardiac, development of, 309f, 312, 312f
of inferior vena cava, 308f–309f
mitral, development of, 312f
of oval foramen, 302f–303f, 304, 305f
semilunar, 312
sinuatrial, 299f–301f
tricuspid, development of, 312f
varicella virus, 496
as teratogen, 488t
vascular structures, fetal, adult derivatives of, 306f, 337–339
vasculogenesis, 64, 65f
vas deferens See Ductus deferens
vasectomy, 28b
vein(s)
associated with heart, development of, 290–295, 293f–294f
azygos, 292, 293f–294f
lobe of, 209b
brachiocephalic, left, 291–292, 293f–294f, 304
cardinal, 299f–300f, 381f
anterior, 291–292, 292b, 293f–294f, 299f, 304, 305f

common, 148f, 290–292, 293f–294f, 295, 296f, 299f
development of, 291–292, 293f–294f
posterior, 66f, 249f, 291f, 292, 293f–294f, 299f
endometrial, 113–114
gonadal, 293f
hemiazygos, 293f
hepatic, 292, 293f, 333, 334f–336f
hypogastric, 293f
iliac
common, 293f
external, 293f
internal, 293f
jugular, 293f
oblique, 293f–294f
ovarian, 293f
portal, development of, 294f, 307f
pulmonary, 305f–306f, 306
primordial, 309f
renal
accessory, 253b, 253f
development of, 293f
sacral, median, 293f
spermatic, 293f
subcardinal, 292, 293f
subclavian, 293f
supracardinal, 292, 293f
suprarenal, development of, 293f
umbilical, 223, 290, 296f, 299f–300f, 305f, 333, 381f
adult derivatives of, 334f
development of, 293f–294f
transformation of, 294f
vena cava See Vena cava
vitelline, 290–291, 296f, 299f–300f, 381f
development of, 293f–294f
velamentous insertion, of umbilical cord, 128f
velocardiofacial syndrome, 484t
vena cava
congenital anomalies of, 292b
inferior See Inferior vena cava

superior See Superior vena cava
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, as teratogen, 488t
ventral, as descriptive term, 9f, 10
ventral abdominal wall defects (VWDs), detection of, alpha-fetoprotein assay
for, 103b
ventral median fissure, 394
ventral median septum, 394
ventral mesentery, 223
ventricles, cardiac, 298
development of, 296f, 301f–303f
primordial, positioning of, 307, 310f–312f
ventricular foramina, 410–412
ventricular septal defects, 318b
ventricular zone, 392
ventriculoperitoneal shunt, for hydranencephaly, 420b
vernix caseosa, 98
vertebrae, variation in number of, 350b
vertebral artery, 295, 333f
vertebral body, 350
vertebral column
cleft, 355b, 355f
congenital anomalies of, 354b–355b
development of, 348–350, 349f
bony stage of, 349–350, 350f
cartilaginous stage of, 349, 350f
vesical artery, superior, 295, 335f, 337
vesicle(s)
brain
cerebral, 2f–4f, 78t, 395–398, 409f, 411f–412f
primary, 393f, 404
secondary, 393f, 404
lens, 431
metanephric, 250
optic, 408, 431
otic, 442f–443f
telencephalic, 408
umbilical See Umbilical vesicle
vesicouterine pouch, 271
vesicular appendage, 273b

vesicular appendix of testis, 272b
vestibular nerve, 425
vestibulocochlear nerve, formation of, 425
viability
of conjoined twins, 138b
of fetuses, 95b
of gametes, 29–30
villous chorion, 110, 111f, 113f, 115f, 123, 130f
viruses, transplacental transport of, 117f
visceral peritoneum of liver, 223
visceral pleura, 205–206
viscerocranium
cartilaginous, 351, 352f
membranous, 351
vitamin(s), transplacental transport of, 117f
vitelline artery, 66f, 214f, 236f, 381f
fate of, 295
vitelline veins, 290–291, 296f, 299f–300f, 381f
development of, 293f–294f
vitreous body, 438
volvulus, of midgut, 232b
vomeronasal organ (VMO), 165
vomeronasal primordia, 187
von Baer, Karl Ernst, 8
von Beneden, Eduard, 8

W
Waardenburg syndrome, 486t
warfarin, as teratogen, 488t, 493
waste products, transplacental transport of, 117f, 119
water, transplacental transport of, 117f
Watson, James, 9–10
weight, birth
cigarette smoking and, 101, 491
extremely low, 95b
low, 95b, 101b
Wharton jelly, 126–127, 129f
white (anocutaneous) line, 240
white fat, fetal, 99, 101b
white ramus communicans, 425–426
Williams syndrome, 484t
Wilmut, Ian, 10
Winiwarter, Felix von, 9
Wnt signaling pathway, 507–508
Wolff, Caspar Friedrich, 7–8

Y
Y chromosome
46 XY, DSD, 276
and spermatogenesis, 18–19
yolk sac
fate of, 132
formation of, 43–44, 132
primary, 43
secondary, 43–44, 67f
significance of, 132

Z
zona fasciculata, 264–265, 264f
zona glomerulosa, 264–265, 264f
zona pellucida, 18
zone of polarizing acitivity (ZPA), 371–373
zygosity, in twin pregnancies, 138b
zygote, cleavage of, 32–35, 34f

Instructions for online access
Thank you for your purchase. Please note that your purchase of this Elsevier
eBook also includes access to an online version. Please click here (or go to
http://ebooks.elsevier.com) to request an activation code and registration
instructions in order to gain access to the web version.

