
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 4

 
Journal Articles: 1914-1920
Expanding the Horizons of Child Guidance Neurosis &
Psychosis
Alfred Adler
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by Henry T.
Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2003 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 3320 Sussex Drive, Bellingham, WA 98226. Tel
(360) 935-1661 or e-mail to HTStein@att.net .
Published 2003 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-4-X
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Editor’s 
Preface
2003.............................................................................................. ii Chapter I: 
Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter IV: Chapter V: Chapter VI: Chapter VII:
Chapter VIII:
Chapter IX:
Chapter X: Chapter XI:

Chapter XII:
Chapter XIII: Chapter XIV: Chapter XV: Chapter XVI: Chapter XVII:
Dostoyevsky 
[1918] 
..................................................................115 
Chapter
XVIII: Individual Psychology on Upbringing [1918] ..........................123
Chapter XIX: Chapter XX: Chapter XXI: Melancholia and Paranoia [1914]
.................................................1 The Social Impact on Childhood [1914]
....................................15 Individual Psychology: Its Presumptions and Results
[1914] ....26 Child Psychology and Neurosis Research [1914] ......................37
The Problem of Distancing Onself [1914] .................................51 Neurotic
Hunger Strike [1914] ...................................................58 The Life-Lie and
Responsibility in Neurosis 
and Psychosis [1914] ..................................................................60 Book Review
of Theophil Becker's
On Diagnosing Paranoid Conditions [1914] .............................68 Book Review
of Wladimir Astrow’s 
Petersburg Dreams [1914] .........................................................70 Nervous
Insomnia [1914] ...........................................................72 Minutes of Meetings of
the Organization for 
Individual Psychology [1914] ....................................................78 Minutes of
Meetings of the Individual 
Psychology Organization [1914] ................................................80 The Woman:
Raising and Educating Children [1916] ...............84 The Child's Inner Life and
Social 
Feeling 
[1917] 
......................90 
On 
Homosexuality 
[1918]
..........................................................96 
Compulsion 
Neurosis 
[1918]
....................................................107
Bolshevism and Psychology [1918] .........................................130 
New Aspects on War Neurosis [1918] ....................................137 
The Other Side: A Mass-Psychological Study 
of a Nation’s Guilt [1919] ........................................................149 
Chapter XXII: Concerning Female Neurotics and the 
Masculine Attitude [1920] ........................................................158 Chapter
XXIII: The Individual Psychology of Prostitution [1920] ...................183 
Chapter 
XXIV: 
Neglected 
Children 
[1920]
.......................................................192
Index 
.........................................................................................201
Appendix: “Basic Principles of 

Classical Adlerian Psychology” ...............................................223
i
Editor’s Preface - 2003
Editor’s Preface - 2003
As Adler gradually expanded the horizons of Individual Psychology, he
addressed a multitude of topics in the twenty-four articles published between
1914 and 1920. He focused predominantly on the dynamics of neurosis and
psychosis, but he began exploring the positive and negative influences of the
home and school on the development of the young child, devoting five articles
during this period to child guidance. Adler also contributed several book reviews
to psychology journals; two have been included in this volume.
The political and military issues of his time prompted passionate,
persuasive arguments from his keen, analytical mind. His article, “Bolshevism
and Psychology,” is a classic exposé of the abuse of power and the inevitable
response of the people. His comments remain timeless.
The outstanding exception to his generally insightful view of human nature
is his article “On Homosexuality.” Adler’s view of homosexuality in this article
reflects the rather common bias of his time and culture. Although he transcended
the widespread misconceptions about women and children at the turn of the
century, his view of homosexuality represents a historical limitation and
apparent contradiction of his general perspective. In the interests of scholarship
and historical accuracy, the controversial article has been included in this
volume. The current Classical Adlerian view of sexuality promotes cooperation
between partners, and attempts to correct domination or depreciation within all
sexual orientations. This contemporary stance is more congruent with Adler’s
central posture of equality, respect, and acceptance.
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. More
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
I encourage the reader to patiently follow Adler’s early efforts to articulate
his full theory. It is a fascinating journey of positing, correcting, and refining his
insights into the mystery of human nature.
ii
Chapter I
Melancholia and Paranoia1 2 [1914]
Individual Psychological findings derived from a study of psychoses

Preface
The driving forces of neuroses and psychoses that I have described as
childhood 
feelings 
of 
inferiority--safeguarding 
tendencies, 
striving 
to
compensate
-forged in childhood and then acted teleologically as a fictitious goal for
superiority; the tried and practiced methods, character traits, feelings, emotions,
symptoms and attitudes to thwart demands made in a social context that become
the means for a fictitious raising of personality feelings with regard to the
individual’s environment; the searching for detours and the distancing to dodge
the expectations of society and to escape a realistic self-evaluation as well as
personal responsibility; the neurotic perspectives and the tendentious devaluation
of reality that range to the point of insanity; the exclusion of almost all chances
for establishing relationships and for cooperation,--all these have led me and
other authorities to establish an interpretive principle that has proven to be
broadly valuable and imperative for an understanding of neuroses and
psychoses.3 The mechanisms that were described above can be found in detail in
the author’s articles “Über den nervösen Charakter,” and “Studie über
Minderwertigkeit von Organen” that can be found in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie (Leipzig), in Menschenkenntnis, and in this
volume.4
My further studies concerning the mechanism of psychosis have reached a
preliminary conclusion with the following findings. The three essential
conditions for mania are:
1) The anticipation and hallucinatory portrayals of desires or fears for
safeguarding purposes; 
2) a tendentious devaluing of reality;
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie, pages 171-182, 1920. Translated
into English as chapter XXI in The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Bleuler, surprisingly, addresses this concept disparagingly by stating that “with
this viewpoint everything could be explained.” It would seem to me, and to
others, to be of particular value for just that reason. Another writer, who shall
remain unnamed, calls me a “shyster” (incompetent lawyer). In his ignorance he
believes that the tricks of the neurotic, that I have uncovered, were none other

than my own.
4 (Praxis und Theorie).
3) a resulting raising of personality feelings accompanied by an inability to
cooperate;
4) the struggle with anyone who is near or far and the demeaning of that person;
and
5) the transference of a patient’s activities away from his primary problem to
some secondary arena.
As can easily be seen, all five conditions for mania relate logically and
psychologically. In the following paper, which was submitted in 1914 to the
aborted Congress of Psychology and Psychiatry (in Bern) in almost the same
form, we attempt to present the psychological structure of melancholia and
paranoia in light of the above findings.
A. Melancholia
The attitude and life plan of those disposed toward melancholia; The
outbreak of the illness, and a struggle with the environment; Being successful on
secondary issues for fear of having to make decisions
that could lead to humiliation.
1. Melancholia affects those individuals who since early childhood have
depended on the actions and on the support of others to maintain their lifestyle.
Their life is dominated by easily achieved successes that require little activity,
which by nature lack masculinity. In their contacts they limit themselves to their
families or to a small stable circle of friends, always looking for someone to lean
on. These are people who are not beyond forcing others into supporting them
and, by pointedly exaggerating their inadequacies, make others conform or be
obedient to them. Where they are in positions of power, they use it ruthlessly,
often veiled by ethical exigencies. That they often profit very quickly from their
limitless egoism in these times of excessive advantage-seeking does not argue
against our thesis. When confronted by the principal challenges in their own
lives, making progress in their self-development, or perhaps only maintaining
their own effectiveness, they will either avoid them as soon as problems arise, or
at best will deal with them only hesitatingly. To the contrary, the manic
depressive type can generally be identified by his enthusiasm in approaching
every problem, only to have his enthusiasm wane soon afterwards. This
characteristic rhythm, a behavior and attitude that does not differ much on days
when he feels well, during the course of the illness and upon experiencing
defeat, will be intensified and solidified with purposeful and demonstrative
maniacal ideas. Periodic melancholia lies between these two types. It will break
out regularly whenever the patient’s vacillating self-doubt compels the repulsion

of any of life’s demands (marriage, job, society).
2. The way of life of the “melancholic type” is recognizable by a
deepseated attitude which assumes, at the very outset, a melancholic perspective
stemming from childhood which sees life as a difficult and enormous gamble.
Their world is one in which the majority of the people they encounter seem
hostile. It is also a world filled with distressing obstacles. We recognize in this
attitude, which runs counter to social feeling and cooperation, a strong feeling of
inferiority and one that is replete with artifices that we have described as
fundamentally characteristic of neurotics. Such people feel better prepared to
meet life’s demands with unique character traits, emotions, anticipations, and
facilities (crying) that are transformed into aggressive tendencies. When feeling
“well,” they will seek out a small circle of friends among whom they can assert
themselves, and among whom a series of minor successes at the outset will give
them a feeling of greater security. Transforming their feelings of inferiority into
concrete form, they will demand, as they did as children, either openly or
secretly, that they be given greater deference as “handicapped,” that others
submit to them, or make sacrifices on their behalf.
3. Since childhood, their sense of self-worth has consequently been low,
which becomes apparent from their constant attempts to gain great prestige.
Nevertheless, they frequently emphasize--often providing hidden clues that
characterize their psychological kinship with paranoia--their lost opportunities
for exceptional development, mostly because of poor family conditions. They
also at times betray with their melancholic manic ideas an unshakable
assumption that they are super-beings, even endowed with divine powers. Such,
and nothing else, lies at the source of complaints, hidden behind a fixation of
greatness, that bemoans a horrible fate befalling on them as well as their
families, or when they find blame in themselves for the world coming to an end,
or for the outbreak of a world war, or for the downfall and death of another. Not
infrequently there rests in these forced complaints about their own inadequacies
a threatening hint of very real physical or moral dangers to which their families
and friends will be exposed. All this is accompanied by the strongest possible
promotion of their own personal importance. Such are the goals of the
melancholic and toward such ends these individuals will openly accuse
themselves of being inferior in all kinds of ways, and demonstratively blame
themselves for all mistakes and failures. The result of such behavior, at a
minimum, is that they gain more than heretofore the focus of everyone’s
attention in their limited circle, and spur those persons dedicated to them to a
maximum of effort, to making real sacrifices on their behalf, and to becoming
most accommodating. In following such a course they also free themselves of

even the most minor social obligations and commitments. This greatly suits their
egocentric guiding ideal, which rejects conforming or committing oneself to the
rights of others, and which they regard as an intolerable coercion and a serious
loss of personal worth.
Besides accusing and reproaching themselves, melancholics always provide
hints pointing to heredity, to a faulty upbringing, and a willful lack of
consideration from family members or supervisors, except that this accusing of
others--again a paranoia related phenomenon--results from the initial
melancholia. An example would be the outbreak of melancholia in a younger
daughter after her mother had decided to travel with an older sister, or when a
businessman falls ill after he had been overruled on a number of occasions by
colleagues, and was then forced to carry out some task against his will. Pointing
to inadequacies, heredity, physical anomalies, etc., also serves to support the
notion that the individual is suffering from an unalterable and incurable disease
which itself is, thereby, significantly enhanced in value.
Thus melancholia, like every neurosis and psychosis, serves the striving for
the greater social worth, advances one’s predilections, and enhances one’s
personality, at least in one’s own opinion. The compulsory nature of this
phenomenon in persons with a childlike nature as described at the outset, is
formed under pressure of a deeply felt dissatisfaction and feelings of inferiority,
not objectively justified. The fact that such individuals pay what would seem to
us an unbelievable price in terms of difficulties encountered in their lives as the
consequences of an attitude, is seen above all in the deception they practice, and
is explained by the enormous tension under which they deal with life. Their
sensitive ambition by which they chase obtrusively, albeit with hidden timidity,
after superiority, can also compel them to retreat from, or approach only
falteringly, any social obligations. This systematic self-limiting attitude
sidetracks them into a strictly confined social circle, and lets them engage in
only limited tasks which they perform until threatened by what seems to them a
difficult situation. At that point appears their unaltered, untested pattern created
in childhood, which is to belittle themselves so that they can assert their will
through weakness and illness, and, thereby, avoid all responsibilities.
4. The most effective weapon deployed by the melancholic, stemming from
his childhood days, entails complaints, tears, and a sad disposition. The
individual will demonstrate in the most agonizing ways his weakness and the
necessity for what he desires so that others will be forced to serve him.
5. Melancholics also in their own ways assume, and seem convinced, that
they are not responsible for their failures in life because they constantly appeal
to their weakness, and to a lack of outside assistance. Unmistakable is the

psychological connection with phobia and hypochondria. Except that in cases of
melancholia, because of the greater intensity of the attack, and because of a
stronger feeling of inferiority, the rationale for illness disappears and every
criticism of maniacal ideas is excluded by the anticipation of an unavoidable
calamity, and a determination to empathize with that threatening danger. The
categorical imperative of the melancholic, therefore, is as follows: “ Act, think,
and feel as if that terrible fate, which you foresee, already has occurred, or at
least is unavoidable.” The primary assumption of melancholia mania is: the
victim’s divine-like prophetic vision.
The connection with neurosis and psychosis becomes clear when these
findings are pursued further, and when measured against the common bond with
the pessimistic perspective. A simple example is a case such as noctural enuresis
where the categorical imperative would be: “ Act as if you were sitting on the
toilet!” In pavor nocturna it would be: “Act as if you were in great danger!”
When there are conditions, such as neurasthenia, hysterical sensations, a
weakened condition, paralysis, dizziness, nausea, etc.: “Think that your head is
in a vise, that something was stuck in your throat, that you were close to fainting,
you could not walk, that everything is turning around, you had eaten some bad
food,” etc.
It is always a matter of what effect it has on one’s environment. The same
applies, as I had always emphasized, to “epilepsy” where, possibly always in
pantomime, death, rage, signs of being poisoned, defending oneself and being
subjugated manifest themselves. The way these manifestations occur is the result
of the possibilities afforded by the organism, often originating as innate
manifestations of inferiority (See Studie über die Minderwertigkeit der Organe).
They begin to play a role as soon as they are capable of advancing and
enhancing the neurotic’s higher goals.5 In every case, however, the symptom or
the attack to which the patient succumbs means that he has been transported
from the present (by means of anticipation), and from reality (by empathizing
with a role). This transporting away is probably most pronounced in cases of
epilepsy. A frequent case of this type of illness is seen in a youngest child (at
times followed by a late-comer), and shows an asymmetric lower shifting of the
right side of the face, and an increase in the protuberance of the parietal bone, as
well as traces of left-handedness. I have frequently also found outbursts of anger
by one of the parents.
The psychosis shows that depending on the closed-off attitude of the
patient, who is about to give up making any effort toward honest striving, there
exists a strong tendency towards withdrawal, extensive devaluing, and a constant
distorting of reality.

6. Thus in psychoses and neuroses there are new or difficult-seeming
situations, such as decisions that have to be made in one’s job, in love, or when
being tested. The patient in such situations, in order to escape or hesitate, acts as
if he had a severe attack of stage fright that reinforces his conviction that he is
doomed to be weak and that his will be a sad fate. In examining such a patient,
the physician must guard against being influenced by the difficult situations his
patient describes. Whatever guides the melancholic in his fears, whatever it is
that makes his maniacal idea “incorrigible,” such a person is not unintelligent or
lacks in logic, but his failure lies in lacking the desire to apply these capabilities,
to apply logic. The patient will think, feel, and act “even” illogically, if that is
the only way by which he can reach his maniacal goals, if this will raise his
selfesteem. Whoever tries to dissuade him from his mania, appears to him as an
enemy, which also applies to his feelings about medical intercession, and
attempts made to dissuade him from his beliefs. He regards such efforts as
counter to his interests and, therefore, from his viewpoint, he acts intelligently.
5 The tension to which the neurotic succumbs when sensing defeat presumably
acts on the entire body, but as a symptom becomes most pronounced in the
inferior organ.
7. The melancholic follows a peculiar direction in that he succumbs to an
illness by pursuing old and well tested practices reinforced by hints of his own
weakness that force useless help and concern from those around him. The
uselessness of all reassurances offered him when melancholia breaks out does
not lie in the logical consequences, but in the patient’s unshakeable intent to
exploit the effect he has on his environment to a maximum, to involve everyone
concerned, and to deny them any expectations for improvement of his condition.
A cure will depend on the extent of the patient’s courage to face life, and will
succeed when he has relished his superiority to the fullest, and has been given
encouragement.6 In my cases I have found that letting the patient know the
reality of a given situation, without my posturing superiority and asserting
selfrighteousness, proved to be advantageous. It is probably no easier to predict
the termination of a melancholic arrangement than foretelling when a child will
stop crying, or when deeply felt anger, or a lust for revenge will be stilled.
Hopeless conditions, particularly a history of discouragement with life,
provocations, and an obvious lack of respect for others could lead to an intent to
commit suicide as an extreme act of revenge in situations where there have been
continuous acts committed against one’s own person. Unfortunately, it is self-
evident that the prospects for encouragement decline with age.
The fear of failure and the apprehension of not, or no longer, being able to

meet the challenges or demands of society or family, compel this type of
melancholia, where there are subjective feelings of trouble, to anticipate feeling
forlorn. The perspective that arises from such empathic melancholic
anticipations, and its tendentious effects, which are always newly exacerbated
when awake and in dreams, affects the entire organism, and, because of constant
stimulation, causes a worsening of organ functions. In that light, the functioning
of the organs, the physical posture, weight gain, sleep, muscle tone, heart
functions, intestinal conditions, etc. can be subjected to a careful evaluation. The
etiological interpretation of Abderhalden is refuted when regarded in a
psychological context. In connection with our findings they would, of course, be
found to be consequences, or intensified psychosis engendered symptoms, of
innate organ inferiorities. In the final outcome, organ inferiority, as we have
openly stated among other points, can establish an important etiological basis of
significant childhood feelings of inferiority.7
6 See Adler, “Fortschritte der Individualpsychologie” in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Indivualpsychologie, 2nd edition, vol. 1 and 3
8. To the extent that they are amenable, the organs are governed by the
individual’s melancholic goals, adjust their functions to their overall role, and
thus help in arriving at a prognosis of clinical melancholia (the heart, posture,
appetite, sleep, bowel movement and urine functions, thought processes). The
functioning of these organs, insofar as they obey the arbitrary drives and the
vegetative system, will be melancholic. If their functioning remains close to
normal, it will seem abnormal to the patient, who will then complain. At times
when the organ seems to act clearly in ways that seem purposeless, it will upset
the patient or irritate him (by disturbing his sleep, or by inducing excessive
bowel and bladder activity).
9. In the last case, just as when taking nourishment, the patient will
manifest and plan fully a number of self-induced disturbances which will ensue
automatically with much self-control being exerted. These manifestations, as
well as the patient’s exaggerated demands on the functioning of his organism,
and his erroneous interpretation of a fictitious norm, which he allegedly gives
up, make it apparent that he intends to create an obvious and serious legitimacy
for an illness.
10. Food intake is restricted by a patient who comes up with thoughts
reflecting disgust or fears (poison). Above that, however, as is true for all other
functions, there is the pressure of an empathic tendentious melancholia (“nothing
is of any use; everything will end badly”). Sleep is disturbed by compulsive
brooding, by concerns about sleeplessness, and by transparent means to prevent

sleep. Bowel and bladder functions can be transformed into an illness with
attempts at disrupting their normal functioning, or by forcing them to function
abnormally, and finally by causing the organs to be irritated. The heart activity,
breathing, the individual’s posture and, on occasion, tear ducts, can be forced by
a melancholic fiction to cause the individual to empathize fully with a despairing
situation.
11. Greater insight, possible only in an Individual Psychological context,
will show that the melancholic attitude can be at once a condition as well as a
weapon used by persons who have the characteristics described above. It
manifests itself in situations in which we could otherwise expect an angry,
perhaps even vengeful outburst.8 The lack of social activity, beginning in early
childhood, demands such a peculiar aggressive attitude that, like harming one’s
self by suicide, can lead to threatening those in the individual’s environment, or
to revenge. Occasionally, in cases of raptus melancholicus, or suicide, which
always represents an act of revenge, the emotions that would be expected break
out clearly.
7 Kretschmer’s classification system of pyknik (having rounded body
structure) and asthenic (having slight, slender body structure) types takes the
same factors into account. In that regard, the pyknic is afflicted with less severe
organ inferiorities; the asthenic with the more serious ones, since our culture
obviously is less tolerant of this type of person. 8 Whether one can regard this as
a “repression” is very questionable
12. Never absent, as a premise for acting, are the hidden references to one’s
own importance, becoming apparent in demanding another’s subjugation, and in
the demands made of another.9 Since reference to another’s fault never fails (see
above), so is the attitude of the melancholic with his fictitious superiority and his
lack of responsibility always apparent. By reinforcing the latter characteristic,
the reference to another’s fault, nuances of paranoia break out in the
melancholic.
13. For the melancholic the other person always represents a means to raise
his own personality feelings. His pretensions of friendship and concern, aside
from his illness, also serve a useful purpose. Therefore, he knows no limits in
extending his obsession to lord it over another. If he has been denied his ultimate
objective which is being relieved of all outside demands, or when faced by an
invincible obstacle and is robbed of all hope, he may resort to suicide or harbor
thoughts of suicide.
14. For this type of person an outbreak of melancholia actually is the ideal
situation when he feels his position threatened. The question why such a person

would not relish this condition becomes moot: The aggressive means employed
by melancholics do not allow for any contrary feelings. Since the patient strives
for success, there is no room for feelings that might interfere with his
compulsivedepressive attitude.
15. Melancholia abates as soon as the patient has attained, by whatever
methods, the fictitious feeling of having regained superiority, and is protected
against failures by having legitimized his illness.
16. The attitude of those who might become afflicted with melancholia is
one of mistrust and reproach toward society that had its start in childhood. This
attitude also reveals a presumption of an inferiority feeling along with
compensation, and a circumspect searching for superiority, despite whatever
contrary allegations the individual might offer.
9 It is always difficult to break off a medical consultation with a melancholic. B.
Paranoia
1. Paranoia afflicts a person whose social attitude is characterized by the
following: After acting initially more or less energetically in his conduct and
with regard to his lifeline he distances himself from the goal that he set for
himself and that others expect him to follow. Then, discouraged, he comes to a
standstill. Such a person mentally and physically shunts aside all activities to a
minor stage in life where he engages in a sham struggle against self-created
problems, unconsciously pretending to cover up, justify, or postpone
indefinitely, possible or assumed defeats in life.
2. This attitude in general as well as with regard to specific problems, has
been in the making since early childhood, and has been practiced, and honed to
discount the most obvious circumstances. For that reason the paranoid system,
more so than the other psychoses, encompasses methodical traits. For that
reason, given favorable circumstances, such as in its early stage, it can be
shaken. Neither the social feeling nor “the universally valid” logic that makes it
possible, can ever be fully throttled. Logic, however, should not be looked for in
fixed ideas, such as those that underlie the instigation of revolutions, the total
destruction of an opponent, but only in a person’s overall attitude toward life.
3. A precondition of this attitude can be inferred from the unalterable
feeling of dissatisfaction with one’s achievements in life which forces that
individual to hide failures from himself and from others in order to avoid injury
to his ambitions and his ego.
4. The always present and always apparent activity, mostly of an aggressive
type, and characterized by a yearning for superiority, leads to a breakdown that
usually does not occur until a person’s later years. This also lends some outward
maturity to his obsessive ideas.

5. This activity that is directed toward the goal of a superiority ideal takes
on a critical hostile attitude toward others in its course. In the last analysis this
attitude is sharply pointed toward another person, as well as against influences
and situations behind which either some or everyone hides. Thus the blame is
cast on others for what the patient with his overly extended schemes cannot
achieve. In paranoia the anticipation of superiority ideals (megalomania) serves
to justify the feeling of superiority, and at the same time helps escape the
responsibility for his social failings by creating a sideshow.
6. The attitude of the paranoiac reflects hostility toward others that stems
from earliest childhood. It results from the individual’s active striving for
superiority over everyone, and finds expression in a need for consideration, in a
persecution complex and in megalomania. In these three situations the patient
sees himself as the center of his universe.
7. In the pure form of paranoia, which occurs only in borderline cases, there
always occurs an aggressive start that is brought to a halt by the structure of the
mania system. This is similar to dementia praecox, where the fear of life with its
demands seems larger and which, for that reason, occurs during the earlier years.
Tangentially, one can observe cases of cyclothymia,10 hysterical abulia,11
neurasthenic depression manifestations, and conflict neuroses (see Über den
nervösen Charakter) that indicate the character of a strong temporary recession
following the start of aggression. Strongly related in a dynamic sense is the
behavior of the psychogenic epileptic, the chronic alcoholic, and the morphine
and cocaine addict. Differences lie in the more tenacious or greater intermittent
recession following extensive activity or where the activity is less pervasive. The
seemingly “normal” phases or what appear to be the “healthy” parts of a
psychosis serve in general to entice others, to give them hope so that the
psychotic can continue struggling with them. This also explains falling in love
with a neurosis.
8. In the ebb and flow of a psychosis there clearly lies the hostile,
aggressive trait that at times leads to suicide. In that sense a psychosis in general
seems to us the spiritual suicide of a person who does not believe that he is equal
to the goals set by society or by himself. Even when in recession there are signs
of a distancing oneself, a hostility against reality, while when progressing, even
in moments of exultation, the patient shows an inner weakness as if by fooling
others he seems to run over them.
9. The paranoid’s sense of self is driven to the point of a godlikeness
structured, however, on a base of a deepseated feeling of inferiority. He betrays
its weakness in a hasty spurning of social demands, as well as in forsaking his
own plans. Switching from realistic to unreal situations, a tendency to create

paranoid, faraway excuses, and principally blaming others also characterize it.
Such a person obviously lacks confidence in himself. His denial that others are
knowledgeable or capable forces him to invent cosmic and religious concepts.
Such fantasies that are so opposite to normal perceptions are necessary for him
to regard himself as stable and superior.
10. These paranoid ideas are difficult to correct because they are so
necessary for a patient to solidify his viewpoint, particularly for the attainment
of a state of irresponsibility to excuse the absence of successes, and to force a
halt to any social involvement. At the same time it affords him the opportunity to
maintain the fiction of his superiority without having to expose himself to being
tested. The blame always lies in the hostility of everyone else.
10 (Editor’s note) Manicdepressive psychosis involving recurring cycles of
exhilaeration and depression. 
11 (Editor’s note) A disorder in which volition is impared or lost.
11. If the melancholic’s passivity is an actio in distans to force others into
subjugation, then the active fantasy of the paranoiac is to find an excuse for his
lack of success in life, and to provide a time-consuming preoccupation.
12. His irresponsibility, in contrast with the image of the melancholic, rests
outwardly more on blaming others, or on finding fault with external
circumstances.
13. The evident outbreak of paranoia also occurs when a threatening
situation makes a patient believe that he definitely will not realize the excessive
expectations he has for a social standing. Usually this happens before an
undertaking, in the course of an undertaking, or before a demotion. It can also
occur when imagining the “dangers” that lie in aging.
14. The breakdown of normalcy takes place in an interim construction of
the anticipatory mania-mechanism that prompts the patient to relinquish his
sense of responsibility. At the same time the feeling of importance increases
through the patient’s empathy with thoughts of persecution, deserving respect,
and greatness. We see in this mechanism a compensatory act spun out of an
anticipation of being disparaged, and runs in the direction of a “masculine
protest, as I had summarily stated in the psychology of neuroses (see Über den
nervösen Charakter).
15. The construction of the maniacal idea can be traced back to childhood
where it is derived from daydreams and fantasies, which in childish ways are
associated with some form of disparagement.
16. The paranoid attitude incorporates not only the psyche, but also the
body in a role commensurate with its maniacal system. Stereotypical

expressions, attitudes, and movements are associated with the guiding idea.
Incidentally, they are also more frequently found in borderline cases, and within
the framework of dementia praecox.
17. Melancholic traits are frequently intertwined with paranoia. This applies
in particular to complaints about sleep, inadequate nourishment, etc. As these
progress, they are generated into ideas of persecution, poisoning, and greatness.
The last direction can sometimes be seen only in the emphasis given by an
individual to the uniqueness of his sufferings.
18. Hallucinations are closely related to a strong empathy with the role
being played and can serve both to encourage or to warn the individual. They
occur in every case where the patient is determined to follow a certain direction,
while wishing not to be held responsible for his actions. Hallucinations can be
likened to a dream and need not be understandable to the patient, but they
characterize the patient’s way of dealing with a particular problem.
Hallucinations, like many dreams, are the result of a contrivance for objectifying
subjective impulses to which a patient unconditionally dedicates himself for their
seeming objectivity.12 The compulsion for irresponsibility does not permit the
will to be guided by factual determinations, but substitutes instead seemingly
alien voices and faces.
19. Added to this, as a way to reinforce the system, are the tendentious, i.e.
whatever appears suitable, choices of memory, and those experiences selected by
the maniacal system, evaluated in light of the final goal. From our viewpoint
more apparent are the tendency (to reinforce the system), and the decisive
compulsion arising from those tendencies, as determined by the goal (retreat!,
arrangement of irresponsibility, blaming others, covering up the obvious
breakdown).
20. From our viewpoint, paranoia occurs when normal people lose courage,
where the less stable person commits suicide or accuses everyone else, where an
aggressive person cowardly avoids the normal demands of life and turns to crime
or becomes an alcoholic. Only those well adapted to society and with good
character maintain their equilibrium. Occasionally, one will find a touch of any
of the various tendencies cited.
21. The independent struggle of those disposed toward paranoia for
dominance results in everyone being seen as an enemy, or a chess figure, and
being treated accordingly. The paranoiac, like every neurotic and psychotic,
lacks genuine good will toward everyone else. He is never a responsible social
partner and displays a bad attitude toward all human relationships (love,
friendship, occupation, society, etc.). This attitudinal anomaly stems from a low
selfesteem and an overestimation of life’s problems. It is also this that leads him

to arrange (neuroses and) psychoses. Accordingly, his hostile attitude toward
society is certainly not innate, nor is it unredeemable, but is a tempting way out
and a blunder. The fact is that one cannot make an argument against
cooperation.
22. Paranoia seldom abates since it arises at that point in the lifeline at
which the individual suspects his inevitable collapse. Manifestly subjective
exaggerations can in an early stage be corrected. Occasionally the illness can be
cured.
23. The attitude of those tending toward paranoia beginning in childhood
manifests a tendency to easily give up when faced with difficulties. For that
reason one will find in such an individual’s history frequent lapses in
development that seem puzzling in nature. All these undertakings that deter the
individual’s progress (also frequent job changes, and living the life of a drifter)
are actually forced by the guiding idea: to waste time in order to gain time.
12 See the author’s dream theory in “ Traum und Traumdeutung” and in
“Nervöse Charakter.”
Dominance, quarrelsomeness, lack of fellowship, the absence of romantic
relationships or choosing inappropriate companions are regular manifestations in
a paranoiac. He is characterized by his querulous and unfairly critical nature.

Appendix
Excerpts from the dreams of melancholics
A forty-year old government official was being transferred to another
office. Thirteen years earlier, when he experienced a similar transfer, he was
affected by melancholia. This time he was again unable to carry out his duties.
He was also plagued by thoughts that others were to be blamed for his plight.
They did not accept him and placed obstacles in his way. In short, the path
toward paranoia was in the offing. He asked me for poison to escape his tortures.
Whatever happened to him he always interpreted it in most negative ways. He
increasingly complained about sleeplessness, digestive problems, but above all
of feeling constantly depressed and of being terribly afraid of the future. These
indicators left no doubt about the diagnosis.
I have shown how melancholia can be understood as a “remnant problem.”
The personality of the afflicted drives the individual to verify his illness, to place
the blame on himself, to belittle himself in order to avoid having to make
decisions. Our patient, for example, in his own way, will either thwart any
failures, or use his illness to undercut their importance, or make a successful
outcome seem as only an indication of a fictitious capability that exceeds
anything seen heretofore. He never fails to take advantage of other people who
are meant to become distressed by his illness so as to devote themselves to him
even more. If this situation were reduced to the level of a child, we would find
that person in tears.
The first childhood memories of this patient were as follows: He sees
himself on a sofa crying. In another recollection, when he was eight years old,
his aunt once spanked him, making him run into the kitchen crying: “You have
robbed me of my honor!” Under this unique scheme, already developed in early
childhood, he casts blame on others, tries to shock them (overpower them?), and
is now able to face his new situation. Not to be overlooked is the fact that the
scheme he devised can only be understood under the assumption that here is a
very ambitious person who lacks the selfconfidence needed to reach his goal
along a straight and narrow path. Thirdly, it can clearly be seen how, when
everything is related to what had occurred before, under pressure of his secret
godlikeness idea, he would like to be relieved of the responsibility for his actions
in order not to have to put his god to a test. This also explains his hesitating
attitude and the unconscious arrangement of the “remnant,” and the distancing
from his goal of superiority that he fears losing with every decision he has to
make.

During the first week of treatment this patient had the dream, described in
Chapter XIX ,13 in which he saw the world coming to an end. We can find in
that dream all the workings of melancholia that were described above. In his
mind he assumes complete irresponsibility, shows himself to be stronger than
another, and in his fantasy toys, like a god, with the fate of the world. Everything
is permitted when all is lost.14 Is this not the same melody that we heard when he
said: You have robbed me of my honor? When he belittles himself are we not
forced to think of what would follow: Now I play my strongest suit? Does not
the threat of suicide hang in the air? Does not the depression turn into
pressuring?
Everyone must submit to his will! That is how he constructed his
melancholia. Here is the second dream: “A girl that I saw on the street came to
my room and submitted herself to me.” What is behind this dream? How far is
he from being openly aggressive? He must be possessed of magical powers that
cause everyone to submit to him. However, like a sleight-of-hand performer, he
advances his purpose by believing that the world is coming to an end, and by
using his depression against others.
A third dream shows us the arrangement of his depression. “In another job,
which he had actually refused to accept, he finds that he can manage the work
easily. Everything works out well. That means that the places where I am not is
where happiness dwells.” This is an assumption created by his tendency to find a
present situation painful. It is impossible to argue against this, since it concerns a
need that is impossible to fulfill because he sees himself in another situation. If it
were possible to transfer him into that situation, he would simply start to invent
new excuses.
13 In this volume (Praxis und Theorie) “Zur Rolle des Unbewussten in der
Neurose” [On the Role of the Unconscious in Neuroses]. (This article has been
newly translated as chapter XXII in volume 3 of The Collected Clinical Works of
Alfred Adler.) 14 At the same time there follows the relief from social feeling.
Chapter II
The Social Impact on Childhood1 2
[1914]
Everything related to child rearing must be considered with the individual
in mind. The caregiver and educator should pay attention and be guided in their
actions only by what is evident in the case at hand, what effect it has on that
person, what must be done to make changes here, or give support there, and in
what form and to what extent that person’s mind is being influenced.
Physicians, parents or teachers act no differently when it comes to matters

affecting a person's physical health. Some cases require curing a general malaise,
others call for healing a particular sensory organ; in one instance harm must be
prevented, in another it must be removed. In every case treatment must be
designed for a particular situation in order to affect the prospects of the
individual.
However, an efficient thought and work process requires creating and
applying rules for rearing. As long as there is a culture, a language, and a way of
child rearing, there is a presumption, conscious or unconscious, of "social
usefulness." The idea of "social usefulness" has grown and is constantly
advancing only because of that goal.
Therefore, there is an obvious difference between measuring the extent to
which a child or adult has socially adjusted, or even fosters social integration,
and applying or conceiving rules that can be expected to make a person useful.
Both fall under the discipline of rearing and, where there are ill effects, they
enter the realm of psychotherapy. Both also have social usefulness as a goal or
benchmark for measuring effectiveness. However, in the first case we look for a
result or attempt to alleviate a shortcoming by comparing it with an ideal that we
envision. In the second case we try to indicate ways by which we can attain this
preconceived ideal. In the first case the caregiver or psychologist is faced
essentially with an artistic task that calls for creative forces to succeed. In the
second case the attempt is by scientific means to derive general guidelines and
maxims from experience and from passed down teachings and to lay out a norm
for the course of the individual’s development.
We would be making a big mistake were we to carry to an extreme such
findings and evaluations of an individual’s competence or actions. Time and
again we have seen when examining the operation of the psyche that we must
proceed with the greatest caution and even then only for the purpose of
categorizing and only incidentally may we divide up the unity of the psyche.
This applies equally to the body: every part of which is related to the whole and
we can understand a part solely in the context of the whole. However, to
understand the totality of an individual's psyche means to see that person in the
social context. From that point of view every part of his psychological makeup
will seem different than if, in order for us to understand or have an influence on
him as a unique person, we were to remove him from his social environment.
1 Originally published as "Soziale Einflüsse in der Kinderstube" in
Pädagogishe. Archiv., Vol. 53, pages 473-487, 1914.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Thus we may claim that the pedagogue must have been schooled as an artist

and scientist, which is no different from demanding that a psychological
examination not be separated from the social foundation. Above all, it is the
ambiguity of a psychological phenomenon torn out of context that makes an
isolated examination impossible. I shall try to explain this with the example of a
lazy child.
Once we have recognized the "vice" of laziness and out of necessity also its
cause, which is more difficult, and as soon as we set in motion ways to
overcome it, we no longer act unconditionally, not to mention out of aesthetic
considerations but, consciously or unconsciously, out of consideration for a
public interest and the child's progress in an appropriate social setting for that
person. Furthermore, the indifference of a student would not have come to our
attention had we not brought along an ideal social image of a student according
to which, knowingly or unknowingly, we formed our expectations. This thought
process shows us that raising and teaching a child is in accordance with rules
derived from observing society or represents the results of such observations.
Very modestly it should be asked: which segment of society should guide the
teacher?
On the other hand something like laziness in a student cannot be understood
in an isolated psychological setting. The presumption that there is a willingness
to work is so strong in our lives that where this is not the case we feel justified
believing a deeplying psychological revolt by the child causing such negative
behavior. It is then not difficult to understand that such behavior in the last
instance points to an earlier developed direction for a life goal that raises
expectations like, "others will take care of me." In light of our study, however, it
is important, in order for us to deal with it, to recognize that laziness is
associated with some often-misunderstood future social life. Those raising
children must understand enough of child psychology that with professional
help, or alone, they can deal with such a failed development and ameliorate it.
Excuses that such cases represent merely common human tendencies are
unacceptable. Every case will bring surprises that arise from deeplying
psychological motives. I am convinced that it is still too early for us to come up
with a general formula for such a psychological complex situation. I am satisfied
with accepting common occurrences such as: laziness appears as a sign of
resignation often in children consumed by burning ambition who believe they
are not equal to a struggle with their perception of their future life. They no
longer strive, and forsake developing independence. Yet, the premise of life as a
struggle stays with them. They give up only the image of a direct struggle, but
their intractable laziness creates a battle that does not seem to threaten them with
defeat. Whoever is able to empathize with the behavior of such children,

whoever is able to see how they enjoy the powerlessness of parents and teachers,
often even embracing punishment but at the same time being smothered with
attention that they never had before, can easily form in his mind a very real
image, the picture of a child who might be standing in a corner with his arms
closely folded watching others urging him to work or trying to be helpful. The
following is an example of such a case:
A nine-year old boy no longer was making progress in school. At home it
had become apparent for some time that he avoided all activities and that he
expected others to take care of doing such small tasks for him as dressing,
washing, and homework. He was lethargic in his movements, made no physical
efforts, and presented a picture of a physically and mentally incompetent boy
who seemed at least two years behind in development. Punishment and
prompting were to no avail and soon he required three persons to take care of
him in his affluent home. He came to me for treatment because of sexual
problems. It became immediately obvious that his manipulation was to draw his
mother's attention away from his younger siblings and toward himself. Further
examination showed that this boy's ambition was to create a fantasy world for
himself in which everyone would serve him. He saw himself succeeding in this
by never making a move on his own behalf. His ambition was apparent in his
desire to gain his mother's attention exclusively for himself. His obvious
obsession with fairy tales and magic shows demonstrated even more clearly how
his attitude was related to his overriding idea of moving into a fantasy world. If
clearer evidence of ambition was needed in this case of an otherwise lazy child,
it could be found in his tendency constantly to chew on a cigar holder and to take
away hats from adults. The tendency to acquire other people's property is
important, since it indicates how in his laziness the child already chose a way of
life in which others would serve him or accede to him.
The boy's expectation of a hostile and dangerous world in the future is so
apparent that no further evidence is needed. In this particular case it was not
difficult to find the reason for this presumption. His father was an angry and
domineering person who brought his job related struggles into his family and
thereby guided the child in wrong directions. He exaggerated his child's
weakness and imparted to him a desire to become dominant like himself, using
laziness as a practical way to achieve it.
The degree to which the child's development under those conditions was
harmed would be hard to judge. This boy was no less endangered by his
inappropriate view of laziness than by having his talents put in question.
Regarding the latter, I would like to note in particular the little use to which the
idea of "talent" is put in rearing, except where there are deeplying organ

inferiorities. I, at least, have never seen a child or an adult whose talents were
judged on any basis other than accomplishment or effort. If that is the case, we
introduce a murky and mystical concept into raising children which in certain
cases, where this seems advantageous, can raise feelings of irresponsibility and
frequently cause a person either to underestimate his ability to accomplish
anything on his own, to lament his fate while being resigned or inactive, and to
believe that his inactiveness is due to a lack of talent.
Similar cases present a most important principle for raising children. As
difficult as our lives, our work, and our social role as man or woman may be, the
greatest mistake that can be made in early childhood is to shake a child's belief
in his ability to overcome those challenges by creating doubts in that child's
mind about his own powers, or by exaggerating life's problems.
Of course, these mistakes are more frequently made unknowingly and
unnoticed rather than with intent. This is particularly the case in bringing up
girls. Often they become women who exhibit the behavior of a hunted deer with
an attitude toward life and their husbands that is shaped by anticipating defeat or
their own destruction. This leads, as I have shown, to the most serious forms of
neurosis and psychosis manifested in an eloquent protest against a life which is
seen as faulty, humiliating, and degrading. More on that later.
In general, when more closely examined, the presumption that life is a
bitter, yes, a killing struggle can strongly influence the caregiver and also guide
and distort the child's psyche. Lack of trust, timidity and fear result of necessity
when the child approaches life from such a perspective. At this point I can only
briefly state that such a child often finds satisfaction when his view of life has
been confirmed by certain events that strengthen his resolve to be aggressive. It
is also not uncommon that such a child will come in contact with others in his
own family who grew up with a similar aggressive attitude. But this particular
child will greatly overestimate the importance in his own life of his immediate
surroundings and is rarely able to correct on his own an attitude that he regards
in others as hostile. He is then more apt to draw the same wrong conclusions as
most of the others. This presumably is the result of having grown up with the
superstition that under all conditions our social life must give evidence of our
superiority. This problem can be illustrated with a three-day experience of an
eight year old girl that shows again how one can be misled by judging "talent."
A mother, after a short and joyless marriage in which she experienced much
suffering, separated from her husband and, to obtain work and live
independently, gave up her few months old child into the care of a farmer
family. After considerable effort, and after having attained her goal, this brave
woman decided to take back her child to raise as a good and useful person. Her

own misfortune, fears and uncertainties prompted her to be very strict with her
daughter, expecting her thereby to have a more successful life than she did. An
initial short period of joyful reunion was followed by spankings and the first
tears. Not long thereafter the child's teacher declared that the child was totally
inept and that nothing could be done with her. This was followed by more
threats and spankings. Most of the time the child sat quietly and tearfully in a
corner of the house; the mother, who had never before brought up a child,
became discouraged and helpless. I met both of them dissolved in tears. Their
common suffering and the sympathetic demeanor of the young girl, as well as
the understanding and well-meaning attitude of the mother, made me believe that
both had done something wrong. After briefly giving this matter some thought I
concluded that the little girl must have expected miracles upon her return to her
mother. My questions, therefore, concerned her treatment by the farmers and I
learned that while she was not badly treated, there also was no lack of spankings
and strict disciplining. The little one also told me that she expected love and
patience from her mother. Thus, while the child dreamed of love from her
mother, which she did not expect from strangers, she also exaggerated the lack
of affection by people not close to her. The mother, trying to harden her child for
a struggle with life, distorted by her own experience, came up with a plan that
was destined to destroy her child's highest hopes. Since the school and teacher
were unable to be very sympathetic to the child, she could only turn to her home.
I discussed with the mother what I thought would explain the behavior of the
child and succeeded in gaining her trust. I reasoned with her to give up the
specter of a heinous motherly authority and urged her to discuss with her child
the mistake made and the failed principles by which she tried to raise her. It
helped. After three days the mother told me that she and her daughter had
become good friends, which was joyfully confirmed by the daughter. The
miracle continued in school where the little girl became the best and most
competent pupil in her class.
No matter how much one struggles with problems of upbringing any effort
at making general rules would be to no avail. Every case calls for different
approaches and considerations. The caregiver and psychotherapist have to
respond to only one, clear, general requirement: to practice and develop their
artistic sensitivities for another person's mental state, to recognize that person's
attitude toward his environment, to ascertain that person's goals, and, in difficult
cases, to move forward carefully and in accordance with Individual Psychology's
tried and proven experience. This approach will also eliminate the superstition of
innate, perverse, criminal and sexual "drives" and, instead, lead to an
understanding that these pathological attitudes are the product of a failed

upbringing. In the same way the defiant attitude of such children will be
explained. Eventually, these children's struggle with the outside world and their
mistaken belief in the impossibility of overcoming external barriers will be
traced to their own feelings of inferiority. The pressure of parental authority
often ends with a child being subjugated and forced into unquestioning
obedience. However, as if to revenge himself, as that person matures he begins
to display signs of a quiet but ardent struggle directed against society. This
becomes a particular problem when the individual begins to choose a profession,
a selection that should not be influenced one-sidedly. I can tell of cases where
every step taken by the individual led to a bad end, until it was decided to allow
that person to make decisions freely on his own. Usually these failures appeared
as if fated, when in fact they came about because of a morbid ambition, a lack of
confidence in one's own powers. This caused constant fear of making decisions,
timid behavior, and a pathological tendency to make excuses and engage in
machinations of all kinds resulting in time and favorable circumstances being
lost.
From these examples we can see that in the final analysis both the caregiver
and the child were guided in their actions by a vision suited to expectations for
the child, in particular his future social life. In making this statement we are
affirming that the social life of his time constantly provides direction and
guidance to the psychological development of the child. At the same time we
should add that we can barely fathom the full extent of this influence, and that
there is an inexhaustible amount of material that must still be studied.
From one particular aspect, however, the social influence in child rearing
leaves little doubt. Where innate deficiencies, prospects for illnesses, and a high
rate of infant and early childhood deaths affect large segments of the population
living in squalor the social influence on child rearing has long been known. Also
there is no lack of evidence of this where children are infected with syphilis, and
where an unenlightened part of the population drowns its sorrows in alcohol.
Less obvious, but still understandable, is the social influence that is apparent
where nations and classes live under political or social pressure. Children in such
circumstances discover the subterfuge employed by the weak, their failings and
virtues. They will often acquire a defiant attitude that may at times bring them
relief, but which they retain mostly because it is called for by their combative
attitude, and because even social inferiority can become a good pretext if they
lack faith in their own powers.
Birth control to limit the number of children, which has advantages and
disadvantages for society and the family, should also come under consideration
since it is also controlled by social influences. All these deliberations show that

the small world of the family and the thriving of the child always are connected
with the life and striving of society. Therefore, every question raised with regard
to psychological growth shows how it must be seen with reference to a social
goal.
The result of our investigation resolves into the following picture: The child
and caregiver embrace either consciously or unconsciously almost unalterable
dominant beliefs consistent with a behavior relative to a social structure. This
structure, which forces itself imperceptibly on both, is only partially valid when
judged against reality; it is far more often made up of a faulty understanding and
of tendentious opinions. The prerequisites for a social and future life differ with
each individual, and for the child and the caregiver pose a never-ceasing
question such as: "How will you behave when confronted by certain problems?"
The answer lies in their behavior, in the kind of life they lead. Whatever we then
find--the pursuit of a straight-line course, character traits, emotions, "drives,"
and also tricks, psychological subterfuges, temperament, indecision, doubt, an
optimistic or pessimistic nature, elan vital, or a tendency to retreat -- stems from
a compulsion for a unity of the personality, an attempt at and preparation for the
goal of gaining standing and superiority. Therefore, in childhood as well as in
raising a child there lies the danger of having a wrong perspective on life, which
is difficult to ascertain and to change. Family atmosphere and childhood, which
must first be adjusted to accept the realities of life, are poorly suited for fostering
a social sense, which is mostly developed in school. The narrow horizon and the
usual family problems more often produce rigid guidelines to deal with
imaginary struggles and dangers impairing chances for preparedness for the
future. Thus the family and childhood years often lead to an almost immutable
mistrust, fear, and despair, and permeate the growing child with an insatiable
greed for triumphs of all kinds.
As was said, it would be presumptuous to establish general rules in light of
the variety of situations and the magnitude of ambiguous relationships. Luckily
many children succeed in expunging or moderating wrong presumptions and
prejudices when they enter school or start life on their own. As for the
remainder, revising their faulty life plan is possible by an Individual
Psychological examination. Such would be most effective early in such
children's lives and before acquired harm has not yet become a fait accomplis,
which would complicate rectifying wrong approaches to life. I should like to
point out the most important facts uncovered by our school of psychology: The
feeling of inferiority will always appear as layered over by psychological
subterfuges until the sham and whatever supports it, and certainly also any
psychological illnesses, have been discovered.

My discourse would be quite incomplete if it could not be supported in the
context of what is probably our most important social problem, the status of
women. Our life, when seen from the standpoint of work and earnings, and when
given expression in terms of numbers, finds the man demanding and being given
higher value than the woman. This economic relationship is expressed in the
minds of most to infer that the woman came into this world to serve the man.
Both men and women maintain such an unnatural presumption, an artificial
division of the natural relationship between the genders, a preconception that is
often ascribed to women when they occasionally fail to meet expectations. Such
beliefs cannot be found in words or ascribed to conscious thoughts, but only in
attitude or behavior. The low selfesteem held by women is then cause for them
to avoid tests and decisions in life because they have lost faith in themselves.
Their efforts often fade too early or they betray their lack of confidence in
effusiveness. A tendency to act independently often is extinguished in childhood
and an exaggerated need for support, which seems seldom satisfied, attaches to
their performance the aura of inferiority. The weapons of the weak, detours to
gain exceedingly high goals, and submissiveness, seem at first exaggerated but
soon turn into an obsession to dominate. The natural purpose of the body and its
organs are perverted, all emotions are changed and poisoned by the sought-after
and at the same time disdained goal, and through coercion in marriage. Natural
female tendencies have fallen by the wayside through debasement and can be
restored only conditionally. Whatever learned writers believe to have discovered
as "innate female" traits, in the worst sense of that term, or as female types, is
nothing other than what we have just described as a product of necessity that is
destined because a young girl accepts the male superstition about the
hopelessness of her intellectual striving and, therefore, attempts to speak with a
male voice. However, all attempts at protesting so as to restore her selfesteem, of
which she was robbed in her early childhood, merely detract from the
naturalness of the experience. When a boy has problems in his work, he finds
support first of all in that trouble is a common phenomenon, a recognition that
reassures him and allows him to keep on working. A girl in such a case hears
from all sides, and from her own heart, "because I am a girl!" Soon her efforts
are dissipated. The human psyche, however, cannot find peace with such self-
denigration. The end result is a mostly hidden but easily decipherable peculiar
hostility toward the apparently favored male.
The man, on the other hand, who since childhood has been burdened with
having to prove his superiority over the woman, responds to the secretly hostile
female with increasing mistrust and possible tyranny. In light of the self-evident
equality of "everything with human features," it is conceivable that an eternal

struggle grows out of the unnatural, but sheerly unavoidable attitude of both
genders. A fallout from this is an inevitable arming, securing, and shadowboxing
to serve superfluous prestige, keeping both sexes apart. Fearing defeat, they
confront each other with exaggerated caution, mounting fear, and an antagonistic
defiance.
It would be foolish to offer in response to this discourse, which tries to
discern the most deepseated sickness of our social organism by showing that a
faulty childhood perspective leads to a tragic fate, the sham of a refinement of
our feelings as an outcome of the struggle between the sexes. Whoever wishes to
pursue this examination further should be aware that all the evidence presented
to demonstrate superiority in the relationship between man and woman is always
specious and does little to further "being superior." Furthermore, it should be
added that those using such deception prefer to employ proscribed subterfuges,
guile, and false illusions.
Schools have a right to ask a psychiatrist to provide guidelines that will
make it possible to recognize, and at least not to aggravate, conditions of those
who have strayed psychologically. It is always worthwhile to reemphasize that a
request simply to ease up on the curriculum does not by itself ensure proper
guidance to the psychologically unbalanced or neurotic student. A consciously
practiced and well-developed respectful relationship between teacher and student
probably is more productive than any form of administrative relief. On the other
hand, a tense and domineering teacher, whose feelings often seep unintentionally
into class instruction, will always arouse nervous resistance by the
psychologically unbalanced child. I have often experienced with my younger
neurotic patients that they assume a combative attitude with me as if I were a
particular teacher. They have seen that teacher symbolically as hostile and
always expect to be forced to endure the same kind of pressure that they felt
coming from him, even outside of school. How far back such a combative
feeling can develop is seen in that frequently the teacher--despite all indications
to the contrary--in the mind of the pupil is seen as intending to exert about the
same pressures as the father, the mother, or an older brother. The student's
natural striving, as well as his prospects, are impeded by preconceptions
stemming from his early childhood upbringing. In such cases it is most
important that as soon as this acquired perspective reveals itself, it be exposed,
made suspect, and destroyed.
How deep an impression teachers make can often be inferred from dreams
about problem teachers and tests that adults often have when looking for proven
ways to deal with a difficult situation, as if fearing a familiar adversary. When
awake, they are uneasy and often adopt an inappropriate attitude giving the

impression as if sitting at their school desk.
A characterization of the neurotic student would fill volumes.3 It is essential
to recognize a student’s often veiled biases even in his later years toward society,
his comrades, teachers, work, and the opposite sex. Measuring against an
average standard, for example, a cooperative student may do this. Every student
who deviates significantly from him would become suspect. The psychological
profile of a child is also formed in school with regard to the extent to which he
desires social accommodation and whether his goal conforms to the social
mores.
Noticeable faults and deficiencies in socially poorly adjusted children
should be seen, and at first only in terms of an assumption, as signs of lacking
firm values. These signs often are caused by a faulty psychological development
and a skewed view of the world. Without delving further on this point,4 it should
merely be emphasized that the fate of such children is determined by the extent
to which these faults have meaning for them. It is also possible that physically
well developed children can have the same misplaced attitude, having been
deluded into trusting too much in the magic of their personality. It is precisely
those students who fall apart completely when experiencing failure and who then
become totally inactive and lazy. However, they betray their concealed
sensitivity by sudden outbursts and in some cases with attempts at suicide.
The same problems should be expected where there is a too strict or
excessively pampered upbringing. In those cases, as strong as may be the
suspicion that the student's attitude toward his environment was detrimentally
influenced, one should still count on the possibility that the student will
successfully compensate for its effect.
The indicator of the greatest significance--which in light of this deliberation
weighs most heavily--can only be the student's attitude toward the normal social
expectations of the school and of those in his environment. This attitude, which
is reflected in the way the student looks, walks, holds his head and by the
posture of his body, as well as by his attentiveness, his diligence, and his
temperament, provides some measure for assessing major or minor problems
during his upbringing. Deviations from the norm can be seen more clearly
among students in the higher grades as the time toward graduation draws near.
However, the most prominent disorders should not be expected in the higher
grades; the totally wayward child was already eliminated from school in the
earlier years. Nevertheless, at the end of the school year, or before final
examinations, indications of cowardice are seen in the most manifold forms of
nervousness.

3 Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, Wiesbaden, 1912, Bergmann, and
"Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie," Munich, Reinhardt. 
4Adler, Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen, Vienna, 1907.
Even among these upper grade students, poor attitudes stem from
perspectives derived from their families and from the youngsters’ preconceived
attitude toward life. Occasional problems resulting from an obsolescent
curriculum are given too much importance by such students as reasons for their
own inadequacy. Such indicators must never be regarded as "causes" of crises;
what should rather be taken into consideration is the degree to which they affect
the student. In all such cases, a more careful examination will show that not one
cause but anticipated and feared consequences by psychologically unstable
children can be expected to bring about a crucial turn in events. It might be
possible to forecast when increased defiance, greater neglect, and a tendency to
give up will become noticeable in a group of students. Frequently, there are no
actual but only perceived problems. If the student then loses faith in himself, he
will not see himself as responsible, a situation that must be laid at the feet of our
entire system of rearing and educating. Instead of assuming responsibility, the
student will opt to find excuses. In fact, he will create them in such
inconspicuous ways and keep them so far from self-criticism that he cannot be
blamed. Whatever happened cannot be blamed on him, but will seem an
unavoidable act of fate. In times when he is beset by such difficulties, the
psychological portrait of the student will appear more sharply than at other
times. It will seem like a caricature. Some will point to innate weaknesses,
defects, and inadequacies without allowing their own responsibility to come into
question. Everything that comes under consideration in such circumstances
points to fate, heredity, a faulty upbringing, and to the teacher, as if the
individual were obligated to become incompetent. A halt in progress often is
regarded more readily as a mystery, or an illness is given as the cause. There is
another type of person who, after some struggle, will give up the fight and
relocate to another place.
The picture that I shall present in conclusion resembles that of a deserter or
of someone struck by homesickness. The student's movements slow down and
his progress becomes deficient, or he becomes noticeably hasty without making
any progress. Some are always late, daydream in school, try to duck any issue,
and blush and become frightened when called on by the teacher. Others become
totally indolent or frequently skip school. It then becomes apparent that they
drift, often are found in inappropriate company, or constantly sit at home and
occupy themselves with things that can hardly be considered schoolwork. This

type of person differs only in nuances from the type who falls in love just before
final examinations, or who pursues music, philosophy, or literature for
distraction. Not all such students should raise alarms. However, of their own
powers they will not rid themselves of their fear of life.
The most serious cases among those who show signs of a faulty upbringing
beyond puberty, and who cannot be helped to make progress, will require the
intervention of a physician. Otherwise they will experience the most serious
forms of regressive development, i.e. mental incompetence (dementia praecox),
or suicide. Greater familiarity with individual cases will show that these are
children who early in their childhood had lost faith in themselves, and who had
embarked on life with fear and trepidation. They will fail time and again when
encountering the problems and expectations of society. They fear tests, their
jobs, sex, responsibility, and engaging in social situations. Resorting to a defiant
nervous shrug of the shoulder, they reject all social demands.
Chapter III
Individual Psychology: Its Presumptions and Results1 2
[1914]
A survey of the views and theories of most psychologists reveals a peculiar
limitation regarding their research and the methods by which they acquire data.
It appears as if experience and an understanding of human nature are
intentionally shut out, and that artistic and creative perceptions, as well as
conjecture and intuition, are consciously regarded as invalid. While experimental
psychologists gather or devise phenomenon in order to categorize reactions, that
is they study the physiology of the inner life, others catalogue all forms of
expressions and manifestations into traditional or only slightly altered systems.
In following this course, they might well find dependencies and relationships
among distinct forms of expressions. However, they had already taken those into
account in their schematic representation of the inner life.
Alternatively, investigators attempt to establish from barely measurable,
singular, physiological manifestations certain psychological and mental states by
equating both. That such an approach eliminates the application of subjective
thought and empathy with the patient, which in fact firmly establishes the
connection, is considered advantageous from their view of psychology.
This method and the direction it follows as a preliminary to an exploration
into human nature is reminiscent of a now outmoded and antiquated natural
science with its rigid systems that today has universally been replaced by a view
that, through biology, but also philosophy and psychology, seeks to understand
life and its variations as a unity. This also applies to a direction of psychology
that I have named "Comparative Individual Psychology." Based on the

presumption of the unity of the individual, it attempts to capture the profile of
one variant of the integrated personality from individual styles of life and forms
of expression. Particular traits are then compared, consolidated along common
characteristics, and individually integrated to produce a complete profile.3
It should be noted that this approach to the human psyche is certainly not
unusual nor is it particularly bold. Among various approaches employed in the
study of child psychology, this approach ranks above all others. In particular it
can be seen in the works of painters, sculptors, musicians, and especially poets,
who portray every detail of their characters' traits in ways understandable to an
observer. Such a person then can perceive the fundamentals of the characters'
personalities, fathom their style of life, and anticipate what the artist with a view
toward the finale had earlier hidden in them. With regard to any particular event,
life in a social context, i.e., without any scientific preconceptions, has always
been under the influence of the question: "where does it lead." It must, therefore,
be said that, notwithstanding contrary scientific positions, no one has ever
formed an opinion about any occurrence without searching for a direction that
seems to link all of an individual's psychological expressions to his fictitious
goal.
1 First published in Scientia, Vol.16, 1914, pp 74-87. Reprinted in Praxis
und Theorie in 
1920. Translated into English as Chapter I in The Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New transaltion by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 William Stern arrived at similar results along different paths.
When I rush home, the actions and gestures I display should be those that
an observer would expect from someone returning home.4 This is true however I
may act, or whatever influences I might be under. Indeed, my reactions might be
different from what is expected. However, what has been psychologically
perceived, and what interests us psychologically and practically, is only the
course a person pursues.
Furthermore, if I know a person's goal, I can then anticipate more or less
what happens next. I also shall then be able to sort out every subsequent
movement, recognize its context, and constantly correct or adjust my rough
psychological understanding of interrelationships. If I only know causes, which
means only reflexes and reaction times, characteristics, and similar
manifestations, I will not be able to know anything of the inner life of that
person.
Added to this, the person being examined has no idea what to make of

himself, as long as he is not pointed toward a goal. As long as we are unaware of
a goal-oriented life line for this individual, the whole system of reflexes that we
recognized, including all the causal demands made on him, would not allow us
with any certainty to determine the consequences of his next movements: These
could easily be reconciled with every possible psychological consequence. This
failing can best be understood in connection with association tests. I would never
expect a man who suffers from a serious disappointment to associate "tree" with
"rope." However, as soon as I know that his goal is suicide, I would easily
recognize where his thought process is leading; in fact, I would be so certain of
my conclusion that I would remove knives, poisons, and all weapons from
anywhere near him. It is only from the consequences that a person chooses that
his individuality, his apperception scheme, is revealed.
If we examine this concept more closely, we shall recognize the laws
governing the unfolding of all psychological occurrences: It is not possible for us
to think, feel, desire, or act without envisioning a goal. All the causalities are not
sufficient for a living organism to overcome a chaotic future and obviate the
haphazardness to which we would become victim. All actions would be confined
to an indiscriminate groping. The productive power of the inner life would
remain unattainable: Unintegrated, lacking physiognomy and personality, we
would rank with the amoeba. Only what is lifeless obeys a recognizable
causality. Life, however, is doing.
4 The expert will recognize that only Gestalt Psychology applies the same views.
There is no doubt that goal-setting for our inner life is a better way to
confront life's demands. This applies equally to singular phenomenon taken out
of context, as we can easily prove. With goal-setting as a theory, one need only
observe a toddler or a new mother just after giving birth attempting to walk.
Clearly, if one were to try to understand these events without a theory they
would be incomprehensible. Even before the first step is taken, the law of
movement has been established and is reflected in every step.
In the same way every psychological activity shows that its direction is
governed by a predetermined goal. However, soon after a child's psychological
development starts, all these tentative, individually recognizable goals come
under the dominance of the fictitious goal, a finale that is regarded as firmly
established. In other words, the inner life of a person is made to fit into a fifth act
like the character drawn by a good playwright.
This insight into any personality that can be derived from Individual
Psychology leads us to an important concept: If we are to understand the nature
of an individual, then every psychological manifestation should be perceived and
understood as only preparatory for a particular goal. Everyone develops a final

goal, either consciously or unconsciously, but ignorant of its meaning.
The extent to which this viewpoint advances our psychological insight will
become apparent as soon we understand the multiple meanings of the
psychological processes that have been torn out of context. For example, take
the case of a man with "a poor memory." Let us assume that he is aware of his
condition and that tests show that he has difficulty remembering meaningless
words. According to what has thus far been psychological usage, which today
might be called abusive, the man would be diagnosed as suffering from an
innate, or pathological memory deficiency. Incidentally, the usual result of such
an examination had already been presented as a premise only using different
words. In this case, for example, when a person has a poor memory, or can
remember only a few words, he then has a limited capacity for remembering.
The procedure followed by Individual Psychology is completely different.
As soon as organic causes can be eliminated the question that has then to be
posed is: What is the purpose of the weak memory? What is its objective? We
can ascertain this goal only from an intimate knowledge of the individual as a
whole so that our understanding of this aspect can only be derived from an
understanding of the whole. We would then find what applies to a large number
of cases. This person is intent on proving to himself and to others that for
underlying motives, which will be unnamed and of which he will remain
unaware, but which are supported particularly well by a poor memory, that he
must refrain from taking any action or from having to make any decisions
(affecting his job, studies, tests, or marriage). In that case, the poor memory
would be unmasked as tendentious and we would regard it as a weapon against
failure. We would then expect at every test that person uses the excuse of having
a poor memory, which is a part of that person's secret life plan. This weakness,
therefore, has a function that becomes apparent only from an examination of the
entire framework of his particular personality. There still remains the question
how such a deficiency or hindrance is devised. One person might "arrange" a
problem by intentionally stressing general psychological weaknesses and then
claiming them as personal afflictions. Others succeed by empathizing with an
abnormal condition, or by preoccupying themselves with dangerous and
pessimistic expectations. The consequent psychological tension would then
destroy their faith in themselves to the point where they could no longer count
on being able to exert even half their strength, attention, or willpower. I have
named this deficiency the "inferiority complex."
We make the same observation in cases involving emotions. For example, a
woman suffered from anxiety attacks that occurred repeatedly. Until something
more significant could be established as a cause, it was enough to assume that

this was a case of a hereditary degeneration, a vasomotor disease, or a vagus
nerve affliction. It was also possible to believe that the cause could be
determined more specifically if that person's history included some horrible
experience or trauma which could then be blamed for her condition. When we
examined this person more closely and followed her guide line, we discovered
an excessive striving for power to which anxiety allied itself to become a
weapon for aggression. This weapon takes effect whenever another person fails
to respond as requested, such as when the patient's husband wants to leave the
house without asking for permission.
Our science requires a strictly individualized procedure and, therefore, is
not suitable for generalizations. As a general rule, I should like to propose the
following: When I have recognized the goal of a psychological action or that of
a life plan, then I must expect every facet of that action to be in accord with that
goal and that life plan.
This formulation, with some restrictions, must be broadly upheld. It retains
its validity even when inverted: The correctly understood aspects of a particular
psychological action must in their context reflect a unified life plan and a final
goal. With this statement we maintain that regardless of tendencies,
environment, and experiences, all psychological forces are under the banner of a
fixed idea, and all expressions, i.e. feelings, thoughts, desires, actions, dreams
and their psychopathological phenomena are permeated by one unified life plan.
Out of this self-determined goal-striving grows the unique personality and thus a
teleology occurs in the individual's psyche that should be seen as a subterfuge
and as a self-fabrication, as the final compensation of an ubiquitous human
inferiority feeling. The following point may justify and also ameliorate these
heretical sentences: More important than tendencies, objective experiences, and
environment are their subjective evaluation. Furthermore, such an evaluation
exists within a certain, admittedly capricious, relationship to reality. This basic
factor is difficult to detect in popular psychology because the "ideological super
structure on top of the economic base" (Marx and Engels) as well as the given
reality compel an offsetting of personal differences. From an evaluation of an
individual, which often, however, establishes a permanent disposition in the
sense of an inferiority feeling, a fictitious goal develops in our mind conceived
as an attempt to attain a virtual final compensation and a life plan.5
I have spoken much about “understanding” human beings, almost as much
as some theorists who use the “psychology of understanding” or those who
believe in the personality psychology. However, they always stop short when
asked what it is that they really had understood. The danger we face in a brief
discussion of this aspect of our study of the results of Individual Psychology is

great enough, since dynamic movements have to be captured with static words
and images and disparities must be overlooked in order to arrive at a unified
formula. This creates mistakes that are strictly forbidden in practice, i.e.,
applying to the individual psyche a sterile template as the Freudians attempt to
do.
With this as a prerequisite, I shall describe in the following the most
important results of our research into the inner life. It should be underscored that
the dynamics of the inner life that I shall discuss here apply equally to the
healthy as well as to the ill. Whatever distinguishes the person plagued by
anxiety from those who are well lies in the stronger "safeguarding tendencies" of
the former in whose life plan such tendencies are incorporated. However,
regarding "goal setting" and the life plan adapted to it, there are no fundamental
differences except for one, admittedly significant, which is that the neurotic's
"concrete" goal always lies on the useless side of life.
Consequently, I am able to speak of a general goal applicable to all human
beings. A thorough study has shown that the manifold and diverse psychological
manifestations can best be understood if we accept as a general premise that
they are directed toward a goal of superiority. Great thinkers have articulated
much on this subject; everyone knows some of it; most, however, is hidden
behind a mysterious darkness lifted only in insanity or in ecstasy. It matters not
whether the person is an artist who strives to be foremost in his field or a tyrant
in his home, whether he holds a dialogue with God or humiliates others, whether
he sees his own suffering as the severest and requires all to pay him homage, or
whether he is pursuing unattainable ideals and ancient deities, or whether he
breaches traditional boundaries or shatters norms6--whatever his direction, he is
led and guided by a longing for superiority, by his godlikeness, and by his belief
that he possesses special magic. In love he also wants to feel his power over his
partner; when choosing his profession the goal he envisions entails exaggerated
expectations and fears; even in suicide he perceives revengefully a victory over
all obstacles. In order to gain control over an object or a person he can steer a
straight course, and is capable of pride, dominance, obstinacy, or cruelty; or by
experience forced to resort to deviousness or to taking circuitous routes he may
gain his victory through obedience, submission, docility, or modesty. Even his
character traits have no independent existence since they also adapt to the
individual life plan by readying their most important traits for conflict.
5 The "fictitious goal" blurred, unstable, and immeasurable, established
with few adequate and certainly not with propitious powers, has no real
existence and is, therefore, causal and not fully comprehensible. However, when

seriously needed, as the teleological artifice of a psyche seeking orientation, it is
concretely fashioned. 
6 Also whether he, childlike and with empty phrases, tries to disparage
Individual Psychology.
This goal of superiority over all, which in specific cases turns out peculiarly
enough, however, is not from this world. Seen by itself, we must categorize it as
a "fiction" or as "imagination." Vaihinger (Die Philosphie des Als-Ob [The
Philosophy of 'As If'] 2nd edition, 1913) rightfully says that while it is nonsense
standing alone, it is of the greatest importance for functioning. This agrees with
our position so much so that we say: This goal of superiority which so utterly
mocks reality has thus far become the primary prerequisite for our lives. It has
taught us to differentiate; it provides us with poise and security; forms and
guides our deeds and actions, and allows us mentally to anticipate and to perfect
ourselves. Adversely, it so easily creates hostile and combative tendencies, robs
us of uninhibited feelings, and constantly attempts to estrange us from a reality
that it tries to subvert. Whoever seriously adopts and personally accepts this goal
of godlikeness, taking it literally, will soon be forced to face real life and as a
compromise flee from it to another life, which, under the best of circumstances
will be in the arts, but in most cases will lead to exaggerated spirituality, to
neurosis, or crime.7
I cannot go into details here but a clear indication of these bigger-than-life
goals can probably be found in every human being. In some it is reflected in
their attitude, others betray it in their demands or expectations. Sometimes its
traces can be found in obscure memories, fantasies, or dreams. If seriously
sought, it cannot be discovered merely for the asking. However, an attitude
expressed either physically or mentally speaks loudly of its origin in a striving
for power; within it carries the ideal of some form of perfection and infallibility.
In nearneurotic cases there will always be a strong urge to measure oneself
against others, including against those deceased as well as heroes of the past.
It is easy to verify this finding. If everyone possesses an ideal of superiority
such as we find to a greater degree in neurotics, then there must also be
manifestations that point toward suppressing, humiliating, or demeaning another.
Character traits such as intolerance, dogmatism, envy, cantankerousness, taking
pleasure in others' misfortunes, conceit, boastfulness, mistrust, avarice, in short
all attitudes predicated on confrontations are compelled to erupt with far greater
force than required by self-preservation, or necessitated by social feeling.
Next to these characteristics, sometimes existing simultaneously or
interchangeably, and depending upon the individual's zeal and selfconfidence

with which the final goal is sought, there are traits of vanity, competitiveness,
courage, deliverance, generosity, and domination. A psychological examination
requires much objectivity so that a moral judgment does not interfere with the
outcome. One must also take into consideration that these different character
traits will affect our approval or disapproval. Finally, and this applies in
particular to the neurotic, these hostile traits are so hidden that the individual
himself will be justifiably surprised and unwilling to accept their existence when
he is made aware of them. For example, where there are two children, the older
one creates a rather unpleasant situation in the family because he seeks through
defiance and obstinacy to gain dominance. The younger one chooses a wiser
course, turns into a model of obedience, and soon becomes the idol of the family
whose every wish is obeyed. Spurred on by ambition that is inevitably followed
by disillusionment, the younger one’s obedience stops. Signs of illness become
apparent which are then exploited to counter every wish of the parents, who are
under the impression that their child was making a determined effort at
compliance. It is an obedience immediately nullified by compulsive thinking.
Obviously, the younger child attained the same objective as his older brother by
using a circuitous route.
7 Also see "Das Problem der Distanz" (The Problem of Distance) in this volume.
The whole weight of personal striving for power and superiority takes
substance and form in early childhood. However, the mind can absorb only as
much of it as the immortal, genuine, physiologically grounded social feeling
allows. Out of the social feeling develops tenderness, neighborliness, friendship,
and love. The striving for power, seeking to force itself on the social feeling,
unfolds disguised, secretly and with stealth.
At this point I must confirm an old principle followed by all students of
human nature. Any conspicuous attitude can be traced to its start in childhood.
The attitude of an individual and the groundwork for its future development is
formed in the nursery. Fundamental changes can result only from an extensive
self-knowledge or, in neurotic cases, when the patient after Individual
Psychological treatment by a physician recognizes the mistakes made in his style
of life during his lifetime.
In the following case I shall delve more deeply into neurotic goal-setting as
it is seen in innumerable situations. An exceedingly talented man who had won
the love of a girl with his amiability and refined behavior is considering
marriage. At the same time he presented her with his ideal of education that
required considerable sacrifices on her part. For a time she endured the demands
made on her until she decided to avoid further ordeals by breaking off her
relationship with him. This led to his nervous breakdown. An Individual

Psychological examination established that the patient's goal of dominating his
bride long ago had pressed inevitably toward the breakup of the relationship. He
himself, unawares, forced the breakup of the engagement because he believed
himself unable to meet what he perceived would be a struggle-filled marriage.
This self-doubt originated in his earliest childhood when as an only son of an
early widowed mother he grew up almost completely cut off from the outside
world. From that time, during which he experienced constant domestic crises, he
gained an indelible impression, which he never admitted to himself, that he
lacked masculinity and would never be equal to a woman. Such a psychological
attitude is comparable to a permanent feeling of inferiority, a condition that,
quite understandably, can determine a person's fate and force him to look for
recognition elsewhere rather than to seek fulfillment on the useful side of life.
Clearly, the patient had attained his goal of bachelorhood for which he had
secretly prepared. It is also clear that he had succumbed to fears of a restless
relationship with a partner in a quarrelsome marriage. As it turned out, his
attitude toward his fiancée was not unlike that toward his mother, whom he also
sought to subdue. Such a driven relationship based on a yearning for conquest
has been misunderstood by Freudians as a permanent incestuous infatuation with
the mother. In fact, the patient is driven by his bolstered childhood inferiority
feelings, stemming from his relationship with his mother, to establish powerful
safeguards against the risk of ever having to struggle with a woman. Whatever
else we may understand as love, in this case it is not an unqualified social feeling
but only the appearance of it, a means to an end. That goal is finally to force a
triumph over some suitable woman. This explains the constant tests and
demands, and also allows us to predict with confidence that this engagement will
dissolve. The solution at which this patient arrived did not come accidentally but
was artfully staged with well-established means and based on experience the
man had gained from practicing on his mother. A defeat in marriage was made
impossible by never allowing it to happen.
This case clearly shows the predominance of " personal feelings" over an
"objective" or unbiased view. This is explained with the concept of the quaking
ambition. There are two forms of ambition, the second of which replaces the first
as soon as discouragement resulting from a defeat sets in. The first form drives
the person forward; the second holds him back: "When you cross the Halys
River you will destroy a great empire." Primarily neurotics experience the
second form. Then the first form appears only as traces, or it exists conditionally,
or only seems to be present. Persons with the second form of ambition may say:
"I used to be ambitious." However, though still ambitious, by an arrangement of
their suffering, their depression, and their asocial behavior, they barred any

forward movement. In answer to the question: "Where were you when the world
was parceled out?" they respond with "I was ill." And thus, instead of interacting
with the world outside they are occupied only with themselves. Later, Jung, and
then Freud, would mistakenly perceive this most important neurotic process as
innate types, the first calling it an "introversion," the other "narcissism."
While little remains puzzling in this particular patient's behavior, since we
clearly recognize the aggression that passes for love, there is still the less
comprehensible nervous breakdown suffered by the patient which requires a few
words of explanation. It leads us directly to the domain of the neuropsychologist.
Just as in his infancy, the patient as an adult encountered failure with women. In
all similar cases the neurotic is tempted to bolster his security measures and gain
greater distance from danger 8. Our patient needs the breakdown to feed on a bad
memory, to raise the issue of guilt and cast the blame on the woman so that at
some later time he can proceed with even greater caution, or to finally take leave
of love and marriage! Today, this man is 30 years old. Let us assume that he will
carry his pain for the next ten to twenty years and for the same length of time
will mourn the loss of his ideal. He has thereby protected himself, possibly
forever, from any romantic relationship and, in his mind, from any new defeat.
8 See Problem der Distanz [in this book, Page ...]
Based on his experience he forges the nervous breakdown with the old
means of his childhood, that he has since reinforced, when he had refused to eat,
sleep, or work, playing at dying. His fortunes ebb and his beloved is to blame
while he ranges far above her, superior in both culture and character, and
witness: He has attained what he yearned for, he is the superior, the better; his
partner "is bad like all women." They cannot measure up to him as a man. Thus
he fulfilled the obligation he had felt as a boy. He has shown that he is superior
to females without having to subject his powers to a test.
We can understand that for him his neurotic reaction can never be too
strong. He must spend the rest of his life in reproach of women 9. 
If he were conscious of his secret plans, then his behavior would be hateful and
ill intentioned and could, therefore, never fulfill his purpose of elevating him
above women. He would then see himself as we do, unbalanced, a person who
schemes to attain a carefully planned goal. Whatever happens no longer would
be a matter of "fate," not to mention that it would be a plus for him, i.e.
advantageous. However, his goal, his lifeplan, his life-lie, demands a plus!
Consequently, the "result" is that this lifeplan remains in the unconscious so that
the patient can be led to believe in an irresponsible fate and not in a well
prepared, well considered, and responsible life. 

At this point I shall avoid an extensive description of this "distancing" of the
neurotic from making a decision, which in this case is marriage. I shall also
postpone describing the "neurotic arrangement." It should only be pointed out
that this distancing is clearly expressed in the patient's "hesitating attitude," in
his principles, his worldview, and in the lie he gives to life. These characteristics
are developed most effectively by neurosis and psychosis. There is a strong
similarity here to perversion and every type of impotence stemming from the
same source. The individual finds a conclusion and reconciliation with life in
constructing one or more "if" sentences: "If something had been otherwise...!"
The significance of questions relating to child-rearing to which our school of
psychology ascribes the greatest importance (see Heilen und Bilden, Third
edition, 192810) becomes very apparent in this context. 
The methodology of the present work is not unlike that applied to a cure in that it
goes back, first examining the goal of superiority in order to discern the
individual's aggressiveness,11 particularly that of the neurotic, and then
attempting to understand the sources of this superb psychological mechanism.
We have already considered one fundamental aspect of psychological dynamics
that lies in the transient, inescapable, artistic quality of the psychological
mechanism to adapt to and extend into reality by means of artifices, fiction, and
goal setting. I have briefly attempted to explain how the goal of godlikeness
transforms the attitude of the individual toward his environment into one of
hostility and how struggle seeks to bring the individual either along straight-line
aggression, or carefully guides him toward his goal. If the line of aggression is
traced back into childhood the following basic principle resolves: During his
entire period of development the child is possessed by a feeling of inferiority in
his relationship to his parents, siblings, and the world. Because of the
immaturity of his organs, his insecurity and dependency, his need for support
from stronger individuals, and because of being painfully subordinated to others,
he develops a feeling of inadequacy that makes itself apparent in every aspect of
his life. 
This feeling of inferiority creates in the child a constant restlessness, a need to
prove himself, a search for a role, the need to pit himself against others, the urge
to prepare for the future, and to get himself ready both physically and mentally.
The entire potential for the child's development depends upon this feeling of
inadequacy. The future for such a child lies in a world from which he expects
compensation. His hostile attitude also is reflected in his feeling of inferiority;
his sole compensation is derived from whatever lifts him above his present
inadequate state and makes him superior to all others. This brings the child to

setting a goal, a fictitious goal of superiority which will transform his poverty
into wealth, his subordination into dominance, his suffering into happiness and
pleasure, his ignorance into omniscience, and his ineptness into creativity. This
goal is set higher and will be adhered to more tenaciously the longer and more
clearly the child perceives his insecurity, the more he suffers from physical or
mental impediments, and the more intensely he feels being neglected. If this goal
is to be discerned the child must be observed at play, at freely selected activities,
or when he fantasizes about his future occupation. The constant changes in what
the child reveals is only a superficial expression; whatever new goal is set the
child believes himself triumphant. A variation in this goal-forging, often found
among less aggressive children, in girls, and sickly persons, is to abuse their
weaknesses, forcing others to become subordinate to them. They will repeatedly
attempt to do this also later in life until their lifeplan and the lie they give to life
have been fully exposed. 
To the careful observer a particular aspect becomes apparent when the nature of
this compensatory dynamic makes the sexual role appear as secondary while
pushing for super-masculine goals. In our male-oriented culture, girls as well as
boys believe themselves required to exert particular efforts in that regard and
feel a need to resort to various artifices. Undoubtedly, there are a variety of these
stratagems that are helpful and supportive. It now becomes our task to promote
those, while exposing the numerous misleading and harmful guidelines in order
to render them harmless. This task leads far beyond medical skills and is one
from which our society, our children, and our educational systems should expect
the most fruitful results. Our goal is to achieve a strengthened sense of reality
and responsibility, and to seek to replace latent hatred with mutual good will.
This, however, can only be attained through a deliberate unfolding of social
feeling and a conscious renunciation of the striving for power.
If one is looking for examples of power fantasies in children, they can be found
masterfully portrayed by Dostoyevsky in his novel A Raw Youth. I discovered in
one of my patients an example of particularly crass fantasies of power. In this
person's thoughts and dreams was a constantly recurring wish that others should
die so that he would have more living space, and that others should suffer
privations so that more favorable opportunities would come his way. This
attitude is a reminder of the thoughtlessness and heartlessness of many people
who trace all their ills to the presence of too many people on this earth. These
are sentiments that have probably made the World War more palatable for many
people. The confidence with which such fictions are upheld is a carryover from
other realms. In this case it was derived from the fundamental principles
underlying capitalistic enterprises in which one party actually fares better the

worse another party suffers. "I want to become a grave digger" a four-year old
told me. "I want to be the one who buries others."
9 
The 
paranoid 
trait 
is 
recognizable. 
See 
Lebensluege 
und
Verantwortlichkeit in der Neurose und Psychose in this volume [Page...]
10 [New edition, Frankfurt a.M. 1973, Fischer Taschenbuch, vol. 6220]
11 "The struggle for existence, “the struggle of all against all” is only different
perspectives of the same relationship.
Chapter IV
Child Psychology and Neurosis Research1 2
[1914]

Part I
The origin of a neurosis can always be traced back to a person's first and
second year of life. During that time the child's attitude toward its environment
is formed. Whatever appears then as "a bad habit" or "nervousness" will later
develop into neurosis under the influence of a faulty upbringing.
If one were to describe what is common to both children and neurotics in a
relationship to their environment, it would be their lack of independence. Each is
unable to deal with life's problems without demanding that others serve him. The
neurotic demands such services to a far greater extent than the rules of society
normally allow. Whatever support is naturally given to a child by the family is
provided the neurotic by family, physician, and those around him. Whatever a
child requires because of helplessness and feebleness, the neurotic attains by
looking to "illness" as a way of enlisting the right people to respond to his ever
increasing demands, or for them to make sacrifices that will ensure his personal
privileges.
This similarity between children and neurotics in their increased demands
would seem to make comparison easy. More important, however, are the
findings of "comparative Individual Psychology" which show us that in the
uniqueness of human beings we see sharply focused their past, present, and
future, as well as their goals. In fact, we are forced to assume, even if we find
evidence only after extensive study, that we can determine traces of external
influences on an individual from the attitudes expressed and even from his
posture, in short from a person’s modus vivendi.
Given this approach, we say that Individual Psychology is concerned only
with understanding already completed manifestations such as will, character,
emotions, temperament, that is, all psychological characteristics, as these relate
to a formed life plan and as the means for sustaining it. Thus, will is
demonstrated in a patient appearing for treatment upon having established
enough evidence of illness whereby his life plan, in the case of agoraphobia, for
example, will have been significantly boosted by having confined his
battleground to his home. The same patient at some later time may demonstrate
his will by terminating treatment, if a failure of treatment will further that same
life plan. This means that a person who pursues two contrary ends can still desire
the same thing! Or, if you were to distribute those two strands of will between
two people it comes to this: if two people are not doing the same thing, it often
may still end up to be the same (Freschl, Schulhof). It can easily be asserted in

this case that an analysis of the symptoms will not produce understanding. What
interests us is that the unique personality, the person's nature, exists in a
preparatory stage before it appears as the goal. When that goal becomes
apparent, however, the characteristics forming the personality themselves appear
only at a point of intersection. In both of these cases, however, the total sum of
all essential manifestations, such as energy, temperament, love, hate,
understanding, folly, pain and pleasure, recuperation and deterioration, are
present to the extent to which the patient needs them to ensure the success of his
desired outcome! It can easily be shown that conscious and unconscious thought,
feelings, and desires are dictated by this urge to structure one's personality, with
the result that this repressing becomes a means and a template of the individual
being and not by any means its cause.
1 First published as "Zur Kinderpsychologie..." in Wiener klinische
Wochenschrift, Vol. 
27, Pages 511-516, 1914. Republished in Praxis und Theorie, 1920. Translated
into English as chapter VI in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology,
1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
The same connections, as I have shown3, are valid for determining
character and its role in serving the personality. The gradations in
constitutionally derived vitality, how the child evaluates it and how it
experiences the outside world, influence goal-setting and the lifeline. Once these
have been established, character as well as the drives are exactly matched to
them. Of course, divergences or differences in means must not be
unconditionally regarded as fundamentally at odds with a meaningful spiritual
life. As much as a hammer and a pair of pliers, differ both can be used for
nailing. Where there are neurotically disposed children, they will wrestle at
various times for dominance in the family, some from defiance and others to
subjugate. In one case, a five-year old boy had the not uncommon bad habit of
throwing everything he could lay his hands on out of the window. After having
been frequently spanked, he was so afraid that he might throw things out of the
window again that he became ill. With these two symptoms he was able to chain
his parents to him and forced them to occupy themselves with him, even though
they had to care for a younger sibling. He, thereby, made himself their master.
Until the arrival of a younger brother, one of my patients was the most
pampered child in his family. For some time, his rivalry with the younger
brother was in the form of defiance and indolence. In order to gain the attention
of his parents, and to regain the hold he had on them, he developed enuresis and

refused to eat. When he failed to succeed with this strategy, he turned to
becoming exceedingly pleasant and industrious. However, in order to maintain
his place as the favorite child, he strained so hard that he developed a severe
compulsionneurosis. A very pronounced fetishism betrayed his modus operandi:
Fearing women, he deprecated them. The once favorite younger brother more
easily attained the predominance this patient attempted to attain with angry
aggression against everyone with pleasantness. A slight stuttering on his part,
however, also betrayed him as tending to defiance, ambition, and feeling
basically insecure.4
3 A. Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, 4th edition, Munich, 1928 (New
edition: Frankfurt a. M., 1972, Fischer Taschenbuch, Vol. 6174).
We thus encounter the psychological process, as well as neurotic desires,
feelings, and thoughts, and the connection between neurosis and psychosis, and
can recognize it as a long-standing arrangement and as a perceived way to
succeed in life. The beginnings, however, always lead us back to earliest
childhood when, legitimized by a person's constitution and dependent on the
psychological framework in a given environment, the first tentative attempts are
made to attain an ever more apparent goal of superiority.
In order to understand what makes up the arrangement of the life system,
we should observe how a child approaches life. At whatever point we may wish
to establish the creation of the child's consciousness, it probably is at a stage at
which the child has already gained some experience. It is most important,
however, that this gathering of experiences can succeed only if the child already
has a goal in mind. Otherwise all life would merely be a meaningless groping,
every method for evaluating would be futile, and it would be senseless to speak
of categorizing, gaining access, better viewpoints, connectivity, and exploitation.
All evaluating would be worthless in the absence of that fictitious measure, the
firmly set goal. And thus we see that no one endures his experiences without
giving them direction. Which means that a person derives from his experiences
whatever can advance or deter the attainment of his final goal. What is effective
in experiences and particular events is that which points toward a goal-oriented
life plan, which also governs how in our inner ear we hear experiences with
voices that sound either encouraging or threatening. Or, that we can understand
and evaluate experiences correctly only when we can hear those voices.
At whatever point in the life of a child, or during anamnesis,5 we examine
an experience or a recollection, the manifestation itself tells us nothing; it is in
and of itself ambiguous. Every interpretation must be read into it and proven.
This means that what interests us is not the phenomenon itself but what lies, as

one might say, before or after it. Furthermore, we can understand a psychic event
only after we have intuitively recognized a lifeline. A lifeline, however, is
determined by at least two points. One must, therefore, proceed by connecting
two points in an individual's psyche. By this means an impression is formed of a
system that, by drawing on other experiences, then becomes more extensive or
restrictive. The process that occurs is best understood when compared with
portrait painting. A portrait's value is established by what it represents, and not
by rules for painting. Often, however, a patient's attitude can turn quite graphic,
as in the case of one of my patients suffering from hysteria who, when
experiencing an attack, lost consciousness and also suffered from a paralysis of
the arm as well as amaurosis6. It turned out that in order to maintain a secure
hold on her husband, she developed, in addition to several daily attacks, a
marked suspicion of everyone, particularly physicians. To bring her hostility
graphically to her attention, I pointed out to her that she distanced herself from
others by stretching out her hands. When I explained this, her husband, who
attended the treatment, told me that this proved to be true when during her first
attacks his wife suddenly, as if to defend herself, stretched out her hands. The
first attacks occurred when she feared that her husband was unfaithful. As I
learned through anamnesis,7 the patient behaved just as she did in childhood,
when once left alone for a short time she almost became the victim of a sexual
attack. When these two seemingly distant events are connected, you cannot fail
to get an impression that cannot be derived from either event alone: The patient
fears being left alone! It is against this recurring experience that she now directs
with all her might a useful experience gained in childhood, which is that a girl
must always have someone nearby. In the past it was her father who provided a
strong, non-sexist counterweight to her mother, who greatly favored the older
sister.
4 See Appelt, "Fortschritte der Stottererbehandlung" in Heilen under Bilden.
These observations, which have frequently been reported by me and by my
associates, demonstrate the indefensibility of the concept that illnesses can be
explained on the basis of earlier experiences, as the French school attempts to
do, and as Freud, and in particular Jung had proposed, "as if the patient suffered
from reminiscences." Even the subsequently reworked theory, which gives
greater credence to real conflicts and which comes closer to our view, still
suffers in that it fails to consider a patient's lifeline. Experience and so-called
actual conflict are tied together by the effective lifeline, the patient's persistent
and hypnotizing goal, which makes it possible that one experience here and an
event there are elevated to where they become a personal experience and

conflict.
For psychology, and in particular child psychology, the imperative follows
never to draw conclusions or arrive at interpretations based on a single detail, but
always judge from the total context.
If we wish to pursue further the Individual Psychological interpretation of
the case cited above, then what we have learned, that this patient fears being left
alone, is not very helpful. Even this disposition is ambiguous and, therefore, tells
us too little. For that reason we should extend this finding more widely to
discover other connections. The earliest childhood memories of this patient are
filled with thoughts and feelings that relate to rivalry with her sister. Memories
keep recurring about her sister being taken everywhere while the patient was left
alone. We see that even in her childhood memories, which the patient said were
her earliest, the same trend keeps coming back, supporting our presumption with
regard to her lifeline. Would this also explain another symptom of sporadically
occurring "splitting" headaches, and would it reveal that this pain always occurs
when the patient has her periods? According to the patient's recollection, the
headache first appeared shortly after an intense scene with her mother, who
acted unfairly toward her. After her mother had seized her by the hair, the
patient, who just then had her period, filled with anger, ran into the ice-cold river
near her home in hopes of becoming sick or dying. She had often witnessed in
her two older brothers that rages were meant to hurt another and were so intense
that they endangered one's life. Acting like her brothers, the patient clearly broke
a rule that applied directly to her as a girl: She entered ice-cold water during her
period! Her anger went against her own nature as a female! While she did not
comprehend what she was doing by acting and reacting intuitively, she also
made a statement that went something like this: My brothers revolted and are the
masters of the household; my sister enjoys the love and affection of our mother;
I am a girl, and at that the youngest sister, and I am left alone; only illness and
death can stop me from having to suffer humiliation! With such feelings and
with what followed she expresses so clearly the yearning for equality that there
is no need for her to be consciously aware of it. What actually had occurred
expressed everything sufficiently.
6 (Editor’s note) Partial or total loss of sight.
Of course, there are other reasons that this process remained in the
unconscious. There was no need for her to become conscious of the underlying
mechanism. However, there is more! Becoming fully conscious of this process
by necessity would jeopardize the desired result: It would be impossible for this
girl to keep her personality intact were she to become aware of how we see her,
a woman whose life's raison d'etre and life plan rest on a deeply rooted feeling of

the inferiority of woman. In order to arm herself against such exposure she draws
on all her experiences and arrives at a maxim that is applicable here: In order to
maintain her selfesteem, she must not be left alone! When she feared losing her
esteem, her influence, her power over her husband, the already developed attack
and defensive mechanism, the most important aspect of which we know as
neurosis, went into action and proved and established her need and belief that, at
least in appearance, she still retained her old power: She must not be left alone!
We have thus forged ahead to the center of all acting, feeling, and thinking,
and are looking at the patient's psychological portrait. At that point we can
observe a number of additional traits and individual characteristics that develop
clearly from what we have observed. The fear of being left alone must have led
the patient to seize upon the nearest weapon: anxiety. When we probe in that
direction we discover direct confirmation of this conclusion. For example, an
anxiety attack would ensue regularly whenever she had to sit alone in the coach,
while her husband drove from the carriage seat. This complex of symptoms is
the answer to the subordination, the exclusion of one's own will, and of the
failure to gain the desired response. Our patient calmed down only when she sat
in the seat next to the driver. The plasticity of this attitude needs no further
explanation; in fact it is further clarified when we learn that even when seated
there, she experienced anxiety attacks at every twist in the road and when other
vehicles were met. At such times she, not being a skilled driver, would try to
wrest the reins from her husband. She also became fearful when the horses ran
faster. Whenever her husband noticed this, he would tease her by spurring the
horses to greater speed. The fear that was her weapon had deserted her! What
occurred then is remarkable and important for gaining an understanding of
apparent cures. The anxiety attack was not to keep her husband from spurring
on the horses!8
An additional and most significant insight can easily be derived when we
ask a very justified question: Why did this patient, who so ardently strove to be
the equal with the man, fail to learn how to drive the carriage herself? Her entire
past provides us with a very strong response: She does not trust herself to be
equal to the man. She was much more interested in finding a way out by trying
to gain her husband's service, to have him support and protect her, and thereby
be able to raise herself above him.

Part II
More than ever before, psychology and pedagogy must rely on the findings
of neurologists and psychiatrists. Psychotherapy powerfully forces us to study
child psychology. As I have tried to demonstrate repeatedly, what we experience
in life, what we learn from the past, and what we expect from the future must
favor a fictitious life plan formed in childhood. Further, that a slight misreading
and a little autism-and this is probably its purpose!--are enough to regain the old
habits and to bring to the surface, openly or veiled, heightened aggression
against social demands. If one wishes to avoid the consequences of such a life
that has been lived in the imagination, then there is no other course open than to
undertake a revision of this childish system. I believe that I have focused
correctly on the synthesis necessary to do this, which is to view as a whole the
symptoms, character traits, emotions, personality evaluation, and sexual
relations, and to give each its place just as is done for neurosis and psychosis.
These are the means, the contrivances, the magic tricks that serve the tendency
to rise from below to above. In experiencing a patient's destiny, in what the
psychotherapist feels about the psychic portrait of a patient, there is always the
impression of increased tension, a kind of spitefulness that exists between the
patient and his world, and how he hopes to deal with it. And yet, we actually are
speaking of childhood conditions and of the psychology of the child when we
describe how fear becomes a weapon for self-love and how one exercises
selfrestraint only to avoid constraints imposed by society; or when we refer to a
hesitating attitude in the face of making decisions, when restricting oneself to
limited activities; or mention an unwillingness to cooperate, when we allude to
trying to make oneself insignificant in order to escape the demands of life, and
when we suggest having delusions of grandeur.
It would be incorrect to regard these manifestations as always infantile. We
see only that when a person feels weak, whether as a child, a savage, or a
responsible adult, he is forced to apply subterfuges, subterfuges familiar to him
from childhood and those which he has since practiced under circumstances that
did not promise success if acted on directly. Instead, what seemed to succeed
was obedience, submissiveness, various forms of childish defiance such as the
refusal to sleep or eat, being indolent or sloppy, and the many ways that express
weakness. In many respects our culture resembles the nursery: it gives special
privileges to the weak.
8 The physicians treating battle neuroses, the electric shock specialists, the

hypnotists, and the charlatans all fell for the same ostensible cures. Along with
them, the patients and the science itself were duped.
If life, however, is a constant struggle, as the neurotically disposed child
presumes it to be, and as that child shows it to us with his attitude, then it
becomes unavoidable that every defeat and the fear of a threatening decision is
accompanied by a nervous attack, the weapon, the revolt of a human being who
feels himself inferior. This hostile attitude of the neurotic, which has guided him
since childhood, is reflected in his hypersensitivity, in his intolerance of anyone,
including anything the culture imposes upon him, and in his constant striving to
isolate himself from the rest of the world. This also is what constantly spurs him
on to transcend the limits of his powers, just as a child will experiment with fire
until burned, or defy gravity until hurt.
Children who suffered unbearable pressures while growing up, who were
pampered and became effeminate, or whose development was seriously
hampered physically or mentally will later manifest increased hostility, abnormal
competitiveness, scheme and daydream, undergo excessive physical training,
adopt obtrusive, defiant and sadistic ways of expressing themselves, believe in
magic, think of themselves as gods, and escape into perversion out of fear of
their partner. An exaggerated security coefficient is believed by such a person to
smooth the way to greater heights and protect against defeats. Then, as if by
magic, all kinds of obstacles 9 appear between the patient and the fulfillment of
his tasks among which illness as an excuse always plays the decisive role.
Inanities are overblown and become a useless burden, as in compulsive neurosis,
until the time for action has happily been squandered.
It cannot be denied that such tensed compulsion to attain certain success
will at times produce outstanding achievements. However, only where, often
unnoticed, that person's contact with the community is strong. What we
neurologists see of this situation often is a sad ut aliquid fieri videatur, a state in
which natural organ functions have been perverted so as to deter any action. In
his fanaticism, the weakling can distort every function. To avoid complying with
any realistic demands, and also to gain the appearance of martyrdom, thinking
will be replaced by brooding. Sleep at night will be disturbed artificially, so as to
lay the groundwork for fatigue and the inability to work the next day. The
sensory organs, motility, and the digestive system become dysfunctional through
a tendentious imagination and by aiming at a confused goal. The ability to
empathize with painful situations causes pain and engenders horrible
recollections, nausea, and vomiting. The long practiced tendency to carefully
evade one's spouse, often bolstered by prudently selected ideals, arguments, and
lofty demands, totally destroys an already culturally constricted romantic

relationship.
9 See below: “Das Problem der Distanz.”
In many cases the patient's unique individuality assumes such a peculiar or
exclusive attitude toward love and marriage problems that the type of that
person’s illness and its onset seem almost predetermined. How far back into
childhood such a life plan reaches can be seen in cases such as the following:
I. A 34-year-old woman who some years ago was afflicted with
agoraphobia still suffers from a fear of trains. Even when approaching a railroad
station she begins to tremble to an extent that she is forced to turn back. These
and similar manifestations make it seem as if a magic circle is formed to serve as
a barrier. Her earliest childhood recollection is of a scene between her and her
younger sister in which she wants to deny her younger sister her place in the
family. The ambiguity of this incident leaves little doubt. If we were to draw a
line, however, to the fear of trains, her last apparition, and compare that with her
earliest recollection, it then seems as if she also wants to deny the train its place.
This quickly raises the impression that the patient gives way to any situation
where her compulsion for dominance will bear no fruit. Similar cases bring to
the patient's mind her reaction to her older brothers, who forced her into
obedience to them. We can expect from this patient that she will seek to
dominate women while retreating from male authority, whether as carriage or
train drivers, and in the end also from love and marriage.
An additional important detail is derived from another childhood
recollection. For a long time as a girl it was her custom to walk around her estate
with a whip with which she beat male servants. From this we can expect
incidents in her life in which there will be attempts at treating a man as a
subordinate. In almost all her dreams men appear in the shape of animals which
are either overpowered by her or driven to flight. Only once in her life was she
briefly close to a man. As we would expect, he turned out to be a weakling and a
homosexual. Prior to their engagement he proclaimed to be impotent. Her train
phobia can be equated to her trepidation with regard to love and marriage: She
cannot trust another's authority.
II. Of course, this process, the "masculine protest," can be studied even in
childhood. It is particularly noticeable in girls and the various directions taken
by this expansion-tendency are manifold. It is in this area that one discovers that
a child's actual anticipated tensions regarding his or her immediate world are
aroused to excessive extremes. In no case have I ever failed to find this
masculine delirium.
From a child feeling reduced in status there regularly follows a fanaticism
about weakness that conveys to us all forms of hypersensitivity, negativism, and

neurotic artifices. For example, an otherwise healthy three-year old girl exhibited
the following symptoms: A constant struggle with her mother, terrible sensitivity
about any kind of constraint or neglect, stubbornness and defiance. The girl
regularly refused food, was constipated, and revolted against house rules. The
extent of her negativism was almost unbearable. Once when her mother gently
suggested a snack, the following monologue ensued: "If she says milk, I drink
coffee, and if she says coffee, I drink milk!" Her yearning to be man-like was
expressed frequently. One day, standing in front of a mirror, she asked her
mother: "Did you also always want to be a man?" Eventually, when the
unlikelihood of a sex transformation became apparent to her, she suggested to
her mother that she would like to have a sister, but not a brother. She then
confided to her mother that when she grew up, she would have only sons. With
this she later betrayed her unquestionably higher estimation of men.
III. Because the following case is so perfectly clear, I should like to
describe an incident in the life of a healthy, three-year old girl. Her favorite
preoccupation was to dress in the clothes of her older brother and never in those
of her sister. One day, while out walking she stopped her father in front of a
boys' clothing store and tried to persuade him to buy her some boys’ clothing.
When told that a boy does not wear girls' clothes, she pointed to a coat that could
possibly also be worn by a girl and demanded that he should at least buy her
that. This case presents a not too rare transformation of the character guiding line
that also can be found in a masculine final goal: even a semblance of maleness
suffices.
In these two cases involving young girls, which I consider typical, we can
observe a developmental trend that I find quite common. In this regard it is
important to ask: What means has pedagogy provided us to date to reconcile one
half of humankind with an unalterable condition with which it is not satisfied? It
is absolutely clear that if we do not solve this problem, we shall constantly be
faced with a condition that I have discussed in great detail: A permanent feeling
of inferiority that will always exacerbate dissatisfaction and will lead to the most
varied efforts and artifices to prove, no matter what, one's own superiority This
is how those weapons, some having actual value and some being imaginary, are
forged, by which the external image of a neurosis is created. That this condition
also has advantages, that it can enable a person to live a more intensive, more
subtle way of life, can be overlooked when we are trying to get help for the far
more serious disadvantages that prevail. This state of mind, where at one
extreme there is the feeling of inferiority and at the other end a yearning for
quasimasculine standing, is further intensified as soon as the girl is relegated to a
subordinate position when coming in contact with boys, when the course of her

development seems curtailed, and when molimina,10 menses, childbearing and
menopause set in, engendering new disadvantages. It is well known that these
periods in a woman's life are often decisive in neurotic revolts and, therefore,
can be predicted. Once we have laid bare one root of neuroticism, it is very
unfortunate that we lack in our pedagogical as well as therapeutic inventory any
means to prevent the consequences of this naturally and socially created
situation. From our viewpoint it becomes essential that children are taught early,
for prophylactic and therapeutic reasons, the immutability of their gender, and
that disadvantages not be presented as something insurmountable, but as
problems to be understood and resisted just as other problems are countered in
life. It seems to me that with this approach will disappear the insecurity and
resignation associated with a woman's role, as will the exaggerated yearning for
recognition that so often makes her appear inferior.11
10 (Editor’s note) Normal prementrual symptoms.
IV. The case of a ten-year old boy should demonstrate how the poison that
somehow seeps into social relationships, in our case the masculine protest in
women, also affects the other half, men and boys, with almost the same
manifestations. As we know from human nature, it is clear that boys, whose
higher esteem, mostly openly expressed but also brought to light in social
interactions, feel not only more flattered, but that they carry greater
responsibilities. Consequently, tension is also increased in boys as they face the
world. To the extent to which we look upon actual physical achievements, our
culture in fact places greater weight on males. Here, however, a minimal amount
of pressure that closes off the path for cultural aggressiveness can be enough to
cause hostile attitudes, meanness, a lust for dominance, and fantasies. Boys then
often fear not being able to meet their duty to attain that measure of esteem that
seems necessary to them to attain masculine perfection. Thus, in cases of organic
inferiorities and in children who are depressed and pampered, we can see early
on the start of scheming, a haste and greed to attain superiority despite all
obstacles. In many cases, this means taking advantage of their weaknesses,
displaying a general hesitating attitude, showing obstinacy when in doubt,
vacillating, and being constantly in retreat! Alternatively they may also revolt
openly or secretly and display an unwillingness to cooperate. Thus the basis for
the neurosis has been formed and the damage can now be seen.
The case I wish to discuss concerns a severely nearsighted boy who, despite
all his efforts, was unable to cope with his two-year older sister. His aggression
manifested itself in constant quarrels. He also was unable to attain any influence
over his mother. His father, however, surpassed the rest of his family in

importance and influence, maintained a strong regime, and frequently swore at
the "women folk." As I shall show later, the boy clearly favored the father. In his
somewhat hard-pressed situation, the boy was not confident he could
demonstrate in any way that he was equal to his father. He failed with boyish
pranks, partly because of his nearsightedness. When he once tried to use his
father's typewriter he was quickly told that he could not learn to use it.12 The
father, a passionate hunter, sometimes took his son on hunts. To the boy, this
seemed the kind of masculine expression that gave evidence of his equality with
the father and of his superiority to the "women folk." However, when the father
did not take his son hunting, he immediately started bedwetting, which enraged
the father. Eventually, this also occurred whenever the father punished the boy.
The connection between these events came to light in a number of interviews
that also revealed that hallucinating in his dreams created all the elements for
bedwetting. It was easy to see that the boy's suffering emanated from a yearning
to accompany his father on the hunt and not to be left alone. It also reflected a
serious revolt against his father: Prior to or after a nightly accident, he often
dreamt that his father, when he had not taken him hunting, had died. When asked
about his future plans, the boy answered that he wanted to become an engineer,
like his father, and that he would engage a housekeeper. I asked him whether he
wanted to marry, like his father, a suggestion he dismissed with the comment
that women were only interested in frills. The boy's prepared attitude, his
arrangement for life, can clearly be discerned. If he continues along the line of
fearing women and, given other bolstering circumstances, there is the possibility
that by excluding women from his life he will become a homosexual.
11 See Schulhof, Individualpsychologie und Frauenbewegung, Munich,
1914. 
12 Contrary to other opinions on this matter, we see in this not an isolated
incident, but an important indication of the father's attitude toward his son and its
consequences.
V. Similar, but also quite different, are the manifestations of the masculine
protest in an eight-year old boy who suffered from status lymphatitis and was
slightly retarded, both physically and mentally. He came for treatment because
of compulsive masturbation. His mother dedicated herself almost exclusively to
the younger children, leaving him in the care of the servants. His father was an
angry person who constantly gave orders. The boy's feelings of inferiority
manifested themselves in shyness and in being grateful to those who paid
attention to him. He felt himself most compensated by a restless fascination with
magic tricks, which he learned from fairy tales and viewing films. He was far

more fascinated by these activities than most other children and was always
looking for a magic wand to take him into fairyland. His guiding idea was to
avoid all problems and to be given everything gratuitously. He deceived himself
with this idea to the point where he made others do everything for him, a
conclusion he reached from a distorted picture of his father, who also had
everyone serve him. He also concluded that he could pursue this path only if he
were incompetent and clumsy. This is then what he became.
The mother noted the boy’s masturbating after a long time. When she did,
she began to pay more attention to him and he, as a result, gained greater
influence over his mother. His selfesteem rose. If he did not want his importance
to erode, he had to continue masturbating, which he decided to do.
His goal to become his father's equal revealed itself incidentally in an
obsession to wear formal adult hats. He was thus acting like a child who can't
wait to grow up. He also stuck cigar tips in his mouth.
In a brief summary statement, please allow me to relate to human history
what we know about neurotic artifices acquired in childhood. The belief in
possessing magic powers, or a belief that others possess it, can be more easily
recognized during the early stages of human history, but is today also a premise
for human behavior and for lacking in selfconfidence, i.e. feeling inferior. The
male neurotic's fear of women and his animosity have their historical analogy in
a belief in witches and in the practice of witch burnings. The female patient's
fear of men and their masculine protest are similar to a fear of the devil and of
hell, and to practicing witchcraft. Briefly, it should be noted that in denigrating
women, natural mutual affection suffers. Furthermore, contrary to the general
belief that fostering some kind of magic in place of mutual respect in
relationships between men and women, and that forcibly imposing male
authoritarianism will produce a healthy psyche, such behavior is far more likely
to sow the seeds for a delusionary mind.
Concluding Remarks
1. In the concept of "life" the organic and psychological mode has been
preformed. It encounters us everywhere as the "compulsion for setting goals."
This is because life demands that we act. It is in this way that the ultimate
character of the inner life is fixed.
2. Human beings are endowed with an incessant stimulus to strive for goals
because of a feeling of inadequacy. What we call “drives” is the established path
that is oriented by the goal. Will power accrues in spite of apparent
contradictions in order to forge toward this integrated goal.
3. Just as an insufficient organ creates an unbearable situation out of which
grow numerous attempts at compensation until the organism feels itself equal to

the demands, so does the child's psyche out of a feeling of insecurity seeks that
font of extra strength to rise above that feeling of insecurity.
4. The study of the human psyche first of all must take into consideration
these tentative efforts and exertions of strength that grew out of the individual's
actual physical state, and that reflect practiced and accomplished ways of dealing
with life.
5. For this reason every manifestation of an individual's psyche can
therefore be seen only as one aspect of an integrated life plan. All attempts that
fail to explain a psychological phenomenon along these lines and that try to
understand a child's psyche solely through an analysis of that phenomenon, not
seeing it in its whole context, must, therefore, be regarded as unsuccessful. What
actually happens in a child's life should never be regarded as complete in itself
but, if observed with a goal in mind, should be seen only as preparatory for
moving toward that goal.
6. In accordance with this concept nothing can occur without a purpose. We
shall attempt in the following to highlight the most important guiding principles:
Reality 
a. Developing abilities to gain superiority 
b. Measuring up to one's environment 
c. Gathering knowledge and skills 
d. Awareness of the existence of hostility 
e. Utilizing love and obedience, hate and defiance, social feeling and striving for
power to attain superiority.
Imagination 
f. Developing "as-if" reasoning abilities (fantasy and symbolic 
successes) 
g. Exploiting weakness 
h. Procrastinating decision-making, search for cover
7. An essential precondition for these guidelines is finding a lofty goal, an
omnipotence and godlikeness that must remain in the unconscious in order to be
effective. As soon as the purpose and meaning of this goal and its contrariness
to the truth has been fully comprehended and understood, the individual no
longer is its captive and will be able to invalidate its automatic, stereotypical
influence with an intelligent approach to practical social needs. This goal,
shaped in accordance with an individual's constitution and experience, is
variously concretely covered and can, in that form, rise regularly into
consciousness as psychosis. The unawareness of this goal for power is
conditioned by its unbridgeable contradiction to real social feeling. Gaining
insight, without astute penetration, and given a general human obsessiveness

with striving for powe,r can hardly be expected without outside professional
help.
8. The normal veiling of the striving for power, which when necessary can
manifest itself in other, often seemingly contrary forms, can be presented
schematically as a juxtaposing of "male and female," "below and above,"
"everything and nothing" which portends to be the sum of all power in which the
child seeks to be a participant. In the inherent contrast, usually the weaker is
regarded as the hostile element and as such is to be subdued.
9. All these symptoms become very prominent in the neurotic because, up
to a certain point, the patient with his combative attitude and his unique
apperception scheme has indicated refusal to undergo any extensive revision of
his childish misjudgments. Furthermore, he is assisted in defending this position
by a solipsistic attitude that consequently has become fixed.
10. We should, therefore, not be surprised to learn that every neurotic behaves as
if he must constantly prove his superiority, including over women.
Chapter V
The Problem of Distancing Oneself1 2 (On a basic problem of neurosis and
psychosis)
[1914]
Far too little attention has been paid to the obvious fact that the neurotic
leaves his social, professional, and sexual problems largely unsolved, and that
he prefers to fend us off with symptoms and reasons for his failures. Indeed, a
problem can only be ascertained if one accepts the viewpoint of Individual
Psychology that there is no arguing against society, against work, and against
love! We are unrelenting in demanding that life for others be made easier and
more pleasant! Yet, we hear arguments to the contrary and justifications along
with reasons why this need not be so. We are here at one with the poet who says:
"The Last Judgment does not call for your reasons."
The practical significance of Individual Psychology lies in the certainty
with which we can recognize an individual's lifeplan and lifeline. We ascertain
this from his attitude toward others, toward life, toward society, from his dealing
with the general problems essential for society to function, from his ways of
gaining prestige, and from his social feeling. While we make assumptions for
many of our viewpoints, we point in particular to the existence of the “inferiority
feeling” as the driving force in the inner life of the healthy as well as the
neurotic. This applies equally to the "compulsion to set goals and the need to
raise esteem," to a "compensatory" act, and to an obtruding "lifeplan" that is
supposed to guarantee the individual the attainment of his goals variously with
"aggression," "exclusion," and "avoidance" along the line of the "masculine

protest," or the "fear of decision making." I also assume an understanding of the
neurotic’s and psychotic's adherence to a "guiding fiction," as opposed to the
healthy person who perceives his "ideal model" as a general orientation, and as a
means that he sees objectively, but not subjectively. This understanding also
applies in general to neurosis and psychosis which I see as a “safeguard” for the
individual's personality feeling.
The way that constant human striving to move "upwards" compels cultural
progress, while providing a method and technique of life whereby all
possibilities, including the organic realities, are utilized, even if not correctly
applied, should have been sufficiently clarified to make plausible the
psychological meaning of the "finale," as opposed to attempts at causality as an
explanation. In this context the untenability of the so-called sexual psychology
becomes manifest as one of the basic principles of our Individual Psychology:
the sexual behavior of the neurotic and psychotic is understood to be
"analogous" to his lifeplan. This has quietly been widely accepted.
1 This first appeared in Zeitschrift für Individualpsycholgie, Vol. 1, pages 8-
16, 1914. Reprinted in Praxis und Theorie, 1920. Translated into English as
chapter VIII in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Furthermore, in our research we have come to know the tendency to "seek
pleasure" as a variable, but not by any means a leading factor that adapts itself to
the lifeplan. Contrary to to what is commonly believed, character traits,
feelings, and emotions were shown to be tested and therefore accepted means for
reaching the fictitious goal of superiority. Concurrent with this discovery, the
theory of "innate sexual components, perversions, and criminal tendencies” has
become untenable. We were also able to recognize the general area of
psychoneurosis as the domain of those who from childhood--whether as the
result of an organ inferiority, from a flawed upbringing, or because of a harmful
family tradition--had been imbued from birth with a feeling of weakness, a
pessimistic perspective as well as with the same or similar age-old subterfuges,
prejudices, tricks, and exaltations that suit the development of an imaginary,
subjective feeling of predominance. Every single trait and every emotional
expression is toward the goal that promises peace and triumph, which justifies
the assertion that all neurotic manifestations entail as a precondition an
overpowering personal ambition and at the same time, a discouraged
personality that has no faith in personal powers. It can only be understood from
that vantage point. Neurosis is best defined as a "yes-but" condition.
The same psychological overexertion has been recognized by our school of

psychology in the fantasies, dreams, and hallucinations in patients. The driving
force is always a state of preparation, feeling its way, allowing the expansion
tendency to act "as if" so as to find other avenues for the striving for personal
power, or guarding against dangers. One must always take into account that the
latter, guarding against danger, is always the more immediate concern. The
consequences of action do not necessarily follow from a decision to act; the
yearning for esteem can often be gratified by the social consequences of
demonstrating genuine illness--or by believing it to be true. However, the extent
to which for the neurotic all experiences become only means or material to
support his perspective so as to win new stimulus for his neurotic direction is
evidenced by his often concurrent use of apparently contrary attitudes3--in the
double vie, in dissociating, in polarizing, in being ambivalent. Then there is his
distortion of the real world that can go so far as to close it off, the willful and
always tendentious shaping of feelings and emotions including a resulting
outward reaction. There is the planned interplay of recollections and amnesia,
having conscious and unconscious impulses, and being both knowledgeable and
superstitious.
3 Is it really so difficult to recognize “semblance” in so-called introversion and
its opposite, and to see them as means rather than as disposition?
Once the never-failing impression has been gained and confirmed that
every neurotic's psychic expression entails two premises: a feeling of not having
measured up, of being inferior, and a compulsive striving for a goal of
godlikeness, then one will not be misled by the "multiplicity of meanings" of
symptoms, a point already made by Krafft-Ebing. In the course of the
development of the psychology of the neurosis, this multiplicity of meanings
presented a not insignificant obstacle. Fantastic systems and narrow
selfrestriction seemed to make posssible the domination of neurology, when both
must be measured differently: the former by the systems’ insoluble
contradictions and the latter by their fruitlessness. Individual Psychology is
principally dedicated to exploring the system of a psychological illness along
paths followed by the patient himself. Our work has shown the great importance
of the actual material, but even more important is the patient’s evaluation of each
step taken. For that reason the most important requirement for us is to
understand the individual and examine him as an individual. When the
development of his lifeplan with its rigid demands for superiority in all
directions is examined, it brings to light the contradictions with reality inherent
in those demands, that is with those of society and how this prevents the patient
from acting to meet normal social obligations, and by revolting with illness.

This clearly led to a socio-psychological influence in the study of neurosis :
The lifeplan of the neurotic always takes into account his individual perception
of society, the family, and gender relationships, which allows us to recognize
from his perspective, the uncritical attitude of others. The fact that general
human traits recur, albeit without an inner adjustment and more intensely,
teaches us anew that neurosis and psychosis are not far removed from the
inherent nature of the human psyche, and that they should be seen as variants.
Should anyone quarrel with this fact it would also necessitate rejecting for now
and for all time the possibility of gaining any understanding of
psychopathological phenomena since what is accessible to us for an
investigation is only the normal human psyche.
If one adheres to what our school of psychology regards as the controlling
direction of the neurotic, emanating from a feeling of inferiority, which is to rise
"upward," then what is presented to us is a neurotic hybrid who vacillates
between two conditions. It becomes a constant "back and forth," a "neither-nor."
It is the attitude of an unconscious exaltation which brings to light either traits of
unconsciousness or of exaltation."4 As is the case with neurotic doubt,
compulsion neurosis, or phobia, the end effect is a "nothing," or an almost
nothing. At best it is the harbinger of a difficult seeming situation and a
legitimizing of an illness arranged-- in favorable cases -- to appear that the
patient is unable to act. We shall explore the reasons for this.
4 This is, of course, most predominant in manic depressive psychoses.
I have extensively described as a "hesitating attitude" this peculiar process
that can be demonstrated in all cases of neuroses and psychoses, in melancholia,
paranoia and in dementia praecox. Under favorable circumstances, I am able to
delve more deeply into this concept.
If one were to pursue the lifeline of a patient in the direction indicated by
us, then one understands how in his individual ways (which means simply
applying individual experiences and personal perspectives) he intensifies his
feelings of inferiority, thereby escaping responsibility by attributing his
shortcomings to heredity, blaming his parents, or finding other reasons. If one
further recognizes from his attitude and from tactics he employs the insistence
on a superior faultlessness, then one will constantly be surprised by the neurotic
who at a certain point in his aggressiveness will deviate from the direction he
was expected to take. For the sake of a broader view, I shall describe a four-fold
modus operandi that in each case is marked by the fact that the patient at that
point in his aggression will firmly place "distance" between himself and the
action he was expected to take, or from a decision he had to make. In most cases

this rupture will seem like stage fright, which will become apparent to us
outwardly as a symptom or a neurotic illness. Concurrent with this tendentious
distancing, which very frequently also finds physical expression, the patient will
develop a high degree of tension with regard to social problems and therewith
shape his withdrawal from the world. Based on his own experiences, every
neurologist will be able to relate to this portrayal, particularly when he considers
the manifold gradations of neuroses.
1. Retrogression - This category includes suicide and suicide attempts,
serious cases of agoraphobia in which the individual distances himself greatly,
compulsive blushing and serious compulsion neurosis, asthma nervosum,
migraine and severe hysterical pains, hysterical paralysis, abulia,5 mutism,
various severe anxiety attacks, refusal to eat, amnesia, hallucinations, psychoses,
alcoholism, addiction to morphine and drugs. Vagrancy and criminal tendencies,
anxiety dreams and dreams about falling, as well as dreams involving a crime
are common and show an exaggerated caution in anticipation of something that
might be in the offing. The idea of an external compulsion is enormously
exaggerated and every social, yes, humanitarian expectation, is rejected with
hypersensitivity. In serious cases, which must be considered in this context,
every useful activity ceases. The legitimizing of illnesses, of course, also serves
to assert one’s own will positively which, in a negative sense, also ensures a
triumph in not having to be responsive to normal social demands. This applies
also to the following three categories.
2. Stagnation. It is as if a magic circle were drawn around the sick person
which keeps him from approaching reality, facing the truth, taking a position, or
allowing himself to test or decide his own worth. Whenever problems arise
relating to tasks to be performed at work, tests that have to be taken, or the need
to engage in social, love, or marital relations the result actually gives rise to fear,
memory loss, pain, sleeplessness leading to the inability to work, compulsive
illusions, impotence, ejaculatio praecox, masturbation, totally disturbing
perversions, hysterical psychoses, etc. These manifestations are security
arrangements meant to prevent crossing the line. Also included in this category
are the less severe conditions of the first category. Dreams of being confined and
of being unable to reach something, to miss the train, as well as dreams about
taking tests occur frequently and often represent concretely the patient's lifeline
and how, at a certain point, he aborts and distances himself. Niebuhr in his
History of Rome III, Page 248, says: "Nationalism, like personal vanity, is more
ashamed of failure, since it betrays the possession of only limited powers, which
is more serious than the severest disgrace, since it carries in its trail the indolent
and cowardly refusal to exert any effort. It destroys all vain aspirations which

otherwise would persist."
5 (Editor’s note) A disorder in which volition is impaired or lost.
3. Doubt and a mental or physical "back and forth” ensure that distance is
kept. The individual then ends by invoking the illnesses named above, or doubt
which so often is associated with them, or reaches a conclusion that it is "too
late" to do anything. There are clear indications of an effort being made to waste
time. This is an open field for compulsion neurosis. In most cases the following
procedure can be detected: First some problem is created that is first "extolled”
and is then followed by a futile effort to resolve it. Manifestations that are quite
often observed include compulsive washing, pathological pedantry, a fear of
touching (also a spatial expression of distancing), tardiness, retracing one's steps,
destroying work started (Penelope!), or always leaving something unfinished.
Just as frequently one sees work being deferred, or a decision is made to pursue
an insignificant activity as "an irresistible compulsion" or to amuse oneself, until
it is too late to perform a significant task. Or, shortly before a decision has to be
made, a complication is construed (for example, stage fright). This kind of
behavior shows a clear relationship to the preceding category, differing only in
that in the cases above the decision itself is frustrated. A typical dream contains
vacillation or being late which is indicative of a probing attempt at testing the
lifeplan. The superiority and security felt by the patient results from a fiction,
often expressed or unexpressed, but never understood. The patient "says it, but
he knows nothing." It begins with an "if" clause: "If I didn't have this (suffering),
I would be at the top." Understandably, he does not give up this life-lie as long
as he retains his lifeplan. As a rule, the "if clause" entails an unfulfillable
condition, or an arrangement by the patient which only he can alter.
4. Creating obstacles, together with overcoming them, as an indication of
distancing. These are less severe cases that somehow work out, at times even
superbly. Sometimes they develop out of more severe cases spontaneously, or as
the result of some medical treatment. In such cases the physician and patient
persist in believing that a "remainder" of the illness lingered on. This
"remainder" is nothing other than the old "distancing" that is applied differently
and now used by the patient with a stronger social interest. If he formerly
established distance in order to break off social relations, he now uses it to
overcome them. The "meaning" and the goal of this attitude can easily be
ascertained: The patient has established a cover regarding his self-appraisal, and
often also how others regard his selfesteem and his prestige. If he finds himself
wanting, he can invoke his problems and the evidence of his (self-created)
illness to explain himself. If he is found not wanting, he can point to what he had
achieved, that is to say with one hand tied behind his back, and what more he

could have achieved were he not ill. The arrangements that are made in this
category are as follows: anxiety and compulsion conditions; phobias; fatigue
(neurasthenia), insomnia, obstipation and stomach and intestinal disorders that
consume strength and time and require a time-consuming, pedantic regime;
obsessive-neurotic pedantry; headaches; memory failings; irritability; mood
changes; pedantic demands to subjugate others and a constant anticipation of
conflicts with them, masturbation and pollution accompanied by superstitious
conclusions, etc. In this process the patient always tests his own suitability, but
he consciously concludes, without admitting it to himself, that he suffers from a
pathological inadequacy. This result often lies unstated, but can easily be
discerned from the neurotic arrangements that his lifeplan fosters. Once this
distancing has been accomplished, the patient can then afford to call on his
"other will," or to struggle against his own attitude. He then pursues a line that is
composed of the following: an unconscious arrangement of distancing plus a
more or less unproductive battle against it. It should not be mistaken but that the
battle in which the patient is engaged against his own symptoms, and his
complaints, his desperation, and his possible sense of guilt while in the state of a
developed neurosis, is first of all intended to strongly accentuate the meaning of
the symptoms in his eyes and in those around him.
In conclusion it should be pointed out that where these neurotic methods are
manifested, the prospects for any personal responsibility appear to have been
abrogated. The extent to which this is magnified in psychoses will be shown
next. At the same time, the neurotic's life, consistent with his throttled social
feeling, takes place primarily within the framework of his family. Should a
person thus afflicted be found in a large social circle, he would always give
indications of withdrawing toward members of his family.
It is only consistent with the views of our school of Individual Psychology
when an analogy with the behavior of healthy persons becomes very apparent. In
the case of both the healthy and neurotic types, the psychological behavior of
each should always be seen as a planned response to a social problem. As
impending premises and security measures, we shall then regularly find a
lifeplan that strives toward unity, a lifeplan that counts on a tendentious self-
evaluation, on a goal of superiority, and on psychological artifices that--again in
a uniform context--grew out of a childish perspective.
Not any less convincing is the similarity of the types of individuals we have
presented with figures from mythology and poetry. There is nothing surprising
about that. They are all creations of the human psyche, fashioned from the same
viewpoint and ideas having mutually influenced each other. In the lifeline of
these artistic creations we again encounter the signs of "distancing," most clearly

in the figure of the tragic hero who experiences peripeteia6 linked to the
"hesitating attitude." This "scenario" is obviously derived from life. Also, the
idea of "tragic guilt" points to clairvoyance and at the same time to activity and
passivity, to "arrangement," and to a vanquishing through the lifeplan. Not only
are we presented with fate in the form of the hero, but above all, with a planned
experiencing. The hero, whose sense of responsibility only appears to have been
extinguished, shows us that in fact it exists because he listened to the eternally
probing question that asks whether he is empathizing with social demands so
that he can soar as hero above all others.7
The threat then that faces everyone who seeks new paths alien to society
lies in the increased danger of losing touch with reality. The interplay between
ambition and insecurity, common to all these types, fosters peripeteia in their
lives, and precludes them from acting because of their individual distancing.
6 (Editor’s note) A sudden change or turn of events (especially in literature).
7 As opposed to this, the "chorus" represents the voice of the community, which
later in the development of the drama, is transferred to the hero.
Chapter VI
Neurotic Hunger Strike1 2
[1914]
One of the most powerful ways that ambitious but discouraged human
beings can revolt, and which can even be regarded as suicidal,we see in a
number of cases of neurotic hunger strikes. This affliction always affects people
who were used to playing the leading role, who wanted to continue to play that
role, who constantly strove to be the center of everyone’s attention, and who
were unable to find any other course in their lives.
As a rule, this symptom, the fear of eating, begins at about age 17 and
almost exclusively affects girls. The result of such behavior, usually a rapid loss
of weight, has an ominous end goal, which can also be determined from a
patient’s overall behavior, and is the rejection of the female role. By attempting
to reject nourishment--as is the usual mode--the development of feminine
features can be arrested.3 In one of the cases familiar to me, the patient also
painted her entire body with iodine in hopes of thereby losing weight. However,
this same person regularly cajoled her younger sister into eating. Another patient
finally ended up weighing 28 kilos and looked more like a ghost than a young
girl.
This always pertains to girls who as children had already discovered the
significance of a“ hunger strike” as a means of gaining power.4 In every fully
developed case of neurosis there exists the same effort by those afflicted with

this illness to exert pressure on everyone around them, including their physician.
Suddenly everything turns around the patient and her will dominates in every
relationship. It should now also become understandable why such patients
ascribe so much importance to food, and why they feel they must sustain that
importance by an “arrangement” of fear: They cannot place a high enough value
on nourishment since it is only by overstating it that they can attain their goal of
dominating everyone around them (such as a husband!, a father!) . It is only in
this vein that they can be critical of everything, create anxiety in their mothers
by denigrating their cooking, dictate the choice of meals, insist on punctuality at
mealtime, and ensure that all eyes are fixed on them with concern over their
eating.
1 
First 
appeared 
as 
“Zur 
Sitophobie” 
in 
the 
Zeitschrift 
fűr
Individualpsychologie, Vol. I, pages 27-28, 1914. Reprinted in Praxis und
Theorie in 1920. Translated into English as chapter XVII in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 2 New translation by Gerald L.
Liebenau, 2003. 
3 In more recent times hunger strikes are to force attention to oneself. Also see
Internationale Zeitschrift fűr Individualpsychologie Vol. !!, “Fragebogen zum
Verständnis und zur Erziehung schwer erziehbarer Kinder.” (Questionnaire for
Understanding and Raising Problem Children). 
4 For those to whom the idea of a neurotic choosing a symptom presents a
problem, it should be pointed out again that a mistaken view of power
relationships, when they are effective among only a few people, becomes
transformed into exercising that symptom, causing the individual to focus solely
on a single problem and, thereby, disturbing the harmony of life.
After some time, one of my patients changed her behavior regarding the
emphasis on the importance of food by demanding and eating enormous
quantities, which resulted in the same demands on her mother to dedicate herself
fully to her daughter. She was engaged to be married and presumably wanted to
get married, but only “when she was well again.” At the same time, however,
she impeded her progress toward a female role with symptoms of anxiety
(depression, rages, sleeplessness), and specially by embarking on a fattening diet
that made her monstrously large. She constantly ingested bromide, declaring that
she felt worse without it, while complaining about developing bromide acne
which, like her diet, disfigured her. (Similar purposes are often served with
nervous constipation, compulsive bowel and bladder movements, occasional
tics, facial contortions, or compulsion neurosis.) Some patients achieve the same
ends by fasting publicly and eating secretly. Finally, well known is the enormous

significance of hunger strikes in melancholia, paranoia, and dementia praecox
which aims to renders the will of others impotent.
Analogous to many other arrangements in neurosis is the ruse of “going
back and forth”5 in order to waste time. This becomes understandable in all
cases when it is recognized that the patient, for “fear of having to make
decisions”--in the case above, for “fear of the partner”--decides to adopt a
“hesitating attitude,” “retreats,” or attempts suicide. It begins with exaggerated
dieting which is followed by a fear of taking nourishment, and finally, as
expected, becomes a hesitating attitude regarding compliance with normal social
demands, an abstaining from them, and finally, retreating. This attitude clearly
reflects old childhood inferiority feelings toward life’s demands, and makes it
easy to uncover the “artifices employed by the weak.” Always present in such
cases are feelings of revenge, as well as tyranny in families.
5 Later, Freud described this manifestation as “repetition-compulsion.”
Others have described this as “iterations,” “clinging,” etc. Compared with our
original findings those of other authorities seem shallow.
Chapter VII
The Life-lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis1 2 A Commentary
on Melancholia
[1914]
If this chapter, in the final analysis, concludes that all psychological
illnesses, which include neuroses and psychoses, are clearly symptoms of a
greater magnitude, and if as such they define the workings, the form, and the
structure of individual lifelines, then a comprehensive explanation for this
conclusion will follow in a later work.3 However, in the course of the following
study it will be unavoidable to accept this proposition for which I am indebted to
a number of prominent authorities. Thus, a number of psychiatrists have pointed
to a connection between individuality and psychosis. Similarly, advances made
in the field of psychiatry show a progressive blurring between the lines that
separate the two. Ideal types have disappeared from the pages of the professional
literature, and also are no longer found in the profession. The emphasis that I
have placed on “the unity of neuroses” should also be mentioned in this context.
We are generally approaching a basic principle to which our Individual
Psychology has made a significant contribution: It established that the neurotic
way of life seizes, with a seemingly unswerving and individually rationalized
regularity, methods for acquiring a useable neurosis or psychosis in order to
sustain itself.
Our Individual Psychological findings are very appropriate to support this

viewpoint. In the final analysis our findings show that the afflicted person
created his inner world on the basis of a failed individual perspective, a world
that is in conflict with reality. That inner world, however, which dictates such a
person’s attitude toward society, is quite understandable, and, in another context,
might even seem normal, not infrequently reminding us of others, either real or
of characters in literature, who have skirted such an abyss. There is absolutely no
evidence that heredity or any experience, or the environment, causes a neurosis,
or necessitates succumbing to a particular neurosis. This etiological necessity is
not present without an individual’s tendencies and assistance. It exists only
because of a rigidly adhered to assumption, by the patient or some authority, that
in order to safeguard the consequences of his neurosis or psychosis, the integrity
of his illness, he has to try attributing the cause of his illness to any impression,
whatever that might have been, and let that be responsible for the consequences.
He could feel and act less etiologically were he not led unto that path by his
goal, his imagined act, that final scene. However, his life plan demands
categorically that someone else will cause him to fail, and that his personal
responsibility will thereby be rescinded,4 or that only some fatal triviality denies
him his triumph.
1 First appeared as “Lebenslüge und Verantwortlichkeit in der Neurose” in
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. 1, pages 44-53, 1914. Reprinted in
Praxis und Theorie, 
1920. Translated into English as chapter XX in The Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 See “Fortschritte der Individualpsychologie”, in Internationale Zeitschrift für
Individualpsychologie, 2nd ed. Vol. 1 and 3, Vienna, 1923.
What is so basically human in this kind of yearning becomes very apparent.
The individual helps it along with his own means, and in that way his entire life
is imbued with the life-lie, that calming and anaesthetizing current that is the
opinion he holds of himself. Every therapeutic treatment, and even more so
every clumsy, brusque effort to demonstrate the truth, that tries to tear from the
patient the cradle of his irresponsibility, will only be met with the strongest
resistance.
This attitude, which we have often discussed, stems from a patient’s
“safeguarding tendency” and shows his inclination to seek detours, to stop,
retreat, practice deceit and treachery. It becomes apparent whenever the
individual has to make decisions regarding social matters and when required to
cooperate. The Individual Psychologist is familiar with all the excuses and

pretenses that are employed by the neurotic to to turn his back on his tasks and
on his own expectations. Our research has put a strong spotlight on these
problems and uncovered them. We find very few cases where casting blame on
others seems to be missing. Among such cases in particular are those suffering
from hypochondria and melancholia.
A most practical way for making psychogenetic symptoms more
transparent is to raise the question of an “antagonist.” The answer will show us
the psychogenetic patient no longer in a state of artificial isolation, but in the
context of his given social system. It will demonstrate the combative tendency of
neurosis and psychosis. What might otherwise be regarded as the final prognosis
of the specific illness will now be seen in its proper light as a means, a method
for living, as symptomatic of the direction in which the patient is going in order
to arrive at the goal of superiority, or what he believes to be his due.
In the case of some psychotics, but also in neurotics, belligerence as well as
accusations are not directed at a single person but at many, at times at all of
humankind, at bisexuality, or at the order of the world. This condition is
particularly acute in cases of paranoia. The total rejection of the world along
with its condemnation is expressed in dementia praecox. More hidden, and
limited to fewer people, is the struggle of the hypochondriac and melancholic. In
those cases, Individual Psychology provides us with a sufficiently broad
viewpoint to recognize the artifices being employed in such cases: for example,
where an aging hypochondriac succeeds in abstaining from work for fear of
being disappointed, and at the same time can tie a relative to his home and force
that person to devote himself fully to him. The distancing of such a person--in
this case from his literary talents--is so great that it cannot be ignored. He would
underscore it with an extraordinarily effective agoraphobia. What is to blame for
this? He would claim to have been born at the time of the revolution and casts
blame on that as his hereditary burden. His digestive problems would be in a
hierarchy of aids that he cites to support (Stern) his obsession for dominance and
allow him to idle away his time. Those problems are brought about by
swallowing air and with tendentious constipation.
4 See “Das Problem der Distanz”
A 52 year-old businessman was overcome by melancholia when on one
evening his daughter left for a social engagement without bidding him goodbye.
This man always insisted that his family regard him as the head of the family, a
position which he attained with hypochondriacal complaints, by demanding
service, and by expecting strict obedience from family members. His nervous
stomach was troubled by restaurant food. Consequently, when he went on trips
“for his health,” his wife was required to prepare his food in locally rented

kitchens, while he went on walks. He attributed his aging to his daughter’s
“unchildlike” behavior and claimed that it enfeebled him. When he then
succumbed to melancholia, the importance of his work as the wage earner was
made obvious to his daughter, as well as to the rest of his family. He had now
found the way to invent and enforce a status for himself that his circumstances
did not avail him. He was on the way toward not being responsible for any
failings in his role. One of my patients, who always dominated her well-meaning
husband, had lost her mother. She was the only sibling who had a close
relationship with the mother. She also wanted to have her mother live with her,
but her husband gently objected because of a lack of space. After her mother’s
death, the patient became ill with melancholia. Her illness was an accusation
against her siblings, and a lesson for her husband to take better care of her in
the future.
A seventy year-old manufacturer in his later years suffered every other year
from a case of melancholia that lasted for several weeks. As with the case above,
the patient started to become ill as his prestige threatened to wane following a
failed enterprise. He also neglected his work and alarmed his family, which
depended on his income, with his constant complaints about becoming
impoverished. The situation that he thereby created was akin to a violation of his
environment. He was immune to every complaint or criticism raised against him
and he disavowed all responsibility for his irresponsible enterprise. His role as
the supporter of his family now became very clear to everyone. The more severe
his melancholia and the more he complained, the greater his worth. He
recovered 
when 
resentment 
about 
his 
failed 
enterprise 
disappeared.
Subsequently, melancholia always appeared when he encountered an uncertain
financial situation, and once when he was subjected to an audit of his taxes. His
condition improved whenever problems dissolved. It was easy to see that he
engaged in prestige politics with his family by seeking cover under melancholia
whenever forced to make a vital decision. This excused him and left him without
any responsibility whenever something did not go well. He also received the
highest acclaim whenever his efforts ended successfully. This case also vividly
portrays the symptom that is described by a “hesitating attitude” and by
“distancing” whenever decisions have to be made.
Before I discuss another case of melancholia, I would like to explain more
specifically the mechanism of melancholia from the vantage point of Individual
Psychology, and also examine how it differs from paranoia on a particular point.
Once the social condition and the combative attitude in melancholia have been
established, the goal of superiority, which hypnotizes the afflicted person, can
easily be discerned. Albeit, the direction he takes is initially strange: He

denigrates himself, anticipates a miserable situation, and draws from these
sensations an emotional sadness and a feeling of being crushed.5 These
sentiments seem contrary to an assertion of greatness. In fact, however,
alarmingly depleting physical strength becomes a terrible weapon with which the
patient gains selfesteem and avoids responsibility. There is no psychological
illness that causes more harm to one’s family and friends than melancholia.
What pure melancholia achieves is an artistic creation; except that it is not a
conscious creation, but an attitude that has been developing since childhood.
This melancholic attitude can be traced to earliest childhood and manifests itself
as a work of art, as a way of life which, in its phase of insecurity, appears in the
patient as a concrete, well prepared lifeline. It is actually a striving that
anticipates another person’s downfall, so that one’s will can be forced on that
person in order to preserve one’s own prestige.6 Toward this end, the patient
will invest everything, all his physical and mental capabilities, so as to disturb
his sleep, affect his eating, and physically ruin him, giving legitimacy to his
illness. It will affect his digestive system, as well as bladder function, and set
him on a course that will lead even to suicide. Further evidence of the aggressive
nature of melancholia is found in the occasional impulse for murder, and
frequently melancholia manifests itself as anger and paranoia. In such instances
“others are to be blamed,” as was seen in a case where the patient believed
herself dying of cancer because her husband had forced her to visit a relative
suffering from cancer. If we summarize the above, it seems to us that the
difference between a melancholic and paranoiac attitude is that the melancholic
seems to blame himself, while the paranoiac blames another. We can gain
additional insight when we add: if such a person fails to assert his superiority in
other ways. Incidentally, these two traits, when examined closely, appear not
only very human, but also are widely found.
The psychological susceptibility of a psychosis often founders on the more
strongly perceived goal of superiority.7 The emphasis, which is only partly
justified, placed on the “incorrigibility” of a delusional idea stems from the
hypnotic goal. We have already demonstrated how the psychotic, by distancing
and using a life-lie, is able to safeguard his personality feeling. A neurosis can be
healed only if the patient is able to weaken his dominant idea. “Persuasion”
applied to symptoms can, therefore, be partially successful (curing symptoms) if
the patient, for whatever other reason, is willing to be healed, or if he succeeds,
unbeknownst to himself and to his physician, in gradually slackening off on his
goal. As far as we can see, a delusional idea is not the result of a faulty intellect.
It is compelled by the dominant idea and is adequate to attain the final goal,

which is making the individual not responsible and, by distancing, to safeguard
his sense of personality. Testing a delusional idea torn out of context with logic
cannot easily harm it because, as a tried modus dicendi et vivendi, it already has
fulfilled its purpose in the context of the patient’s life, and because the patient,
given his restricted social feeling, has relinquished logic and cooperation, which
after all, is what binds us as a social entity.
5 This is akin to the exclamation in Hamlet: “He weeps for Hecuba! What is
Hecuba to him?” The psychotic, not unlike the neurotic, furthermore reveals in
his complaints his “arrangement.” 
6 Not infrequently the technique of melancholia is manifested incidentally, or
predominantly, in feelings of revenge.
The last described patient who I treated for melancholia uncovered the
whole arrangement of his illness in a dream he had at the beginning of treatment.
He became ill when transferred from a senior position in his job to one in which
he first had to prove himself. Twelve years before that, when he was 26 years
old, he succumbed to melancholia under similar circumstances. His dream was
as follows:
I am in a boarding house where I usually have lunch. A girl in whom I had
been interested for some time served the meal. Suddenly I notice that the world
is coming to an end. At that moment a thought sprung to mind that I could rape
this girl since I would not be responsible. After the act was concluded, it turned
out that the world had not come to an end.
An interpretation of this dream becomes evident. We learn that the patient
avoids every decision concerning love because he fears responsibility. He has
often played with the idea that the world will be coming to an end (he hates
people). The dream, cloaked in sexuality, indicates that he has to believe that the
world is coming to an end, in order for him to triumph. This is how he creates a
situation of irresponsibility. The final sentence in his dream shows the patient
with a fictitious arrangement, an “as-if” situation, testing aggression, a rape, to
attain his goal.8
Now we can examine the construction of this patient’s guiding line! He
betrays himself as a person who has no selfconfidence, who does not believe that
he can succeed by being direct. We must, therefore, be prepared to find in his
earlier years, as well as in his present melancholic state, a departure from a direct
path in order to attain his goal. We shall also find that he will seek to distance
himself from a direct approach to his goal. This will also justfy our assumption
that when faced with a decision, he will strive toward an “ideal situation” in
which he can be certain to avoid any responsibility for an impending failure, and

that he will regain his courage only when he is certain of victory. This
observation, drawn from the dynamics of the dream, agrees with the above
viewpoint developed about melancholia. At the same time, we should point out
that this attitude found in melancholia applies to some extent to a majority of
human beings, and that it can also be found among neurotics. Irresponsibility as
well as incorrigible ideas are driven to the heights of a psychosis by the special
force and the exclusivity of the dominant superiority idea, along with its loose
ties to logic. For that reason we can also presume a certain degree of obstinacy
and an asocial obsession with dominance. When the patient was confronted by
our findings, he denied any of these character traits.
7 I disregard the intermediary condition of a marked incapacity ending in
imbecility resulting from a long period of having lost reasoning power. The
latter will always be damaged when barred from its sources, the social feeling. 
8 See “Dreams and Dream Analysis” in this volume, as well as the author’s
dream theories in Nervösen Charakter.
From what the patient remembered, the following is noteworthy: When he
was a boy, he once fell while dancing with his partner, and his glasses slid from
his nose. While still on the floor, he reached with one hand for his glasses but, to
steady himself, held down his partner with his other hand, making for an
awkward scene. This case already hints at an asocial trait, and at a tendency to
violate another person. The usual ways for this patient to act will again be
illuminated by his earliest childhood memory, which is as follows: “I am lying
on a couch and am crying for an inordinately long time.”9 The patient has no
explanation for this recollection. His older brother, however, who strongly
confirmed his brother’s obstinacy and obsession with dominance, told
spontaneously, when asked for some confirmation, that as a child the patient
with his incessant crying had forced him to let him use the whole couch for
himself.
I cannot describe here in detail the extent to which this patient’s sleeping,
eating, and intestinal functions were distressed to where he became visibly ill. I
am also unable to tell how by making unreasonable demands and with
assurances as to his poor condition how he persuaded himself and others that his
situation was hopeless, and how he had come to feel that every step taken by his
relatives, and the intercession by his physician was causing his health to
deteriorate. He even went so far as to deny any possibility of being able to earn a
living, and with that was able to place every family member and friend at his
service. They in turn allowed themselves to be intimidated by him when he
forced them to speak to his superiors to implore them to be more amenable and

assign him to a position where he could again act like the big boss. He then
began to quarrel with his superiors, whose assignments he thwarted and
eventually sabotaged with his irresponsible behavior. When he had attained his
goal, he allowed himself to be persuaded that the world had not come to an end.
9 I have discussed the tendentious forming and retention of early childhood
memories in Nervöse Charakter, and Schrecke (fright) [Kongreß für
Psychotherapie in Vienna, 1913]. Also see Menschenkenntnis Third edition,
Leipzig, 1929. [New edition: Frankfurt a.M. 1966, Fischer Taschenbuch vol
6080].
In my book, Über den Nervösen Charakter, I described with selected cases the
prerequisites for a state of delusion as follows:
1. An intensified feeling of insecurity and the inability to face an impending
decision; a feeling of strong discouragement; the inability to be cooperative.
2. The mechanism for this is to become increasingly detached from reality
and devaluing reality, including rejecting logic as a function of society. 
3. Intensifying the guiding line toward the fictitious goal of superiority;
superhuman ambition in the face of a setback. 
4. Anticipating the guiding ideal.
With regard to melancholia, point Number 4 can be augmented by stating
that the person so afflicted will attempt to meet the practiced guiding ideal of a
helpless, weak, needy child which, on the basis of his own experience, has given
him the greatest strength and the most compelling power. His attitude,
symptoms, and irresponsibility will be shaped accordingly. The elimination and
devaluing of all human relationships becomes very apparent. This also accounts
for such a person’s superiority.
Psychiatry has maintained that the most significant characteristic of the
“endogenous” psychosis is the absence of a “motive” or an insufficient “motive”
for acting. This consistent position surprises us since the problem of a “motive”
has been well known in Individual Psychology, and is almost never omitted in
any of our discussions. The vital role modern psychiatry ascribes to individuality
and to character deals directly with our problems, and must eventually justify
our point of view.
It becomes apparent that the most important question concerning the
healthy as well as the afflicted psyche is no longer “where-from?” but
“whereto?” It is only when we understand the individual’s effective guiding goal
that we can claim to know which of his actions are truly uniquely preparatory. In
this “whereto” resides the motive.
According to the Vienna school of psychiatry, the definition of

melancholia10 is as follows: “The nature of melancholia is a primary, i.e. not
motivated by external events, sad/anxious mood accompanied by inhibited
thought processes.” The results of our findings highlight motivation as derived
from the goal, as well as from the unique and individually formed lifeline, which
then brings out the hidden activities of melancholia. In this representation we see
the “hesitating attitude” and the “retreat” at their fullest, both being necessitated
by the “fear of decision-making.” Accordingly, melancholia manifests itself to
us as an attempt and an artifice to handle what are the individual’s “remnants,”
and his “distancing” in order to attain by detours his goal of superiority. As is the
case in every neurosis and psychosis, this occurs by willingly assuming the costs
of the struggle. In this regard this illness is not unlike a suicide attempt, which is
how some cases end. Thought and speech impediments, stupor, and the way a
person physically carries himself, make the “hesitating attitude” particularly real,
and since they intend to frustrate social functioning they also point to inhibiting
social feeling. Fear serves, as always, to ensure security, as a weapon, and as
evidence of illness. Paroxysms of anger, episodes of raptus melancholicus, occur
occasionally as expressions of weakness and signs of hidden emotions.
Obsessive ideas point to the sources of tendentious fantasies which serve the
illness and provide the patient with arranged emotions. Furthermore, the
mechanism of anticipation seems unmistakable, as it introduces the individual to
the role of a person who is about to perish. The most intense moment in the
illness is in the morning hours, which means when the patient is required to
become engaged with life.
10 See Pilz, Spezielle gerichtliche Psychiatrie, 1908.
The experienced observer will not fail to note the melancholic’s
“belligerent posture.” Pilz, for example, cites among others how the
conscienceridden qualms lead to making presentations of senseless gifts and
offers of testimonies. We object only to the use of “senseless.” This seemingly
passive psychosis is replete with hate and tendencies to demean. Under those
conditions, when the patient wishes to punish his relatives, he also has the
necessary, but ineffectual, pangs of conscience to help him escape his
responsibility.
Our patient’s medical history shows with great clarity that all melancholics
are of one type: a person who is not really dedicated to anything, who soon feels
rootless, and who easily loses confidence in himself and in others. Even on days
that he is well the melancholic shows himself to be ambitious, but acts
hesitantly, recoils from responsibility of any sort, excuses himself with
falsehoods that contain the evidence of his own weakness, but are effective in his

struggle with others. It is a total misjudgment to speak of melancholia in terms of
good will, and kindness. These are merely signs of a domineering tendency
which, under favorable circumstances, can lead a melancholic to great
accomplishments.
Chapter VIII
Book Review of Theophil Becker's On Diagnosing Paranoid Conditions11 12
[1914]
The author highlights the various demarcations of this condition and tries to
present evidence that this is a particular emotionality as opposed to the
assumption of a purely intellectual disturbance. Opposed to this "fallacy," he
maintains that the delusional fixation is clearly characterized by an inability to
correct this condition and by the patient's unalterable attitude toward life. The
Kraepelin chronic paranoia, unlike any other psychosis, is dominated by the
delusion that is central (to the patient’s being). The succinct presentation by this
accomplished author allows us, using his cases, to demonstrate our view on
psychosis. We do not believe this would diminish the value of Becker's work.
With reference to the first case, the hidden aggression against the husband,
and the resentment against being dominated and also against bearing additional
children [five children] cannot be overlooked. The psychoses here represent a
symptom and a means to do battle, tempered by irresponsibility,--the blame
ascribed to the other as a paranoid premise, his punishment by unfaithfulness,
becomes apparent. The same holds true for the dominant emperor illusion. Even
the language used and thoughts expressed reflect irresponsibility. The related
speech and mental defects can be seen as a revolt against her social character.
The fallacy can be corrected since it is a consequence, an epiphenomenon. The
delusion, however, is planned. For that reason the relationship of the delusion to
life goes as far as is necessary. Dissimulation and the possibility of giving free
reign to thoughts also exist only as conditions warrant them.
The hybrid nature of psychosis (the first case exhibits praecox besides the
manic condition) is given the right emphasis by Becker. Pure types are a rarity in
a psychosis. Most cases can be shown as transitional manifestations, which
explain the difficulty in discriminating conditions.
The second case provides an opportunity to illuminate briefly the nature of
"incorrigibility." In so far as the patient is concerned, a querulous person who
insists on always being always being right, he is, according to Becker's
presentation, wrong. However, that goal of being in the right is clear from the
outset. Becker himself postulates that querulous paranoia is found in most people
"who by nature are apt to quarrel and who insist on always being right." The
condition resulting from this particular tendency is the goal of superiority sought

by means of aggression against others. However, his being in a state of decline-
the patient was facing a total breakdown--leading thoughts and lines of direction
come more sharply to the fore. Since he is a captive of his goal, hypnotized, his
actions come independently. In his case there are no wrong actions; they are,
after all, planned and purposeful and, therefore, incorrigible. This applies also to
the neurosis. This patient is paranoid because he promotes irresponsibility in
order to save his prestige. Accordingly, we find also in this case: aggression, and
a tendency toward irresponsibility. What becomes apparent are the old
guidelines and the male protest ("because I am a foreigner, a Jew!”).
11 First appeared as [review]T. Becker. Zur Diagnose paranoischer
Zustände, Munchn. Med. Wiss., No. 12. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, pages 62-63.
(Translator’s note: The article is signed simply with the letter "A." The style of
writing and the complexity of thought processes in this article tend to agree with
Alfred Adler's similar works.) 12 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2003.
The third case shows, aside from various superficial manifestations, the
slowly seeping emperor illusion, which had weakly been seen in earlier
manifestations, such as in "dictating peace." The prominent symptom "hearing
voices" clearly shows the readiness of the paranoid to suppress reality.
The fourth case illuminates the problems encountered in examining a
patient for paranoia and the extensive, but justifiable, defenses that follow. What
helped us in forming our conclusion in this case, in agreement with Becker, is at
the very least the absence of a prominent guiding line. Having no feelings of
being ill in cases of paranoia arises from the necessity of the much more urgent
task of holding on to one's highly rated, fictitious, personality ideal through
aggression whereby blame is attributed to others. Where there are symptoms of
an illness, there are at least indications of hypochondria tending toward
melancholia, if not the characteristics of a neurosis.
The excellent presentation by Becker will fascinate every psychologist.
Chapter IX
Book Review of Wladimir Astrow’s Petersburg Dreams1 2
An unfamiliar story by Dostoyevsky
[1914]
Under this title, Dr. Wladimir Astrow ( Neue Freie Presse, the Easter
holiday edition) reports on a paper with an autobiographical content that
contributes considerably toward an understanding of Dostoyevsky. Only recently
two works came to our attention that dealt with the problem of Dostoyevsky.
One, a lecture by Stephan Zweig, comes close to our views, to be sure, without
abandoning the principles of psychology as they relate to poets. Kaus' work

(which appeared in the "Weisse Blätter") seems to us as an immersion into
artistic works, but seen from a distance shows a secure handling of the problem
that appeared so masterfully in his "Fall Gogol" (The case of Gogol). We plan to
discuss his larger work on the psychological artist, Dostoyevsky, which,
hopefully will be published soon.
The short piece cited above stems from an earlier time and for that reason
alone raises expectations of a clear guiding line. If anything consistent can be
drawn from the development of an artistic soul, then it must relate to the line
stemming from earlier works, projects, and plans leading to a later shaping of his
creative powers. Then, above all, it means assuming that the course of creating
art takes place outside the turmoil of this world. We can expect that the course of
every artist will detour, come to a halt, or reverse as soon as he has to deal with
normal social expectations. He who creates a world out of nothing, or let us say,
from a concerned view of the things of this world, and who, instead of an answer
in the practical sense, shows us the amazement of an artistic creation, will
remove himself from life and its demands. "Well, I am a fantasist and a mystic,"
Dostoyevsky teaches us.
We shall be able to see more clearly a picture of his approach when we
learn at what point in the action Dostoyevsky stands still. He speaks clearly
enough in the above sketch. "When I approached the Neva, I stood still for a
moment and cast a glance along the river into the dim, frost-covered distance
where the last crimson glow of dusk had died down." He was on his way home,
hurrying so that he could dream as a secular person of Schiller's heroines. "I also
did not become aware of the real Amalie who lived very close to me..." He
preferred to be drunk and suffer so as to endure these pains more sweetly than all
the pleasures in this world, “because, had I married Amalie, I would surely have
been unhappy.” Is it not the easiest thing in the world? A poet dreams away from
the world's turmoil, stands still for a moment, finds the sweetness of the
suffering in his dreams unequaled and knows, "how reality destroys the zenith of
every ideal. I do not want to travel to the Moon!" That, however, means being
alone and not becoming enamored with anything of this earth.
1 First appeared as [review] W. Astrow (Ed.) Petersburger Träume: eine
unbekannnte Erazählung von Dos tojewsky. Neue Freie Presse, Osternummer. Z.
Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, pages 63-64. Adler signed the review as “A.”
Thus the poet's life becomes a protest against the harsh reality and its
demands. This is different from the "Idiot," different from the case of the patient
who "had neither voice nor protest." Rather, he just did not know that his
exercise in enduring all misery would make him renowned. When he was thrown
off course with torments and reproaches, he discovered the secular man within

him, the precipitator and revolutionary Garibaldi. It was now said what the
others had never understood: humility and subjugation do not mean an ending,
but always are the seeds of revolution since they point toward the surmountable
distance. Tolstoy also knew this secret and often preached to deaf ears.
But something can appear in a newspaper and no one will know anything
about it, if it is a real secret. No one knew on whom Kharpagon Solvyov would
take revenge, he who starved and died in misery and had hidden a fortune of
170,000 rubles among his dirty papers. How happy he must have felt when he
sadly and helplessly denied the pleas of his cat, his cook, and his landlady, and
left all in debt. He had them in his hand, forced them to beg, all of them who
knew only money as power, and who adored it. To be sure, out of this grew in
him a peculiar responsibility, a methodical abuse of his life. He himself had to
starve and go without in order to carry out his plot. "He is beyond all desires."
How? For living like this one had to be crazy? Well, Solovyev makes that
sacrifice also. He can now show, without feeling any responsibility, his disdain
for mankind and for people's illusions about the things that make them happy,
and he can torment anyone who comes near him. He had everything in hand that
would smooth the path into society. Then he stands still for a moment, throws
his magic wand into the trashcan and feels himself important and sublime above
all mankind.
This appears to us the strongest line in Dostoyevsky's life. All his brilliant
creations would follow that line: The act is meaningless, corruptive, or criminal;
the healing lies only in subjugation, if it conceals the secret pleasure of being
superior over others.
Chapter X
Nervous Insomnia12
[1914]
A description of the symptoms of insomnia would essentially provide
nothing new. Complaints by patients refer either to the short duration of their
sleep, to their inability to experience deep sleep, or to the point when their sleep
was disturbed. The main emphasis, as banal as that might seem, is always on the
lack of rest and its result which is tiredness and an inability to work.
For the sake of accuracy, we should point out that quite a number of
patients also complain about lacking energy and being unable to work, despite
having slept well and undisturbed.
The type of illness that manifests symptoms of sleeplessness can easily be
circumscribed. There are no psychological illnesses and no associated symptoms
where insominia is not also present, either for longer periods of time or only
occasionally. Particularly acute forms of sleeplessness usually precede the most

severe psychological illnesses, the psychoses.
What is interesting is the attitude of the afflicted patient toward his
symptoms, the strong emphasis on the torments suffered, and the numerous
remedies unsuccessfully tried. Some spend half their nights desperately wishing
to fall asleep; others go to sleep after midnight in hopes of finding rest resulting
from exhaustion. Then there are those who constantly try to eliminate even the
slightest noises, or count repeatedly to one thousand, or run through complicated
ideas, or attempt new sleep positions until daybreak.
In less severe cases, rules are made up and kept to ensure sleep. Some
people feel they can fall asleep only after imbibing alcohol or taking bromides;
others by eating supper early or late, or by eating much or little. There are those
who think they can fall asleep only after playing cards, having had guests or,
alternatively, spent time alone. Then there are people who refrain from drinking
coffee or tea, and those who drink one or the other. The often-contrary
requirements for inducing sleep are remarkable. This is even more the case
because of the many explanations that are offered, such as those by patients who
claim that sexual intercourse is a proven remedy against sleeplessness, while
others swear that abstinence is the answer.
1 First appeared in Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. 1, 1914,
Pages 65-72. Translated into English as Chapter XII in The Practice and Theory
of Individual Psychology, 1925.
It seems that a mid-day nap comes easier, but here also a number of rules
are concocted such as being able to sleep only "if I am not disturbed," or "when I
get to sleep at the right time," or "only right after eating," etc. In some cases a
nap merely induces greater fatigue, headaches, and drowsiness.
When considering all of a patient's described sufferings then, in addition to
the impression of dealing with a sick person, particularly when we focus on the
emphasis he places on the effect of his insomnia , we also recognize something
else. It concerns his diminished or shattered capacity to work which, in effect,
encumbers his life, and for which no personal responsibility is taken.
For the sake of simplicity, we shall abstain from citing older cases in which
the misuses of alcohol or narcotics took control over the patient and created new
symptoms and obstacles. Organically induced insomnia will, therefore, not be
examined in this context. However, it should be noted that the use of narcotics
would result in the same irresponsible work attitude as does insomnia. The
individual gets up later, feels tired and beaten, and will use a part of the day to
recover from his sleeplessness.
As a rule, the "harmless measures" have little effect in remedying this
condition. They have only an effect either at the outset of medical treatment, or

none at all. Those whom it helps are patients who characteristically are
outwardly conformists and good-natured. A successful cure is always signaled
by the way the patient approached treatment initially, which is as if he wished to
prove the uselessness of a medical intervention. Defiant and unwilling neurotics
start with insomnia at the outset of treatment and for that blame the physician.
The case history of such patients usually shows that they had previously used
insomnia to signal an increased precariousness in their condition that would
allow them to plead staying away from work, or to lay down rules for others to
follow. Frequently insomnia is used as recrimination against a husband or as
punishment.
What we can further learn, or discern, from a patient's account is the
importance ascribed to sleep. No physician will underestimate the importance of
sleep. However, if something that is very obvious is strongly asserted, it calls for
an explanation. What should become clear when such strong assertions are made
is that the patient is demanding recognition of his difficult situation. Clearly,
only when the patient receives such recognition is he relieved of responsibility
for possible mistakes in his life, and can then claim double credit for his
successes.
If we pursue the psychological tug-of-war that leads to the arrangement of
insomnia, and that makes a weapon of it for the protection of threatened
personality feelings, we will then come to understand how this affliction has
somehow adapted itself to a patient's precarious situation. The sense that this is a
useful tool comes to the patient from his own experiences or from those of
others, or from the effect his suffering has on his environment and on his own
person. We should, therefore, not be surprised that as long as the psychological
condition of the patient remains unchanged, the physician, or any medication,
can often only confirm but not heal a condition.
At this point Individual Psychology has to come into play. It will attempt to
bring the patient therapeutically to where he recognizes the connection and will
repudiate his secret desire to invoke plans to attain a state of irresponsibility. He
will become fully responsible and will consciously take action as soon as he
avers to the physician, and more so acknowledges to himself, that insomnia is
only a means, and will reject it as a mysterious absolver of responsibility. Its
similarity to other neurotic symptoms such as compulsion and doubt, and its
practical application in neurosis, can easily be seen.
We now also become aware of the type of personality that will develop
symptoms of insomnia and it is possible for us to describe it to a patient with
surprising accuracy. Traits of mistrust in one's own powers will always be found
as well as highly set, ambitious goals. Overestimating any successes or problems

in life, being cowardly to some extent, having a hesitating attitude, and fearing
decision-making will also be present. In most cases, other lesser means and
certain artifices characteristic of neurotics will be employed such as pedantry,
depreciating tendencies, and dominance. Occasionally there is a tendency to
deflate oneself, as found in the attitude of hypochondriacs and melancholiacs.
Insomnia can represent an important link in the chain of every neurotic lifestyle.
Quick and successful cures cannot be forced. If quick results are urgently
needed, the best course to follow would be to explain to the patient directly but
tactfully that his insomnia is the favorable sign of a treatable psychological
affliction. It requires that the patient, without paying any attention to the
insomnia itself, examine thoughts that occur during the night. Occasionally,
insomnia is displaced by a deep sleep that extends into the day and has the same
detrimental effect as insomnia in keeping the patient from carrying out his tasks.
As far as I can see, the thoughts of a patient during the hours of
sleeplessness are important from two points of view. They represent either a
means for the person to keep himself awake, or they entail the kernel of
psychological problems of which the individual became aware, and for which he
constructed sleeplessness. Regarding the latter, I have begun to discuss this
subject in a chapter to follow on "Individual Psychological findings with regard
to sleep disturbances." I found repeatedly, reading between the lines in thoughts
of those suffering from insomnia, the sense of trying to attain something without
incurring any responsibility, something that would otherwise be impossible to
attain except by being a fully responsible person. Thus, insomnia joins the group
of psychological manifestations and arrangements that serve to keep at a
distance the goal imagined by the patient, to effect "actio in distans."
It behooves Individual Psychology to describe this "actio" and to gain an
understanding of the attitude of a patient toward his world, to find the connection
between sleeplessness and the problems faced by the individual. The invaluable
therapeutic examination lies in having the patient express his fictitious,
incomprehensible, and logically inconsistent guiding line, and to relieve him of
the implacable thoughts that stem from it. At the same time the patient is
carefully led away from his position of irresponsibility and forced to give up his
no longer unconscious subterfuges (fictions!) and accept responsibility. We have
frequently stressed that this step-by-step process of clarification must be
conducted with compassion. It must lead to encouraging the individual.
The means employed for creating insomnia are relatively simple to
understand once the usefulness of insomnia to the individual has been
established. It fully coincides with what someone would do to purposefully
avoid falling asleep, for example, read, play cards, go out socially or invite

guests. To keep from sleeping such a person tosses in his bed, thinks of his
business, raises all sorts of problems and exaggerates them, counts, fantasizes.
All the while he is wishing he could fall asleep, but keeps track as the clock
chimes the hours, or lets himself be awakened by the chiming. When finally
falling asleep, he is suddenly awakened by a dream, pain, or fright. He jumps out
of bed and runs around the room, or wakes up at an early hour. These are
conditions that could easily be mastered with some practice, if the patient would
deem it necessary--mostly to free him from responsibility. For example, a patient
plans to study for a test he has to take the following day. He is fearful that
sleeplessness would hinder him in taking the test successfully, but demonstrates
his good will-he awakens, i.e. he wakes himself up at three o'clock in the
morning, remains awake, complains bitterly about this mysterious occurrence,
but now is relieved of all responsibility for the outcome of the test. Or is there
someone who doubts that it is possible for a person to learn to wake up at the
right time?
Sleep disturbance from pain seems more puzzling. In the patients I treat, it
is mostly pain in the legs, stomach, the back of the head, and in the back.
Regarding the first, I believe that leg pains are spasmodic and caused by
unconscious but regularly over-extended muscles. I have found back pains in
people who swallow air and in patients suffering from scoliosis. Incidentally,
these posture anomalies play a significant role in the symptomology of neurosis.
They can easily be the result of an unconscious tendency to employ poor posture
to inflict pain, especially in the group of symptoms associated with neurasthenia
and hypochondria. A patient can often be relieved of his fixation with pain when
told directly that he has a segmental nevus [as a sign of inferiority]3 and then
hope that it works. This must be followed by orthopedic treatment which is
important and valuable. Frequently, it is possible to establish a connection
between pain and a person's posture.
Less frequent but more illuminating is the condition of a patient who tells,
or his family tells, that he awakens because his head had fallen over the side of
the bed, because he kept moving his head, or he repeatedly banged it against the
headboard. More questionable would be the claims of patients who tendentiously
have such hypersensitivity to noises and light that in their effort to shut out such
disturbances they wake up. 
A few examples might illustrate our theory: 
A patient, whose illness and conscious behavior was clearly targeted
3 See my "Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen." (Part II, Volume 2 of
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.)

against his wife, awakened at the slightest noise. He was even disturbed by
his wife's breathing! The physician recommended that the wife move out of the
bedroom.
An artist, whose enormous ambition prevented him from ever completing a
painting and showing it in public, suffered from nightly pains in his legs, forcing
him to jump out of his bed and walk up and down in his room for hours. The
next day he was unable to work.
A patient, who suffered from agoraphobia in order to attain better control
over his household,4 was unable to keep her husband from his nightly visits to a
bar. She awoke several times at night from fear and started groaning, which
woke up her husband. She accomplished her goal of causing her husband to
become so tired that the next day he came home earlier. He then took to napping
during the day. The wife, thereupon, occupied the couch with the excuse that her
illness required rest, and thus forced her husband to retire earlier in the evenings.
Another patient, who against his will was required to travel frequently, also
tried to convince himself and others of his inability to go to work. He constantly
disturbed his sleep by claiming stomach and back aches, as described above, and
consequently slept until late in the day. He also liked to foster his tiredness by
taking sleeping pills. His condition had hardly improved when he was struck by
two ideas similarly valuable in supporting his irresponsible behavior with regard
to work. He discovered that his health would be improved were he to go riding
in the morning. He, therefore, had himself awakened at six in the morning, but
still went to bed after midnight. In order to steel himself for uncomfortable beds
when traveling, he bought a cot on which he slept miserably until two in the
morning, when he crawled into his comfortable bed. The result of both tactics
was that he was incapable of working.
A patient, who wanted to ascribe blame for his poor business to his rich
relatives, who he alleged made him ill by failing to help him, had learned the art
of putting so much pressure on the arm on which he was sleeping that he
awakened. Now that he also suffered from insomnia, the guilt of his relatives
became self-evident. There is no end to such examples.
The physiology of sleep-related conditions focuses in particular on the
increase of enervating conditions and on the accumulation of blood in the brain.
Most likely there are forms of insomnia that are primarily the result of a
disturbance in the sleep-regulating mechanisms (painful vascular and kidney
diseases, psychological trauma, etc.) Insomnia caused by anxiety is quite
different. It serves, not unlike other symptoms of anxiety, the tendency toward
anxiety expansion, which asserts itself regardless of the physiological condition
of insomnia. It springs from psychological tension caused by a patient having to

solve problems for which he believes his ability to cooperate to be inadequate.
4 See "Traum und Traumdeutung" [Dream and Dream Interpretation]. See
Volume 3 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler (Chapter XXIV).
Appendix
On Positions Taken in Sleep
Individual Psychological research teaches us that the manifestations
conditioned by sleep also conform to the individual's lifeline. As long as these
conditions are based on a superstitious belief that they are due to binding forces,
people will assume that they are at their mercy, and are, therefore, free from
having to assume any responsibilities. We are convinced that the actual and
realistic reasons for dreams and a person’s ability to sleep never are purely
physiological, but are always exploited and construed by the individual to favor
his personal expansion tendency, his lifestyle. A careful examination based on
considerable material evidence will show that even the position assumed by a
person in sleep reflects his lifeline. I have noted this in the examples that follow.
For persons who were subjected to an Individual Psychological examination, it is
possible in most cases to describe their sleep position. I invite psychiatrists,
neurologists, and educators to contribute from their experience toward the
following examples:
1. K.F., a 16 year old apprentice (as a waiter) became afflicted with
hallucinatory disorientation. Studying his position while sleeping showed that he
assumes a particularly provocative position with his hands clasped in back while
sleeping on his side. During the day I have seen him frequently walking with his
hands clasped in back. His psychological condition was one of great
dissatisfaction with his job. He wanted to become either a teacher or a pilot.
When asked whether he knew the reason for clasping his hands in back he
answered confidently that his favorite teacher always had his hands clasped in
back when walking. It was he who had suggested that the apprentice become a
teacher, a plan that he had to abandon because of his parents' poverty.
The apprentice's sleep position clearly signaled his hostility toward his
present job. It represents a position in imitation of Napoleon; an imitation
arrived at via the teacher, who had the same psychological make-up. The young
apprentice waiter's obsession was that he had been selected to embody the great
field marshal to war against Russia, an idea that one year later was shared by
other apprentices.
2. S. suffered from progressive paralysis. He sleeps in a cowering position
with covers over his head. His medical history shows him "not to be a
megalomaniac, but apathetic, helpless, and without any initiative."
In conclusion, I should like to state, based on several clear observations of

positions assumed by children in their sleep that understanding the significance
of this can be of great importance to educators.
Chapter XI
Minutes of Meetings of the Organization for Individual Psychology1 2
[1914]
7 February 1914 - Dr. Adler is listed to present: Casuistic Report.3
Dr. Adler: The fundamental aspect of kleptomania is defiance. The rage to
become rich, as demonstrated by the last case in Strasser's work, is often found
in people with a pronounced feeling of inferiority. Also instructive is the attitude
toward the military: Suicide because of disqualification is found in nervous
persons; on the other hand, there is a terrible fear of the military.
14 February 1914 - Discussion on Strasser's work "On Kleptomania"4
Freschl: The kleptomaniac triumphs twice: one has to deal with him and yet he
cannot be punished.
Wexberg cites the case of a seven-year old school girl who fantasizes in a
school paper about stealing from her father and then vomited for fear of
punishment. Here also is a case of overwhelming the father and not being
punished for vomiting.
Dr. Sperber points to the significance of Strasser's work in criminology.
(No mention of Adler in minutes for meetings on 21 and 28 February.)
1 First appeared as “Sitzungsbericht des Vereins fur Individualpsychologie,
March 7, 
1914. in Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, page 96. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 The meeting on 7 February 1914 was in two parts. The first consisted of brief
reports :a. Dr. Oppenheim spoke on Plutarch's biography of Fabius Maximus
Conctator. b. Dr. Adler made some casuistical remarks . The second part was a
talk by Dr. Charlot Strasser (Zurich) on Kleptomania. 
4 At the meeting on 14 February 1914 where a discussion was held of Dr.
Strasser's work on Kleptomania, Adler was the first to speak.
Meeting on 7 March 1914
Dr. Leonhard Deutsch: Culture (Kultur) and Individual Psychology
The lecturer discussed the consequences for a cultured person that can be
drawn from Individual Psychology. The essence of cultured behavior is leaving
one's fellow man in peace, i.e. not to burden him, not to torment him (with
emotions, neurotic tricks, etc.). The nervous person, therefore, is not a cultured
person (or has no culture).
The discussion following the lecture heatedly disputed the views of the

speaker. Freschl thought just the opposite of what was said to be the true concept
of culture. The principle of leaving another at peace would end in stagnation. Dr.
Bloch, Glassner, and Cresis subsequently supported that opinion. Dr. Furtmüller
thought that understanding culture (Kultur) as a social manifestation cannot be
something with which Individual Psychology should be concerned. Every
formula for every individual culture is arbitrary just as that of the speaker's.
Lurking in the background is always the tendency to contrast a small aristocracy
with a large rabble. Dr. Adler expressed the opinion that demanding leaving
people in peace could carry some weight, as could the contrary. The ideal public
spirit, on which our life is structured, demands peace as well as mutual agitation.
In his summary, the speaker pointed out that he did not wish to propagate a
nihilistic ideal, that in his thinking, “leaving in peace” does not enter as a
requirment for culture. He only calls for refraining from a particular fruitless and
irritating kind of anxiety that is so characteristic of the nervous. It makes no
sense to argue over the meaning of words such as culture, uncultured, and
civilization. It is all that which he calls culture. If someone else calls the same
thing uncultured so is that also understandable, since no one can be expected to
regard himself as uncultured.
Chapter XII
Minutes of Meetings of the Individual Psychology Organization1 2 [1914]
Meeting on 14 March 1914
1. Short report: 
a). Dr. Bloch: Excerpts from Rfosegger's "Waldheimat" b). Dr. Furtmüller:
Paper on C. G. Jung's lecture at the Congress in Munich: "Contribution to the
Study of Psychological Types."
2. Tagliapietra: "Contributions to the Psychology of Music."
The lecturer took as his point of departure the physio-psychological effect
of the simplest tone combinations and showed that some can be felt as male and
others as female. This inherent symbolism of the musical language, which in its
physical manifestation is somewhat analogous to color combinations, can bring
an understanding of the emotional effect of music wherein distinct connections
to Individual Psychology's concept of sexual problems (male-female, above-
below) ensue.
During the discussion Dr. Adler points out that the analogies presented by
the speaker certainly are justified, but they represent a primitive perspective not
characteristic of music.
Dr. Wexberg: There is no doubt that the scheme "male-female" can be

found in music, but only if one searches for it. This symbolism is not a given, a
priori, and is not generally perceived.
Mr. Glassner: The nature of music is rhythm and agitation of the rhythm. Life
can similarly be defined.
1 First appeared as “Sitzungsbericht des Vereins fur Individualpsychologie,
March 7, 
1914. in Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, page 143. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
1). Short reports: 
a). Dr. Adler: Psychological treatment of chorea3 minor. b). Ms. Horwitz: Paper
on Smith: On the Psychology of Daydreaming.
2). Dr. Furtmüller: "On Teaching Morals"
In light of the vehement dispute regarding a method for teaching morals,
the speaker found it necessary to ask first what it is that can be expected from
teaching morals. He pointed to the theory of the individual development of
ethics that he tried to present in his paper, "Psychology and Ethics." He believes
from this follows that for the development of ethical experiences in the child,
direct educational intervention or special moral teachings are not necessary; it is
only necessary to provide clarification and make corrections. On the other hand,
since the ethical form of a subjective experience provides no guarantee for
objectively regarding the ethics of a whole personality, an ethical education is
ineffective in dealing with the most difficult character problems, and at best
could result only in a deceptive change in form, in fact could result in specific
dangers. Contrary to this, the speaker emphasized a "pre-ethical education," i.e.
the planned and purposeful influencing of those manifestations within the child's
psyche from which ethical experiences initially arise, which is the feeling of
inferiority and reactive behavior, (pre-ethical) obedience and defiance. The
speaker clarified his presentation with numerous examples from the pedagogical
literature and practice.
Discussion: Frau Doktor. Furtmüller questioned the practical application of
a moral teaching. Although the principle of education that is derived from
Individual Psychology--to spare the child from ethical demands, to leave it in
peace,--cannot be carried through where harming fellow human beings occurs.
Dr. Adler: The ambiguity of the ethical phenomenon forces us to find
therein the line of the individual. Ethics is the incarnation of the sense of
community. The "pre-ethical education" is a clarification of the child's lifeline.
The goal is the education of the child for the community.
Dr. Bloch believes that moral teaching should be incorporated into various

teaching subjects, foremost with history. Mr. Leitner pointed to the hidden
aggression in a pupil's guilt feeling. 
1. Short reports:
3 (Editor’s note) A disease of the nervous system.
a). Mr. Freschl: From Nietsche
b). Dr. Oppenheim: On Rostand's "Cyrano de Bergerac." 2. Discussion on the
relationship of children and neurotics to animals.
Dr. Adler points to the animal symbolism of character traits, which often
are used in deprecating people. In pathological form it manifests itself in a case
of dementia praecox, on which he then reports.
Based on an example from Henry Lichtenberger's novel Le Petit Roi, Frau
Doktor Adler discussed the drive for dominance over animals observed in
children.
Frau Doktor . Kramer, Ms. Mandel and Dr. Kramer referred to a large
number of school papers on the subject of the individual's relationship to
animals. Frau Doktor Furtmüller spoke on an American statistic concerning
types of animals that children like for pets.

Meeting on 4 April 1914
1. Short reports: Dr. Adler: On the problem of distancing in a case of
paranoia. 
2. Discussion of the relationship of children and neurotics to animals
(continuation).
Mr. Freschl regards the essential element in that question to lie in the
tendency of children to gain dominance over animals. Mr. Freschl, Dr. Wexberg,
Frau Doktor. Furtmüller and Dr. Weiss spoke on the extent to which children
presume animals to have human feelings and thoughts. Also speaking were Mr.
Leitner, Mr. Taliapietra (casuistic report), and Dr. Adler, who had the last word.
Meeting on 18 April 1914
1. Mr. Leitner: Attempted to formulate a psychological sketch of G.
Hauptmann's work "Und Pipps Tanzt" (And Pipps Dances). Leitner points out
how effectively Hauptmann creates a dream-like atmosphere around things and
people. He attributed to the main character in the drama the traits and powers of
a witch -- it was Adler who recognized that women empathized with many traits
of witches in their perception of goals -- and also showed the effect of a witch on
the other persons in the play. Pipps is but the symbol of passionate wishes, an
idea that sprung from the mind of the bleary-eyed young workman.
The discussion examined the appearance of witch types in Hauptmann's
dramas. 
2. Ms. Horwitz: Presented a paper on Smith's "Ueber das Spielen mit Puppen"
(On Playing with Dolls). 
3. Dr. Adler reported on dreams (that of a morphine addict, an alcoholic, and a
paranoiac) that reflect clear tendencies of irresponsibility and shifting blame. 
The topic of the discussion was the tendency to shift blame in psychosis and in
dreams (Mr. Freschl, Dr.Wexberg).
Chapter XIII
The Woman: Raising and Educating Children12
[1916]
In poetry and in theory the question has been decided: The woman raises
the children. A fleeting glance at life around us leads to the same conclusion.
Even where both parents are working, influencing the child's body and mind is
the responsibility of the mother. Similarly unquestioned is this role of the
woman in nursery school and as governess in the home. Furthermore, the

education of girls in school is for the most part by women, and to a large extent
for boys.
If we exclude those who argue that there are no influences in rearing
children--who are as irrational as those who expect everything from their
upbringing--we then encounter the large number of those who wish to limit the
influence of the woman to the very earliest time in a child's life, almost to the
moment of birth, and to their antagonists who regard upbringing by the mother
as the sacrosanct principle in human development. Both sides point to their rich
experience and to a number of notable men and women as evidence of their
belief. And as a matter of fact, we are greatly impressed by the story that
Achilles was raised by women, and we find pleasure in Goethe's description of
his intimacy with his mother, whom he honored and appreciated for the
influence she had on him. At the same time we hear those who constantly
criticize and complain about the ways of women, and that their upbringing is
worthless. In the case of boys, the role of the woman in raising them is often
regarded as disastrous.
In the midst of this confusion of views, the war now introduces a more
contemporary viewpoint in that it places the upbringing of children into the
hands of the mother almost everywhere in Europe. Are we now better able to
judge? Or are there difficulties other than material needs that prevent an
objective insight? Is the quest for a better way of upbringing impossible and one
of those insolvable problems created by human society that instigate only
controversy and competition?
What we can contribute now, after two years of war, first of all are personal
impressions arising from the social circles to which we belong. Inquiries that I
conducted established that greater problems did not occur either in the home or
in school, when mothers were the sole caregiver. We found more frequently that
the absence of the father and the dangers he faced had discouraged children from
pursuing temptations. The aim of these children to please their fathers and to
spare them worry and grief in their absence clearly became apparent. True, in the
segment of society to which I relate, parents had an understanding and were
interested in matters concerning the raising of children and therefore, together
with others, exerted their influence on them.
1 Originally published as : "Die Frau als Erzieherin" in Arch. Frauenk.
Würzburg, Vol. 2, 
341-349, 1916. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
An analysis such as this, favoring upbringing by the mother, does not carry

much weight. The influence of the father was not eliminated. From time
immemorial children heard in the voice of their mother also that of the father.
On the other hand, in most of the cases I examined the attitude of the children
was to win their father's respect. Their mothers were praiseworthy for not trying
to interfere with that desire; in fact, they supported it. A perversion of this
advantageous and cooperative influence on the child would be if the mother
would secretly exploit the father's help by threatening a misbehaving child with
reporting him to the father. It would be a mistake to credit the mother with
successful or unsuccessful upbringing in the face of such a strong authority in
the father. It would also be mistaken to assume that such threats are only
occasional tricks used by the mother in rearing her child and, therefore, are
meaningful for evaluating that method. Rather it indicates by being an obviously
preferred method how often women reinforce the rearing of children with the
male authority. In other cases, the caretaker, teacher, uncle, principal, are
assigned the same role. In my collection of cases of children's fears, I found, for
example, the following expression by a seven year-old girl: "I am afraid when
the devil comes with his chains. I am afraid of a mouse. I am afraid of Serbs and
Russians. I am afraid of ghosts. I am afraid of my mother and of my guardian. I
am afraid of the carpet beater and snakes. I am most afraid of being beaten." In
the order of misgivings, the poor child places the guardian near the top, but lets
us know that every intervention by the mother is on behalf of the male guardian.
When we thus see from our perspective the strong limits imposed on the
woman's range of influence, we can speak of the mother as primary educator
only in the rarest cases. This important realization is in full accord with the male
dominance in our contemporary culture. Therefore, the man has to assume the
undisputable responsibility for his part in rearing.
_____________________
This study first of all is meant to provide guidelines and invite further
examination. It will also examine the progress in school of children with an
absent father, or a male teacher, for either shorter or longer periods of time.
However, the same considerations as above also apply here. The male influence
cannot be eliminated. This is even more so since the common ideals of the
culture somehow influence every child's goal. This cultural ideal clearly carries
the male stamp, directs the yearning of the child and all his movements toward
mastery and value in his environment. It is in fact the individual will of
childhood fused to the social will. This general, male-directed ideal affects the
outlook and validity of upbringing by the woman. Usually from the tension that
ensues springs insubordination of the child toward the mother while the standing
of the father is more easily endured from the start.

We therefore conclude that upbringing by the woman is regularly
subordinated to the influence of the man and a male culture; she abides by the
dictates of the man. The woman, therefore, cannot be charged with the full
responsibility of rearing. She cannot be accused of failure, such as in wartime,
when surprising changes suddenly take place and the harmony in guiding
children is marred and trouble arises. The woman is now charged with governing
the child alone, without any adequate preparation. Against her innermost nature
she must carry on the task independently, a task that gives voice to the victory of
male principles. The support provided by the man becomes a barrier and a
guidepost. However, the woman acting alone in the task of raising the child
lacks the instinctive familiarity with the male principles that reside in our
culture. Even when she consciously acknowledges and attempts to integrate
them, she will always face barriers in her natural, undeniable need for
selfesteem. The spirit of harmony in child rearing suffers even further since
distress and vacillation in the family produce a general sense of insecurity and
are reflected in the feelings of the child. Although the child may not comprehend
the changes taking place, he still suffers from the impression of conflicting,
faltering, leadership. At this point the child's considerable need for selfesteem
makes itself felt, giving impetus to revolt. Or the woman, as a countermeasure
against her subordinated position and by overcompensating, assumes a forced
authoritarian position often favored by tendencies derived from childhood. In
such circumstances an open or disguised revolt is in the offing, particularly by
boys, but also frequently by girls. In the absence of accustomed principles, it is
easier to reach for a socially accepted authority than to seek one's own place
based on an objective and rational decision. To this it must also be added that
probably no child grows up without having experienced how others
disparagingly, either occasionally or always, look upon mothers or at women in
general. The mother then usually rationalizes the apparent superiority of the
father by tending to ascribe undo importance to his infrequent contacts with his
children. However, we find the same manifestations that we see in families also
present in public and in boarding schools where the mother is as little available
to the child as is the father.
As the saying goes, trouble does not go away by shutting one's eyes. The
guidelines for what is permitted or denied a child in our culture rest in the
authority of the man. Whoever interjects his or her personality into raising a
child must count on that fact, for better or for worse. In our time, the unfettered
development in women of the art of rearing children is impeded by the woman's
feeling of inferiority. If there were any way to ameliorate these existing
problems, it would be to recognize women's lack of selfconfidence. It is from

this that her timid behavior is derived, albeit also her exaggerated craving for
authority. Furthermore, as this paper attempts to show, the prevailing tendencies
to deprecate the effort of women in raising and educating children are unjust and
socially harmful.
This problem can be resolved in light of our current educational system
only to the extent to which it seems to be influenced by the absence of the male
partner in raising the child. If it is shown that the physical absence of the male is
enough by itself to bring about the corruption of the child, that finding would be
the strongest condemnation of our current method for raising children, regardless
whether the man or the woman raises the child. It would not only question the
independence of our children, but would indicate that in raising our children we
operate with the crudest methods of fear and terror in the belief that our
children's morals can be upheld only by keeping a whip before their eyes. Who
would dare defend a position which has as a precondition that the male is
indispensable?
Nevertheless, we are forced to concede that we uphold similar principles to
explain the failures among a significant part of our youth. Regarding school
delinquencies and criminal behavior by children, which have risen significantly
in all countries engaged in war, a tentative look has shown us that the offenders
never possessed a significant amount of courage or activity. Also, we saw that
earlier in their lives they performed their normal tasks only under strict
supervision and dread of punishment. Far more frequently than is usually
assumed, they displayed traits of cowardice, indolence, and fantasizing. They
also feared independent social activity, and were apprehensive in assuming
responsibility. These people who practiced escaping and shirking from
childhood, who like to associate with one another to find succor in gangs, and
who no longer are under the whip that kept them in line, now are condemned to
a fate of dependent weaklings. Puberty, when the feeling of masculinity
awakens, is when the cowardly boy in particular engages in boastful acts. His
feelings of weakness keep him from competing in society where in the past he
engaged only under pressure from his father. He already has subjugation in his
blood and he uses his newly won freedom to instigate a slave revolt. Once
having neglected school and taken flight into the world of the criminal, his
antagonist becomes the absent father. The mother, therefore, must remain
without influence and all her efforts fail. The natural cowardice in such children
is displayed in their exploitation of hidden opportunities such as the problems
faced by overworked and overburdened teachers, by lying at home and in school,
and submitting to a leading spirit by following those who form gangs for their
own protection. With regard to the last, and in terms of overcompensating for a

feeling of insecurity, Dr. Charlot Strasser presented extensive informative
material in his instructive work, Das Kumulativvebrechen (The cumulative
crime),3 which is a masterpiece in Individual Psychology.
Given these facts it would be inappropriate to measure the merits of an
upbringing by a woman on the basis of school achievement, or by the rise in
crimes among youth during wartime. This is even more so the case because the
inescapable degrading of laws in wartime tempts the troubled morals of those
who stayed home. There are many other more significant reasons for lowered
school performance and rising criminality than incompetence in women for
raising children.
3 Archiv für Kriminalpsycholgie, published by Vogl, 1914.
However, the argument can well be made that the woman is no more able
than the police, or the threat of punishment, or the schools, to deal with these
social problems. Therefore, it may be generally useful if the psychologist is
permitted to point out three commonly found harmful attitudes of women that
could easily denigrate her role as educator. In each of these instances we deal
with an attitude on the part of women toward life, that is a philosophy of life,
that should not allow us to expect immediate changes. These three attitudes, as
different as they may appear in their outward manifestation, are similar on one
point: they developed out of a feeling of inferiority that is subjective in form.
Furthermore, there is the acceptance of a masculine prejudice to which a woman
has been subjected since childhood which regards her as dependent and naturally
weak. Rarely is a girl able to free herself from that prejudice. Generally one
assumes, even without understanding the connection, that a woman's
apprehensiveness is an immutable character trait and, therefore, gives reason to
insist that she is that way by nature. Or, the girl attempts with great effort to
escape her presumed inferiority and dependency and easily succumbs to the
other extreme which is to attain her goal frantically and by excessive means. A
mixture of these approaches gives shape to that person's fate.
Marriage and children appear to such women as burdens forced on them
and are seen as an unalterable inequity. Or they strive with great anticipation for
relief from all the harm stemming from inferiority but in the process develop a
heightened sensitivity that can bring only disappointment in light of the harsh
reality. In their feeling of weakness they also depend more on the magic of their
looks than on their own strength or, misled by the external manifestations of "the
powerful male," attempt to imitate him, exaggerate these characteristics and
become domineering, tyrannical, and despotic. They blindly avoid developing a
mutually respectful relationship with their husband and children, which is an

essential quality for a harmonious rearing of children.
From this not so insignificant number of unfit members of society stem the
three types of totally unsuitable caretakers whose incompetence becomes
particularly prominent in difficult times. I shall present without mentioning the
many mixed cases and without accusing--we are dealing here exclusively with
victims of childlike and infantile prejudices--a simple comparable outline of the
three worthless types. I am speaking of this publicly because I am convinced that
widespread abuse does not diminish by attempting to cover it up.
The first case is very apparent and one that I described in great detail in a
previous work (Erziehung der Erzieher) [Teaching the Upbringer], in Heilen und
Bilden, Reinhardt {pub. Munich, 1914} [Healing and Teaching]). If a girl grows
up consistently disdainful of the female role, she will suffer visibly and in most
cases become neurotic upon her marriage and during her first pregnancy. In
mysterious ways the care of an only child, and more so where there are two or
more children, will be associated with unimaginable problems so that everyone
around her will get the impression that more children would become an
unbearable burden for the entire family. Despite good intentions, the attitude of
the woman influences the entire process of rearing. The child, deluded by
unreasonable pampering, raises his demands beyond bounds, or responds to
heartless pressure and nagging with vengeful revolt. If, as is the case now in
wartime, the child is alone with his adversary, all stops will be pulled and the
point will be reached where the child confronts his father in a situation that will
be living proof against additional children.
A second type of incompetent caretaker, the cause of which is similar to the
first, is the mother who, in not trusting in her own powers, forfeited her faith in
her ability to raise her children. She believes only in her husband whom she sees
as her natural and responsible supporter, and thus, not believing that she can
change, finds herself at the head of her family, impotent and unsettled by the
spotlight trained on her, in charge of children who have lost their respect for her.
With that attitude toward her children such women think only of retreat, as if
their primary responsibility were to justify their outlook on life which is that
only the husband is creative and, therefore, has the full responsibility, yes, is
irreplaceable, for raising the children. They reach for methods of upbringing that
conform to that attitude. They agonize and lament desperately, clamor
powerlessly, and rant and rave ineffectually. The children easily see fun in this
and play their heroic roles surprisingly well, unaware, of course, that they also
are playing into the hands of their antagonist. At the end there is "proof" that
only the man is suited to bring up children!
The most prevalent of the three types is the last. This mother finds the

magic formula for solving life's problems in "masculine" aggression--and
overplays it. She becomes domineering and practices excessive strictness;
corporal punishment becomes a constant factor in upbringing. Under such
pressure the child tends to become cowardly and apprehensive, but watches for
the mother's downfall. The way is open for the child to fight order and equity in
the family, in school, and in society. The absence of the husband often becomes
a challenge for the mother to become stricter. She thereby encourages defiance
in the child and leads both to founder. Power is not exalted, even when cloaked
in masculinity.
Upbringing means: to make someone useful for social interrelationships.
Master in this, men or women, are those who consider themselves worthy
members of society.
Chapter XIV
The Child's Inner Life and Social Feeling1 2
[1917]
What we find in a new-born child--organ functions, reflexes, a sum of
movements, instincts, even emotions--is by no means the most important and
most valuable part of life; that part is what we understand to be the child’s
"Seelenleben,"3 the inner life. We wish to see those other manifestations more as
the functional inheritance, as the living material from which the inner life is
formed.
Because in the life of a child, and in his physical and mental development,
we find a mostly hidden line that leads "upward." It is a relentlessly guiding line,
and all the above named physiological realities are placed at its service by
putting them in order and giving them directions. Instincts and reflexes integrate
themselves, are recognized as “useful,” and modified and evaluated. The
movements of the eyes, of the limbs, the torso, obey one "plan," and all
emotions: pleasure, happiness, sadness, pain, anger, love, hate, and desires,
rationally take their assigned places. The way they express themselves, and in
their temperament they connect closely with their environment and with people.
Soon appear traces of character traits that call out and respond to the demands of
the outside world with which they establish further contacts.
This stage of development, which begins as early as the second half of the
the child’s first year of life, can only be understood by accepting an assumption
of an integrated "state of readiness" of spiritual forces to deal with resistance
from the outside.
Only at that stage of development can we speak of a child's inner life. Then
begins the growth of a spiritual apparatus which by testing and groping makes

the attempt at starting the work of establishing a position on the questions of life.
Consequently, this apparatus, that we name simply "Seelenleben," the inner
life, much like a machine operating for a specific purpose, admittedly is
infinitely more varied and a thousand times more suitable for aggression and
avoidance. It contains its own life experiences, as well as those of its forbearers,
in organ structure and organ functions. Foremost an aggressive organ, it
expediently gathers experiences, exercises self-control, functions cautiously,
tries to protect its gains with a large security coefficient, and never misses its
goal. This is how "Seelenleben," the human inner life, appears to us.
1 Originally published as "Kindishe Seelenleben und Gemeinsinn" in Ann.
Nat. Kult. Phil., p. 38-45, 1917. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 The word "Seele" literally means soul. At times I have used “psychology,” but
here, I think Adler means to say that even before we can use terms like
psychology, there is a "soul."
*
The organs and their functions are limited in their capabilities at the outset;
only a small portion of the universe, and then only that humanly perceivable, can
in some manner be captured and evaluated. The extent of our mastery over the
world is constantly being narrowed by momentary as well as constant physical
and mental demands. This relational dependency, along with the restrictive
feeling that grows out of it, burdens the inner life with feelings of feebleness,
inferiority, and insecurity. This is the raw material that forms from existing
possibilities the spiritual apparatus of memory and foresight, and the essential
"security" measures against fear of experiencing defeat in life. Connected with
these, and guided and influenced by them, grow ideas, tactics, and emotions
arising from a physical and psychological need to enhance personal standing as
much as possible. Uninterrupted progress is guaranteed by the urge to struggle
from a state of insecurity to a higher level toward the goal of mastery over
matter.4 The human being can bear the feeling of feebleness only by engendering
from within himself a tenacious upward striving, by awakening the belief in
himself and in his future and by recognizing that all human beings share a
common fate.
Careful observation of the inner life of a child reveals in the same way as
memory in the adult that this struggle for security, this anticipating and forging
the future, begins early and forms and hammers with unabated force the "unity
of the personality," individuality. However, in the child the feeling of insecurity
is much greater, causing the child to become frightened, increasing his need for

support and leading him to seek protection and instruction from adults. The fact
that children can be trained speaks eloquently for their feeling of inferiority and
concern for their future. This feeling of insecurity increases immeasurably in
those whose training threatens to fail, because such children choose to
"compensate" in altogether different ways. With three particular categories of
children one should be prepared for increased pathological feelings of
inferiority. The first is that of children who are constitutionally weak or sick.
The second is that of children who are not ill, but who were robbed of courage
by a severe and unjust upbringing. The third categoy consists of pampered
children who had never gained courage.
Whatever the degree of the child's insecurity, however strong the urge may
seem for compensatory strivings, the child could not progress by one step, even
when possessing great abilities and strength, as long as there is no "goal" that
forges the path. It is to the abiding credit of the school of Individual
Psychology5--which is of value in practice as well as theory--to have discovered
this fact, and to have it verified through countless observations. Recall what we
had said earlier with regard to the limitation and insufficiency of our organs
which, given their makeup are capable only of certain technical "tricks and
ruses." For the scientist, in the structure of an antediluvian organ lies a clear
goal, a direction, and a method of operating. He will understand it only when, in
addition to knowing all its parts, he also keeps an eye on the goal of the organ,
the "whereto."
4 Adler, Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen, Urban and Schwarzberg,
Vienna 1907.
The inner life of the child develops on the strength of his feeling of
inferiority in the direction of and toward the goal that promises tranquility,
satisfaction, standing, and superiority, in short, "growth." Every manifestation of
the child points in that direction. One can speak of an understanding of spiritual
emotions and of understanding human nature only when one has recognized this
methodical guiding line in its individual form of expression. Just as the child
who is learning to walk can take his first steps only when he has a goal in mind,
even though he may not reach it, so is every movement of man's inner life
motivated and instigated in the name of that "fictitious finale," created during his
insecure childhood as a fixed pole in this chaotic world.
*
It is different with upbringing, which is mostly toward an actual goal! The
self-selected goal of childhood displays all the signs of "godlikeness." Not
surprisingly, it corresponds to spiritual manifestations that always are in conflict

and in contradiction with reality. The fictitious goal of childhood has different
purposes; it should be calming and guarantee superiority. This "ideal" seeming
goal of the child then leads to a hostile perception of the world, of his
environment, and of his immediate family, so that the child prepares for, and
creates, an aggressive posture that only on occasion is penetrated by real love.
Consequently, hateful, or in more noble terms, aggressive traits, arise from the
child's individual and family life contrasting with the prerequisites for a mutually
benevolent social life of amicability, a public spirit, and equality.
The result of the collision of these two "guide lines" becomes the nucleus of
the future personality. A further examination of this observation would exceed
the framework of our current analysis.
According to our viewpoint, the life of an individual as well as life in
general progresses with a conscious, or semi-conscious, planned view toward an
unattainable but direction-giving goal to build the future. Every manifestation of
the inner life, besides its actual or causal meaning, assumes, thereby, a singularly
significant role for psychological research: an act of preparation that contains
direction and a goal!
5 Its publication is the Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Reinhardt, Munich
1914.
The questions relating to the child's inner life now appear to us in another
and much brighter light. The concept and the nature of raising a child derives
from the necessity for the individual to become a part of a community. The
primary assumption, therefore, is that it must under all conditions and in all its
nuances be "preparatory" for a social, and socially acting, community. No
purpose, no matter how ideal, must derail it unless the meaning and nature of
bringing up a child is derailed. True, raising a child in our divisive society is a
task that cannot be successfully achieved. For that reason it becomes essential
that only those should be qualified to bring up a child whose social guideline is
sufficient to at least seek a sense of community. The social structure and its
demands for accommodation reflect on the upbringing and the make-up of the
child. The person raising a child must know the causes of harm, and should the
child encounter these, resist them and learn how to find new, socially acceptable
ways. I could show in innumerable cases the great harm that can come to an
entire generation, even to the folkways of an entire people, from the social
debasing of women, and the mutual posturing of the sexes that follows. The
results are deplorable: girls are neglected and assume their female role only
under protest and make mostly irreconcilable demands for compensation. This
unhealthy relationship affects boys no less, since they feel constantly obligated
to demonstrate their superiority over girls, demanding that this be accepted, and,

thereby, making enemies of women and passing the decision to them.
Everything that perpetuates the "struggle" between the sexes stems from this
imbalance of different social levels that burdens the child early in life.
The human spirit, probably from its origins, has a tendency toward a goal of
superiority over its universe. As soon as the child senses from the behavior of
adults the intense struggle for dominance, the will to power, he will feel justified
in his own behavior in seeking power. The child will seek to assume an
aggressive posture in particular when he has felt that kind of pressure from early
childhood. With a mostly malicious attitude which leads to constant competition
with others and to an always overheated urge for prestige the child grows away
from family and into a social life. It, therefore, becomes self-evident that all his
capabilities develop as if readying for battle.
For that reason, the significance ascribed to inherent characteristics
obviously is exaggerated. Many of the observed manifestations turn out to be the
result of imitation. We deny the existence of a "drive." Whatever hesitating
attempts the child has made in his struggle for godlikeness, and whatever
seemed to have given the child an advantage, was either freely invented or
imitated.
Similarly, character traits and ideals develop under the constant pressure
and changing needs of society. Society's higher or lower standards are the result
of a conscious or unconscious upbringing that is capable of closing off certain
paths to the goal-striving child. Thus it often appears as if obedience is promoted
over defiance. The same is true for cowardice and courage, which does not mean
that these two qualities occasionally cannot develop and be used interchangeably
in one person. In any case, it appears as a powerful human condition, not yet
overcome, which creates this kind of uncertainty, fearfulness, and subjugation
that reaches back into early childhood where it conjures up an analogous
behavior.
Since the child always looks toward the future, the result is a dependence
on social characteristics that become the child's destiny. A world of hostility and
adversity will suggest to the adult as well as the child that failure, weaknesses,
crime, and self-debasement, can be acts of revenge, revolts, while exaltation is a
way to power. Such obsessive attempts to break down social barriers are
countered by the no less disparaging posture toward others in which efforts at
eliminating every "mistake" ever experienced result in a state of constant
despair, a waste of time, and a timid and hesitating attitude for the rest of one's
life. These two types of people are found so frequently that our age has been
dubbed "neurotic.” The timid are in the majority, which can easily be explained
by the peculiarity of a typically modern way of upbringing, by which the child is

made overly cautious, often only to spare the parents trouble. It is easy to
understand how such a fearful perspective toward life can distort all values and
create a constantly morbid attitude toward the world. Accepting experiences
with an unprejudiced mind can change such an attitude. Mistakes frequently are
of lesser significance than the consequences that the child draws from them. This
presumably also applies to sexual lapses in childhood. One must never forget
that the child must resolve his sexuality. If he makes mistakes, one should also
keep in mind inadequacies because of his age and the faulty attempts at
correcting by those bringing up the child. An important insight that we have
gained is that the sexual attitude of the maturing child fully reflects his
individual behavior and can be changed only along with such behavior.
The unity in the "child's life plan" can also be discerned in favorite games,
in fantasies about one's professional future, recollections of earliest memories,
the attitude of parents, teachers, fellow students, attitudes toward strangers and
particular characteristics some of which I shall mention here.6
For example, our viewpoint allows us to deduce from a child's lies that his
spiritual growth was so overcome by a feeling of inferiority that the child had to
resort to being divisive and to using ruses to attain a higher goal. The choice of
lies and of similar devices, such as laziness, blushing, timidity, tardiness, etc.,
pedantry, whining, irascibleness and other characteristics appears always in a
relationship to whatever strength the person possesses, his experiences, and
whatever it takes to battle effectively with the environment. More extensive
elaborations can be found in the other cited works. The most poignant
impression gained from the behavior of children who had a poor development is
a "distancing from social life," a disdain or dislike to "play along," or even
spoiling the game for others. The social deficiencies, the absence of a public
spirit, become very apparent. 
*
6 See Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, Bergmann, Wiesbaden 1912.
We have tried to show that the advantages and disadvantages of society
could have an equal influence on the spiritual development of the child and that
by giving direction to the child's ideals and yearning for superiority, they either
strengthen or weaken those ideals. This is how they influence the perspectives of
the child and force the child to assume an attitude for the rest of his life which,
quite imperceptibly, regards a "not me" view of the world as hostile and
contentious. We presume that these firmly one sided, tendentious, views of the
world, stemming from childhood, wilt the public spirit, or at least remain
unrecognized and incorrigible as long as a greater self-knowledge does not force

a change.7 In conclusion, to turn these ideas into specific examples, two primary
types of malcontents should be mentioned. One type consists of those who find
ways by which they are always in opposition to others. Their low selfesteem is
as evident as is that of the second type, who by pointing to their own weaknesses
always cast "blame" on themselves, but only for the purpose of having others
serve them. The extent to which such people are in conflict with the demands of
real life has been proven in our school of psychology by demonstrating that they
represent the major contingent of neurotic and psychologically afflicted people.
7 See Heilen und Bilden, Reinhardt, Munich 1914 Chapter XV
On Homosexuality1 2 3 4
[1918]
It is in the nature of human coexistence to establish certain conditions, rules
of the game (Furtmüller) one might say, which affect all of us and which, in all
circumstances, are found to be inherent, real, and true. This applies to the
principles that govern our society, authority, heterosexuality, fashion, morality,
etc.
Since humankind is not “perfect” and since we can only approach absolute
truths by way of mistakes, lapses are not out of the question. As an example, the
history of “Greek Eros” is extremely complex and lengthy and one has to search
for correlating viewpoints in order to present a brief account of the research
conducted on the psychology of homosexuality. Perhaps it would suffice for now
were I to address the views of the largest group of authorities, which includes
scholars and laymen, which holds that inheritance is the most significant factor
with regard to homosexuality, the implication being that a person is born a
homosexual. At that point, opinions probably diverge. Some assume that the
genes of a male homosexual are somehow diminished in favor of genes that
somehow tend to be female. Others believe that there are those who were
endowed at birth with particularly powerful organs, etc.
No one has ever asserted that the inherited female characteristics, the
female attributes in the male homosexual, were stronger than are female
attributes in a woman. Yet, when we examine homosexuals, we see exclusively
persons with female or female-leaning tendencies, while the masculine attributes
seem to be missing. On the other hand, women exhibit masculine tendencies to
an extraordinary degree. This argues poorly in favor of an inheritance theory
because we are justified in asking: where are the masculine tendencies? I must
add parenthetically that in well established cases the male emotionality is not
missing, or not totally missing, but is forced into the background by female
attributes to such a degree that this discrepancy, this inner contradiction,

becomes particularly apparent.
1 Lecture presented to the Juristisch-Medizinische Gesellschaft in Zurich,
1918. First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
127-135, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XIV in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 See Adler, “Das Problem der Homosexualitaet,” Munich, 1917. Also,
“Handbuch der normalen und Pathologischen Physiologie.” 
4 (Editor’s note) Adler’s view of homosexuality in this article reflects the rather
common bias of his time and culture. Although he transcended the widespread
misconceptions about women and children at the turn of the century, his view of
homosexuality represents a historical limitation and apparent contradiction of his
general perspective. In the interests of scholarship and historical accuracy, the
controversial article has been included in this volume. The current Classical
Adlerian view of sexuality promotes cooperation between partners, and attempts
to correct domination or depreciation within all sexual orientations. This
contemporary stance is more congruent with Adler’s central posture of equality,
respect, and acceptance.
A second objection that is equally justified, and one that must be faced
squarely, is the enormous frequency of homosexuality by choice, which means
that homosexual occurrences can arise in anyone whether in childhood, on long
voyages, such as with sailors, prisoners, soldiers, or in boarding schools. This
selective homosexuality, which many observers believe to be an almost regular
manifestation in everyone’s life, leaves us just as disinclined to place much
weight on heredity in this matter.
A second group of scientists presumes that some earlier sexual experience
was fixed in a person’s mind (primarily in childhood). This also is refuted by
experience insofar as such childhood, presumed or actual, homosexual
encounters are very common. Furthermore, the homosexual experiences related
to us by patients, or by those accused of having engaged in such activities, is
often so vague that it is impossible for us to draw from them any significant
conclusions. At most it is remarkable how often homosexuals cite such
experiences to explain their entire development. We must respond in a similar
vein to those authorities who presume that such experiences leave a permanent
imprint that explains the homosexual condition. There is no adequate ground for
homosexuality.
We must also ask another question that will throw additional light on the
questionable nature of that particular point of view. We have to ask why

homosexuals fixate on specifically those experiences and not on others in which
they undoubtedly also participated. This is a question that is also dealt with
frequently by educators in other ways. What is it that we normally adhere to?
Are not human beings in their drive to imitate actually guided by binding laws?
From observing young people, children, but also adults who are particularly
strong imitators, we can learn that no one imitates something not suitable to that
person.
What, however, is it that is accommodating to the homosexual when fixing
on a homosexual experience? We must turn back to a time before such an
experience occurred. When we examine the background of such a person, we
often find that, aside from any sexual incident, he always emphasizes that even
at the age of two or three years he was taken for a girl, that he enjoyed playing
with dolls, and that he associated almost exclusively with girls, etc.
Even the theory of a fixation on an early childhood experience hardly leads
to an understanding of what appears to be an unalterable attitude of a person who
apparently had worked against the social order from his earliest childhood.
In his development, the homosexual denies the fundamental principle for
the preservation of our social order. No matter how he arrived at his attitude and
feelings, it is inconceivable that he was unaware of the enormous social
opposition to the direction in which he was developing. It can well be said that it
is exceedingly far more difficult to live as a homosexual than as a normal
person. It requires an enormous expenditure of energy to go through life as a
homosexual. We can in fact see such an investment of energy when observing
the perverse individual. We can watch his whole thought process, how he looks
at men, at women, at his experiences, and we can see how he prepares himself,
step-by-step, to apply the devious techniques for arriving at a consistent attitude
that cannot easily be shaken. The innumerable bisexual cases, which are in the
majority, demonstrates homosexual development, often in stages, which entail
the expenditure of a great effort in order to abandon a normal way of life and to
restrict such an existence to make room for homosexuality.
It is often actually moving to observe how those thus affected hypnotize
themselves step by step and how they force themselves to believe that they are
not made to adjust to the norm. Their arguments are of such little weight that one
has to be accustomed to the dialectics employed by homosexuals not to become
upset. I know several such people who outwardly would not arouse any notice
but who nevertheless point to some minor blemish, such as to their larynx not
being masculine, to their facial hair growth as sparse, etc. One soon gains the
impression that such individuals try to find all kinds of reasons to support their
argument that they are different.

The question that concerns us is from where their unalterable tendency
stems to deny themselves all signs of masculinity and to attain authentication
and assurance for their feelings and outlook being different.5 An explanation can
not be found from observing how homosexuals act and think. As with all other
manifestations of the human psyche we can gain an understanding only when we
have examined the total personality, when we have fathomed the senses and
penetrated the very essence of their nature in order to learn how they respond to
social demands. When we look beyond the homosexual act, which probably
brought homosexuals in conflict with the law, or which tormented and restricted
their lives, we shall find that in their other life activities they also fail to conform
to a norm that might be expected from someone who feels himself equal to
meeting life’s demands, but still may be wanting in his sexual relations. The
prominent signs that can be found in the character of many homosexuals, albeit
altered on occasion, are as follows: Often, an inability to cooperate, inordinate
ambition, an exceeding caution or cowardice, and a high degree of
discouragement with regard to meeting social demands. Quite the contrary, in
other areas, in sports, war, adventurousness, etc., homosexuals may manifest
courage and cockiness, particularly when aggressive.
From these universal findings we can ask how it is possible that two such
contrary character traits can be found in one individual: ambition that can never
be satisfied and a cowardice that from the outset prevents attaining one’s
ambition. In some form or other, and in a weakened form, every neurotic
possesses these two characteristics. Thus, when we examine more closely the
characteristics of many homosexuals, we are often presented with the clear
picture of a neurotic whose neuroticism is not as pronounced only because his
activities, due to his homosexuality, have been more restricted than those of the
typical neurotic. In such narrow confines neurotic symptoms are often not
extensive. The homosexual usually has achieved, by excluding burdening
demands, a lifestyle that satisfies him, or one that he can pursue more easily, or
one that would force a heterosexual constantly to face the realities of a social
existence with all its problems, demands, and difficulties. Nevertheless, one can
find no dearth of problems in many homosexuals whose activities are not too
limited. The most prominent of these are compulsive personality disorders.
5 Feelings cannot be used as an argument. Everyone feels in accordance with his
ultimate purpose.
The childhood histories of homosexuals also manifest numerous
expressions of behavior that can easily be related. One of the most important
findings that support my theory is that homosexuals almost regularly have great

difficulty with their sex identification, and that they arrive at a resolution of that
problem long after other children. Their histories reflect that as children their
complexion was refined, that they wore their hair long, were dressed in girls’
clothing longer than other children, always played with girls, and had no
experiences that would make them feel anything other than female. Often such
children had already mistakenly accepted the idea that they were girls when they
learned to their surprise that this was not the case. This presented new problems
to children whose ambitions already were highly stimulated, and whose caution
hampered them from facing anything new. It was no longer enough that they had
different experiences but, quite to the contrary, they exploited such experiences
to reinforce their belief that they were not like other children, that in their case
they encountered some miracle of nature, that they were somehow different, a
viewpoint they interpret as distinguishing, which is a perception that favored
their ambition. Furthermore, these often were children who were indulged and
protected from difficulties, or as children were rejected, either of which applies
to children who grew up lonely, may never have learned to be cooperative, and
who usually yielded to any person who flattered them. They are the people
whose social feeling was hindered either by a mother, or by the absence of a
mother.
Why is it that ambition plays such an important role in children? This does
not apply to children whose development has been along straight lines and
unimpeded, but to those who either derived from their position a feeling of
weakness and inferiority, or to those who came under such outside pressure, or
were so strongly indulged, that from the beginning they wished intensely for a
future that would spare them any calamity6, and that, by some miracle, would
always find them ways that guaranteed them to be ahead of everyone else. This
applies to both extreme forms of upbringing; either one nourishes and intensifies
the child’s yearning for a future untouched by life’s problems. This striving,
along with the fear of being shortchanged, leads in peculiar ways to fantasizing
about dominating and wishing to dominate in order to avoid facing any danger.
In addition to problems with gender identification and problems within a family
stemming from a failed marriage, if the child experiences other difficulties, it
will foster thoughts for satisfying ambition in other ways. Such constricted
natures, who also derive erroneous reasons from physical idiosyncrasies and
inferiorities for pursuing ways that are different, find in an inadequate childhood
additional reasons for homosexuality since ties to same-sex playmates are much
easier to establish than to those of the other sex. The question that arises after
puberty is how they will relate to the other sex. That is the question for which
such individuals were wrongly prepared.

6 See Adler, Studie űber Minderwertigkeit von Organen.
There are different answers to this question. While we find in the
development of some homosexuals the total exclusion of the other sex, we can
find others who are able to make compromises. However, the shadow of
reproach always falls on the other sex. The moment the child turns to
homosexuality the denigration of the other sex begins. The two different
developments that we have noted, toward total exclusion and compromise,
actually stem from the same dynamics, differing only in the way they are
viewed. The two developments must at some point come together and converge.
For that reason we have not treated them as separate but as related. This also
explains the burning ambition resulting from a difficult childhood, and that the
child must carefully protect such ambition by exercising special caution. The
confluence of these two character developments determines that the person as a
child and later as an adult will develop a very particular posture. From the way
he moves and from his attitude toward life, we can always identify such a person
once we take into consideration that these traits are not as pronounced when the
person believes himself to be in a secure situation. The homosexual will always
have a vacillating attitude toward normal life and, as is applicable to all
neurotics, will always be on the lookout for an alibi.
The homosexual has different characteristics. He will be turned off from
social life to various degrees. He will have changed jobs, will have started
working later, and will terminate working earlier. His whole life plays out as if
controlled by a brake mechanism. The power required by this brake mechanism
must always be generated by the homosexual himself and is derived from his
burning ambition.
First Case:
The patient is a thirty-year-old male from a prominent aristocratic family.
He is tall, athletic and muscular, but has less facial hair than would be found in
another, comparable, male. He tells that his brothers also have sparse beards,
which is not true for the father. However, their grandfather emigrated from a
region where men are known for their light beards. For years he proved to
himself and to every physician treating him that his homosexuality was inherited
and characteristic of his race and that nothing in his attitude has changed. We
can see from this example the tendentious readiness with which all patients
advance their evidence. This is done not with ill intent but with what is well
known to us as the unconscious deceit practiced by neurotics. It is their personal
viewpoint, their neurotic apperception scheme that they acquired unawares
through their incessantly present caution that adhered to them like a bad habit
rather than as intended deceit.

He was the youngest of five brothers. The children were closely supervised.
Until the age of ten he had never been in the company of girls. Within his family
he had been close only to his two brothers. This circumstance is not without
significance. The psychology of the youngest child is exceedingly complicated
and interesting. In particular, there are two traits that regularly characterize the
youngest child, but which are present in such different mixtures that we often
find what appear to be contrasting characteristics. One type of youngest child
feels depressed because of his smaller size. He always acts as if under pressure
and is distinguished by a desire to be taller. He is strongly affected by events and
words that point to his small size and that challenge his ambition. The world of
fairy tales also describes the youngest child, characterizes him, and ascribes to
him a special disposition. He is always active; he is the one who wears the
seven-mile boots, etc. This also explains why among the world’s prominent men
who have attracted attention for having become successful in a short time,
particularly in the arts, were frequently those who were the youngest child. We
can speak here of a “position” psychology. The birth-order spurs on the youngest
who, pressed by his ambition, always seeks to rise higher than anyone else in his
circle. However, this occurs only under favorable conditions. Otherwise, the
difficulties and obstacles that the youngest see standing in their way frequently
are the reason they lose faith in themselves, cause them to be particularly
cautious, and easily lead them to become resigned. Their cautiousness can even
be seen in their faces. During a review of troops in the war, I was often able to
pick out the youngest sibling. They were more restless than the others and by the
way that they carried themselves reflected either a quivering ambition, or the
urge to run away.
Our patient further reported that he was always held back by his older
siblings, despite his undeviating desire to be out in front. He had always
measured himself against his siblings, was certain that his ambitions ranged
above the norm, but would not take any risks. He reconsidered every situation a
hundred times and constantly fell to doubting and vacillating. His overly
protective family excluded any early exposure to sexual matters. At the age of
ten he began his schooling at a convent where his only contact was with other
boys. I know the convent school as being strictly disciplinary and zealous. When
his male sexuality made itself felt, he was at a loss to understand his sexual drive
and his sexual role. Girls appeared to him as puzzling and beyond
comprehension. He also learned that yielding to sexual urges was a grievous sin.
When he eventually grew more courageous and was enlightened by his
classmates, he was left with no alternative but masturbation, which he regarded
as sinful but which he accepted more readily since it caused no one else any

harm. From a social standpoint, this view is totally wrong. Kant had questioned
why masturbation should be regarded as something sinful. It seems to me that
the common overriding normal human feelings, the differential social feeling,
the love of humankind, and the need to cooperate must reject this form of anti-
social sexual activity even when, as in the cases we examined, the individual
seemed to have come to terms with it. Sexuality is not a private matter.
We must emphasize in this particular case that because of our patient’s high
aristocratic standing his life otherwise was extraordinarily isolated. He
associated with few people and was intent from the outset on spending his life as
an estate owner. There is nothing in his life that we can identify as initiative. He
graduated from the convent school conditionally and inherited his parent’s
estate. He was not an ill-intentioned person and had never harmed anyone. He
always stayed where he was put, wherever fate had ordained him to be. In his
homosexuality we can observe his distancing from social life, and in his sexual
needs we see the same lack of initiative or progress, which, however, is more
apparent in other aspects of his life.
Suddenly there is a new development: The patient marries. The woman is
an orphan from a prominent family to whom our patient confessed his
homosexuality shortly after they met. As is frequently the case with women, she
was also challenged by her role as savior and entered into marriage under all the
conditions set by her husband.7 The marriage was an abject failure. There was a
total psychological impotence. Behind this psychological impotence hid a lack of
devotion and cooperation. Such persons, who are incapable of devoting
themselves to any one thing or person and who are concerned only with their
own prestige, are always turned off from life. Eroticism in particular is ill suited
for games that entail ambition. The patient found himself in a particular state of
psychological development in which he avoided any test of his worth. He had his
estate and a wife. Whatever else life demanded of him he rejected. His task now
was to reject any demands made on him justified by his homosexual illness and
other neurotic problems. This applied also to his wife, toward whom he felt
totally guiltless since he had confessed to her before their marriage. She,
therefore, had no right to complain. In fact, given the situation into which he
brought her, she was committed to stand by his side as a friend and supporter.
He, after all, had never made any promises to her. It was the situation of a person
who had abandoned this world and who yearned for pampering that harkens
back to his childhood. In light of many other manifestations in his life, and in
that of others, we must assume that the intent not to play along was so strongly
imbued in him that it can be regarded as his ideal solution to the problems of
life. Supported by this ideal solution, he approached the physician with the same

caution and secretiveness that provided him protection against having to
socialize with others who would recognize him instantly as a homosexual.
Homosexuality to him was a stigma.
7 Occasionally we also find women who, because of their denial of any
sexuality, are attracted to homosexual men.
Important in all these cases is the following: Homosexuals will often affirm
their misconduct with pride8 when not prevented by some condition to express
such feelings. However, compulsive thoughts and compulsive actions are
executed as if the patient wanted to reject them, as if they were
incomprehensible to him, which from the vantage point of an established system
would seem like a significant difference. Psychologically, however, the
difference is not that significant. Compelled by the sexual drive, a sexual
compulsive thought demands execution. If execution is possible and is relieved
by the patient’s actions, then he must somehow be able to comprehend his
compulsive thoughts since he would otherwise renounce his goal of gratification.
There are quite a number of homosexuals who in their thoughts and fantasies
find something incomprehensible and puzzling that they constantly seek to
contest. The analogy with compulsion neurosis, therefore, has been fairly well
established.
Second Case:
For reasons that relate partly to legal matters, the literature deals only with
male homosexuality. The same principles, however, also apply to female
homosexuality.
A 25 year-old patient, the older of two siblings, was fours years old when
her brother was born. He attracted the attention of the entire family, while she
was pushed aside. This led to the development of her enormous ambition.
Furthermore, the family situation was extremely dismal: The father was a man of
violence; the mother careless. The bright girl soon became aware of her family
situation. She was revolted by the idea of marriage, withdrew from her father, in
whom she saw the violence, and sought to find the same characteristics in her
brother in order to justify her conclusion that all men are brutal. She withdrew
from the two males in her family and spoke with neither. She led a terribly
isolated life, found no interest in games, and adopted superior airs with her
playmates. Her ambition, however, won the sympathies of her teacher. It was
then decided that she enroll in school. At the age of ten she attended the birth of
a servant’s child in the next room. Her rejection and fear of the female role grew
enormously as a result. With puberty she took to brooding and to alcohol. Here
again we find an exertion of energy and activity directed toward escaping the

normal life of a girl from a wealthy family, and the rejection of all reasonable
demands made of her .
8 See Pindar, Fragment 123 (ed. Christ). “He who is not inflamed with love
for the boy Theoxenes has a heart of stone. He has been condemned by
Aphrodite either to strive arduously for the sake of money, or be driven along
frosty paths as servant to female effrontery.”
Her movement into homosexuality took place over a considerable period of
time. She had been friends with a homosexual girl in her hometown, but it was
not until after a violent quarrel with her mother, and in a fit of anger, that she
turned to her friend and began to live with her. She had always kept her distance
from men. However, there was one relative, a young man, a repulsive figure
with an ugly face, with whom she shared confidences and with whom she
engaged in scientific and social discussions, and occasionally went out for
walks. He seemed totally safe to her. However, it was her great caution that
proved to be her misfortune. One day she confided in him her homosexual secret
and he responded by trying to force her to marry him. They eventually entered
into a marriage that lasted four weeks before being terminated in divorce. The
woman proved to be impotent, if I may use that term. The story became public
and her mother, with whom the girl had always been seriously at odds, asked me
to accept her daughter for treatment.
The patient spoke only of her ambition and about her desire to achieve
something in the scientific field. Her rejection of the female role was so clear
that it could not be overlooked. In a social setting she constantly tried to make
herself impossible. Whatever work she undertook she always found a way to
break it off. This idiosyncrasy stemmed from an early childhood misconception
of life’s demands which, in her pessimism, she judged to be too great, fearing
not being able to meet them. This is reflected in her low estimation of women.
With a pessimistic attitude homosexuals see the dangers in a heterosexual
life as so enormous that it becomes natural to shrink from any undertakings that
might jeopardize their homosexual role. The homosexual’s attitude is as if trying
to hold back time, to deter a normal development. We know what motivates
homosexuals who fight acknowledging their sexual role. They accept as genuine
what we regard as erroneous and are supported in their belief by a literature of
supposed experts, scientists, or laymen, who justify a belief in the inalterability
of homosexuality. It is a mentality that guides the homosexual’s fantasies and
actions and that leads to irresponsibility. The intercession by society is therefore
not out of the question. What to me seems most important in treatment is the
logic of life which must also impact on the homosexual, causing him to be so
secretive and troubling him when he pursues his passion. This is the voice of

society which must under all circumstances be averse to homosexuality.
In conclusion a word on the theory of hormones and a comment regarding
the views of Steinach and his followers on curing homosexuality by increasing
gonad secretion. The homosexual is frequently a seriously discouraged neurotic.
He usually lacks psychological preparation for a social relationship with the
opposite sex. If he can be encouraged, he can be healed. In my experience with
individual cases, a patient can be emboldened with a surgical procedure without
either patient or physician fully understanding the process. Some who have
undergone this procedure are already on the way toward encouragement. In other
cases this does not follow. The psychological preparation that is so essential can
only be advanced by Individual Psychological methods. The problem that is
encountered results from the individual having to train in skills in dealing with
the opposite sex that others had practiced and acquired since childhood.
Finally, we wish to show how Individual Psychological findings on
homosexuality should be approached medically under the law.
Testimony
E. F. is 41 years old, married, and the father of two children. He reports that
he recently was wrongly arrested for mutual masturbation in a public toilet. He
explained that his offense in fact consisted of watching another man masturbate.
A physical examination of this slightly built man showed traces of his
having had rickets and having been afflicted with strabismus. 
His medical history indicated that his parents were blood relatives and that their
marriage was troubled. The father had suffered from diabetes, which contributed
to his death. His mother died following several strokes of unknown etiology; she
had led a squandered life. His two grandmothers were sisters and the two
grandfathers brothers, which leads to the possibility of incest. Like his father, the
patient had been suffering from diabetes for the past seven years. 
Since childhood the patient has had an unexplained tendency to look consciously
at male uncircumcised genitalia. He is not aware of any reason or purpose for
this irresistible compulsion. To the contrary, he regards such an interest as
natural and commonly understandable without having to look into it any further.
The patient traces back his interest to his earliest childhood and relates it to his
Jewish heritage and to his own circumcision. He remembers that as a six-year
old he experienced first lust and then ejaculation when he saw a farm boy’s
penis. This eventually developed into a tendency to touch and then into mutual
masturbation, manifestations that were derived from an original compulsive
“voyeurism” (optical inferiority). 
A more careful examination, however, indicates a psychological connection
unknown to the patient. It allows us to understand his homosexual attitude as a

wrongly perceived malady that prevented him from abnegating his compulsive
impulses. In particular, the patient was burdened since earliest childhood with a
morbid feeling of inferiority that made socializing in general impossible, and
more specifically any social intercourse with women. This also applies to his
marriage, into which his mother had pressured him and which had never been
one that was uninhibited but troubled and filled with unhappiness and strife. He
always believed that he had made a bad choice in his marriage and that he was
unlucky. 
The same observation, an inevitable abandonment of any effort to reach a goal,
can be made with regard to this patient’s business affairs, which regularly fail
because of “fatal obstacles.” Yet, in each case it becomes clear that he missed an
opportunity because he lost faith in his own powers.
The same failure becomes apparent in his relationships with others. He hated his
father, was hostile toward his only sister, and was constantly at odds with his
wife. He never found a friend because he mistrusted everyone else and assumed
that everyone assumed that he bore hatred against them. 
Out of this morbid psychological depression, which outwardly had to lead to
isolation, marital strife, and material problems, particularly when external
circumstances become acute, springs, as we have seen in many similar cases, an
obsessive-compulsive need for a liberating, gratifying sexual act. In our case it
reflects a firmly rooted experience and a subjectively judged feeling tied to a
“foreskin fetishism.” 
These conclusions are clearly in accord with the objective and subjective
manifestations that we have described above. When in this case we see a
psychopathic inferiority along with an obsessive-compulsive disorder, we also
become aware that the patient has been burdened since earliest childhood by an
impression of his physical and psychological inferiority to the extent that normal
development was made impossible for him.
Healing such a morbid attitude toward life is only possible with retraining and
changing the personality to raise the patient’s courage to face life. On the other
hand, legal punishment, not justified because of an absence of responsibility for
the act alleged to have been performed, would only exacerbate the feeling of
inferiority. The patient would endure punishment conscious only of being the
victim of an innocent, unalterable disposition. It would seriously impede any
cure in the future. 
The patient’s homosexual tendencies are all that was left him, since he now feels
himself forced out of any other normal activity. The compulsion toward
homosexuality stems--as in the case of every other obsessive-compulsive
neurosis--not from homosexuality, but from being compulsively forced away

from normal relationships, which to him mean certain defeat, and which he
regards as if standing at the edge of an abyss.
Chapter XVI
Compulsion Neurosis1 2
[1918]
Discouragement, the surest sign of the neurotic, forces him to put distance
between himself and unavoidable decisions. In order to justify this distancing, he
resorts to arrangements that mount before him like a heap of dung. This is how
he retreats from life. When asked where he was when the world was parceled
out, he points to the dung heap. His existence in life’s hinterland and wasting his
life, is thus marked by a compulsive character driven by fervent ambition,
compelled not by the compulsive idea, but by a fear of cooperation, a fear of
life’s problems.
If one calls to mind the mood of the compulsion neurotic, the image most
likely is that of a person who busily struggles outside normal human activities.
He is tormented by fear and worries.
It also is apparent that patients who have never read any medical literature
refer to their yielding to compulsive actions as imperative, a concept that has
also been adopted by science and philosophy. It is surprising to note that
philosophy frequently uses expressions and views similar to those employed by
the neurotic.
The most common forms of compulsion neurosis relate to washing,
praying, masturbating, to moral ideas of various kinds, and to brooding. A
systematic classification of compulsion neurosis could significantly broaden the
field to include the same process that applies to symptoms of nocturnal enuresis,
neurotic eating disorders, fasting compulsion, perversions, etc.
The symptoms of compulsive actions have also been incorporated in
classical literature. Three examples are as follows: 
There is the case of the forgotten romanticist von Sonnenberg who in early
childhood, and continuing far into puberty, suffered from a compulsion to pray.
He was a stubborn, very ambitious, beardless boy who frequently came into
conflict with those around him. Early in his life he had religious visions. He
manifested these symptoms mostly during classes so that lessons often had to
come to a stop. Jean Paul in his “Schmelzlers Reise nach Flaez” described
innumerable compulsive actions. In his youth, the hero of the story was
overcome by a compulsion to cry out “Fire,” which could easily have caused
panic. This particular symptom and similar others occurred very frequently,
often causing serious public disturbances. In the third example, Vischer’s “Auch
einer,” the hero is constantly compelled to sneeze and sniffle. 

A particular characteristic for compulsion neurosis is that all compulsive acts are
preceded by a phase that can only be described as one in which the patient
struggles against submitting to his compulsion. He suffers this phase with
embarrassment. All authorities point to the fact that the victim is fully aware of
the senselessness of his compulsion symptoms. 
As with similar maxims and viewpoints presented in the literature on neurosis,
the above statement also must be taken with a grain of salt. A number of patients
reported to the contrary that they felt relief and satisfaction from acting out their
compulsions “because they reflect their true nature and proved justified and
necessary.” This phase, in which there is a conscious decision made in favor of
the symptoms, is preceded by months and years during which patients
experience great psychological tension. For that reason we can rightly assume
that this attitude actually serves only to release the symptoms. It seems that
regarding their alleged struggle against their compulsive actions, patients want
to justify producing their symptoms. It should not be overlooked that in arguing
their case, patients arbitrarily ascribe to themselves the role of judge, plaintiff,
and defendant. 
Compulsion neurosis actually presents us with an almost self-contained
pathological picture that also includes the essential features of neurosis in
general. It entails interrelationships of the most varied sort. There is a very
normal transition to the neurasthenic complex. When we consider the
compulsion to swallow air, which occurs more frequently than is normally
assumed, the connection with the frequency of neurasthenic stomach and
intestinal afflictions becomes apparent. Just as frequent are associations with
hysteria. In the area of war neuroses in particular the analogy with tremors,
paralysis, and spasms has been widely recognized. In cases of compulsive
blushing we find not infrequently manifestations of slight or severe paranoia
(delusion about being watched). The connection with anxiety neurosis lies in the
fact that the suppression of compulsion symptoms leads to anxiety. Not too
rarely does compulsion neurosis develop into alcoholism or morphine addiciton.
Particular situations are derived from manic depressive psychosis connected
with a manic compulsion to commit crimes, as well as with self-incrimination
and with moral insanity. Numerous associations portend what appears to be
unseemly behavior, for example, certain forms of idleness, pedantry, time
wasting, and in particular agonizing hyper-moral or religious beliefs, fanatic
defenders of the truth, etc. 
Actually, nearly every person’s psychological makeup manifests characteristics
that suggest compulsion neurosis, which, depending upon its development, can
lead to occasional problems that may not be insignificant. 

For example, an exaggerated faith in a supernatural source permeates some
people’s entire lives and actions to the point where they expect everything to be
provided to them as a gift. Many people recount actions such as counting
syllables, reading ads, counting windows, etc., all actions that are senseless.
Similar manifestations are particularly apparent in childhood which reflects a
feeling of impotence in confronting the real world. 
There are extremely close connections between compulsive neurosis and
neurotic anviety. The psychic connection among these manifestations creates the
danger that we lose ourselves in the psychology with its immeasurable
discrepancies. There are, however, a number of tests to ascertain how correct, or
close to correct a neuropsychological diagnosis may be. 
One of these tests is the following: The neurologist in the presence of the family
physician has to conduct an examination without resorting to leading questions
or allowing himself to pursue a particular direction. Instead, he has to proceed
with an examination that throws light on the whole personality. This has to be
done without consulting with the family physician, who usually can detect the
connections, but which the patient will not be able to establish during the course
of the examination from the questions asked or from the responses given. 
This method, of course, provides no positive results. For that reason further
probing becomes necessary to establish the correctness of our prognosis based
on the symptoms. One now has to put aside the symptoms, ignore the actual
reasons for treating this patient, and concentrate solely on his personality. The
effort should now be made to learn more about the patient, about his nature, his
goals in life, and his attitude toward family and social responsibilities. Soon a
substantially clear outline of his character will be established. The examination
will show that the patient is encumbered with a number of character traits that
we can assemble into a composite picture.3
In most such cases we are dealing with individuals who cannot be described as
passive. They do not shy away from being active. This is apparent from the fact
that they do not keep themselves in the background. They normally have already
passed certain tests, have learned something, and are in a phase of their life in
which they must make decisions, such as with regard to love, marriage, a
profession, their parents, etc. 
If a conclusion has been drawn from this sketch and from the guidelines that
emerge, if traits of great sensitivity have been detected and a behavior that we
can describe as distant, when we can show that the individual lacks in humanity,
cares little for anyone else, has lived in isolation, has few friends, but has strong
ambitions, so strong in fact that he himself is conscious of it, then we have
gained a firm impression that such a person confronts life with a dismissive

gesture. 
As in the case of other neuroses, we can speak here of a position illness as
opposed to what other authorities call a disposition illness. The family subject
their children to pressures that cause latent or open defiance. This combative
attitude is applied to every demand raised by society. Suddenly the individual’s
manifestations of compulsion begin to tell us something. They tell us that he
deploys them to protect his defensive position. 
The patient must then be asked: What would you do if you were not ill today? He
would then confidently tell us that he would respond to exactly that demand that
we could expect him to shun. 
The war provided considerable evidence to support this contention. War neurosis
is a form of illness in which, as a last resort, the safety of isolation becomes
decisive. The war made demands to which a person in shock and filled with an
understandable anxiety responds by seeking to withdraw. 
The test whether the conclusions drawn are correct is when, in the patient’s
guidelines that we have uncovered from his innermost self, we can recognize the
symptoms as necessary, useful in whatever ways, opportune, and intelligent.
Naturally, no argument can be made for a causal dependence; the patient in no
way is obligated to his symptoms, as one would have to conclude from a causal
perspective. It is more as if the patient allowed himself to be enticed by his
symptoms. This is the case of a seduction of human nature, which is so
understandable that we can empathize with it. 
This in the patient’s psychological structure stems from a more or less
pessimistic worldview. It is superimposed upon a feeling of inferiority and
automatically resolves into the temptation to retreat from any social
responsibilities the patient encounters. On the other hand, this fact also explains
that a change in the individual’s nature can come about only with enlightenment.
The correlations presented above will be clarified in the following two cases: 
The first case concerns a young woman who some years ago was forced into
marriage against her will by her somewhat strict father. She had always been a
serious, striving girl whose conscientiousness was valued even by her father,
whom the girl regarded as the most prominent personality in the family, and
whom she held in high esteem. She was the only girl among four children and
she conveyed to us immediately her belief that she had suffered greatly for
having been placed in a subordinate position. She was put in charge of the
household and actually restricted to taking care of her rather cantankerous
mother. Her conscientiousness earned her praise from her father. 
She offered little resistance to marriage. The marriage was Catholic and was
annulled after two years for offenses committed by her husband. Soon

afterwards she met a man with whom she fell in love and with whom she was
married in accordance with Hungarian rites. The marriage was met with her
mother-in-law’s disapproval. When the war broke out, she was forced to move
into her mother-in-law’s home while her husband served in the army. She
brought with her a boy from her first marriage. This was a new situation for her,
coming so shortly after her marriage, and one from which she dearly wished to
escape. Her new situation saddled her with a feeling of defeat familiar to her
from living with her mother. Her mother-in-law’s criticisms laid a heavy burden
on her. At that point she found a book by Professor Foerster in which she read
that a marriage cannot be dissolved, and that divorce was a serious moral crime. 
Since that time, and during states of depression, she had the idea that she should
really return to her first husband. She suffered constantly from depression. In her
case it was a compulsion neurosis accompanied by depression reinforced by
compulsive thoughts. The significance of these compulsive thoughts lay in
legitimatising a pathological condition on which she depended for a number of
privileges, in particular those which supported her ambition. She was now
relieved from all criticism. She turned her back on her nagging mother-in-law
and moved into her father’s home. There she was able to turn over the care of
her child, which she regarded as denigrating housework, to her mother. Soon she
saw herself the center of attention in her home with a number of imagined
advantages that would serve an ambitious woman as a substitute for what she
felt had been her disadvantageous position vis-à-vis her brothers. 
If there is any question about the correctness of what I have established as her
goal of superiority then the following test should be applied: Look for the
symptom itself, her compulsive thought that she had committed a sin. What is
behind that thought? Her religious and conscientious father never expressed such
thoughts himself. The daughter played up the idea that she was the more
religious and conscientious person! She was extremely ambitious and was
dissatisfied because her ambition was not fulfilled in her new situation, and,
given her nature, would never be satisfied. Her action was really a revolt in the
form of passive resistance such as we could find in any case of neurosis. She
made herself incapable of carrying out the work she was obligated to perform by
establishing not a compulsion that relates to society and to life, but one that was
self-created and which preoccupied her to a point where she crowded out all
family and social responsibilities. It can regularly be noted that such a person’s
greatest enemy is time itself. She has to waste time, since time makes its own
demands, by asking: “How will you deal with me?” The patient wasted time
with an extensive correspondence with clergymen and moralists, by devoting
time to her depression, and in looking for consolation from everyone in her

surroundings. She was frightened out of the responsibilities for her second
marriage, especially by the disapproving new mother-in-law. 
The second case concerns a patient who is an unusually able and ambitious
person. Even as a child he felt that he had problems dealing with his life, which
made him stand out from his compatriots. He never gave any thought to a future
vocation or to marriage. Given that he took for granted his feelings on this
subject, we can conclude that he is not lacking in ideas but that he consciously
precludes any job or marriage from his life. These are resolves frequently found
in children. The patient undoubtedly was very ambitious but, as we can see from
his avoidance of work and marriage, he lost all belief in himself. 
His parents in his upbringing paid much attention to him. His father clearly was
an honorable man. As a child, however, the patient experienced an upsetting
situation when his father caught him in a white lie, which he could not forget for
the rest of his life. Shortly after this incident, feelings of guilt became
compulsive. His suffering was so embarrassing to those near to him that they
tried to ease his feelings. For months he berated himself because he gave out
false information. He brooded one whole year over inconsequential matters, told
all to his parents, and then went to his teacher and confessed to him that one year
before he had given him incorrect information. 
Despite this, he passed his examination and graduated from a university. At that
point, when he reached adulthood and was about to take up a vocation, he was
thwarted by an illness that prevented him from getting started. Not only did his
feelings of guilt continue, but he also felt compelled to fall on his knees in public
places and recite prayers. He hoped that he would be regarded as an
exceptionally religious person and would not be taken a fool. With that
assumption he justified prostrating himself. 
He had just recovered from his illness, when it was recommended that he change
his field of studies. Shortly before he was to take a test in his new field, he
moved to another city. There he went to a church and, after careful preparation
and in the presence of a large congregation, he threw himself on the floor
wailing strong accusations against himself, and confessing his sins before the
entire assembly. He was arrested and placed in the care of his father. 
After his health improved, he took up his new academic studies. One day he
suddenly disappeared. He was discovered in a mental institution to which he had
fled to recover. There, because he was freed from having to take any tests, his
condition improved. His urge for self-condemnation abated and his feelings in
that regard became increasingly benign, but still left him with the imperative to
prostrate himself. However, he was capable of resisting that urge. His physician
advised him to return home and to somehow keep himself occupied. The day he

returned home, he appeared at dinner totally naked. He was a remarkably
handsome and well-built man. 
After a considerable period of time he left the institute with his condition
improved. He also continued his studies. However, every time he had to face a
self-imposed task, or when others made demands on him, he fled to the mental
institution, where he remained for some time. He was regarded as quite well
informed in his field and was far from passive; in fact, he stood out well above
others. In his own mind, however, he saw himself as incompetent. His highest
goal was to surpass everyone else, in particular his older brother. His suffering
allowed him to feel somewhat at ease because he believed that he had enormous
reserves. He was always able to content himself with the thought that he could
achieve far more were it not for his neurosis which robbed him of much time
and effort, and caused him endless troubles. As a consequence, he was tempted
by his ambition to believe that his illness had rescued him, just as others had
sought refuge in drugs, alcohol and, in some instances, in politics. In his
despondency, the neurosis acted like a balm for his bruised ambition. 
It is impossible to understand this patient on a purely intellectual basis. This type
of person needs to devote all his abilities and emotions to arrange his suffering.
He was now intent on being successful only among his closest acquaintances and
not in society or in living a useful life. This can be gathered from his compulsive
thought which is that “I am better than the others; I am aware of guilt where
others feel nothing in particular; I am more pious, virtuous, and conscientious
than all the others taken together, including my father.” 
Thus he wanted to be the first in his narrow circle of friends, which meant not
carrying out his social obligations, not doing something constructive with his
life, or asserting himself in any way. He was satisfied with his own preconceived
ideas and with his pretext of superiority. He was master of his decisions and
would accept only those social responsibilities that suited him. With his
compulsion neurosis, he shut out all the other demands and was freed from
having to cooperate with anyone. 
The tendency toward superiority is common to all neurotics. It is also the driving
element in compulsion neurosis. There is no case in which this would not be
found. Yet, the symptoms of compulsion are appropriate only for those who
have a disposition toward neurosis, persons whose lifeline is more compatible
with social responsibilities. Under those circumstances, the outbreak of
compulsion neurosis, like a revolt, thwarts a total surrender to the demands of
society.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
136-143, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XV in The Practice and

Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Another test: A prerequisite has to be found in accordance with which the
patient’s behavior makes sense. If this prerequisite is valid, the patient will
always make that his point of departure without understanding its significance.
Alternatively, the question can be raised: “What would you begin to do were I to
cure you in a short period of time?” The answer almost always identifies the
problem the patient is forced to avoid.
Summation
Compulsive ideas, compulsive speech, and compulsive actions emerge from
a fearful, anxious, and tormenting mood as an “imperative intuition.” The
frequency with which this neurosis occurs is known. However, it is more
extensive than is presently assumed, that is, when it is not seemingly curtailed by
regarding neurotic compulsion as symptomatic of neurosis in general and then
categorizing it variously. Classical literature made a valid contribution on this
subject with the biography of the melancholic, deceased, and now forgotten
romantic author, Sonnenberg. There is also Vischer’s book, Auch einer, and
Jean Paul’s character, “Schmelzle.” Enuresis, stuttering, compulsive fasting, and
sexual perversions necessarily belong in this group.
The general assertion by various authorities that the essential characteristic
of compulsion neurosis is a feeling of senselessness and inevitability is not
always correct. There are instances when a patient insists, contrary to his usual
behavior, that his compulsion is purposeful and in accord with his nature.
However, the significance of senselessness as a characteristic of compulsion
neurosis cannot be found where these authorities look for it. They seem to prove
it with the patient’s unbridled intelligence when that is only how the patient
legitimizes his illness by insisting that, despite all his efforts, he cannot escape it,
and that it torments and burdens him. The fact is, of course, that it relieves him
of some or all of his responsibilities.
The lines separating neurasthenia, hysteria, and fear neurosis are often
blurred. Alcoholism, morphine addiction, etc. are closely related. Similar
psychological structures are found in impulsive insanity, compulsive activity,
and compulsion to incriminate oneself, certain stereotypes and psychological
disgruntlement. Normal psychological manifestations provide clues to a practical
basis for compulsion phenomenon in certain forms of habitual behavior, in the
exaggeration of principles, and in the misuse of the truth and of morals, all of
which are structurally related. There is a close connection between a feeling of
doubt, which also hinders forward progress, and a silent “no!” expressed when

facing responsibilities. The correct definition of every neurosis is a “yes, but!”
An Individual Psychological clarification of a case of compulsion neurosis
would demonstrate the unconscious intent of a patient to use his pathological
compulsion to relieve or free himself from being compelled to cooperate, and
from having to comply with essential demands of society. The individual creates
a sideshow for himself in order not to be a participant on the main stage of life,
and as a way to waste time that might otherwise draw him into fulfilling his
personal responsibilities.
The only determining test for the validity of a psychological clarification in
a particular case rests on whether the patient can also employ means other than
compulsion neurosis, that is aside from his pathological symptoms, to attempt to
escape life’s demands, or at least try to mitigate his responsibility for making
decisions, with excuses, evasiveness, pretexts, and by applying seemingly valid
reasoning.
Treatment consists of clarifying facts, the removal of false childhood
notions, and dealing openly with exaggerated ambitions, self-love, and fear-
driven tendencies toward isolation. The mechanism of compulsion neurosis must
be recognized, clarified, and, by unveiling, annulled. For this to succeed, the
patient’s cooperation with the physician is necessary.
Cooperation, of course, must be trained. Recently, authorities have tried,
more with words than substantively, to associate superficial similarities entailing
automatic, organically determined behavior in cases of post-encephalic
manifestations (iterations, compulsive staring, compulsive repetitiveness, etc.)
with compulsive neurosis. This assumes the existence of a determining organic
basis, and that the choice of neurosis is conditioned. Such a concept is clearly
regressive and points to a lack of understanding of compulsion neurosis. This
“persistence in adhering to an assumed attitude” (Goldstein) in the case of
postencephalitis has a completely different meaning than compulsion neurosis,
or neurosis in general, and certainly means something different in every person’s
life. A simplistic comparison of the two manifestations, never mentioned by
Goldstein, but by some later authorities, leads to phantom problems. A neurotic
compulsive movement is a positive arrangement created by a person afraid of
life to which that person must adhere because he intelligently, but wrongly, fears
everything else. The cases cited by these authorities are far more transparent
than they assume them to be.
Chapter XVII
Dostoyevsky1 2
[1918]
Deep under the earth in Siberia’s mines Dimitry Karamasov hopes to sing

his song of eternal harmony. The guilty and yet innocent murderer of his father
takes up the cross and finds salvation in harmony.
“For fifteen years I was an idiot,” says Prince Mishkin in his gracious,
smiling manner. He is the man who could interpret every stroke of a person’s
handwriting, who freely gave voice to his own ulterior motives, and who could
discern everyone else’s ulterior motives! It would be hard to fathom a sharper
contrast between what he said and what he is.
“Am I Napoleon or a louse?” ponders Raskolnikov while lying in his bed
for one month. He wants to cross the line laid down by his life thus far,
fashioned on the basis of his social feeling, and his life experiences. Here again
is a contrast to which we can respond only with great astonishment.
This is not any different from what we see in the lives of his other heroes
and in his own life. “Like a whirling Dervish the young Dostoyevsky reels
through his parents’ house,” and when we read his letters to his father and to his
friends, we find considerable humility, submissiveness, and subordination to his
sad fate. His path was widely strewn with hunger, torment, and misery. He
pursued the course of his life like a pilgrim. The young firebrand had accepted
his cross like the wise Sossima, like the omniscient pilgrim in “Youth,”
gathering step-by-step all experiences and in one wide embrace gathered in all of
humankind to gain knowledge, to taste life, and to find the truth, seeking the new
Gospel.
A person who confines such contrasts within himself and who feels that he
must reconcile them, must dig deep if he hopes to find a place of repose. He is
spared no effort, no pain in life, and cannot pass by even the tiniest creature
without testing it against his own formula. Everything within him compels him
to find a harmonious interpretation of life so that he can find security and peace
from his constant doubts, his inner conflicts, and his restlessness.
The truth is what he has to uncover if he is ever to find peace. The path
toward the truth, however, is always strewn with thorns, requires much work,
great effort, and enormous training of mind and feelings. No small wonder that
this seeker after the essence of nature had come closer than anyone else to
discover the reality of life, its logic, and of living together, and is now far more
able to take a stand on life.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
195-202, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XXII in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
He had come from meager circumstances, and when he died all Russia

followed his funeral procession in spirit. He, the enthusiastic creator, the
courageous, who always encouraged himself and others, he, the most
handicapped of all, was afflicted with a terrible epilepsy that hindered him for
days and weeks from carrying on. The state criminal who suffered four years
with his feet chained in the Tobolsk prison, and who had then served four more
years as a prisoner in a Siberian line regiment, this noble, innocent sufferer left
prison with feelings expressed in the words: “My punishment was justified
because I had harbored ill intentions against the regime. But, it is sad that I must
now suffer for principles and for a cause I no longer hold.” All of Russia,
however, denied his guilt and began to suspect that a word, a thing, can
inherently mean its opposite.
There was also no dearth of contrasts in his own country. When
Dostoyevsky came out in public, the country seethed in ferment, particularly
with regard to the problem of freeing the serfs, which stirred all emotions.
Dostoyevsky was always driven to help the poor, the underprivileged, the
children, the sufferers. His friends knew all about this and related to everyone
how easy it was for him to befriend a beggar who might have come as a patient
to one of his friends, and how Dostoyevsky persuaded him to come to his room
to be fed, and to become acquainted with him. In prison his greatest sorrow was
that other inmates avoided him because he was a nobleman. It was his great
longing to rationalize and recognize the meaning of prison, its internal laws, and
to find the parameters within which he could understand and befriend the other
prisoners. As has been the case with other great men, he utilized his banishment
to sensitize himself to his environment in both big and small ways. He honed his
sensitivities in order to find a meaning in life, and to create a spiritual basis for
the concept of a decent human being. He strove to find a synthesis that would
put an end to the contradictions that upset and confounded him so deeply.
What did he seek in this state of insecurity and spiritual confusion? This
sometime rebel and sometime obedient servant, driven to an abyss from which
he shrank back in horror, sought nothing but a valid truth. At this point he
courageously made fallacy his guide. Even before he articulated it, his basic
principle was to approach the truth through a lie and because we shall never be
able to fully recognize the truth, we must always count on the smallest lie. This
made him the enemy of those in the “West” who at their core, he found, were
striving for a European culture, which is through truth to arrive at a lie. He
could find his truth only by synthesizing the contrasts that raged within him, and
which he expressed constantly in his works, and which, like his heroes,
threatened to destroy him. This is how he accepted his ordination as poet and
prophet, and how he strove to set limits to self-love. He found the limits for the

intoxication with power in loving one’s neighbor. What had originally driven
him was an unqualified striving for power, for dominance. Even hidden in his
attempt to define life with one formula there is still much evidence for this
striving for superiority. In all the acts of his heroes we find this urge to lift
themselves above all others, to accomplish Napoleonic deeds, to move right up
to the edge of the abyss, even to hang over it and chance falling down to crush
themselves. He says of himself: “I am reprehensibly ambitious.” But, he was
able to channel his ambition for everyone’s benefit. This is also how he treated
his heroes: He allowed them to wildly transcend the boundaries that were
established by his own logic of a social existence. He drove them to the very
limit with the barbs of ambition, vanity, and self-love, only to chase them back
with the hosts of furies to the boundaries set by nature, so that they could sing
their hymns in harmony.
There is no image that returns more frequently in Dostoyevsky’s works
than that of boundaries, occasionally also the image of a wall. He says of
himself: “I immensely enjoy penetrating to the very edge of reality where the
fantastic begins.” He describes his epileptic attacks as an intoxication with a joy
of life that reaches the very limits, to a point where he feels so close to God that
he can hardly take one more step without severing his ties with life. This image
recurs with deep meaning for every one of his heroes. We hear his new
messianic message: The great synthesis arising from the heroic and the love of
one’s neighbor has been achieved. At this point the destiny of his heroes seems
fated. That is where he is tempted to go, that is where he suspects the fulfillment
of human dignity in fellowship. He drew this line extremely fine, finer than had
almost anyone before him. This, his goal, was particularly important for his
creative faculties and for the ethical stand he assumed.
Time and again he and his heroes were compelled to go to the periphery of
experience. Here is where gropingly and hesitatingly he blends humanity with
deep humility before God, the Emperor, and Russia. The feeling, often described
by his friends, that captivated him, a feeling that might be regarded as being on
the edge, a feeling that forced him to a halt, was transformed in him into a
safeguarding feeling of guilt. He had no explanation for its source, but in a
peculiar way related it to his epileptic attacks. The hand of God reaches over
protectively and warns to take stock whenever a person, in overweening conceit,
seeks to transcend the limits of social feeling.
Raskolnikov, who worked bravely on his murder plans, and who
impulsively believes that everything is permitted those who belong to the select
few, already thinks of the sharply honed ax. He had been lying in bed for months
before he crossed the line. Then, with the ax hidden under his coat, feeling the

thumping of his heart, he mounts the last steps before committing his murder.
The beating of his heart speaks the logic of human existence, and expresses
Dostoyevsky’s finely honed sense for limits.
There are a number of Dostoyevsky’s works in which not an isolated
heroism transgresses the bounds of fellowship, but where, quite to the contrary,
the individual lifts himself from insignificance into thriving heroism. I have
already mentioned the writer’s love for the weak and the insignificant. In those
cases the hero arises in a man from the bottom of society, the average man, a
prostitute, a child, characters that suddenly grow into giants, until they reach the
boundaries of an all-embracing heroism toward which Dostoyevsky wants to
lead them.
The concept of the permissible and the forbidden, the boundaries, was
brought close to him from his childhood experiences. It was no different in his
youth. Frustrated by his illness, he was impaired early in life by his impending
execution and subsequent banishment. In childhood, a pedantic father seemed to
have wrestled with his son’s stubbornness and kept pushing his unbroken, fiery
spirit firmly toward the edge.
A short fragment from “St. Petersburg Dreams” dates from the author’s
early days and allows us, for that reason, to expect a clear line of direction. If
anything conclusive can be drawn from the development of an artist’s spirit, then
it must come from a direction that had its beginning in his early works, his
sketches and plans that will lead to the later development of the artist’s creative
powers. In following this line, it is imperative that the course of artistic creation
runs outside day-to-day worldly concerns. In every artist we can expect to see a
departure, a halt, or a reversal as soon as he is confronted by ordinary social
demands. He, who creates a world out of nothing, or let us say, from a favored
position, and who gives us a perplexing artistic creation instead of answers in
terms of a practical life, will turn his back on life and its demands. As
Dostoyevsky tells it: “Well, I am a dreamer and a mystic!”
We can gain some understanding of his method of attack, as soon as we
learn at what point in his actions Dostoyevsky comes to a halt. He speaks clearly
enough in the sketch above: “ When I approached the Neva, I stopped for a
moment and cast a glance along the river into the dim, misty distance, where the
last glimmer of dusk faded.” It happened while hurrying home to dream as any
secular person might of Schiller’s heroines: “I also had not noticed the real
Amalia; she lives close-by.” He would prefer the experience of having to suffer
intoxicated with love rather than all the joys of the world, because, “had I
married Amalia, I would certainly have been unhappy.” Is it not the simplest
thing in the world? As a poet one dreams far from the tumult of the world, stops

for a moment, finds the sweetness of dreamed of suffering unsurpassable and
knows “how reality destroys all lofty ideals. Don’t I wish to travel to the moon!”
That means, however, to be alone and not to hang one’s heart on anything
earthly!
This is how the poet’s defenses are turned into a protest against reality and
its demands. This is quite different from the “Idiot,” and unlike the case of the
sick man who had “neither protest nor voice.” Rather, he did not know that his
exercise in enduring all misery would distinguish him. However, when with
abuse and accusations he was thrown off his course, he discovered the secular
person in himself, the destroyer and revolutionary Garibaldi. There he said what
the others failed to understand: Humility and submission do not mean the end,
but are always a revolt indicating what still has to be surmounted. Tolstoy also
knew this secret and often preached it to deaf ears.
It can be published in newspapers and no one has any idea what it is if it is
a true secret. No one knew it when Kharpagon Solovyev wanted to revenge
himself; Solovyev, who starved and died in misery, and who had hidden a
fortune of 170,000 Rubles wrapped in soiled paper. How he must have enjoyed
cutting himself off from his cat, his cook, and his housekeeper whom he left in
his debt! He had them in his hand, forcing them to beg, all of them who knew
only the power of money, which they worshiped. True, out of this grew a
particular obligation, a methodical violation of his life. He had to starve and live
in need himself in order to carry out his assassination. “He is beyond all desires.”
How? One had to be crazy to do this? Solovyev makes this sacrifice as well.
Only now with total irresponsibility can he demonstrate his contempt of
humankind with its conceit, can chase after pleasures, and harass everyone who
comes near him. He controls everything that smoothes the path to the best social
circles. Then he stops for a moment, throws his magic wand into the dustbin and
feels powerful and exalted over all human beings.
This seems to us to be the strongest line in Dostoyevsky’s life. All his great
creations were to be forged along that line: The act is useless, pernicious, or
criminal; salvation lies only in submission, when hidden behind it is the secret
pleasure of feeling superior over others.
Every Dostoyevsky biographer wrote and interpreted the writer’s earliest
childhood memories as he had described them himself in “The House of the
Dead.” In order to gain a better understanding of what the author had recalled, it
will help to describe the mood underlying these reminiscences.
When he had given up in despair trying to connect with his prison
comrades, he threw himself on his bunk and reminisced about his childhood, his
development, and his whole life. Suddenly, his attention was drawn to the

following recollection: He had strayed too far from his father’s estate, returned
across a field and suddenly stopped still, frightened by a call, “The wolf is
coming!” He quickly hurried toward the safety of his father’s house when he
saw a farmer in the next field to whom he fled. Weeping and frightened, he
grasped the farmer’s arm and told him of his frightful experience. The farmer
made the sign of the cross with his fingers above the child’s head, consoled him,
and promised not to allow the wolf to devour him. This recollection is frequently
interpreted as bonding Dostoyevsky with peasants and with their religion. The
issue, however, is the wolf. It is the wolf that drives him back to humanity. He
retained this experience as symbolic for all of his striving, since it entailed the
direction for all of his activities. The fear he had of isolated heroism was the
wolf of his past experience. It drove him back to the poor and the degraded. It
was there that, under the sign of the cross, he hoped to find the connection; there
is where he wanted to help. He expressed this sentiment with the words: “My
love is for the people; all my convictions are dedicated to humanity.”
We must also point out that Dostoyevsky was a Russian and hostile to
westernization. The Pan-Slavic mentality was firmly rooted in him. This is not in
contradiction with the spirit that sought to search for the truth through error. In
one of his greatest declarations, Dostoyevsky tried to justify PanSlavism in his
speech “In Memory of Pushkin,”and establish a synthesis between the
westerners and the Russophiles. The result that evening was brilliant. Supporters
of both parties rushed to him and embraced him, declaring their agreement with
his viewpoint. However, this unanimity did not last long. An awakening had not
yet taken place.
As Dostoyevsky intensely pursued his heart’s desire, an all-embracing
humanity, a task that he assigned, above all, to the Russian people, and one
which he sought to carry to the masses, there formed in him the concrete symbol
of neighborly love. Then, as he sought to save himself and others, the concept of
a savior, the Russian Christ, filled with humanity and despising worldly power,
was very near to him. His confession of faith was very simple: “Christ, for me, is
the most beautiful, the most exalted person in all of world history.” Here
Dostoyevsky reveals for us in remarkable sharpness his guiding goal. This is
how he described the epilepsy attacks, how in rapture he had achieved his ascent
to eternal harmony and nearness to God. His goal: Always to be near Christ, to
bear His wounds, and to fulfill His tasks. Isolated heroism, which he regarded
more succinctly than anyone else as an illness arising from conceit and contrary
to the spirit of community, which he derived from the logic of coexistence and
of neighborly love, this heroism he countered with: “Bend your knee, you, filled
with pride!” However, to those who were resigned and whose pride was hurt, he

said: “Work, idler!” And, when someone, in order to shake his faith, reminds
him of human nature and its seemingly eternal laws, he responds with: “Bees
and ants know their formula, but human beings do not!” Given Dostoyevsky’s
nature, we must add: The individual must seek his formula that he will find in the
willingness to help others, and in one’s devotion to the people.
Dostoyevsky thus became a solver of riddles as well as a God-seeker. He
had a stronger sense of his god than the other dreamers. “I am not a
psychologist,” he once said, “I am a realist.” With that, he makes the point that
distinguishes him above all modern poets and psychologists. He had an intimate
relationship with the basic principle of a social life, the social feeling, the only
true reality, one that we can never really know, but can only surmise. That is
why he could call himself a realist.
Now to the question as to why the characters that Dostoyevsky created have
such a strong effect on us. The answer is that they are wholly integrated. One
can examine a Dostoyevsky hero from any vantage point and will find that the
character embodies all the essentials for existence and striving. If we look for
analogies, we must turn to music where we can find a similar integration. All the
currents and movements in a melody can always be found again in the course of
its harmonic development. This is also true of Dostoyevsky’s characters.
Raskolnikov is the same character whether he lies in bed and broods about his
murder, or ascends the steps with his heart beating strong. He is also the same
when he pulled the drunk from under the wheels of the carriage, and then spent
his last kopek to support the drunk’s needy family. This unity in the
development of his characters is the reason they exercise such a strong influence
on us. With every mention of his heroes, we conjure up a concrete picture as if
they were cast in bronze. These heroes are no different from the Biblical figures,
Homer’s heroes, and the heroes of Greek tragedies whose names need only to be
mentioned to release from deep within our soul a whole host of complex effects.
There is a second problem in our attempt to understand the effect of
Dostoyevsky, although the precondition for solving this problem already is
given. It lies in a dual personality inherent in every character fixed on two
points that we can sense. Every Dostoyevsky hero moves with confidence in an
area that, on the one hand, is limited by an isolated heroism within which the
hero transforms himself into a wolf, and, on the other hand, the hero is contained
behind a line drawn by Dostoyevsky where there is love of one’s fellow human
being. This dual personality gives strength and security to his characters, and
anchors them firmly in our minds and feelings.
One more word about Dostoyevsky as a moral philosopher. He was forced
to take a position by circumstances and by his own internal contrasts that he had

to reconcile. He was also forced to take a position by the contrasts he saw in his
environment and that he had dared to harmonize. He was compelled to arrive at
some formula that would advance his deepest longing for an active expression of
love for one’s fellow human being. He thereby arrived at a formula that we can
put well above Kant’s categorical imperative “that every individual shares
another’s guilt.” Today, we sense far more than ever how far this formula
reaches and how intimately it relates to the truest realities of life. We may wish
to deny this formula, but it will always surface and will punish us for our denial.
Nevertheless, it releases an incredibly strong activity, such as the love of one’s
neighbor, which often is misunderstood, or used in vain, or is applied as a
categorical imperative which, even in the isolation of personal striving, retains
its validity. If I share the guilt of my neighbor as well as the guilt of all others,
then I shall always carry a responsibility that will drive me, that will make me
responsible, and that will compel me to pay the price.
Thus, Dostoyevsky stands before us as an artist and a great and unequaled
moral philosopher. His achievements as a psychologist have still not been
exhausted. We venture to proclaim that his psychological vision penetrated
deeper because he was more attuned to nature than those whose knowledge of
psychology rested only on abstract perceptions. Consider Dostoyevsky’s
observations on the Meaning of Laughter, where he examines the possibility of
understanding an individual based on his laughter better than on his attitude
toward life. Also, consider the concept of the accidental family where every
member lives isolated from one another, and where children are inculcated with
self-love. These perceptions show that Dostoyevsky had seen more than can be
asked of, or expected, from any psychologist today. Consider how Dostoyevsky
described in A Raw Youth that the boy under the cover of his blanket allows all
fantasies to stream out culminating in one, single concept: Power! Consider how
he described so clearly and accurately the origin of emotional disturbances as a
way of revolting. Consider also how Dostoyevsky recognized that human beings
have a tendency to be despotic. Such a person can still teach us today and, as
Nietsche advocated, should be celebrated as our teacher. His understanding and
explanation for dreams have still not been superseded, and his perception that no
one acts without a goal, a finality, coincides with the most modern achievements
of Individual Psychology.
It is thus that Dostoyevsky has endeared himself as a great teacher. The
reality of life is what impacts us like a shaft of light striking the eyes of a person
asleep. The sleeper rubs his eyes, turns in his sleep, and knows nothing of what
had happened. Dostoyevsky slept little and awakened many. His characters, his
ethics, and his art lead us deep into the concept of human coexistence.

Chapter XVIII
Individual Psychology on Upbringing1 2
[1918]
The enormous importance of a well grounded understanding of problems
related to raising children becomes particularly apparent from the viewpoint of
the practice of psychology. It makes clear the importance of every physician
being able to deal to some extent with those problems, and obligates physicians
in particular to understand human nature. The important relationship between
physician and patient often founders on the physician’s ignorance of human
nature and of raising children. It is this viewpoint and this perception that brings
to mind the words expressed by Virchow that “physicians must eventually
become responsible for bringing up humankind.”
A frequently asked question that is acute in our time, and will probably
become more so in the future, is how to delineate responsibility between
physicians and those charged with raising children. It is undoubtedly important
to find some agreement on this whole complex of questions, and to gain an
overview of this problem. Both parties too often encroach on each other’s area of
responsibility. There clearly exists an obvious lack of cooperation.
If we ask ourselves what the aim should be when bringing up children then
the point that concerns us primarily falls into the physician’s purview. Raising
children to become morally acting adults, who are able to make use of their
capabilities to further the common good, undoubtedly is regarded by every
physician as a self-evident precept that governs all his actions. One would expect
from physicians that in their professional capacity they would follow that
precept in everything they do. While the immediate responsibility for raising
children will always be in the hands of parents and educators, it is incumbent
upon them to be familiar with the problems and difficulties they encounter that
can only be resolved by a physician. It is the physician who must approach those
problems with the child’s psychological well-being in mind. I want to
emphasize, however, that the enormous scope of this subject makes it impossible
to discuss it fully in a short time span. For now, therefore, I can address only
particular points before a uniform concept of upbringing can be fully discussed.
Nevertheless, it is important to become acquainted with those viewpoints, which
Individual Psychology time and again insists, are of enormous significance and
which, if these are not correctly understood, will seek their revenge on our
children in the course of their development.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
221-227, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XXVI in The Practice and

Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
What involves the physician with questions of raising children is the
connection that exists between psychological and physical health. This is not in
the sense of the commonly held view that a sound spirit dwells in a healthy
body, a belief that has no validity at all since we have seen too many physically
healthy children and adults whose psychological condition was far from sound.
In another context, however, this view carries important meaning. It is difficult,
and perhaps impossible, for a weakly constituted child to attain the harmonious
state that we can expect from a healthy one. Take for example a child born with
poor digestive organs. From the time of birth persons expressing great care and
concern will always surround such a child. Such children will grow up in an
atmosphere of enormous affection. They will always be guided and treated with
solicitude. Their lives will be proscribed by a great many rules and restrictions.
The importance of eating will grow to where the significance of nourishment and
the problems of eating and digestion are out of all proportion. It is children with
stomach ailments who are a large contingent among the problem children, a fact
apparent to experienced physicians. It has been asserted that such children must
become neurotic, but there is absolutely no proof for such a determining
causality. However, the “hostile” character of life presses more sharply on the
psyche of suffering children and invests them also with a hostile, pessimistic
perspective about their environment. In their feeling of shortcoming they
demand stronger guarantees for selfesteem, turn egotistical, and easily lose
contact with others. Their search for their own identity all too often finds them in
conflict with their environment.
Children suffering from frequent aggravating stomach and intestinal
disorders are sorely tempted to seek compensation from advantages that can be
gained by giving legitimacy to their ailment. This applies to their relationship to
their environment and to their attitude toward school and the world at large. For
example, such children will develop an unusual tendency to be indulged. From
earliest childhood they will become used to having those around them pave their
way and eliminate all problems. It will be far more difficult for such children to
become independent, especially since they will have accustomed themselves to
avoiding precarious situations in life that require any significant effort. Their
courage and selfconfidence will be shattered. This attitude remains with such
children into old age. It is not a simple matter to change such individuals into
courageous adults who are empowered with initiative, enterprise, and
selfconfidence, as required by our times, after they had been raised as weaklings
and were pampered for 10, 15, or 20 years,

The damage to society is probably far greater than what we can discern
from this vantage point once we take into consideration not only children with
intestinal problems, but all those who were born with inferior organs, and those
with deficient sensory organs who, as a result, experience greater difficulties in
their lives. The problems such individuals face can often be gleaned from
biographies we read about others or from patients themselves. Physicians in such
cases have to treat not only psychological problems related to their patients’
upbringing. They must also strive with all their might and with whatever aids,
treatments, or corrections to ensure that the paths such children follow leading to
inordinate feelings of weakness are cut off in time. We shall pursue such cases
with even greater vigor once we are convinced that in most cases we are not
dealing with a permanent condition or with problems of greater or lesser
magnitude. We should keep in mind the numerous cases where originally
weakened, but later corrected organs had caused constant feelings of weakness
making the individual unfit to meet life’s demands. These situations become far
more complicated because the children themselves strive in some ways to
correct their deficiencies or compensate for them. Only a few will succeed in this
effort. They will try this in various ways, and possibly by using unacceptable
means, but at times also by applying more initiative and making greater mental
efforts to make up for their shortcomings.
In all these cases we shall also observe character traits that become apparent
and that lead to emotional disturbances, such as becoming significantly more
sensitive and provocative. We are confronted here by manifestations that are a
daily occurrence in the life of the individual and that we cannot afford to ignore
because of the physical and psychological damage they cause.
We cannot overemphasize the distress and tension that rages in a child. It
takes little effort to make a person understand that feelings of uselessness were
carried over from childhood. In general, illness and the idea of being ill are far
more serious for a child than we normally assume. If a child’s psychological
state is examined with that in mind, very significant experiences will become
apparent, also that for the child being ill in almost all cases does not seem to be
regarded as arduous, but coming as a relief. An illness can even be regarded as a
valued means for engendering kindness and gaining power, and as a way of
attaining some advantages at home and in school.
There are numerous children who always feel sickly and weak. Such cases
that show persisting symptoms, which cannot be explained with an illness, are
indications of a child making use of feeling ill to gain the upper hand, and to
justify a wish for dominance and esteem within their family. An example would
be a case of whooping cough where the child persists in laboriously imitating the

coughing experienced during the illness long after it has passed. We have
regularly found in such cases that children succeed in scaring everyone around
them with their coughing attacks. Such are cases where a physician is required to
intervene in the role of a pedagogue.
Then there are parents and caretakers who take an opposite position and
who discipline their children, even abusing them, or who try to make them
believe that they are stern disciplinarians.
Life is so varied that it often reconciles mistakes that were made in
upbringing. However, a person who grew up without love will show himself to
be devoid of love for the rest of his life. He will always suspect that others aim
to treat him unkindly. He will close himself off and will lose contact with others.
Often such a person will profess to have had a loveless childhood, as if that
forced him to become what he is. Of course, a child is not foreordained to
develop mistrust because of a hard upbringing, to evince coldness toward others
because this is how he was treated, or to question his own powers. Neuroses and
psychoses easily develop in such persons. Among such children there will
always be a disturbed adult who, for lack of understanding, or with bad
intentions, will poison a child’s psyche. For such cases there is hardly any
person other than a physician able to bring about a change in environment, either
by physically moving the child to another location, or by correcting
misunderstandings.
However, complications can ensue which become apparent only after a
thorough examination of the individual. Once the nature of the problem has been
diagnosed, the picture becomes much clearer.
There is then a basic difference in the psychological development of a first-
born child as opposed to that of a second or of the youngest child. It is also
possible to establish the unique character of an only child. It often is very
significant for the psychological development of a child if there are only boys or
only girls in one family, or if one boy grows up among girls, or one girl among
boys. These are the given realities and conditions which form children’s
attitudes. It is often possible to establish whether a child is the youngest or the
oldest on the basis of attitude. I have determined that a first-born child is almost
always conservative in his viewpoint. Such a child counts on power, acts
forcefully, and displays certain amicability. Consider Fontane’s biography
where he declares that he would give much if someone were to explain to him
from where he derived his tendency to side with the more powerful. When I read
that, I concluded, correctly, that he must have been a first-born child who found
an inviolable benefit in his superiority over his siblings.
The second born will always be surrounded by people who are more

capable, who are more important, have often more freedom, and are superior to
him. If the second child is able to develop, he will certainly live in a state of
tension in order to overtake the older sibling. He will work restlessly and under
pressure. In fact, among the restless neurotics there are a noticeable number of
second born children, while the first born more or less unwillingly face all rivals.
The attitude of the youngest is predominantly somewhat immature,
reserved, and hesitating. That person acts as if not trusting himself and as
incapable of attaining any noteworthy achievements which he sees or assumes in
others. You can easily gather from these characteristics that we are dealing here
with an originally existing condition. Such a person will always be engaged with
people who are more eminent than he is, in fact he is actually aware of only such
people. On the other hand, as a rule, he will attract all the love and tenderness
from others without giving anything in exchange. He does not need to develop
his own powers since he manages to be at the center of attention. We can
immediately understand the damage he does to his own development: He expects
everything from everyone else. A second characteristic of the youngest is the
“Joseph type.” Restlessly striving he overtakes everyone with his initiative,
which (according to Kunstadt) often is outside the norm, forging new paths. The
Bible, as well as folk tales, reflect an understanding of the common people when
such works bestow upon the youngest the strongest attributes and magical
powers.
The behavior of an only girl among boys is significant; in such cases the
tensions are so great that we must expect the development of some abnormal
attitudes. I am speaking here of far from absolute conditions. The girl is given to
understand early in her life that she is a totally different creature and that she is
denied what boys by nature regard as their rights and privileges. It is not easy to
make up for this situation with praise or by pampering, since we are often
dealing here with values and feelings that in children are significant and
irreplaceable. Girls will constantly be nagged and every step they take is
followed by advice and instructions. Such children are particularly sensitive to
criticism and are constantly attempting to cover themselves against making any
mistakes. At the same time they are fearful of being recognized for their
insignificance. Such girls frequently encounter a plethora of neurotic illnesses or
failures as they grow older.
The situation is not much different where there is an only boy among girl
siblings. The difference seems even more acute here. The boy usually is
accorded more privileges with the result that the girls operate against the single
boy as if in a secret plot. The boy in such a situation often suffers, as if he were
the object of a vast conspiracy. Every word he utters is met with laughter and no

one takes him seriously. Everyone tries to diminish his privileges and seeks to
exaggerate any mistakes he makes. The boy soon loses control over himself,
begins to lack selfconfidence, and in most cases makes poor progress in life. He
is generally thought to be lazy and shiftless. These, however, are only the
outward signs that build up on pathological moods and a fear of life. The main
point is that we are dealing here with individuals who have lost or can easily lose
confidence in themselves. Boys in such situations will habitually withdraw and
fear derision even when there is no justification for such feelings. They give up
easily and are given to wasting time, or they become delinquent. They also are
found to be reckless, as if having to prove their manhood. The same problems
are encountered in the development of an older brother among younger sisters.
Another area that concerns physicians is the sexual enlightenment of
children. No formula has thus far been discovered for dealing with this subject,
if for no other reason than the differences in the way children are brought up,
their unique individuality, and the influence of those among whom they grow up.
In any case, one thing has to be kept firmly in mind. It is unfair, and will
eventually come back to haunt the adults, if children are left uncertain as to their
sexuality. This is done surprisingly often. I have frequently heard from patients
that for the first ten years of their lives they were unsure of their sexuality. Their
whole development was permeated with a feeling that unlike others, they were
not born as boys or girls, and that they would not grow up to be like them. This
meant that they were so insecure that it became apparent in all their actions. The
same applies to girls. There are girls who when eight, ten, twelve or fourteen
years old were uncertain about their sex. In their fantasies they still believed that
they could later transform themselves into boys. This fact also finds support in
reports published in the professional literature.
In cases such as those above, the individual’s development will be troubled.
The childhood years are spent with efforts to artificially spur the sexual role, to
give it a masculine form, or to evade making decisions that could end in failure.
A basic insecurity is clearly discernible, or is betrayed by the individual’s
exaggerated behavior. Girls assume masculine attitudes, or take pleasure in
forcing behavior that they, and everyone else, regard as characteristic for boys.
They enjoy roughing it not only in childish and harmless ways that we like to see
in children, but so unrestrained and with such consistency that parents early on
already see this as characteristically pathological. Boys also are caught in this
wild turmoil, but having experienced resistance, they soon assume an uncertain,
vacillating attitude, or turn to what girls do. The awakening sexuality in both
boys and girls will then follow an unnatural or perverse course from that
normally taken.

Something should be said about what is commonly known as defiance. This
topic entails innumerable signs that physicians already regard as pathological.
These would include the many ways of refusing to eat, and even in forms of
revolting against bowel movements and urinating. All these pathological
symptoms, which in their most pronounced forms may be seen as enuresis or as
inexplicable and unchangeable obstipation, are frequently based on a deep
rooted defiance by children. Those children would use any occasion to avoid
being forced to take directions because they regard all force as demeaning and
humiliating.1 The refusal to adapt to the demands of their culture gives those
children satisfaction, and imparts to them an important indication of their
esteem. We interpret such reactions as an expression of their revolt. This can
easily be checked. To begin with, we never ignore traits of defiance, including
harmless acts of bad manners such as nose-picking, sloppiness, nail-biting, etc.
Bad habits to us have become indicators of a development antagonistic to social
demands. The antagonist is never missing! The symptom is almost always seen
in an individual who has been able to function only marginally since infancy.
It is extremely interesting to trace the line of occupations chosen by
children. Girls may begin when very young wishing to be a princess, then
dancer, then teacher, and then, resigned with their role, end up as housewife. As
adults, the choice of occupation in some fashion often becomes one that is
contrary to what the father had suggested. Of course, this counterplot does not
occur openly. The logic develops under pressure of a hostile end-goal. The
advantages of one occupation are strongly emphasized, and the disadvantages of
that which was suggested are stressed. By this means one is able to argue for and
against everything. An attitude like that calls for careful attention. When
providing occupational counseling and discussing choices in occupations, the
physician is strongly influenced by another aspect. He must consider first of all
the individual’s physical condition, while also paying attention to psychological
factors, which in some cases outweigh the physical considerations.
It becomes very awkward to chase after every impaired person suffering
from a neurosis or psychosis in an attempt to help or cure him. That would be an
enormous waste of time and energy. The time has come that we devote ourselves
more to prophylaxis, which is an area with many good prospects. When
educating parents and physicians, we always attempt to make this point.
However, in light of the enormous number of neurotic and psychotic cases,
particularly where there has been neglect, better results are urgently needed.
Foremost would be to publicize and apply the findings of Individual Psychology.
This applies in particular to its emphasis on understanding human nature and the
skills it advocates in education. This would allow everyone within their powers

to contribute and assist in this endeavor. The psychological anomalies that we
first notice as bad habits in the development of children often give vent to the
most serious forms of neurotic illnesses and to crimes.
1 Just as significant is a child’s tendency to draw attention with deprivation and
suffering.
We regard the schools as most appropriate for intervening with problem
children and have found the school counseling centers as best suited for
recognizing defects among problem children. These centers that Individual
Psychologists, the physicians, and teachers have established together can now be
found in many locations. By working together, physicians, teachers, parents and
the child have always found the right way to reinforce the child’s ability for
cooperation.2
2 Also see Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, VII edition: “Die
Schulberatungsstellen in Wien,” (School counseling centers in Vienna), Leipzig
1929.
Chapter XIX
Bolshevism and Psychology1 2
[1918]
The means of power have been torn from us Germans. We have abdicated
dominance over other nations and look without envy or ill will at how Czechs,
Slovaks, Hungarians, Poles, Ruthenians have gained national power and have
awakened to a new independence. Suddenly, all artificially cultivated hatreds of
yesterday against the Western Allies have dissolved and we bring them brotherly
love, even when we painfully and sadly feel that we could have been spared
some of the harshness of the armistice, and the intensity of the famine. We
Germans ourselves are inspired and animated by a strong sense of community. It
reaches beyond borders toward a hopeful feeling of fellowship for all humanity.
We still are troubled by old emotions of mistrust; we still fear foreign
domination and the greed for power by the powerful in our land who were
thwarted. However, we feel ready to struggle for the unification of mankind and
to make every sacrifice. Our people are not oppressed by defeat. The victor's
laurel that adorns the brow of the strong commander does not lead to anguish in
us. We were the infatuated for many years and have now become wiser. Behind
the sorrow and the misery of the present our people see the shining glimmer of a
new realization: We were never more miserable than at the height of our power!
The striving for power is an illfated delusion that poisons human fellowship!
Whoever seeks fellowship must forsake the striving for power.
We are closer to this truth than are the victors. We have behind us the

sudden collapse that threatens others. Sooner than all other nations, we received
the new teaching of healing in order to proclaim to mankind that the history of
mankind with its horror and misery has so far been nothing other than a
continuous chain of failed efforts for power. A deep tragedy such as our people
experienced must make for vision or else it misses its only sensible purpose. Out
of its agonizing experience, the renewed Germany brings us the most deepseated
belief of all civilizations in the final rejection of the striving for power and in the
irrevocable raising of the sense of community to be the guiding thought. The
cruel specter of the tower of Babel again made fools of mankind,--now misery
urges us to reflect.
1 First appeared as "Bolschewismus Seelenkunde" in the Internationale
Rundschau, Zurich, Vol. 4, pages 597-600, 1918. Reprinted in Psychotherapie
und Erziehung: Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band I: 1919-1929, p. 23-32 from an
expanded version in: Der Friede, Wochenschrift für Politik, Volkswirtschaft und
Literatur, Vienna, Vol. 4, , pages 525-529, 1919. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
The people actually always followed the path to a social consciousness.
Every intellectual and every religious revolt has been opposed to the striving for
power. The logic of human coexistence always pioneered the way only to end in
dominance. All laws of society of the past, the tablets of Moses, the teachings of
Christ, always fell into the hands of the powerful who misused the holiest for the
purpose of their domination. The most clever falsehoods, the most refined tricks
and treachery were called upon to shift the recurrence of the feeling and the
creativity of the sense of community toward a striving for power, and thus make
it ineffective for the well-being of all. Truth and necessity drawn out of the
obligation for human coexistence always are twisted into the abomination of
greed for power. "Through truth to lies!" was until now the deepest meaning of
the power culture that now faces a horrible collapse. This is how it came to the
fateful exploitation of the feeling of community by the striving for power.
However, how should one explain that the temptation for power in a few
found ready servants and supporters? There is no other explanation but that the
addiction to power was also in their blood! They, from an inner conviction,
could be found where power tempted because they also hoped that with the
increase of domination by their masters their expectations for increasing their
own powers also would be realized. The years of capitalism with their unfettered
greed for dominance have aroused rapaciousness in the human soul. No wonder
that our psychological apparatus marches under the banner of the striving for

power. Science, shortsighted and too ready to justify everything, explained in
terms of pop-psychology, the lust for power as innate and immutable qualities of
man's psyche. It characterized traits like the craze and striving for power as well
as domination, personal ambition and egotism as innate and unalterable qualities
of the human soul that could not be abated by the feeling of community. The
latter instead was transformed from an end to a means and thus the verity of the
feeling of community was employed with cunning and deception by nationalism
and imperialism in their craze for dominance and power.
Only in socialism did the feeling of community remain as the ultimate goal
and end as demanded by unhampered human fellowship. All the inspired
socialist utopians who were looking for or discovered social systems,
instinctively saw, as did all great reformers in history, a mutual interest in the
struggle for power. And in the dark machinery of the human soul, Karl Marx
discovered the common struggle of the proletariat against class dominance. He
encased it forever in the conscience of his supporters and showed a way to a
final manifestation of the feeling of community. The dictatorship of the
proletariat was to be the expression of maturity and strength and was to lead to
the general redemption from class confrontation and class striving for power.
For many socialists, Bolshevism's most important point, the forceful
establishment of socialism, appeared to be self-evident. We will admit this
much: it appears to be the simplest way to ensure with power everything that is
good and that promises happiness, or whatever is necessary for humankind’s
progress. Where in the lives of people, or in human history, have such intentions
succeeded? As far as we can see, wherever even the mildest force is applied, it
causes resistance even where it obviously is to the benefit of the oppressed. The
patriarchal system or enlightened absolutism is shocking proof of that. Even God
was not tolerated without opposition. If the domain of a person or a nation is
invaded, power and resistance will arise immediately, often secretly, and will not
disappear until all bonds have fallen. The victorious struggle of the proletariat
against coercion by capitalism clearly shows this development. Even the
growing strength of the labor movement can cause greater or lesser opposition in
insecure persons, if carelessly managed. Wherever questions of power come into
play, regardless of the excellence of intentions and goals, they come up against
the will to power in the individual and awaken resistance.
Those in the opposite camp also like to make reference to abstract ideals
and claim to know what the people, demand since only such overtures find
lasting resonance in the conscience of the masses. Our spiritual organism
responds to external force with counterforce and seeks satisfaction not in
rewards that come from obedience and conformity, but in trying to demonstrate

that its side has greater power. The struggle for power, therefore, also has a
psychological aspect that seems to us as an urgent duty to demonstrate. All the
riches of this world, pleasures, and rewards, are not enough to support power
forever, even when the goals that are being pursued seem to be beneficial to the
promotion of society. The militarism of the Central Powers had to collapse
because it constantly provoked resistance from those it subjugated. Time worked
against them. “Individual Psychology” explained this counter play of the striving
for power by various individuals and groups most explicitly and clearly. The
thinking, feeling, and desires of the individual today are guided in the first place
by his striving for personal superiority, even when he believes that he serves
higher ideals. Countering his demand for power that originated from the
unbearable feeling of weakness in childhood and that was to have been his
protective shield against his childhood insecurity, is the experience of the
overwhelming necessity for the community's aspirations. The current state of our
civilization and the limits of our knowledge still allow for the power principle to
assert itself secretly by exploiting the feeling of community. An open,
straightforward use of force is unpopular and already has become uncertain,
encountering sympathies at best only among hysterics. The assault, therefore,
often comes under the guise of justice, tradition, freedom for the benefit of the
oppressed, and in the name of culture. The results disappoint both parties. There
is no blessing that arises from the use of power. In the life of a nation, power
politics creates supporters of rulers, who are actually opponents lured to the
cause merely by intoxicating power. Then there are opponents who would have
been supporters had they not been automatically shunned by those in power.
However, those excluded from power lie in wait for the revolt, open to any
excuse to take up arms.
The poison of dominance also seeps into parental love and seeks to hold
fast to the appearance of superiority and infallibility in the name of authority and
filial duty. It then becomes the task of the children to grow beyond their
caregiver in order to deal with him. It is not different with the teacher. Love is
also full of deception and requires far too much submission from the partner. The
male coveting of power demands in the name of "natural destiny" the
subjugation of the female. The result is seen, not gratifyingly, in little happiness,
the destruction of all unconstrained relationships, and the crippling of invaluable
vitality. The joyful games of children betray to the psychologist a uniform
system of gratifying an obsession with power.
The same modern psychology, however, also has shown us that the traits of
dominance, jealousy, and striving for power over others, with all their ugly side
effects, are not innate and immutable. Rather, children are imbued with them

early in life and are accepted by them passively in an atmosphere intoxicated
with the temptation of power. Our blood still is saturated with the yearning for
the intoxicating power, and our souls are the toys of an obsession with
dominance. Only a distrust of all dictatorships can save us. Our strength lies in
our belief in the power of an organized force and in a philosophy of life, and not
in the power of weapons and in emergency decrees. Such means were already
employed by other strong forces, futilely struggling for their existence.
The reign of the Bolshevists is like that of all other governments founded
on the possession of power. With that their fate had been cast. They were
seduced by an intoxicating power that triggers automatically in the unprepared
human psyche that terrible mechanism by which, compelled only by a mutual
will for power, the advances by one side are answered with resistance by the
other, regardless of society's goals. Arguments that are as cheap as dirt serve to
justify actions and reactions. The beautiful becomes the ugly and the ugly
beautiful! Certainly, lies about Bolshevism are outrageous. However, even those
cannot be countered because they are always recreated in the struggle for power.
All of Russia has disintegrated. Already there are those to whom it seems right
to take up the struggle against Bolshevism under a flood of moral
pronouncements for the conquest and subjugation of Europe. The Bolshevists
must answer by reinforcing anew their power position. Whoever has not yet
succumbed to the exhilaration of power must ask himself whether this can ever
be the way toward unifying people and strengthening the sense of community.
We see old friends, true comrades, who reached dizzying heights, misled by
the drive for power, awakened to a demand for power. Here, there is no cutback,
only a further buildup, as is always the case when power has the decisive word.
If there is a way to call them back, it can only be with the memory of the wonder
that comes with the feeling of community that we have to bring about, but which
can never be attained with the use of power.
For those of us who believe otherwise, there are ways and tactics to attain
our highest goal: the cultivation and the strengthening of the feeling of
community.
It is always a matter of the age-old difference between being a subject and
an object. No one wants to be an object. In bringing up children and in education
all measures fail that are applied with force. Even rules for keeping clean and for
eating evoke lively opposition in children when required by parental authority or
when the child already has begun the struggle for dominance. If the parent or
educator invokes harsher reprisals, then the person who is the object of these
measures loses his human dignity and all other efforts to teach appropriate social
customs fail. The animal in the individual awakens. It is no different than under

the coercive regime of the Czars; depravity is inflamed and spreads senseless
violence across the land. Whoever still has any vitality directs his thoughts
toward cunning and force in order to overthrow the rule of the tyrant. Driving a
resisting multitude of people into an artificial socialist form of government is
akin to destroying a costly vase out of impatience
Every form of education must aim for the most favorable conditions for
receptiveness. The most positive result of Individual Psychological research is
the finding that this receptiveness is lost when force is applied, or when
conveyed under pressure of raw authority. Lasting retention comes about only
for what a person has received as a subject and accepted by his own will. The
process of Bolshevism shows all the mistakes of a poor, antiquated method.
Even if it were to succeed somewhere by subjecting a majority, no one would be
happy. Socialism without the appropriate philosophy of life is living like a
puppet without a soul, initiative, or talent. If Bolshevism succeeds, it will have
no value. If it fails, it will have compromised and vulgarized socialism.
In every country, socialism is at the point of fruition. This is what Marx had
foreseen as the consequence of capitalism's suppression of a budding class of
people. It was the proletariat's feeling of inferiority in his struggle for survival
that, like a thorn causing constant irritation, made him search for a new way to
overcome the suppressor and to discover a better organization and a better
economic system. But did a better knowledge of that economic interrelationship
create and sustain this great organization? Is victory for the proletariat, and with
that of social democracy, by itself a guarantee that with his confidence in
economics he knows a better way for dealing with a growing industrialization?
Or, is it not much more the unifying fundamental principles and the premise of
his thoughts, feelings, and desires, the reinforced sense of justice of the
downtrodden, rooted nowhere else but in the immanent logic of human
coexistence, and the proletarian’s undeniable part in society? Whoever has
suffered inequities because of the intoxication with power, whether in an
individual or a nation, "reaches upward to the eternal stars," recalling the
omnipotence of human feelings to which his strongest appeal must be directed: it
contains the eternal truth and is man's ultimate tribunal.
We are not speaking here of ethics as an exercise in science or art. We also
are not speaking of a moral interpretation of the history of the world. These are
only pitiful arrangements, cults, religious or fanciful historically limited
abstractions of this human togetherness’ primitive forms of safeguarding;
sexuality is its organic tie, the family its most frequently failed didactic organ. It
has implanted in us the love for children. In education it seeks the fulfillment of
its self-directed goals. It places restrictions automatically on incest and

perversion, which are obvious contradictions to the feeling of community.
Justice, morality, technology, art, and science stand in its service and are shaped
by it. It fosters inspiration and gives encouragement to progress and discovery in
accordance with its rationale and plan.
We can fight off the feeling of community within us; we cannot suffocate it.
Thus can the human soul delude itself into purging the logic that it has declared
as holy. In committing suicide defiant life abrogates the drive to live. And logic,
like the drive to live, is a reality equal to the feeling of community. Such
transgressions are sins against nature, against the holy spirit of society. It is not
so easy to suppress the social consciousness. The criminal needs an exhilaration
of the senses before or after the deed, in order to pacify his feeling of
community. Delinquent youths band together in gangs in order to share the
feeling of responsibility with others and thereby allay it. Raskolnikov first had to
stay in bed for one month and meditate on whether he is a Napoleon or a louse.
Then, when he ascends the steps in order to kill an old worthless usurer, he
sufferes from heart palpitations. Out of this arousal of his blood speaks the social
consciousness. War is not the continuation of politics by other means, but the
greatest criminal act against the interrelationship of humankind. What sum of
lies and of artificially inflamed low passions, how many thousand-year-old
abuses are necessary to suppress the indignant outcry of the voice of
humankind? Socialism has its roots deep in the feeling of community; it is the
ancient sound of humanity that became a philosophy of life and now the purest
and most practical expression of the social conscience. Bolshevism is a suicide
of the social conscience. It is Hercules who throttled his mother and not the
snakes. What a waste of spirit, strength, and human blood! Is it necessary that
what is obvious has to be said? We do not seek the concrete form; we want spirit
and the new word of socialism. Here it is: developing and furthering the feeling
of community!
Into the confines of the nursery break the waves of society's striving for
power. The lust for dominance of parents and the domestic help, as well as the
privileges of the younger child, irresistibly direct the sense of the child to
remember power and domination and tempt him into believing that this is the
way to exist. Only at some later time do feelings of community flow into his
soul, however, in most cases already subordinated to the existing craving for
power. If closely examined we find that all character traits enhanced by the
striving for personal superiority are based on the unshakable presumption of a
social conscience. When the child enters school or starts out in life, he brings
with him from within his family the mechanism damaging to the social
conscience that has repeatedly been described above. The ideal of being superior

depends upon the social conscience of others, because the typical idealized
figure in our age is the lonely hero for whom others are mere objects. This
psychological pattern made world war palatable and created man's admiration
for the absolute majesty of a victorious commander. Communal feelings require
a different ideal, that of the saint, albeit not encumbered with fantasies or
imbued with magic spells. Neither the school nor life itself can in the long run
unearth the deeply rooted exaggerated striving for selfesteem at the expense of
others. It would be a crass deception to think of the delusion of power as
pertaining only to the individual psyche. The masses too are guided by the same
goal, which makes it so much more destructive since the feeling of a personal
responsibility is significantly weakened. In Bolshevism, the striving for
godlikeness triumphs again, perhaps for the last time. Once more, human
ambition attempts to realize what within man’s limits he has dreamed: to force
on humanity as an eternal truth the idea of being an object. Thus, Bolshevism
unites enemies and friends of the truth against itself.
Today, more than ever before, our Individual Psychological research and
the findings above should be demanded to be heard and tested. As far as we can
see, there is no other viewpoint that is purer and clearer for revealing the
psychological aberrations of our time than the perspective of Individual
Psychology. This psychology had proclaimed even before the War the goal of a
future with a lifestyle that calls for a stronger sense of reality and for
responsibility, replacing latent hatred with mutual goodwill.
It should not be difficult to conjecture the aim of these or similar
postulations. We need a conscious preparation for furthering the advancement of
a very strong sense of community and an end of the obsession with power by
individuals and by nations. In that sense, the direction that Bolshevism has taken
is an obstruction and a tragic mistake.
Chapter XX
New Aspects on War Neurosis1 2
[1918]
The available literature on war neurosis often and conscientiously points
out how little it differs from neurosis in peace time. Many make the observations
that the same phenomena entail a similar etiology, follow the same course, and
manifest the same problems. Only with regard to therapy could some differences
be noted that reflect the necessities created by war and military conditions.
However, one other significant change must be taken into consideration
which might complicate our neurological research today. The treatment of
neurosis in a civilian population, or in peace time, has one unspoken but obvious
purpose. It is to cure patients of their illness, or at least to relieve them of

symptoms, in order to allow them to pursue their chosen way of life. Just as
obvious is the purpose of the treatment of neuroses by the military. It serves to
return the patient not to his own chosen way of life, but to qualify him for
service for “the common good.” Thus, an objective scientific and therapeutic
approach becomes significantly problematic, since it serves a military necessity
and utility. Under those circumstances, symptoms are observed under very one-
sided conditions that raise the question: “How do neurotic patients react when
eventually they will be forced into an undesirable situation?” 3
We have sufficient information stemming from the period before the war
that allows us to understand this particular question. Almost every physician was
familiar with the results of the variously graded suggestion therapies for
particular and insistent symptoms. Unfortunately, these physicians were not
infrequently caught up in a belief, confirmed either orally or in writing, that the
success of their treatment was permanent, while the patient was again being
treated by another physician either for the old or for new symptoms.
Consider the results of treatments for symptoms not for the purpose of
curing the patient, but to enhance his performance, such as a law student who
just before an examination complained about insomnia, tiredness, forgetfulness,
and headaches. The student was scheduled to take an examination eight days
hence. We gladly concede to all grades of improvement in such, not unusual,
cases. There certainly were cases in which, due to intimations and by whatever
course of therapy that was followed by the physician (ways for staying awake,
hypnotism, cold water treatment, shock treatment, or medications), the student
was helped in getting through his examination. It is true in general that for a
considerable number of neurotics merely visiting a physician, or sometimes
calling on anyone else, is sufficient to bring about some progress in the patient’s
condition.4 There should be no argument that such cases, whatever the nature of
the symptoms, should be regarded as not serious, and probably as borderline
normal. We have also encountered other cases that were not successfully cured.
Some students took their examinations and suffered from a severe inability to
concentrate. Among a considerable number the symptoms worsened; some
suffered to the point where they changed their profession, and occasionally their
plight ended in a serious neurosis or suicide. In not too few of the serious cases
the course of treatment followed was blamed for the outcome, a view that found
corroboration from the next physician treating the patient. I remember a case
where a husband succeeded in removing his wife’s phobia of being driven fast
by doing just that, driving fast. We would call that today a “counter shock.”
1 First published in Medizinische Klinik, Vol. 14, 1918, P. 66-70.

Republished in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, 1920. Translated
into English as Chapter XXIV in The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Adler, “Die andere Seite, Massenpsychologische Untersuchung über die
Schuld des Volkes,” Vienna 1918. (The Other Side: A Psychological
Examination on a Nation’s Guilt).
No one would assume that these and similar cases can be regarded as cured.
War neurology, with few exceptions, also speaks of only the removal of a
symptom. Physicians treating cases under such circumstances then prefer to
withdraw their patients from frontline duty. This makes the position of war
neurology more complicated. In contrast with treatment in peacetime, where the
physician does not deal with the patient pointlessly, but with the patient’s
concurrence, seeks to return him to useful endeavors, wartime neurological
treatment seeks to return the patient to military duty. Such military duty,
however, can gradually be eased. The neurotic once removed from the front lines
is faced with new and important decisions that arise from his treatment. All
authorities correctly emphasize the importance of the “atmosphere” in the
patient’s environment. That atmosphere, however, is not the result of how one
feels about the results of treatment provided, but entails hundreds of factors
including more or less justified conjectures about the usefulness of treatment and
what the future holds for the individual when treatment ceases.
The problem of eligibility for a pension must also be given weight. It is not
that the possibility of a pension is not constantly eyed by the neurotic, which
also applies to individuals suffering from hysteria resulting from an accident.
Rather, a pension is regarded as having the same value for a war-neurotic as
does a decoration. In addition to providing a monetary award, it also serves to
document that person’s illness as legitimate when he is back home again. It also
is useful against any eventual attempts to enlist him again for military duty.
Every neurologist must be familiar with the critical tone reserved by pensioned
neurotics for any suggestion that the legitimacy of their case undergo
reevaluation. The “idea of a pension” is far more important to the neurotic even
against what seems to be his logical understanding of fear, danger,
homesickness, and personal gain.
4 For about one half of the “nervous” persons, visiting a physician means a
determination for improvement or a willingness to forego a disturbing symptom,
or one that had become superfluous. In fifty percent of these “cures” all the
neurotic variations continue to flourish.

Just as is true for cases of neurosis in peacetime, the patient with an
opposing argument counters every step taken by a physician treating war
neurotics. I had examined almost all my cases of war neurosis at the front, far
from home and from relatives. I never found that the severity of their cases
related to their dislocation from home. As is true for every neurotic, those who
were afflicted by the war strove to return from the environment in which the war
had placed them to the smaller circle of their relatives. As long as this is a
neurotic propensity, the absence or the occasional presence of relatives will be
influenced by the same neurotic tendency. Every groundless presumption made
regarding this question will impede simplifying a case, and with that the success
of the healing process. For example, a successful cure can depend on steps taken
upon demands made by the hospital in the patient’s hometown.
It can always be shown that the “familiar susceptibility” of neurotic
symptoms stems from the attitude of the neurotic, which allows for the use of the
phrase attitudinal illness. For that reason it becomes so absolutely important that
the neurologist fully understands the individual’s attitude, that he understands
what he says in every sense, which can sometimes be difficult.
The neurotic’s “attitude” also in part relates to the treatment to be provided.
The problem becomes insolvable if the patient is under the care of more than one
physician. Small institutions treating neuroses, therefore, are to be
recommended. They can provide written reports regarding their success, which
would be helpful in providing appropriate treatment. Only such records provided
by the attending physician are valid for certifying claims concerning the success
of treatment.
Psychotherapy, in the narrow sense of the term, should include only those
methods that prior to any treatment require uncovering the patient’s psyche.
Consequently, this excludes almost all “psychotherapeutic” measures currently
in use for treating neuroses. These can only be regarded as general maxims for
treatment. Such measures depend in wartime almost exclusively on the use of
authority, and on the granting of a minimum of comfort. The former would
include hypnosis, waking suggestions, pseudo-narcosis, and sham operations, as
well as “psychotherapeutic preparations” prior to actual treatment. “Heroic”
maxims entail painful procedures, waterbeds, causing fright, deprivations, and
the purposeful aggravation of a patient’s condition. At best, but only as a
makeshift, is the Frank method, advocated by Sauer. It follows what can only be
regarded as a middle course because it discloses too little about a patient’s
psyche, enforces a physician’s authority, and operates with a form of “counter-
shock” treatment. The proven record of this method during war time, and at
times also seen in peace time, is the neurotic flight from treatment, which itself

can be equated to a neurotic symptom. A follower of Freud applies this method
to officers, and the Kaufmann method to the troops, both with about the same
degree of success.
What is noticeable in all situations is that all authorities approach their
cases aggressively. Hardly ever is there a hint of waiting, using calming
methods, or introducing the patient to more favorable circumstances. The core of
today’s war neurology is the tendency to break the neurotic’s obstinacy by
applying counterforce. This condition is not changed when what outwardly
appears to be a milder, but is in fact a drastic type of therapy, that seems to
promise quick and lasting relief, particularly where the neurotic is needed for
military service: It consists of the exploration and uncovering of this neurotic
willfulness. This method also cannot disavow that the patient’s psychological
state is aggravated, but almost always reproaches him for simulating.
The question whether neurosis is hereditary or acquired has not been fully
answered. This is particularly so because educational factors, the influence of the
environment, and children imitating nervous parents, is given greater
consideration now than before. The frequency or regularity of neurosis found in
a patient’s history usually is given much credence. The patient’s attitude toward
life and toward society is decisive when considered from an Individual
Psychological viewpoint. This type of Individual Psychological penetration of a
patient’s psyche, a correct interpretation of his case history, as well as
understanding the way of life he chose should provide the surest guide for
assessing the degree of aggravation, which is never missing in a neurosis, and
for uncovering any possibility that he is simulating.
It has become a common view that the choice of a symptom can easily take
advantage of an earlier organic illness, including its type and location. Simply
put, the symptom is developed in the inferior organ. It may also be said that it
manifests itself in an emotional form that comes close to normal and appears as a
permanent condition such as trembling, vomiting, staring, speechlessness, etc.
and, therefore, become an empathic phenomenon. There are few attempts at
explaining the reason for such fixations. A favorite explanation is the assumption
that this tendency to give permanence to such symptoms is a neurotic
characteristic, as is the susceptibility of the symptom. From the viewpoint of the
neurotic, an actual explanation would be that he establishes a symptom through
empathy when it seems to suit his neurotic purposes, just as he terminates a
symptom for the same reasons. The same phenomenon can be found in normal
individuals within normal parameters.
Based on published material over the past two years, a number of
comments, observations, and suggestions can be made. Schanz (1)5 looks for the

starting point for tremors in a segmentally related deficient vertebra which, as
Blencke (2) points out, actually exists, but which at most contributes only
indirectly to tremors. It is more likely that “neurasthenic” pains can be explained
on the basis of such a deficiency. Often there will be a nevus at or near the place
where pain is felt. Such a finding, often accompanied by a low-grade scoliosis or
kyphoscoliosis, protects against a diagnosis of simulation. Andernach regularly
was successful with verbal suggestions followed by electrotherapy. However, he
also insisted on a favorable atmosphere for this method. Similarly, Rottermann,
supported by Josef and Mann, attempts to overpower patients with sham
operations under anesthesia and with conspicuous bandages. Kalmus and E.
Meyer favor the Kaufmann method, which recently was considerably redressed.
In its milder form, it now requires a preparatory stage with verbal suggestions
followed a few days later by a medium grade electrotherapy that is interspersed
with military style exercises. E. Meyer tried to exclude from such experiments
neurasthenic psychopaths and such hysterics who during attacks experience
psychic manifestations, i.e. more severe cases. By the way, the type of treatment
is less important than the physician. Simulation by the patient should not be
assumed too hastily. Since there are always exacerbations in psychopathic
constitutions electrotherapy should be rejected.6
5 See the list of publications at the end of the article.
Liebermeister (3) seems to have made some important contributions in his
works. Since his method cannot be applied outside of Germany, I can only refer
to reviews concerning his work. From these I gather that the author seems to
support a policy whereby unsuccessful treatments would not require a fee
payment to the extent that such a policy can be upheld. Adler (4) had arrived at
the same policy. He also emphasizes the importance of an Individual
Psychological method, an educational psychotherapy, whereby neurotic
characteristics existing since childhood are uncovered as defective or harmful.
By the avoidance of any pattern one can find, in the final analysis, how the
neurotic instinctively retreats from all normal social demands with a subjective
feeling of impotence and how he seeks to safeguard himself against any real
dangers by empathizing with a threatening situation. In this way the neurosis
becomes a means of evasion. The prognosis becomes increasingly favorable the
more indications are discovered showing the patient to have been a “team
player” in his earlier years, having progressed in school, being able to form
friendships, having a love-life, a timely marriage, children, occupation, etc. The
patient will always reveal himself as a neurotic with his tendency to cling to his
“safeguarding” small family circle. The symptom as well as the attempt to make

it permanent falls under the dominance of safeguarding a future goal. It is,
therefore, not difficult to distinguish a simulation from a neurosis. The lecture
against the use of electrotherapy concluded with the admonition “to avoid every
method of treatment that offends human dignity.”
Lewandowsky (5) makes very similar observations: “Sick people are
afflicted with neurosis in order to gain security. In some cases an innate
insubordination, a feeling of not wanting to go along, plays a significant
role...The actual cause of the illness does not lie in the past, not in any kind of
trauma, but in a future that the sick person no longer wants to endure ... The
illness ensures the fulfillment of a wish...to escape some danger.” Lewandowsky
points out the danger that lies in a gathering of neurotics because of the
possibility of infection. He considers treatment in the patient’s home problematic
because of the person’s desire to stay there. However, he fails to tell what can be
done to counter the wish to go home. The author correctly states that one cured
patient engenders the cure of others. I also recall the case where a nurse
succeeded in curing a patient by speaking of other patients who were cured. It is
possible that Lewandowsky gives too much credit to military rank for a
successful treatment. His treatment consists of aggravating a situation in all
directions complemented by suggestions of electrotherapy that differs from the
Kaufmann method and of the use of hypnosis. He rejects sham operations and
sham narcosis.
6 Trans. Note: Literally “Faradic currents.” I use “electrotherapy” throughout.
The German term may also refer to electroshock therapy (EST).
Meyer (6) considers every method acceptable, as long as the physician
believes in it and applies it fearlessly. The neurotic must be brought to believe
that he can function again in his vocation.
Raether (7) describes his use of the Kaufmann method entailing a form of
psychotherapeutic introductory treatment followed by the application of
electrotherapy in one session and follow-up treatments. The treatments are 97%
successful in that the patients can become wage earners again.
L. Mann (8) pointed out that as early as in 1911 he had treated patients with
verbal suggestions followed by electrotherapy. We should like to cite from
Nagelis (9) “Unfalls-und Begehungsneurosen” where he observed that once a
patient regained his ability to work, a cure was in the offing. He took a strong
stand against Oppenheim and denied, as did most authorities, the existence of an
“accident neurosis.”
Trömmer (10) demonstrated a pseudoclerodermatic (sic) form of traumatic
neurosis (Oppenheim) which he attributed to a hysterical paresis with
trophoneurosis arising from an injury to the back of the hand, and to bandaging

the hand for two months. The same author described a “bilateral monaesthesia”
where two widely separated points of a divider were applied to the skin to be as
touching one place. He saw this as useful evidence for the existence of a
hysterical attention deficit.
Leußer (11) discussed a case of a tachycardia paroxysm that extended over
four generations. 
Heinze (12) described success with hypnotic treatment of hysteria resulting from
combat experiences. He had an 86% success rate; even using simulated hypnosis
he had some success. None of his patients were well enough to return to full
military duty, and only a very small percentage of patients whose symptoms
were healed could carry out any military service. He regards neurotic war
illnesses as transient reactions stemming from a psychopathic inferiority. 
Minkowski (13) recalled a case in which a sham operation was performed by
Israel 30 years before. The cure lasted until the patient learned the truth. 
Bumke recalled how extremely complicated a psychological condition is. The
same applies to hypnosis. A number of patients are refractory, others exploit
hypnosis as a form of retreat, and then there are those who are so happy with
their cure that “wishful thinking” on their part cannot be presumed. His
experience led him to conclude that no pension should be granted, and that
fitness for duty not be considered. Sham operations and some other methods of
treatment should be rejected by medical personnel, who should be instructed not
to resort to force, punishment, or deception. 
Kraus (14) seemed to have avoided dealing with the nature of neurosis where the
symptom becomes a means, when he asserts that neurasthenia is not the sole
concern of neurology. His reasoning seems to indicate that the constitutional
prerequisite, which is that organ inferiority is essential for a neurosis, does not
appeal to him.
Mohr (15) sees the nature of depression as a conflict between the feeling of duty
and a desire to avoid unpleasantness, as is seen in conscientious and scrupulous
people. [To this should be added a word about an “unsocial conscientiousness”].
A cure can only succeed by psychologically influencing the patient. The
treatment necessitates: small nursing homes, far from where the patient resides,
with 20 to 30 patients cared for by each physician, avoidance of all other
treatments, and the introduction of psychotherapy that would make the patient
master his symptoms. 
Weichbrodt (16) emphasizes that the illness often breaks out only some time
after a trauma. Occasionally, it appears only after the recurrence of a trauma or
in anticipation of it, which is what happens to soldiers with no battle experience.
The author does not address the question whether a soldier should be treated

behind the front or at home. 
Rothmann’s method seems to consists of only solidifying in a patient’s mind the
idea of being ill. He also feels that narcosis can be relinquished. He finds
Kaufmann’s method valid. With regard to hypnosis, he considers Nonnes’
personality a decisive factor in treatment. His method consists simply of a bath
lasting 24 hours that can at times be extended to 40 hours. Its effectiveness is
increased if the bath is administered in a closed off and turbulent place. Success
is achieved, however, only with the neurotic disturbance and not with hysteria.
The patient is not allowed to leave the premises or take a vacation. Few of the
patients become well enough for military duty, but all are able to take up their
normal occupation. The method supports denying the individual a pension. It is
not suitable for officers. 
Alt (17) believes only in treating a neurosis far behind the front lines. According
to one estimate, 75% of the patients are able to fulfill garrison duty after
treatment. 
Quensel (18) sees in war neurosis a combination of an actual illness plus a
reaction to external circumstances. 
Jolly (19) finds that 1-3% of neurosis patients become well enough for military
duty. He gives particular weight to work therapy. Hypnosis is of little value;
electro-psychological treatment is effective. He recommends the use of low
voltage treatments and exercises. “What matters is not the condition of these
people upon being discharged, but what will happen to them afterwards.” His
research showed that of 41 patients suffering from hysteria, 30 remained unfit
for duty, three were returned to active duty, five were declared g.h. (sic) and
three a.v. (sic) - Of 23 neurasthenia cases, one was declared fit for duty, 15 were
declared g.d.f.(sic), three were fit to work, and four were unfit for duty. Of 14
cases treated with low voltage electrotherapy, five were returned to full military
duty, nine were g.d.f. (sic). In one third of the cases of hysteria, the intelligence
level of the subjects ranged between slight feeble-mindedness to imbecility. The
author makes one very important comment without following up on it. He found
among his subjects a noticeable number of unskilled laborers. The enormous
amount of documentation located in the Krakow mental institute reflects the
same results. This indicates that clear cases of war neuroses are rarely to be
found among officers, which indicates a fundamental truth for understanding
neurosis. It points directly at the fact that those afflicted with neurosis are by
nature hesitating, and ambivalent with regard to their social obligations. 
Kehrer (20) gave up hope of ever being able to provide even a modicum of a
percentile of war neurotics who were cured enough to return to frontline duty.
However, he urges the greatest efforts to restore such persons for useful work

behind the lines. His method entails various means for aggravating a patient’s
situation, including restricting nourishment, milk diets, and “forced or
compulsory exercises.” He admonishes the misuse of electrotherapy by
nonspecialists and is disappointed in a psychotherapy that does not try to explain
causes more clearly. He also puts much weight on the importance of an
atmosphere in which everyone must believe that they cannot progress in life
without being cured, and he also regards military authority very highly. 
Sauer (21) associates himself with Frank with regard to the early views of
Breuer and Freud, which argue that neurosis stems from restrained emotions. He
denies Freud’s later viewpoint of a sexual etiology for war neurosis. He,
therefore, attempts to reduce “emotional tension” by rejuvenating restrained
emotions through hypnosis. He reported that letters from soldiers at the front
affirmed the success of this method. 
Wexler justifiably opposed for years these and similar theories. He believes that
whoever is changed so significantly as a result of sexual or other traumas did not
as a consequence become ill, but already was ill. Furthermore, it should be
mentioned how little such methods raise an understanding of the nature of the
patient. Such treatments, therefore, should not be regarded as etiological, but
rather as having been aggravated because of an unknown situational change.
There is also the obvious assumption that the patient undergoing such therapies
will learn more about his psychic make-up and his goal than will the physician,
and that this new recognition may ameliorate the symptoms. This argues in favor
of the practical utility for these methods. One more point needs to be stressed
which is that Wexler prefers clinics in the patient’s home location. 
Jalowicz (22) points out how rarely neurosis develops among front line troops.
From among 25 cases of neurosis, he found only two in which there were no
previous problems requiring treatment. He also points to the neurosis-hostile
“battle tonus” on the front lines, the misuse of the trauma associated with
soldiers buried alive, and then asserts that he had never encountered a neurosis in
connection with a person actually having been buried alive. He again argued
against Oppenheim’s theory of a possible carryover from a simulation to an
actual neurosis, and warns against hastily transporting a patient to his home. The
contrast with Oppenheim only seems that way because Jalowicz probably did not
focus on the origin of a neurosis, but on neurotic symptoms in those who started
out by simulating. A “symptom susceptibility” in fact requires for its
actualization a number of preliminary steps such as practice and arrangements,
some, as can also be seen in peacetime cases, can be categorized as simulation
and aggravation. This process occurs during the “latent period” and can clearly
be followed and anticipated in dreams. 

Sommer (23) eliminates functional deafness in soldiers by using an experimental
psychological method. While the patient is sitting at an apparatus designed to
analyze finger movements, a bell is suddenly sounded behind him. Consequently
there is a flicker in the forearm, which proves that the tone was heard. Almost all
of his cases also caused actual damage, for example, by rupturing an ear drum.
Sommer sees the nature of neurosis as a “pathological compulsion to suppress
reflexes.” This is undoubtedly nothing more than a description of the situation as
it actually exists. Nißl v. Meyendorf joins this discussion and points out that in in
this particular case of deaf soldiers, they must all have been able to hear. The
therapeutic effect is not unlike the deception frequently practiced, and often
successfully, in new cases where the patient, after a thorough examination, is
told that “ such an illness does not exist.” Imhofer (24) emphasizes the difficulty
in uncovering simulated deafness. It requires much time, extensive observations,
and a physician blessed with ingenious ideas. Anaesthetizing the eardrum is
meaningless; but the result of examining the static organ is worthwhile.
Furthermore, the psychology of deaf persons should be taken into consideration.
Finally, imbecility should not be disregarded in examining a patient. 
Erich Stern (25) claims to have found a pathogenic psychoneurosis “in a single
unstable psychoneurotic factor from which an unstable equilibrium of the entire
psyche is then derived.” 
Strümpell (26) differentiates between two groups of functional neuroses: 1.
Those illnesses that lie outside consciousness, and 2. those that are associated
with a changed condition of consciousness. In the first group he includes
epilepsy, chorea, eclampsia, myasthenia, tetany, genuine neuralgia, and
migraine. He labels these functional neuroses. He seems to have problems with
including tic, tremors, myoclonic movements, as well as vasomotoric, secretory,
and traumatic neuroses. Organic illnesses are manifested by constant exceptional
precipitations such as degenerative reactions, pupil rigidity, the absence of
reflexes as well as a pathological increase in reflexes along with extended
reflexogenous zones. Among psychogenic illnesses are symptoms of irritation,
characteristic anesthesia, and hemianaesthesia, as well as the possibility that
attacks are provoked by suggestions. Some of these categories may have been
drawn too sharply, for example, the importance given to reflex intensification
along with the extension of reflexogenous zones. These are often seen in cases of
psychogenic war neuroses, particularly unconsciously acquired spasms, which
must have come to the attention of every examiner.
Rothe (27) recommends the stoic philosophy as a means to affect those who
stutter. In light of the many failures of all methods used to cure this affliction,
this is a remarkable theory. Rothe justifiably is searching for a total

psychological transformation of the individual in hopes that “the stoic will see in
stuttering a test imposed by fate which challenges him to prove himself worthy
with calmness.” The flaw in this perception lies obviously in the concept of a
“test.” It does not go to the source of the affliction, which, under the best of
circumstances, could be remedied without the physician gaining any
understanding of how that occurred. 
Sterts (28) emphasizes the analogy between emotional outbursts and hysterical
symptoms. The former were to be seen as physical and not as psychological acts.
The latter, a hysterical reaction, is independent of concurring organic changes
and stems from a particular predisposition. He regards a further requirement for
an outbreak of the illness, as does Charcot and Breuer in the “hypnoidal
condition.” The tendency to fix symptoms could be a general psychopathological
predisposition. Hysterical complexes could exist without desiring them, wishing
them, expecting, anticipating, or fearing them. If the last is the case, however, as
would apply to hysteria in pensioners and soldiers, it then becomes the source
for constantly renewed energy that sustains the illness. The apparent argument
whether the symptoms’ “susceptibility” as well as “fixation” represent a general
predisposition principle, and when the one and then the other takes effect, a
point of view that could lead deeper into the problem, is not taken into
consideration by Sterts. He also fails to identify how he succeeded in eliminating
the hysteric’s goals. On the other hand, his perception of pensioners’ and
soldiers’ hysterics approximates the concept of the “actual position,” a more
aggravated form of the neurotic’s “individual position.” 
Zangger (29) believes in the concept of curing neurosis with character
correction, and with increasing a person’s understanding of his problem. Dubois
(30) opposes, justifiably but without convincing reasoning, the concept of
“conversion” which could have been derived from Freud. He believes that all
“observable nervous disturbances are common physiological manifestations of
the emotional condition which deviates from a normal condition only in intensity
and fixation.” This is correct insofar that we are never actually able to perceive
hyper-physiological manifestations. The conversion concept, however, assumes
something else, a minimal conservation of psychic energy. This concept exists
only because the physician would refer to every deviating reaction as a
conversion. By overlooking the fact that reactions are unique and purposeful,
Schuster (31) comes to the conclusion that in cases where the individual’s
situation pathologically changes constantly or intermittently, the anatomical
essence somehow deviated from the norm.
Nonne (32) with his suggestion treatment focuses only on a symptom-free
outcome. This method also is suitable for officers. There is a high rate of

recidivism and full military duty is rarely achieved. The main value of this form
of treatment is that it reaches the point where the individual is able to work, and
no longer qualifies for a pension. Of 42 new cases, 26 individuals were fully
qualified to work, 16 were still suffering but were able to perform light work,
and two had relapses. The original Kaufmann method was completely
transformed into a persuasion method assisted by electrotherapy. 
Straßer (33) said, “everything arising from the human imagination that develops
creatively can be utilized to create a complex of symptoms for a functional
emotional or neurotic illness. Every psychological activity above all must be
understood as preparatory for a future action. The final psychological orientation
that was meant to apply only to the ‘hysteria of pensioners’ can be seen in every
neurosis. Imagining being exhausted can functionally manifest itself that way.
‘Trauma’ has the capacity to avoid personal responsibility. Numerous traces lead
from the healthy state to neurotic illnesses, and almost everyone having
experienced a catastrophe will carry home with him a memento in some form, as
well as thoughts about protection. Individual Psychology will uncover the
weakling behind every neurosis. An individual’s inability to conform to the
social mores will awaken aggression against them and take on neurotic
characteristics. Therapy must be able to resolve the conflict between duty to
country and the expression of one’s individuality.” 
The work related to war neurosis accelerated the most important problems in the
psychology of neuroses. A further pursuit of the collected material and of the
work performed in this field should lead to a uniform viewpoint that will
approach ours. 
LITERATURE
1. Schanz, Münchner medizinische Wochenschrift, H.12, 1916 
2. Blencke, Ibid, H. 32, 1917. 
3. Liebermeister, Ueber die Behandlung von Kriegsneurosen, Halle 1917. 
4. Adler, Lecture delivered at a meeting of military physicians in Krakow,
November 1916. 
5. Lewandowsky, Münchner medizienische Wochenschrift, 30th Issue, 1913,
supplement on combat medics. 
6. Meyer, Therapeutisches Monatsheft , June 1917 
7. Raether, Arch. für Psychology , Vol. 57, 1917 
8. L. Mann, Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift , 1917, No. 29 
9. Naegeli, Unfall und Begehrungsneurosen , Stuttgart, 1917 
10. Trömmer, Aerztlicher Verein in Hamburg, 22 May 1917 
11. Leußer, Münchner medizinische Wochenschrift , 1917, No.23 
12. Heinze, Medizinesche Sektion der schlesischen Gesellschaft für vaterliche

Kulture zu Breslau , 9 March 1917 
13. Minkowski, ibid 
14. Kraus, Kriegsärztliche Abende 
15. Mohr, Medizinische Klinik, 1915 
16. Weichbrodt, Arch. f.d. ges. Psychologie, Vol. 57, No. 2 
17. Alt, ibid 
18. 20 various Central German psychiatrists and neurologists in Dresden, 6
January 1917 
19. Jolly, ibid 
20. Kehrer, Zeitschrift für die gesellschaftliche Neurologie und Psychiatrie,
Vol.36, No. 1 and 2. 
21. Sauer, ibid 
22. Jalowicz, ibid 
23. Sommer, (see 18) 
24. Imhofer, Wiener klinische Wochenschrift , 1917, No. 23 
25. Stern, Erich, Sommers Klinik für psychiatrie und nerven Kranke, Vol. 10,
No. 1, 1917 
26. Strümpell, Medizinische Klinik, 1916, No. 18 
27. Rothe, Zeitschrift für die gesellschaftliche Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Vol.
36, 1917 
28. Stertz, Ostdeutscher Verein für Psychiatrie, December 1916 
29. Zangger, Neurologische Gesellschaft, Bern 1916 
30. Dubois, ibid 
31. Schuster, Neurologisches Zentralblatt, 1916, No. 12 
32. Nonne, Wandervers. des südwestdeutschen Neurologen und Psychiater in
Baden-Baden, June 1917 
33. Strasser, Schweizer Korrespondenzblatt, 1917, No. 9
Chapter XXI
The Other Side 
A Mass-Psychological Study of a Nation’s Guilt1 2
[1919]
If one were to direct one's steps at 12 noon toward the Hofburg in the
capital of the former Habsburg Empire, a crowd would be seen accompanying
the fortress guards to the bold sounds of Austrian military marches. Citizens and
common folk, men, women and children walk proudly to the beat of the music
toward the courtyard of the old fortress to strain watching the changing of the
guards. And when the drum major raises his baton, not only do the people raise
their heads, but their hearts beat in tune with the march.
Daily, these people were subjected in their schools to lectures on their

obligation to honor the ruling house. All the melodies of their childhood fill their
ears with awesome sounds flattering and praising the monarchy. Distorted
history boasts of bellicose glory of the fatherland, of its archduke, and of its
aristocratic military leadership and seduces the souls of boys to seek mystical
bliss in bloodshed and in battles.
Incessant eloquent sermons pour from thousands of pulpits preaching the
exhilaration of servitude and slavish obedience. Every seat of learning teaches
the student the art of subservience.
Boredom hovers over peace organizations and there is no one, no popular
movement, that organizes against this trend. 
Newspapers and periodicals, politicians and parties seek the favor of the ruling
powers. The arts strive for government support and look for access to the
Hofburg Theater. 
Anyone who becomes engaged in politics ends up a party functionary. The
parties themselves vie for ministerial appointments even when seemingly
opposed to the government. Often they act as adversaries only to gain a
ministerial post. High level contacts and courting the ruling circles softens all
expressions of opposition. Revolutionary organizations are thus crippled and
next to suave politicians and powerful personalities seem intractable or confused
while dissipating their enthusiasm in party offices. 
It took decades for the nation to be trained in weakness and obedience to
authority and for the people to forfeit their self respect. 
Then came war and no one knew from where. According to tried military tactics,
the authorities kept the people in the dark. Again the sound of horns was heard
and hired bands roamed through the streets; idiotic desk-bound warriors came
forward with stinging orations in which they flaunted their own nobility and the
insignificance of others. They also promised a short war that would end in a
glorious victory. In this thick fog the people thought they could see a faint light,
but mainly felt their own impotence. 
Then came the general staff with their lies. Poisoned wells were uncovered,
dynamited bridges discovered far inland, and tales were told of the martyrdom of
citizens living along the borders. As told, there was no end to crimes committed
by the enemy: rape, arson, crucifixions, shameless indignities, and the use of
illegal weapons. Then started the hunt for spies. 
Warnings against spies appeared in every waiting room, on trains, and in every
public toilet. There were constant announcements of arrested spies and of
betrayal. The people totally lost their heads; no one trusted anyone. Whoever
wanted to speak freely held back from fear of meeting up with a spy or someone
bragging to be one. 

Censorship threw an iron curtain over cities and the countryside. Rumors were
ripe about death sentences meted out in the war zones for critical remarks made
in letters sent home. Anxiety accompanied letter writing. 
There was talk everywhere of death sentences and arrests, every critical remark,
even when spoken with the best of intentions, seemed threatened by unexpected
consequences. Objections voiced in the military service or a disagreement with
orders resulted in the severest punishment. Cases of immediate death for even
the most minor disagreements increased and kept the population in a constant
state of anxiety. 
The people looked in vain for salvation. The cities sought it in the countryside,
where many held back food supplies to bring to an end a war that, contrary to all
expectations, had become lengthy. The farmers counted on revolt in the cities.
Journalists and whatever the Austro-Hungarian Empire produced as writers
ineffectively presented plans and tried to raise enthusiasm among the people for
the war and the nation’s military leaders. Those among them who opposed the
war, as well as those who were party members, seemed impotent and, because of
the forced adjournment of parliament, had their effectiveness curtailed. Soon
they gave up their fight and contained their writings to within the bounds of
censorship, moved their quarters to military press offices, to the archives, or fled
abroad. Even from the non-German nations that felt the pressure of nationalism
there was little resistance to be expected. Even parliamentarians who opposed
the war reproached Count Stürgkh that with shutting down parliament the
anticipated enthusiasm for war among the Slavic nations had been tempered. The
people counted most heavily on resistance from the Czechs. Regrettably, they
had delayed their separation to four and one half years after the outbreak of war
and even during the Brest-Litowsk negotiations did not become restless, as did
the workers in what is now Germany-Austria who, independent of their leaders,
sought to bring the situation to an end. 
Incessantly, the trains with their cannon fodder rolled toward the battle fields.
Those who waved to them for encouragement acted more as if consoling victims
fated to die. And those who greeted and expressed gratitude from horse drawn
carts maintained their composure and high spirits not least of all out of pride.
Slogans and pictures on train compartments, that at the outset of the war were
meant to raise a lagging enthusiasm of the masses, now showed the grinning
faces of the general staff. The tenor of daily frontline reports and account of
battles was no different. 
The well connected, the bribers, or those who had more or less plausible excuses
and thereby escaped the misery of war, were not afraid to employ any strategy to
gain their ends. There were many such cases ranging from noncommissioned

officers to the highest ranks who were successful in this. Even physicians and
elegant ladies, dressed as nurses, were known to carry out their duties to varying
degrees of seriousness. On the other hand, the military had available an army of
volunteer physicians, experienced careerists who, like the machine guns, were
arrayed behind the "happy warriors." They remained behind the lines, were well
fed, and were available only for promotions, medals, and friendly smiles from
their superiors. Possessed by a megalomania, which they sported as patriotism
and enthusiasm for the war, they rediscovered age-old tortures which they
employed "with the fewest amenities" to whip collapsing fellow human beings
into some shape and then drive them to their death. Not only the frontlines
threatened death and doom, but also the homeland. 
Constant drafts continuously spewed new lives into the mouths of cannons.
Mockery and scorn greeted questions of fitness for duty. Soon there was no
ailment that allowed for a draft deferment in the eyes of specially selected
generals and mustachioed colonels; no objection raised by honest medics was
thought valid. The people shuddered at the sight of the many drafted cripples. A
silent, untiring, bitter battle took place between the people and the draft boards;
the masses and the physicians. Boards of examiners were carefully scrutinized in
order to seek out those presumed to be more lenient. Physicians were overrun to
certify ailments so as to get more sympathetic hearings, which led to
academicians being assigned as stewards and prominent businessmen and
manufacturers working in military depots. Large-scale dismissals were made
available for the drafted wealthy or well-connected men, making it difficult for
the authorities to escape innumerable demands by influential people. Their most
demanding task often was to separate these well-protected citizens from the
barbed wire of their "connections" to bring them before military authorities. It
was regarded as disgraceful not to have the right connections and to subject
oneself to the military without a fight, a disgrace befitting only the poor devils of
the masses. But there were some who caught on to the game and sought by every
possible means to escape frontline duty, employing all sorts of real or imagined
ailments. This brought them only to a solid front of doctors who, partly imbued
with a military frenzy and partly from fearing frontline duty, fed the battlefields
with the healthy and the sick without shying away from even the most criminal
methods. But, until the very end of the war, there were people who underwent
horrible starvation regimes to make themselves unfit for duty. Others fell into
months-long periods of sleep, feigned deafness or being mute, while thousands
lost control over themselves or gave way to incessant trembling, signaling to
keen observers their aversion to war. 
Any close examination of the system would also disclose that because the

recruitment process gave greater consideration to one’s own citizens than to
foreigners, the authorities clearly strove to create such confusion among the
various nationalities that the selection process was entrusted to foreign officers
and medical authorities. The poor and desperate masses were enveloped by fear
of death, jail, and asylums and with no salvation in sight. Their mute anguish
was not heard over the noise of the eminent authorities who were bought and
bribed. Then came hunger and the endless lines of desperate women and
children who stood day and night in rain and snow before the stores of
profiteering merchants. How could this herd of slaves assert its will on issues of
war and peace! 
Those who were religious lost all faith. Anyone with some understanding of
what occurred in the souls of these people would recognize their despair and
hopelessness. Friedrich Adler's act awakened quiet admiration in many. When an
uprising did not follow it, the people gave way again to a mute resignation. Only
in the dark of night could rebellious whisperings be heard, and at the end of the
fourth year of war the name of Wilson became a suppressed cry for help from all
lips. 
The throttling hold of the general staff and war profiteers became increasingly
tighter. The hatred of the people rose to immeasurable heights and to this day
has not lessened in intensity. This was most apparent immediately at the start of
the war in the people's antipathy for the military, the mass desertions, and
defections which became a constant concern for military authorities. In vain all
that hearty patriotism and all the worldly and spiritual entreaties that gushed
from the mouths of monarchs. During the first retreat from Russia there were so
many desertions to the enemy that rumors had it that orders had been issued that
from among those remaining in each regiment two were to be shot. The military
police was to make the selection. Otherwise, machine guns were readied behind
the troops should their fighting spirit slacken. In spite of daily reports of cruelties
by the enemy inflicted on prisoners of war their number increased. Who would
be surprised that most of these were Slavs and Italians? They were able to speak
with the enemy in hopes of finding traces of a kindred spirit, or discover among
the soldiers of the Entente those who were friendly toward them. What, on the
other hand, awaited the Germans and the Hungarians? Is it really surprising that
more of them stood fast?
There were plenty of Slavs in the highest and lowest ranks who carried out their
duties with love and affection. A Czech regimental medic responded to an
inquiry about sick troops with: "Our medication consists of blows with rifle
butts!" One Czech staff physician prevented another Czech from gaining a
command position with the explanation that he was a "Sokol" and, therefore,

politically unreliable. The coercion meted out by the numerous Slavic superiors
was as severe as that from any others. For the unbiased there was no difference
in their rejection of war; at best, their methods differed. Even hatred based on
nationality among the soldiers was rarely seen. Everyone suffered equally; they
all greeted each other silently as prisoners of a war for which they were
blameless. Everyone with gloomy looks searched for the life-saving shore while
the vessel sailed along in murky waters. Maddening cries cut the air from
someone claiming to have been given the Word of God, who is more often with
those who are mad, and who was constantly yelling at doctors and wardens:
"Leave me alone! I must save mankind! I have drunk from the chalice of
suffering on Monte Santo!" Only fainthearted embarrassment kept the sane from
joining in. At the front as well as in the rear, men of all the monarchy's
nationalities were making peaceful and friendly deals. 
This is the true picture of the soul of a nation that the world and history wants to
burden with guilt for this horrible crime. How is it then that none of the officers
and medics believed that the people had the will for war? That, quite to the
contrary, everyone of these military men presumed the people rejected military
duty in the strongest possible terms and that physicians applied the most forceful
means on the assumption that every sick soldier is a shirker? Why is it that
innumerable orders pointed to desertions and that military courts aimed only at
scare tactics? 
Hemmed in between unfathomable powers, this incited, gagged and horribly
abused nation was left with only the same kind of resistance that is common to
others in similar circumstances, splintered and filled with mistrust: a secret,
passive resistance. The entire army suffered from this. The process of sending
new troops to the front, whether from towns or the country, was characterized by
procrastination. The flow of equipment, troop movements, and the transport to
the front of those who had recovered was appallingly sloppy. The most
unbelievable stories were heard about squandering and waste of food supplies as
well as of untimely replacements. Lacking all ties of mutual trust and a strong,
developed sense of community, these people, who were kept in the dark, were
incapable of any open resistance. Since not one of the people who made up the
nations of the former monarchy possessed a social feeling, none was able to
stage a united, open revolt. The only exception, the January revolt of the
German-Austrian workers, came to naught, but through no fault of their own. 
When the final collapse came, the people rejoiced, feeling that they had regained
their freedom. They strode through the streets of Vienna like victors. Their true
enemies, the general staff, exploitation, and the ruling classes were defeated.
And now the trend was steadily toward the left. The people suffered their defeat

in 1914. Their contribution to the war was arduous and gruesome; their slavery
lasted four and one half years. Now they were free! 
Free? Already new suppressors come to the fore. Soon there appeared a second
and then a third victor ready to subjugate the people by exploiting them. The
experts in the range of ups and downs in the human tragicomedy have the
thankful task of remembering the many tyrants now strutting among the nations
of the former monarchy garbed in the finery of victors. Not too long ago it was
they who served the masters of the defeated nation in stoking the people’s lust
for war. To name only one example: It was a Polish military doctor who carried
out most of the notorious tortures employing electricity, albeit under the guise of
“science.” When the question was raised why a man suffering from Grave's
disease and tuberculosis should be sent to the front on orders of a slavish
commander, and contrary to medical findings, the response, as ordered, was
"because such cases, based on experience, are easier cured at the front." 
Now the rulers of the Central Powers were forced to capitulate to the nations of
the Alliance. Finally, this greatly subjugated and horribly mistreated people
should have been able to breathe freely. Now is the time that justice should have
been meted out to those who drove into war an ignorant and leaderless nation
torn apart into twelve tribes. Their rulers, seducers of a people, torturers of their
own, of foreign nations and of prisoners, the wartime profiteers and exploiters of
the people, judges, army doctors and military authorities, bribed with honors,
ranks, and money, should all be brought to justice, made to pay retribution and
forced to help in the reconstruction of devastated cities. The same fate should
await the propagandists, journalists, and writers who never represented the
opinions of a people they did not know, but only voiced those of the generals
either out of stupidity or for personal gain, to avoid the draft, for military
quarters, or refuge in military archives. Not to be overlooked is the church and
those men of "science" who, until the final days drowned out the cries of the
sufferers in their pursuit of a peace through victory. Away with false contrition!
Those who saw these people with their human dignity deeply wounded, gagged,
and driven to slaughter will not tire to cry out to the world: These people were
disfranchised, denied by deceit and force to be heard! These people had no
means of defending themselves; they had no leaders whose voices they could
have listened to! Their defeat came at the outset of the war, yet they paid their
rulers for the war in ways never recognized: their most precious blood was shed,
hunger and sickness is etched in their faces, the souls of their children are
incurably poisoned, and their farms and factories lie fallow. 
Just as this nation is about to be given a voice, when only a mighty stream of an
awakened social feeling can bring salvation, and when a newly aroused feeling

of human dignity cries out for punishment of the guilty so that the world's
confidence can be regained, the governments of the Alliance threaten these, so
recently tortured people, with a new form of slavery. 
"Is it really so that the government had you Austrians so completely subdued?
Was there really nothing that you could have done about that? So, allow us to
suppress you also a little!" This is how the actions of the West must now appear
to us. 
"What about those who volunteered for the war!" will be the refrain. I will now
show you that on this particular point the evidence is on our side. I believe I
have encountered and examined every sort of volunteer. When, shortly after the
war, I spoke out on behalf of older volunteer physicians to prevent their mass
transfer, I was told mockingly: "Do you really think we don't know that by
volunteering they hoped to avoid being reassigned?" I could only respond that
the physicians who were not drafted hoped for the same. Most of the volunteers
had their eye on a particular army posting or unit when they reported for duty
and, in the beginning, had advantages that should not be overlooked. In their
desperate state, they sought the lesser of two evils. 
Next to these, of course, were a small number of adventurers who in their
ignorance counted on a short, exciting war and with that reported for frontline
duty. A larger number of volunteers consisted of men with problems who chose
this path to avoid difficulties at home, in their job, and elsewhere. Sons from
homes where there is strife departed for the front lines as if to commit suicide.
Then there are the husbands who acted in anger over their failed life. One officer
with two head wounds, who at the beginning of the war had come from America
where he had led a wild life, complained to me: "I volunteered for frontline duty
five times and each time I was sent back because of my mental condition." 
Most of those who volunteered, however, who otherwise were in good stead,
were victims of a false sense of remorse. Those who formed their opinions only
on boastful speeches and rollicking songs, or those who sought distinction for
themselves, as often was the case at the beginning of the war, had a poor opinion
of humanity. Fettered and with our heads in the sand, is how we all heard the call
to die. There was no way out and nothing could save us from a hail of bullets. In
such a situation the volunteers did whatever would ease their crushed souls:
They made virtue out of a necessity! In this chaos they seized at the call to arms
that went out from the general staff and, reluctantly, they staggered to wherever
the orders sent them. Suddenly, it seemed to them as if they themselves had
uttered the call. It eased their soul. They had found a sought after escape route.
They no longer were the whipped dogs who against their will were being
sacrificed to face the hail of bullets. No, they were heroes, the defenders of the

fatherland and their honor! After all, they had made the call themselves and it is
they who went out into a holy war as defenders of justice. Whatever might have
prevented them as individuals from shedding the blood of brothers or to act
against the sacred prohibition of murder disappeared in a rapture of having
regained a feeling about themselves, and a newly found sense of irresponsibility
that accompanies any mass movement. With this inner liberation from a feeling
of the deepest humiliation and degradation, in this convulsive effort to find
themselves, they timidly escaped seeing themselves as poor victims of power-
lusting strangers and preferred to dream of having freely chosen to do heroic
deeds. 
In early 1917, I presented this psychological process to a small group of the
public. I wrote at that time in the "Internationale Rundschau" (published in
Zurich by Rascher) something like this: If someone wished to tell us the values
we might derive from a military regime, he should hold his tongue. There is
nothing we could learn that is new about such a regime. If someone wanted to
convince us of this, he would have had to buy the general staff's deity lock-
stockand barrel and would now be speaking on its behalf. That person would not
have made such a transformation because of his sympathies, or from a passion
for war. Rather from having enslaved himself, cowering vilified on the ground,
desperate and having lost all direction, he sees himself deeply ashamed for
having forfeited his freedom and human rights. In seeking help and trying to find
a way out from under his overpowering oppressors, he now acts as if he himself
had made the call for war. In the end, he finally found some way by which he
was able to rid himself of his feeling of shame and pity. 
In the army and among the doctors, the volunteers did not long enjoy their
favored status. Many soon turned into the most reluctant soldiers. There no
longer seemed to be any advantage in having volunteered, since it had become
known that when on leave, on assignment, in carrying out their duties and on
sick call, these volunteers tried to get preferential treatment because of their
volunteer standing. Not everyone, however, was as clever as one short, black-
haired volunteer who, after a few days at the front, simulated a trembling attack
and then immediately thereafter asked to be returned to the frontlines so that he
would qualify for home leave. While his request was being discussed, he jumped
on a table and performed a dance in front of the commissioners, repeating
incessantly that he was a volunteer for the war. The finding of the commission
was to grant him a long leave and then assign him to rear guard duty because of
his peculiar behavior. 
That there also were noble people among the volunteers is evidenced by a man
who, after his wounds had healed, was to have been given home leave before

returning to the front. He rejected the leave papers, saying: "Now is not the time
for such a swindle. I really don't care about the war; we all have had it with that.
But I cannot get myself to desert my friends and comrades in the field." 
The guilt of these people can only be judged by someone who had lived among
them. How different and milder would be the verdict for volunteers, when
judged in the light of one academician who, only six weeks before the collapse,
eagerly demanded a victorious peace "because otherwise we cannot conquer
tuberculosis." 
No! Whoever dwelled among these people will find them not guilty. They had
no voice, no guidelines, and no leader. It was dragged to the slaughter, shoved,
and driven. No one told them the truth. The writers and journalists were either
under a spell or in the pay of the military. From shame for having been
dishonored, people tried to save themselves by serving under the banner of their
oppressors. From a feeling of shame for having been, and being, dishonored
people are still silent. When people are enslaved , when they are hungry, forced
to pay, and made to assume guilt then look to those who conceived of this work
of hell and who, in full knowledge, took part in it. Apologies are due to the
people. Let us address ourselves to making good the damage done to them.
1 
First 
published 
as 
a 
pamphlet, 
Die 
andere 
Seite:eine
massenpsychologische Studie über die Schuld des Volkes, Leopold Heidrich,
Vienna, 1919. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Chapter XXII
Concerning Female Neurotics and the Masculine Attitude1 2 3
[1920]
Dominance begins with the fear of being dominated by others with the
eventual aim of gaining the advantage of power over others. When a woman has
attained a high state of refinement, she will act demurely only from a mistaken
attitude. She will make no secret of her preference to be a man, which allows her
greater freedom; no man would want to be a woman.
Kant, Anthropologie
The study of Individual Psychology has shown that it is out of the question
for a human being to endure readily real or ostensible inferiority. Wherever we
encounter any degree of inferiority feelings, we also find a sense of protest, and
vice versa. Will itself, as long as it precedes action--else it is only an ostensible
will--always tends to go from "below" to "above" which can only be discerned
clearly when examined in the context of a total personality.
In a series of works on the mechanism of neurosis, I have described among

others a uniform finding that should be seen as the primary mover of neurosis:
the masculine protest against what seems to be feminine or what is seen as
feminine impulses and feelings. The starting point of a neurotic disposition is a
childish pathogenic situation in which the most basic form of this power play is
manifested: On the one hand is the insecurity with regard to a future gender role,
and on the other is an intensified tendency to play a masculine role
(domineering, active, heroic) with whatever means available.
Aside from the certainty by which in general this turning away from his
"feminine" direction and the reinforcing of the "masculine" can be shown in the
neurotic's actions, desires, and dreams, it should not be surprising that the phase
of gender discovery in the child is accompanied by strong emotions. Many
patients report being unaccountably being in doubt on this subject until late into
their childhood years. Others carry lifelong obvious character traits of a
magnified masculine protest so that, as a result, their attempts at social
adjustment whether at work, in their family, or at love and marriage, fail. All,
however, and this is more striking in the case of female neurotics, insist that they
had always yearned to be a total man and that they had given this desire
expression in a variety of ways. Based on my research, such an assertion seems
well grounded. What of this assertion by neurotics is seemingly effortlessly
thrust into consciousness becomes for the major part the compelling force that
unconsciously gives rise to the neurotic's symptoms, actions and dreams. I shall
present in what follows fragments of current and earlier analyses that will give
us, as if from an overlook, an overview of the masculine attitude of female
neurotics.
1 The Introduction and Cases I and II first appeared in Zentralblatt für
Psychoanalyze, Vol, 1, 1911, Pp. 174-178; Section III in this article (1920) is
new. 
2 Published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages 80-99, 1920.
Translated into English as Chapter IX in The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology, 1925. 
3 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
First Case - The tendency of replacing a lack of masculinity with cleverness,
deceit, and courage.
 
A 24 year-old female patient who suffered from headaches, sleeplessness
and excessive rage, primarily directed at her mother, told of the following
experience: One night while returning home she observed a scene in which a
man berated a prostitute for having accosted him. Other men gently tried to calm

him. At that moment the patient was overcome by an irresistible desire to
intercede and to explain to the excited man the unreasonableness of his behavior.
The analysis showed that she wanted to act like a man, to overcome her female
role which demanded reserve, and like a man, be better composed.
That same day the patient was to audit the examination of female academic
candidates. The examiner was educated, with a good sense of humor, but acting
in line with a strong masculine protest. He poked fun at the female candidates
and often dropped remarks about "geese." Our patient stood up in anger, left the
hall, and was beset for the remainder of the day with thoughts about how to
teach the professor a lesson when it was her turn to be examined. That night she
was unable to fall sleep until the early morning hours. She then had the
following dream:
"I was fully draped in veils when an old man approached me who thought them
useless since one could see through them."
The old man resembled a well-known German pathologist who, as the
patient pointed out, was a constant dream figure. In addition, he reminded her of
other persons, in particular the strict but humorous, examining professor. She
emphasized cleverness as a characteristic common to all of them. The expression
"one could see through" the veils stemmed from her treatment.
"Fully draped in veils" indicates that she is thinking of the apparent contrast
with Venus of Milo. The day before, she had spoken of Venus of Milo and had
praised her as a work of art. As could easily have been predicted, further
thoughts related to the covered form of the Medici goddess, and to the armless
statue of Venus of Milo. A third thought-progression doubts the words of the old
man and questions whether it would not be possible with a number of veils, such
as a dancer's, to cover nakedness?
I don't need to explain that the dreamer tended to veil her gender. The
positioning of Venus of Medici's hand and the absence of limbs in the statue of
Venus of Milo clearly express my patient's previously long held wish: I am a
woman and want to be a man.
The two experiences occurring while the patient was awake, her insomnia,
and what occurred in the street scene, as well as her wish to act like a man by
subduing the strict professor, and by duping me with veiling, is part of a
continuum that contains her neurosis. In the dream, doubt silently creeps in as to
whether the transformation will succeed. If that doubt is reduced to the
childhood pathogenic situation, it must correspond to a primitive insecurity, to
the prototype of an insecurity about her future gender role. Later in her life, the
neurotic characteristic is established which will appear to be composed of
masculine traits and of security tendencies forged to guard against the danger of

slipping into femininity, or being lowered. This can be observed particularly in
ambitious girls, who will encounter all the ensuing consequences, such as
frigidity.
Second Case Upbringing by a neurotic mother; fear of childbearing as caused
by a faulty upbringing.
The patient is a 38 year-old woman who was undergoing treatment for
frequent anxiety attacks, occasional heart palpitations, chest pains, and "a painful
appendix." She exhibited an unusual relationship with her only child, a girl, ten
years of age. She watched her every step and was always dissatisfied with her
progress. She constantly found fault with her somewhat mentally retarded but
well-meaning child. Not a day passed without a tumult often ending a trivial
controversy between mother and daughter with a spanking or calling on the
father to be the judge. Following a common pattern, eventually the child
unconsciously fell into a state of defiance and obstruction when eating, dressing,
going to sleep, washing or when studying.4
4 Friedjung described with interesting statistics the fate of the "only child."
He places responsibility in the first instance on psychological grounds such as
pampering, anxiety, etc. Our case, as well as others, can support and expand on
this contention. It uncovers probably the most significant cause of a restless,
constantly contentious upbringing. It is the mother's fear of having another child.
The exaggerated care given during the day and at night is meant to prove "that
one child already is more than can be managed." In addition, the ground for this
psychological development in both mother and child was well prepared by
several organ inferiorities. In their early childhood, both had suffered from
weaknesses. The mother had her first period when 18 years of age. When giving
birth, she suffered unusual labor pains, followed by atony (a genital inferiority)
and shortly thereafter developed a bronchial catarrh (a respiratory inferiority).
The daughter fell ill with nephritis and uremia (a kidney inferiority) and later
developed chorea (a brain
The patient's first attacks appeared at age 19, shortly after she had become
secretly engaged to her current husband. The engagement lasted eight years, was
frequently contested by her family, and produced much frustration and
excitement. The attacks ceased soon after the marriage, only to reappear after the
birth of her child. During that period, the husband resorted to coitus interruptus.
When a physician pointed out the danger of that practice, and related the wife's
attacks to it, the husband resorted to other means of birth control. The result was
surprising; the attacks desisted for some time. Then, without any change having
taken place in the sexual practice, the attacks suddenly reappeared, and over the

past three years, defied all treatment. Sexual relations were regularly
satisfactory.
If there were such a thing as a pure neurosis in the form of an anxiety
neurosis, this would have been our patient's case until three years ago. Analysis,
however, disclosed her psychological state and hysterical pattern. The masculine
protest characteristics were clearly apparent: Defiance, hypersensitivity,
dominance, and ambition. The feeling of inferiority was maintained by the
fiction of exceedingly strong libidinous striving. This "libidinous" striving
existed since she was eight years old, kept alive the fear of falling, and of having
a child, and filled the patient with fear of the female role. When she met her
future husband, and during their long period of engagement, she used her fear to
make sex before marriage impossible by unconsciously (through hallucinations)
arranging it to become a dependable safety measure to which also were added
chest and stomach pains. In her unconscious fantasy, she saw herself as a
passionate but also compliant and depraved girl, who blindly followed her sexual
urges. Her protection against this fictitious lusting woman was her fear and her
neurosis. Where other girls had their morals, she had her fear and her hysterical
pains.
This struggle against femininity was played out in her mind unconsciously,
but had a conscious impact since her earliest childhood in her knowing desire to
be a man. As soon as any situation became tense--whether this was due to what
she considered to be a questionable practice for birth control with the danger of
pregnancy, or unfavorable pecuniary circumstances such as had occurred over
the past three years, a danger which she exaggerated--she reacted against the
female role and her husband, with having attacks that occurred during the night
robbing him of his well deserved sleep, and letting him know how disturbing it
would be to be awakened by crying children. She was also able to reject her
husband at any time, or warn him with an attack of breathlessness of the
prospects of succumbing to tuberculosis following a pregnancy. She was able to
avoid social relations, tied her husband to the house as long as it pleased her, and
subordinated her somewhat gruff husband to herself in various ways.
inferiority). She then proved to be mentally retarded. Even the family
physician counseled against another pregnancy. This then is a reflection of the
struggle that convulses our culture as seen in every case of neurosis in female
patients: A horror in women of all that is female, their childhood fear of the
impending act of childbirth. Moll recently confirmed this assertion
Consciously, she was fearful of having a second mentally retarded child.
In my opinion, the most significant result of this analysis is that it shows
how her nagging and tormenting way of raising her child served her

unconscious tendency. She proved with her rashness and with her constant
restlessness and busyness that one child was already too much trouble. Those
close to her probably had the right impression when they regularly told her,
"Thank God that you have only one child." She pursued her child at every step.
She constantly corrected her, vacillated between various stages of excitement,
carefully avoided having her child play with other children, and helped her to
conclude from her own unconscious behavior that she should never turn out like
her mother, never become sexually precocious!
Other mothers with the same attitude often acted differently, but from the
same tendency: They could not let go of their children either during the day or at
night. They constantly fondled them, always busied themselves with them and
disturbed their nightly sleep with excessive care. They regularly watched what
they ate, observed their bowel movements, weighed and measured their children
and took their temperature. If a child fell ill, the damage caused by the mother
became serious. "Sense becomes nonsense and kindness turns into trouble." This
lasts until the child feels his own powers and begins to rein in the mother. From
earliest childhood, he will suspect attempts at subordinating him even in his
most casual relationships, against which he will always act defiantly.
This patient's dreams regularly presented an excerpt from this ensemble of
psychological impulses and allowed the neurotic dynamic, the psychic
hermaphrodism followed by the masculine protest, to show itself clearly. The
symbolic moving from "below" to "above" recurred frequently. She told of one
of these dreams as follows:
"I fled from two leopards and climbed on top of a box. I awoke in fear."
Analysis indicated a line of thoughts relating to a second child from whom
she fled upward, into the masculine role. Identical with that is her neurotic
primary symptom, fear, which is her most important safeguard against the
female role of bearing children. Concurrently, in dreaming of an upwardly
directed movement lies an attempt to lift herself above the two members of her
family she regards as threatening.
Third Case - Attempt at "reversal" as masculine protest
1. With the analysis of a dream I shall demonstrate that this "reversal," this
desire "to turn everything around" relates to a patient's resolve which is to
behave like a man. First, however, I feel it necessary to bring up a subject that I
treated theoretically in the introduction of this book. Sleep, in accordance with
our interpretation of the psyche as a security organ, is a condition, or a mental
function, during which the rectifying facilities of the psyche partly cease to
operate. The "depth of sleep" accordingly signifies the degree to which this
function has ceased to operate. The biological meaning of this arrangement

could be to spare the most recent and most delicately organized specific brain
functions by providing periods of rest. The rectification, however, comes from
effort and the alert activity of our sensory organs, which includes the motor
mechanism. Since this sensitive apparatus, which provides confidence in our
being beyond our corporeal limits, has partly been turned off during sleep, an
adaptation to the world outside in the broadest sense has been lost along with the
possibility of rectification. At this point, fiction, which itself entails primitive,
analogous, and pictorial security against the feeling of inferiority, grows
profusely. In this fiction there now occurs a reaction to an actual feeling of
inferiority, as if there existed the danger of being again forced down. And, since
this anticipatory premonition is often regarded as feminine, as a security measure
driven intentionally too far, the still-awake psyche reacts with the goal of
dominance, with the masculine protest. From this develops, in the jargon of the
childish psyche, abstract, disjointed, compressed, and reversed sexual
interpretations, the imaginary development of which originally also sprang from
a heightened security tendency.
When Bleuler speaks of the symbolic meaning of sexual acts, he must have
had in mind the symbolic and, therefore, fictitious, and in its dynamic content,
resolvable dream representation or dream constellations, which Freud and his
followers accepted as real and purely sexual in their meaning. These would
include sexual representations, perverse thought processes, sadism, and
masochistic incest. As seen from that vantage point, the difference between a
dream and a neurosis analysis as practiced by Freud, and contrary to mine, lies in
that Freud regards the patient's intentionally exaggerated fiction as an actual and
effective experience. He disregards the patient's intent and then leads him to
forego the "fantasy that has moved into consciousness." My view goes deeper: It
consists of resolving the patient's fiction as a tendentious fable, tracing it back to
its origin, to the feeling of inferiority and to the masculine protest. The ability of
the patient to make corrections, which is tied to his emotional attitude, can
become effective solely in terms of the social feeling and can be utilized only to
bring the impulses of masculine protest into harmony with reality. This is
possible because it is in the nature of neurosis and psychosis to fuse the
corrective powers, a condition by which the patient's fiction in terms of the
masculine protest comes sharply into focus. The choice of neurosis, however, is
determined by the way this fiction was structured in early childhood; a type
where the person seeks esteem from his surroundings not unlike an outpouring
following a line of least resistance.
The "reversed" behavior of certain neurotics must, therefore, be tied to such
an original fiction, and, in terms of the masculine protest, it obviously has the

purpose of reversing an existing relationship in which the person feels inferior.
Certainly, the tendency to reverse everything will have an influence on the
nature of the neurosis. Our patient was distinctive in that she tried to overturn
morality, rules, order, etc. in her home as well as outside. The starting point for
her protest was a wrong submission of her female role which she magnified in
her mind as dangerous. In order to escape, it she tried to discover the source of
her femininity, expecting to be able to revert into masculinity, but was stopped
by two incidents. She had been told by her mother when still a child and trying
to overthrow the order of her home that she was born the wrong gender, and that
she followed a male sibling. Now she wanted to reverse everything, the gender
she was born as well as what followed. All her behavior pointed toward
reversing everything. With me, she first tried to play the superior, to teach me,
and to interrupt our discussion. One day, she occupied my chair. During a later
phase of treatment, she told the following dream:
"I am watching a carousel. Eventually, I actually climb on. It starts to turn
quickly and I fly on top of the person sitting in front of me who then, with me,
flies on top of the person in front of her, etc. I was at the very top. Then the
operator of the carousel says: 'Now we shall go in reverse!' Suddenly, we were
back in our original places."
The thoughts of my already well-schooled patient on this incident were as
follows: "Merry-go-rounds could represent 'life.' I might once have heard said in
jest that life is a merry-go-round. That I flew on top of someone is a
representation recognizable from earlier analyses: I am a man, I am on top. This
relates to sexual intercourse. Incidentally, if in Vienna someone says I fly on top
of someone it means that I want to possess that person. The spatial multiplication
of this scene can be resolved into: I fly on top of many. You must be the operator
since you often say to me that I have it wrong, that I want to reverse whatever it
is. If it were up to you, I would be content in my place, I would be a woman."
The analysis of this dream underscores what I postulated, that the dreamer's
response to her feminine role with a masculine protest can be anticipated. In her
terms, this means to turn her natural inclination around to its opposite. The
strength of this protest can be seen, among others, in the often repeated attempt
to fly high, which is characteristic of the psychology of Don Juan, the Messaline
type, of erotomania, and of mania. In the Messaline type, the restless conquest is
a vestige of a reverting tendency into masculinity. In the case of Don Juan, the
repetition must be seen as an intensified protest and, therefore, as compensation
for a feeling of inferiority. One more indication of this strong longing for
reversal is the thought process that takes place in her carousel dream. In a sense,
it is an "ascent" to masculinity, and in her words the return to her place was a

descent to femininity. Freud in his "Traumdeutung" pointed out that some
dreams must be read backward without giving any further explanation of this
idiosyncrasy. Our view allows us to say that the tendency in the dream-fiction is
capable of also turning the outer structure of the dream. The emotion of this
particular dream clearly is directed against me.
The patient's medical history also reveals that she often complained about
early morning headaches, which she did this time after her dream. She attributes
this to the peculiar position in which she often found herself upon awakening.
Sometimes her head would hang over the edge of the bed, and sometimes she
found her position reversed, with her head at the foot of the bed. Both positions
can be explained as attempts to turn herself around. She also told of a dream in
which everyone stood on their heads. One particular episode that comes out of
her medical history, and which her parents regard as pathological, is her craze to
dance with which she is often seized and which compels her to twirl around
wildly. Analysis revealed two "simultaneously" created fantasies, as if by a
common tendency, in which a man successfully courted her. In the dance
scenario, the theme of reversal comes back, but is ameliorated by the fact that
she is standing up. She, thereby, appears to avoid what she fears most: the
superiority of the male. In her arbitrary view, when dancing she has a feeling of
equality: "Here I can also play the man."
The patient suffered chronically from bladder and bowel incontinence,
which, as her mother had assured her when she was still a child, would make
marriage impossible.
Where then was that actual feeling of inferiority to which this patient
responded with a tendency of reversion? The day before she had her dream, she
had rebuked a girl friend because she had visited a man in his apartment. The
friend responded by asking whether our patient had never done something
foolish. Afterwards she remembered that, long before she thought of becoming
my patient, she had visited me, unbeknownst to her mother, with a personal
request. From the nature of our relationship at that time, there could not have
been any tender feelings on her part for me. Nevertheless, her resistance during
treatment also grasped at a fiction in which she, like her girl friend, seemed to be
"flying" after a man. She wanted to adhere to it even more, since she could turn
it into a categorical imperative never to visit a man and, also, because she could
exploit that feeling against me for threatening to become superior to her and
seeming to have an influence over her. The dream becomes a defiant "no" and
has the same value neuropsychologically as bladder or bowel incontinence. It
says in effect: "I will not allow a man to change my mind; I will stay on top; I
will be a man!"

During treatment, and after the patient had already made significant
progress in her condition, she stumbled upon a cousin living in her home while
he attacked a maid. She became so upset by what she observed that she cried all
day. She was still crying when she came to my office and concluded her story by
saying indignantly: "Now I shall marry the first man to come along only to get
out of this house." It was easy to suspect that this thought, in light of the history
of a girl who had always wanted to be a man, had to continue in the form of a
reaction. I expected a turn for the worse. Given her psychological make-up, her
reaction to thinking of marrying the first man to come along would have to be
serious misgivings about the danger of her situation. In fact, I was able to
observe her reaction the next day. She was more obstreperous than usual;
atypically, she arrived on time, but as if to negate her punctuality, she made a
special point of it. She then told of the following dream:
"It seemed to me as if a number of suitors for my hand in marriage were
lined up. You stood at the end of the line. I passed by everyone and chose you
for my husband. My cousin was very surprised by that and asked why I chose a
man whose faults were already known to me. I responded, 'Because of that!'
Then I said to you that I wanted to stand on top of the man in line with a pointed
head. You told me that I better not."
"A line of suitors for my hand in marriage"--Yesterday she had said that she
wanted to marry the first man who would come along. In her dream, in which
she chose the last man, it was the reverse. Then she remembered a sentence from
Herbert's Pädagogik: If a series of images come into consciousness one after the
other, the next one always cancels the preceding one. When this is related to the
"scene" in her dream ("a line of suitors"), it appears that she does not desire any
one, which confirms what we had anticipated. The analysis of the dream then
would add: or someone whom I know well. That would be me. This is followed
with an attempt to demean me: she knows my faults. The cousin should wonder,
just as she, in reverse, had wondered about his conduct. The man with the
pointed head is one of her early admirers about whom she was often teased. He
is introduced into the dream to demonstrate how she wants to be superior to the
man, how she wants to stand on his head, to be at the top. This "wanting to be at
the top” is one of the most significant expressions for the masculine protest. It is
just another way at "reversal" and in this dream cooperates with the "reverse."
Consequently, it returns by demeaning me, "whose faults I already know." What
I actually said was, "you should leave that alone," meaning that she should give
up her overheated masculine protest. As for me, she was satisfied with a
harmless disparagement.
Her attitude toward men was intensified by the experience she had with her

cousin. This time she was content to heighten her masculine protest by locking
the door to her bedroom to protect herself, as if the cousin might also attack her.
This approach differed from the way in which she found protection against
marriage,--and coincidentally tying her mother closer to her,--by soiling her bed.
Reaching back into childhood situations relates to the nature of intense
abstractions. Neurotics, unlike artists and geniuses, are people who, recognizing
that they must actively find new ways, tendentiously revisit memories of their
childhood whenever they wish to protect themselves from current and future
dangers. Chances are that their analogous childhood apperception will not be
corrected in favor of society, but rather toward ensuring that effective personal
security is attained at any price. This gives an impression of childish behavior,
which should, however, not be seen as psychologically inhibiting, but rather
shows that, similar to children, neurotics seek ways to accommodate themselves
in this world.
A tendency toward "reversal" often appears as a form of superstition that
leads to behavior as if one expects to gain the opposite from what is dearly
desired. It seems that such patients want to play a hoax on God or on fate, an
attempt that lets it be known in advance the strength of their dominant feeling of
insecurity. It also signals how this attempt is designed to win the upper hand by
whatever means over someone stronger and ill-intentioned. This character trait
often is associated with one that attempts to create a bad impression of oneself,
in order not to awaken another person's envy and hatred. From the perspective of
folk psychology, this is where a fear of the "evil eye" and of being "victimized"
appears, the latter so as not to awaken the anger of powerful forces. The "Ring of
Polycrates" should come to mind.
2. E. W., 24 years old, was the youngest child of a man suffering from
consumption of the spinal marrow. For the past five years, the daughter suffered
from compulsion manifestations and, until one year before, had an obvious
speech problem. She would come to a halt when speaking, search in vain for the
proper words, and act as if she were being observed when speaking. For that
reason, she avoided as far as possible any social contacts, acted very depressed,
and was unable to enjoy her studies, which she otherwise anticipated eagerly in
order to advance her education. Her mother, a nervous and constantly nagging
woman whose primary character trait was avarice, tried with discipline and at
times with treatments by nerve specialists to shake her daughter's dour thoughts
and cure her speech impediment. Since none of this succeeded, she sent her to
Vienna from where she returned with her speech defect actually having
disappeared. In my office, one year later, she showed no trace of a speech
impediment. However, other symptoms had appeared. As soon as she engaged in

conversation with someone, she was plagued by the idea that her company and
her person were unpleasant and embarrassing. This compulsive idea, which
occupied her even when at home and alone, left her each time in such a sad
mood that she avoided all social contacts just as she had before.5 Her compulsive
thinking was as valuable to her as her speech defect: it allowed her to withdraw
from social relationships.
I have increasingly found it prudent to use the first bits of information
provided by a patient for a portrayal of the purpose that person’s affliction is
meant to serve. This portrayal must be created in accordance with a fiction, like
an "as-if" statement, and must be based on a conviction that additional analysis
will flesh out particular features. In light of one's own experience, such a
portrayal must be able to answer how the picture of this now afflicted patient
would, or could, look if that person were normal. This provides a necessary point
of departure for measuring deviations from the norm, and for gauging the social
damage caused by the illness. Regularly, we find that for some reason the
patient is frightened of what can normally be expected to be a healthy state, and
one that in fact he tries to avoid.
5 The paranoid character--the other one is to blame--became more prominent.
In the case under discussion, it is not difficult to guess that our patient is
trying to protect herself from normal relations with a man. It would be a big
mistake, however, to assume that having made this tentative presumption, the
riddle is solved. While my psychological preparatory steps are supported by the
primary motive for evasion, the fear of men, afraid of being subordinated, it can
be accepted in principle only as a tentative explanation. The expectation of a
cure, however, is tied to uncovering a particular fault in upbringing that must be
rectified through pedagogic intervention. This pedagogic intervention begins
with the relationship between patient and physician, which has to reflect every
aspect of a patient's attitude toward society. This also becomes a premise since,
if the physician disregards a patient's attitude, either for or against him, an
evaluation of the patient's statements becomes faulty.
The first statements made by this patient already confirmed and
complemented this presumption. The patient claimed always to have had a
happy and satisfactory childhood during which she was always better than her
playmates. From among her numerous and varied memories, she was able to
recall the following:
When she was eight years old, her second sister married. Her new brother-
in-law was very concerned about his reputation and manners and prohibited her
from associating with poor and badly brought-up children. She remembered

from her school days a teacher who treated her unfairly and who frequently
offended her.
When she was 18 years old, she met a young student who was sought out
by all her girl friends. She was the only one who found his bravado unpleasant
and often responded to him harshly. Her relationship with him therefore
worsened and he, in turn, tried in every way to insult and humiliate her so that
she increasingly withdrew from the company of her friends. One day, the young
student used a malicious girl to tell her that he had now seen through her and
found her playing a role quite different from her true nature. This shallow and
unremarkable comment made her feel extremely insecure.6 She constantly
thought about the message that was conveyed to her, causing her to become
extremely absentminded when in the company of others. Whenever she began a
conversation with someone, she visualized the student and recalled his comment,
making her apprehensive in any company. She would become excited, weighed
every word carefully, and often became indecisive in conversations. She finally
was happiest to be alone, which meant withdrawing into the company of her
quarrelsome mother, which of course, gave her no peace. She frequently
underwent medical treatments which ended fruitlessly. It is most important in
this case to keep in mind the attitude of the mother who constantly admonished
her daughter that her problems were "imagined," and that she could change if
she wanted to. This always irritated the daughter who told her mother that she
did not understand what was really going on inside of her.
6 This experience was very useful to her in her tense relationships with
others. For that reason, she retained the memory of this incident, since it would
ensure keeping her distance from love. She needed this distance to avoid
submission and defeat. In her mind, she was being humiliated when she had to
make "sacrifices, serve," or avail herself to others, in short, develop a social
feeling.
After four years it was decided to send the girl, who increasingly shied
away from all company, to Vienna alone to live with relatives. She stayed a few
weeks and then returned home, presumably cured. That is, she no longer had a
speech defect. However, she had become much more reticent and taciturn.
Shortly after her return, she succumbed to the above described compulsive
thoughts which began after an excited scene with the same student who again
tried to humiliate her in front of her girl friends.
The patient then shared other memories. The student mentioned above, out
of revenge against another girl, once plotted to have that girl slighted by all the
young men at a dance, causing her to leave the dance hall crying. With regard to

another girl, this same student said that she would stand on her head if he were
to ask her. When I asked the patient whether she liked this student, she
responded unequivocally in the affirmative.
At our next session, the patient related a dream, which I shall cite along
with my analysis in order to show the impressions made in context. It was as
follows:
"I was walking along the street in front of a laborer who was leading a
young blond girl by the hand." The patient now told hesitatingly that she is
unsure how she arrived at the sensuous thought that follows: "The father
inappropriately touched the girl. I shouted at him: 'Leave the child alone!'"
After some friendly persuasion, she decided to tell me that during her visit
to Vienna one year ago, she went to the theater where she observed a man sitting
in front of her who touched his little daughter indecently. The man, however,
was no laborer. At about the same time, during an outing, a cousin of hers tried
to put his hand under her skirt. She pushed him off and shouted: "Leave me
alone!"
The little blond girl was in fact the patient herself. She had been reading in
the newspapers about a laborer who behaved himself indecently with his own
child.
The starting point of this dream was the memory of her father's illness and
death. Prompted by a question posed during her treatment, she asked her mother
about her father's illness and was told that he had died as a result of consumption
of the spinal marrow. When I asked whether she knew the cause of this disease
she replied that it was from "high living." I told her that this was wrong, but that
until recently it was a commonly held perception. She told about her father that
he had led a useless life and to his wife's consternation spent his days in bars and
coffee houses. He died when she was six years old. A sister of hers had
committed suicide three years before because her fiancé had left her.
When I asked why in her dream she walked in front of the laborer, she
remembered "because these occurrences were behind her." She could not explain
"laborer" and only remembered that he was dressed poorly, was tall and gaunt. I
reminded her, in accordance with my premise, that she wanted to be ahead of
men, superior to them, and that her brother-in-law had warned her not to
associate with poorly dressed children, obviously children of laborers. The
dream, therefore, intending to warn her not to associate with men, was in line
with the warning from her brother-in-law. The patient responded with silence.
Prompted by the context in which she talked about her father, as well as the
unconcealed incest problem, I asked whether her father was tall and gaunt like
the laborer. She answered that question in the affirmative.

The analysis of the dream by itself, but more apparent in connection with
the inferred psychological situation of the patient, is a clear warning against
men. It also confirms our working hypothesis that the girl's illness had the
purpose of protecting her from men. The dream, as well as the illness, represents
a protective action that proves conclusively the psychological nature of the
illness. With this material I shall illuminate in greater detail this central point of
both the neurosis and the dream, which to me seem a sign of anticipating in
order to ensure personal superiority and for creating self-importance.
Normal human thought as well as prepsychotic (unconscious) action is
under pressure of safeguard tendencies. Steinthal similarly presented the psyche
as an organic constructive force, which to a high degree fulfills the need for
expediency. Avenarius and others also pointed to the empirical expediency of
human thought. Most recently Vaihinger (Die Philosophie des Als-Ob, 1911)
presented his observations, with which I became acquainted long after I had
described safeguard tendencies and arrangements. By the way, he has presented
a rich collection of material from others who represent similar views. Claraprede
tried variously to explain neurotic symptoms as atavism. This attempt, along
with that of Lombroso's and the school of Freud, should be rejected since in the
direction of the least resistance there exists the possibility that all eventualities
of the past could be revived without any connection with earlier existing
safeguard measures. The concept of expediency, however, includes teleology. It
says nothing, however, about the type and nature of adaptability. My view of
"expediency" quite dogmatically is that the psyche's dominant tendency is
predicated on the nature of caution that rises as a compensatory superstructure
above organically conditioned feelings of insecurity. The torturous sense of
insecurity and inferiority felt by children with inferior organs or by those with
more pronounced feelings of inferiority forces a greater intensification,
compelling safeguard tendencies which in an extreme situation can lead beyond
a neurotic disposition to psychosis or suicide. We should recall that our patient's
sister, in a state of intensified inferiority feelings when her love was spurned,
turned to suicide. I see this as a psychological turning to fury and revenge, which
I regard as basic for understanding the suicide complex. Within life's enormously
fulfilling dynamic, the masculine protest appears as a reinforcing line, "as-if"
being a man were comparable with being secure and fully equal.
Let us consider the material that the patient presented so far. We find that
she had many recollections in which the man had won or would win the upper
hand. We also find a dream that confirms this view in that, like a sketch, she
presents all men, without exception, including her father -- in that situation in
terms of incest -- as immoral and immoderate, and that she is trying to safeguard

herself from these unbridled drives like a deer fleeing from the hunter.
This flight into retreat or to counter-attack must have had its beginning
somewhere. We, therefore, expect to learn from our patient about attacks on her
in the broadest sense of the word. We should also discover an attitude stemming
from this woman's feeling of insecurity that should allow us to understand why
she reacts as she does. This should come to us not by way of some twisted logic
that would make it seem that an unconscious fixation was the consequence of a
single event, but as the result of her feeling of insecurity, and because of
demands made by her environment. A careful questioning regarding her earliest
memories reinforced our expectations. The patient remembered games she had
played with other children when she was four or five years old. At first, she
recalled playing "mother and father" where she acted the part of the mother most
of the time. She then remembered being engaged in the common game of
"playing at being a doctor." We can say about the first game that it was a
recollection based on a childhood yearning to be grown up. In such games an
erotic impact is often the case, as is true for "playing at being a doctor," which
often entails undressing and touching. When this was explained to the patient, it
resulted in her admitting freely that touching took place in her childhood games.
She then revealed that when she was five years old, she was locked in a closet
with the 12 year-old brother of a girl friend who seduced her into masturbating,
a practice that she continued until she was 16 years old.
The patient then discussed her struggle against masturbation. The basic
motive for this struggle, however, was her fear of being aroused and falling for
the first man to come along. This brings us close to our original assumption that
this patient feared men, and for the sake of her greater security, also feared her
own sensuality. While her sensuality obviously was in no way different from
that of a normal person, given the situation she had arranged, it cannot be judged
correctly. What can be said with certainty is that this patient overestimated her
own sensuality and we must be careful not to adopt her judgment as our own.
She is a corrupt judge; her judgment regarding her own sensuality serves her
ultimate purpose: to protect herself.
At the outset of this analysis, we can recognize that this patient demeans
men for her own security. In her opinion, "All men are bad, they want to
suppress women, soil them, and dominate them!"
Connected to this finding is the expectation that this patient will reveal a
number of typical and atypical attempts that are designed for her to win the
upper hand under all circumstances, and to nullify presumed as well as actual
male privileges existing in our society. In short, we can expect that with
character traits and her attempts at revolt, she will try to demolish male

privileges. The entire arsenal of the social struggle for the emancipation of
women will be reflected in her behavior except that in her version it will be
distorted, foolish, childish, and worthless. Her battle will be a personal struggle
against male prerogatives, but it is also an analogy, a precursor and often also
companion to the great, raging, social struggle for the equality of women that
arose from inferiority to compensation, from a tendency to be equal with men
(see Dönniges, Memoiren).
The character traits that will be found more or less pronounced are
defiance, in particular with men (in our case it is with the student), fear of being
alone, shyness that often is hidden behind arrogance, rejection of society, an
open or concealed disdain for marriage, deprecation of men often accompanied
by a strong desire to please in order to conquer, self-consciousness, etc. Our
patient's neurotic symptoms take the place of character traits. Her hesitating
speech has taken the place of self-consciousness. Her flight from companionship
and her compulsive thought that people are hostile to her are toward the same
goal and stem from her feelings of hostility. Her lack of social feeling and her
being in a constant state of distrust complete the array of characteristics designed
to give her total protection. Morality, ethics, religion, and superstition can in
perverted ways also be called upon for support. Often we encounter
inadequacies, contradictions, and desires to have everything different causing
enormous active contrariness that encumbers working with patients. Just like a
good educator, the physician must deal with all these character traits not because
the patient "conveys" them, but because when seen from a social viewpoint, they
actually exist and constitute all of the patient’s strength and tendencies.
Furthermore, the anti-social attitude of the patient demands that he must present
his aggressive side to everyone.
There are also occasional attempts at revolt or breakdowns that are directed
against men and which the physician frequently also has to endure. These can all
be interpreted to mean: " No, I shall not subordinate myself, I will not be a
woman. They shall not succeed with me. They will all be found wrong!" It can
also lead to attempts at exchanging roles and for the patient to give orders as to
treatment, to put herself (literally and figuratively) in the place of the physician,
to be superior to him.
One day the patient under discussion came to me with the news that since
treatment had begun, she had become even more agitated. On another occasion,
she told me that the day before she had attended a secretarial course for the first
time and had become more agitated "than ever before." When I pointed out to
her that this was directed against me, she stopped contradicting me on that
particular point. This was not because her problem was solved, but she finally

realized that I do not take such attacks seriously and had no desire to demean
her.
When such indications as described above appear, it is easily predictable
that patients in such a mood assume the attitude that they wish to turn everything
around. They act "as if" they could, trying to avoid seeming feminine. Analyses
showed a desire to become a man, to be able to stand on one’s head like boys
often do, but improper for girls. This difference is clung to "as an example" and
has an almost symbolic effect. Quite frequently, it turns into an unwillingness to
visit the physician and ends in a plea to have him -- inversely -- visit the patient
at home. Most frequently, the tendency to invert is expressed in dreams where a
woman replaces the man. In such instances, the tendency to demean comes into
effect. It is suggested even more circumspectly by a hermaphroditic symbol, or
with ideas about castration as I, Freud, and others have indicated many times.
According to Freud and others, the somewhat less important aspect of such
thoughts stems from shocks coming from threats about being castrated. I am
aware that castration fantasies leave traces of an uncertain sexual role which
allow for believing in a transformation from a man into a woman. A dream that
our patient had illustrates this thought process so clearly that it can serve as a
model.
"I was in treatment by a nose specialist. The physician was away for the
operation. The assistant, a woman, removed one of my bones."
In analyzing this dream, which the patient thought quite harmless, we learn
that a few years earlier she was treated for swollen adenoids. She was
enormously fond of the doctor. She considered that grounds for running away
from him. The fact that she remembered this incident in connection with what
had occurred the day before is clearly directly related to me. I was also able to
rouse her sympathies by sidestepping her prejudices against men, which is how
the security tendencies were alerted in her dream to act as a warning against the
future. Her "exceptional sensuousness" as well as a "brutal craving for men" is
the great danger from which she seeks to protect herself in her dream world. The
female assistant, in fact, was not a physician and had never operated. The dream
created an institution of female physicians, which, in its context, is all about the
transformation of a man into a woman, and, as a further degradation, into an
assistant. This turns our thoughts to the problem of transformation. The bone that
is being cut off can be interpreted as representing the male genital. Since the
patient freely reported this herself, the assumption can be made that as a child
she presumed to have been transformed into a woman by castration, an
assumption that she denies. Numerous examples have shown me that this gender
theory and its analogy can persist pre-psychologically, i.e., that all conditions for

its development were present, but did not solidify into a conscious judgment or
were expressed verbally (Watson). In many other cases, it is possible to show
evidence of such a conscious fiction. The fact of the existence of so many
instances of conscious fictions as well as the circumstances under which patients
deal similarly with preconditions for such fictions, as if the fantasy were
conscious and justifiable, leads to a significant conclusion: What takes effect in
the psyche is not a realization, but the feeling of a special inferiority and
insecurity which, at first, is pre-psychic. It can consciously be formed into a
judgment or a fantasy whenever the need arises.7 If, as it turns out, the feeling of
inferiority is judged to be a feminine characteristic, we will then have recognized
in the guiding fiction, in the tendency of the neurotic, compensation in the form
of the masculine protest.
Our understanding of the dream described above is now sufficient to realize
that the dreamer's complaint concerns her femininity (the loss of the bone).
Nevertheless, her protest is directed against men for being superior to her. Her
protest is in concert with a personal ideal of equality: The physician also should
be transformed into a woman. If this is not taken too literally, then there is no
difference between her insistence on this transformation and her own desire to be
a man. Is not the abrogation of her feeling of inferiority the goal of her yearning?
This she can attain by elevating her person as well as by lowering the worth of
the higher valued male. We still are not clear on one aspect of the dream in
which "the physician was away for the operation." The patient could only
explain that she had never heard of similar absences of the nose specialist. In
consonance with the tendency of the dream, therefore, a likely explanation
seems to be the removal of the male and his replacement by a female physician.
It might be summarized as: "Let the devil take all men!"
Something else can also be anticipated. The above thought process points
clearly to the possibility of the arrangement of homosexuality. The dream event
as well as the patient’s psychological situation indicates clearly her tendency to
make a woman out of a man. A further indication in support of this withdrawal
from men is recollections and impressions of masturbation characteristics
stemming from childhood games with girls.
Finally, I should mention that the patient recalled not having been
welcomed by her mother and oldest sister. Her oldest sister in particular had
disciplined her strictly, so that their relationship had always been bad. With
regard to the withdrawal from men, pointed out above, I have to conclude that
she also resists being subordinated by women. In fact, she had always striven to
be superior to the girls and women in her circle of acquaintances, and had
resisted strongly being influenced by her mother. There is no evidence of a

primary, active, or innate homosexuality in the true sense of that term. On the
other hand, it is clear that her experiences and tendencies push her into this "as-
if" homosexual position, which also determines particular responses, without
such tendencies having to become active.
Her behavior, therefore, will be perceived in many ways as "reversed" and
also as "perverse" because, governed by a guiding fiction of male equality, she
tries to turn much, or everything, around, to change things, or to see things in
reverse. This compulsion, which under certain circumstances can appear as a
mania or delusionary,8 is for the most part unconscious and can only be cured if
the patient is given the possibility of understanding it, if her introspection can be
deepened. This possibility now depends on the pedagogical skill of the
physician.
7 Furtmüller and later William Stern describe this in the same way. 8 The
relationship of this case with paranoid schizophrenia cannot be overlooked.
At times, this patient allows in other ways that we are on the right track.
She indicated that she would not be averse to a romantic relationship, on the
condition that the sexual aspect is excluded. Here again the masculine protest
rises to the surface.
As an afterthought, our patient reported hesitatingly that the pleasant nose
specialist had kissed her several times, and that she had resisted only feebly. It
was not until the physician had tried to force her to kiss him that she found the
resolve to tell him that his behavior was ugly and decided to leave him
permanently. At that point her complaints disappeared and she felt well for
almost three months. This incident was followed by her conflict with the student.
Shortly after his banal remark, that she showed herself differently from the way
she really was, did she begin to suffer from her compulsive idea that she could
have no social relationships with anyone because of the embarrassing impression
others would have of her.
The fact that she allowed herself so easily to be kissed by the physician
would seem at first to contradict the assumption of a masculine protest.
Experience has taught us that to gratify a wish for power, a boastful masculine
lust for conquest not infrequently employs feminine means, such as being kissed
and arousing desire. This, however, is true only to a certain degree. At the point
where the partner, the doctor, clearly tried to demonstrate his superiority, when
he employed force, she had to prove her superiority over him. This case is so
typical in its psychological make-up that it should easily be comprehensible. As
everyone knows, an unattainable not yet subdued partner can intensify "love" in
the other, when an openly expressed affection would normally be poorly

received. Eventually, neurotic girls will fail in every relationship with a man
because the courtship, particularly the image of being subdued and possessed,
becomes intolerable to them. A quick victory, a completed triumph, ends this
problem.
An improvement in our patient's condition can easily be understood. She
had triumphed over her physician, as well as over what she considered to be
female, sensuous cravings. When she came up short in her struggle with the
student, when he succeeded even in turning her girl friend against her, she
ascribed to the student's words a long-standing meaning. She feared that her
onanistic manipulations, her "feminine sensuousness," could be discerned. The
words of the student seemed to her that he recognized her as being different from
how she appeared. She gladly ascribed to his words the interpretation that
everyone could recognize her as being sensual, and that they would take the
same liberties as the physician. She saw herself, however, as too weak to defend
herself against a man who would not promptly subject himself to her.
This afterthought, which she offered with difficulty, was preceded by one
hour of complaints about her condition and doubts about being cured. It is easy
to see that these feelings were directed against me. It is also clear that with her
condition, she tried to guard herself against me for having forced her to confess
to her "weakness." In order for her to remain the stronger of us, she also had to
show that her condition worsened, which, in her present state of treatment meant
that I should not have powers over her, and not gain influence over her.
I would also like to point out briefly how fear of men can be "turned
around," namely along lines that men should become afraid. In terms of the
neurotic patient's perception, this line of thinking is in accord with the sense of
rising from "below to above." This tendency to reverse is the case not only for
those suffering from neurosis, but also for those afflicted with psychosis, and
above all is characteristic of paranoia and dementia praecox. This tendency at
reversal manifests itself at times in trying to move things from the bottom to the
top, to turn over tables, chairs, and boxes expressing, thereby, revolt against the
logic of the way things are.
Psychologically, this is equal to the commonly known negative attitude that
a person often can mentally replace by "reversing" attitude. Incidentally, it can
be shown that our patient also had thoughts that surfaced which are familiar to us
from patients suffering from psychosis. For example, the feeling that others can
see through them, that everyone felt embarrassed being near them, and that they
could be influenced. Unlike psychotics, however, our patient is aware of her
childhood fiction and as far as it is logically possible will bring it in accord with
reality, which is how the impression that she is psychotic can be avoided. The

problem, therefore, is not the fiction, which in our case serves to make the
patient more careful, but lies in a weakness to correlate and correct, in a
commitment to logic. As much as our patient may wish to protect her assumed
feminine weakness and strengthen her fiction to act as if she were a man, she
will always find additional protection and act "sensibly” through a correlation by
her correcting mechanism. With that theory, we approach the views of Bleuler
who regards as characteristic for schizophrenia a "loosening of associations."
Our viewpoint presumes for psychosis a relative inferiority of the rectifying
mechanism that lacks the ability to compensate when the apparatus fueling the
imagination strides toward greater achievements.
Years ago, I observed a patient suffering from dementia praecox in its
declining stage. One day, he pointed to a pack of dogs and solemnly said that
they were well known and beautiful ladies and then named each one. He was
under the influence of fearing women and found security in demeaning the
otherwise highly regarded female gender by transforming every woman into a
dog, i.e. "reversing." His rectifying mechanism was not strong enough to
correlate with reality so that he might have turned this observation into a joke, or
else he would have recognized that he was being insulting. The compensation of
the rectifying mechanism failed to operate against the safeguarding mechanism's
strong tendency to demean.
The day after our patient reported the behavior of the nose specialist, she had a
dream that showed us the same psychological dynamics:
"I went to buy a hat. On my way home I saw in the distance a dog of which
I was very afraid. However, I wanted the dog to be afraid of me. When I
approached him, he jumped up at me. I soothed him and stroked his back. Then I
went home and lay down on the couch. Two cousins came to visit. My mother
brought them into the house, looked for me, and said: 'There she is.’ I found it
unpleasant to be surprised in this situation."
The analysis showed that she had angry thoughts because of what she told
me. She must be on guard.9 This then becomes a way to reinforce her protective
mechanism. She had shown herself to me to be weak, was inferior, and I--the
dog--jumped on her. She had perceived her defeat as a sexual-symbolic picture
that in no way is to be taken for real. However, it is just that symbolic expression
which she finds a "defeat,” as feeling feminine, a feeling she regards as going
much too far. She protects this symbolic representation with a reminder that
stems from her warning safeguard tendency and thus debases me to the level of a
dog. With her afterthought, she clearly shows how she tries to "reverse" my
having attained a position of superiority. "I wanted him to fear me!" After the
first days of treatment, she felt tatigued and needed to rest on the couch. These

symptoms were visibly arranged to prove, as she occasionally mentioned to me,
that our conversations did not calm, but tired her. However, far more important
is that after her nose operation, she was also lying down on a couch when the
doctor kissed her, a secret that I had "ripped" out of her. The two cousins are
now married. Our patient was in touch with them when they were still single and
had often visited them, but only in the company of her mother or an aunt. She
considered it unseemly to go anywhere alone. However, she does go out alone,
specifically she comes by herself to me for treatment, just as she had gone alone
to the nose specialist. In her dream, however, she went alone to purchase a hat.
The last time she went out to buy a hat was in the company of her quarrelsome
mother, who bothered her a great deal with her constant complaints about
money. Calming the dog by stroking points to an incident when she soothed a
rejected suitor. She would deal with me in the same way.
The problem the dream resolves can now be understood. "Should I go alone
or with mother? The latter choice is unpleasant since mother always seeks to
suppress me. However, I am fearful of men and shall try to reverse roles. Once I
caused great anguish in a man who wanted to get close to me. I was afraid of
going further and rejected him. This is what I fear every time I speak with a man.
I can make him aware of my superiority only during our first encounter. The
more often I go to the doctor, the weaker I feel. Furthermore, it is improper."
From this position of superiority, which is arranged, stems her tendency for
propriety, which she would use with me on occasion. In fact, two days later,
without any reason, she skipped an appointment.
In short, her feeling of weakness stems from a fear of men and allows her
only one way of rectifying that situation: to act as if she were a man. This
approach, which in her mind is a thorny path, presents great contradictions that
arise from the irrationality of her fiction. The world sees her as a woman, while
she is herself not impervious to female impulses, which she underscores and by
no means crowds out. The underscoring of her feminine impulses, however,
leads to a reversal. It causes her to react acidly which then turns into a
safeguarding tendency: I do not wish to be a woman, I want to be a man! She
tries to apply this with everyone, with her girl friends, as well as with her
physician. With the latter, however, her safeguard fiction must be resolved and
brought into harmony with reality.
9 (Translator’s note) There is a play on words here. The German expression
"auf Hut sein" contains the word for "hat" and probably comes from having to
watch one's hat, i.e. to be on guard. In this instance the patient bought a hat,
which is analyzed to mean that she had to be on her guard.
The continuation of treatment is in fact the most difficult educational task a

physician must face. It entails creating a mood in which the patient can tolerate
guidance. Our patient appeared for treatment obviously in a bad mood. In
response to my asking her what she had to report, she said "nothing". When I
pointed out to her that her poor disposition must still be hostility toward me she
asked: "How did that come up?" These are not words I heard for the first time.
She used this response repeatedly when she and her mother introduced
themselves to me. She always used this phrase when reporting on her medical
history, while her mother would be interjecting critical remarks to the effect that
her daughter was not trying hard enough. I assume that the patient succeeded in
mentally placing me into her mother's role, i.e., not unlike her doctor dream, to
see me not as a man, the goal being to deprecate me and to raise her own esteem.
Whatever else she expressed on that same day were obscured complaints
against me for the deterioration of her condition. This was done so subjectively
that it became clear that she was thinking of trying her fortunes with another
physician. She also expressed hostile ideas to the effect that she would stay away
from treatment for at least some time. That all this was directed against me is
quite understandable, even though the patient denied she had such intentions.
For the time being I presume that her behavior, her forcible response, is because
of her feeling of subordination, of softening, of adjusting, and cooperating. This
behavior relates to the nature of her illness. Her feelings are cast to perceive
others, especially men, as the stronger, superior, and as hostile. Originally
formed to safeguard and strive for power, her own, quite normal feelings are
accentuated and one-sidedly grouped to act as deterrents. Because she regards
these as feminine characteristics, it is against this fiction that, to safeguard her,
the masculine protest is directed as shown, for example, in her attitude toward
me. The safeguarding mechanism continues to function in the masculine protest
and reinforces all feelings about the superiority and hostility of men. This
explains her recollection of incidents where the man was the stronger.
Consequently, her psyche is under the influence of what one may call an
ascending movement that has its origin in a strongly perceived fiction: I
succumb, that is, I am too feminine. The sought after goal is an equally strong
fiction: I must act as if I were a man, i.e., I must humiliate men because by being
too feminine I must otherwise succumb. The action of the neurosis takes place
within these two fictions and all exaggerations and underscoring are
safeguarding tendencies.
What then did the patient complain about? She felt that people were
embarrassed for her, that they were hostile toward her. This compulsive idea
stems by necessity from the patient's psychological situation. Aside from
strengthening the patient's feminine fiction, giving it added expression and

acting as a reminder, it also makes room for the masculine protest: Now she can
cast off her feminine role and live as well as possible along the lines of a man
and can behave toward a man as she acts with her mother. Her mother, after all,
is the only person with whom she has been in touch since falling ill and whom
she can dominate through her illness, albeit also drive into despair. She gladly
can transfer her feelings of hostility to others, since "he who fears disaster
himself causes it." What should be noted is a great dearth of social feeling.
We should recall that this patient's obsessive idea was preceded by another
symptom of illness: a hesitating speech and extreme self-consciousness in the
presence of others. In fact, this was the opening act of her neurosis, the first
expression of her increased tension with other people. It is as if her speech was a
primary safeguard against being subordinated and still be able to keep in mind
the safeguarding fiction of her weakness by stuttering. This worked until she was
attacked by men in the form of the physician and the cousin and then had to go
further in her safeguarding efforts in order to safeguard the male protest: She
either had to fight or run away. This, as can be seen from the above, is as far as
she had come with me. I have observed the same dynamic in the analyses of
persons who stutter. Her stuttering is an attempt at withdrawal from a superior
person by using a form of resistance based on a deepseated inferiority feeling. Its
purpose is to explore, examine, and carefully steal up on a partner. At the same
time, the thought comes to mind that with masochistic behavior a bewitching
effect can be achieved on that person. Furthermore, she can contemplate: "What
could I have achieved, if I did not stutter!" This then is how such patients finally
console themselves while dodging their own sensitivity.
I know that some readers of my earlier works have difficulty with this point
and have raised the question how someone through female contrivances can
devise a masculine protest. The analogy with passive resistance may clarify this
for them. Given such behavior, analysis frequently encounters a particular case
in which "female and male" lines almost merge and cause a compromise, but,
difficult for the beginner to notice, the safeguarding tendency continues without
interruption its upward movement. This is most apparent in the Messalina type10
for whom a defeat seems like a triumph. Can this really be so difficult to
understand?
Let us return to our patient. We can now arrange in some order her two
thought processes that she expressed to me. Her sharp remarks as well as her
subjectively worsening condition are attacks against me, just as are her threats to
stay away from treatment. The former is a reminder of her current symptoms; the
latter reminds us of the earlier symptoms. We also know what increased her
masculine protest: her willingness to relent in her treatment. Now she tells of

having had a dream, but remembers only that she awoke after crying out.
10 Editor’s note: Messalina was the cruel, dissolute, and avaricious wife of
Emperor Claudius. She was eventually beheaded by his guard. The intended
meaning of Adler’s term is not entirely clear.
Such fragments of a dream are excellent for interpretation. It is as if one
had gained access to the psyche through a broad gap without additional details
hampering the physician's progress. When I asked how she cried out, she
answered with a recollection from an earlier time. As a child, she used to cry out
loudly whenever any of the children, or anyone else, wanted to hurt her. Once
she was locked in a cellar and, to scare her, was told that there were rats. She
also cried loudly when operated on by the nose specialist. I point out that a
similar situation must have occurred in her dream, i.e., she cried under the dream
fiction, as if something like what had happened before would happen to her
again.
Every dream can best be translated with the introduction: "Given that ... "
Some time ago, I reported this finding in my shorter studies and am now ready to
discuss this in greater detail. In so doing, a number of valuable pieces of Freud's
theory on dreams will be confirmed, but other aspects will be shown to have
been incidental and misleading. Not enough can be said about Freud having been
the first to have presented works on dream contents, dream thoughts, and on a
residue from the previous day, making dream analysis possible. However,
regarding Freud's view on the primary function of dreams, which is to relive old
sexual desires stemming from childhood and to fulfill these in dreams, the time
has come to dismiss this misleading and insignificant idea. It never was, and
could not have been anything other than a transient, self-contradictory, and,
when measured against reality, meaningless expediency. If its purpose, however,
was to subject dreams to an orderly thought process, it did so in a masterful way.
The principle of wish fulfillment itself was no more than a fiction, yet, it was
wonderfully well suited to make significant advances in the understanding of
dreams. What becomes obvious from the logical viewpoint that describes the
principle of wish fulfillment as expediency is its wide range into a second
framework of that abstraction in which all psychological impulses can be stored.
Indeed, what needs only to be done with thought fragments is to find the
underlying impulses, or even only likely impulses, possibly transforming a
premonition into its opposite and the thought at hand then constitutes the
fragment of a fulfilled wish. Notwithstanding, for us neurologists Freud's
formulations made possible the organization of material of which dreams are
made and to gain an overview. Calculations could now be made (Vaihinger).
The soon resulting contradiction, that the emphasis was placed on early

childhood wishes that were rejuvenated by analogous present circumstances,
while evidently a new contradiction that with past experiences a resolution in
dreams was to be attained, as Individual Psychology had shown, demonstrated
the indefensibleness of Freud's formulation and forced this scientist to adopt new
fictions.11 Among these he adhered most firmly to the idea that incestuous
childhood relationships become fixed, an idea that first had to be distorted and
generalized into crass sexuality. The explanation for that is simply that dream
fictions not infrequently incorporate sexual analogies in order to express other
kinds of relationships, for example, those among people patronizing bars.
11 Lately, Freud also relinquished his position and placed the "the death wish" in
the foreground.
Even the most striking features of dreams: the concern, the premonition,
and the safeguarding that every dream produces and fulfills, became obscured
and were maliciously pushed into the background as soon as calculations
allowed the application of Freud's formula. The main direction of a dream runs
parallel with the effort of safeguarding one's personality and personal
superiority. With that, in our view, the primary characteristics of the function of
dreams have been laid down: The dreamer seeks to attain the masculine line and
defends himself, like the neurotic and the artist, against the nascent feeling of a
defeat in terms of his lifestyle. His judgment of what is male or female stems
from his childhood and differs with and is rationalized differently by each
individual. In the contradictions these entail, they constitute the basis for the
neurotic's main fiction. The dreamer and the neurotic have thought processes that
are manifested in analogies, symbols, and other fictions that are based on the
contrast between moving from below to above, and from female to male. In this
the intention always is to move upward, toward the masculine protest, analogous
to a physical turning of the body, the rising of a sleeper.
If we apply these two categories according to which a dream must be
directed, the models as Klages defines them in his Prinzipien der
Charakterologie (Leipzig 1910), to this minute fragment of a dream, to an
automatic emotional expression which can be understood from the way the
patient acts, we can determine the following: First, that this patient fears an act
of violence similar to one that she experienced with the boy in her childhood,
and more recently with the nose specialist. Secondly, that she reacts to the
anticipation of it in a way similar to her reaction as a child to humiliation. It
should also be noted that this patient talked about a suggestion that had come
from me. I had in a conversation told her, trying to explain the difference
between female and male psychological reactions, that if a group of men and

women were dressed in female clothing, the women for the most part could also
be recognized by their behavior on seeing a mouse. They would press their
dresses with their hands against their legs. This remark came back when the
patient told of having been locked in a cellar with rats. Thus, the automatic
emotional outcry contains a psychological message: "Because I am a girl they
will lock me up, they want to force me, lower me (cellar!)." This is followed by
another psychological message, also as a countermeasure, addressing her
perception of herself in a female role. It is the masculine protest which tells her:
"Yell! So that you can be heard, so that you will not be forced, so that you can
be set free!"
If we compare these two mutually supportive ideas regarding the patient's
attitude toward me, we find that the second thought was honestly expressed and
clearly directed at me. The patient "yells," i.e. she expresses hostility toward me,
defends herself against my "superiority" and declares that she wants to be free,
i.e., discontinue treatment. This means that the first thought, "I am being
overpowered, lowered, imprisoned" must have appeared in the forgotten dream
fragment. When I explained to the patient that in her dream I must have been the
superior man, she made no response. Her resistance continued and was assuaged
only slightly by my explanation that from an exaggerated caution she had
construed for herself an unnecessary nightmare in which she feared, and to
which she protested by yelling, that she would be subjugated by me.
Her perception of a female role, the possibility of being able to yearn for
love, was also clearly magnified as a protective measure, and, consequently, her
libido, from which she sought to safeguard herself, was faked. She acted as if she
would weaken in my presence and believed this fiction to be true, since that
made her feel safe. The importance she ascribed to reversing now becomes
understandable. The patient wants to be the stronger and feared that I would be
stronger.
Unfortunately, I was unable to keep the patient for treatment longer than a
few days, which speaks to her suffering, her unapproachableness, and her
inability to have normal human relations. One year later, I learned that when she
was abroad her condition worsened.
V. The point of departure for a "reversal" in the dream of a
manicdepressive. 
The patient in this case is an uncommonly ambitious woman who always sought
to triumph with her beauty and who never trusted herself to be effective by any
other means. When she began to fear losing her beauty, she entered into a phase
of depression. When that phase receded, she became intensely competitive with
regard to other women. One day she noted that her girl friend, who was younger

than she, became socially popular. One night she had a dream which she related
as follows: "My girl friend and I are sitting on a ladder, she sat above me, I
below her. I am very discontent." 
Her discontent (depression) is manifested in her feeling of inferiority. This is
also true for being "below." Her emotional disturbance compels something that
the dream does not treat, which is to effect a reversal of her situation. For the
time being she will at the very least avoid social contacts so as not to allow for
any comparisons. She will increasingly "distance" herself from life. Her
discontent also points to another solution, to an intensification of her fading
depression. However, her resentment toward her girl friend will be kindled, and
she will attempt to reverse the order on the ladder with carping, meanness, and
harassment.
Chapter XXIII
The Individual Psychology of Prostitution1 2
[1920] 1. The Premises and Viewpoints of the Critical Observer
Experience in life as in science has shown that discussions of the simplest
as well as most complicated problems can spin out futilely for no reason other
than that the viewpoint, selection, and arrangement of arguments and
counterarguments are based on premises that, for the most part, are untested. In
such cases it is often not so much the lack of an opponent’s intelligence, but his
different orientation which allows him to raise objections, disparage a point of
view, inject new material and information, or introduce another viewpoint. As
objective as one might claim to be, it is only the conscious and critical stress of
one’s personal viewpoint, and the evaluation for or against an argument from
that perspective, that lends us the scientific qualification to examine and discuss
a subject matter. This also affords us the possibility of developing systematically
the premises for our arguments. If this clarification is omitted, the spirit of an
inquiry will run in circles and in the end one will believe to have recognized the
premise that was only presumed at the outset of the discussion. The manner in
which all kinds of methods can initially be tendentiously utilized has been
clearly pointed out in statistics, a field that for some also has validity for
psychology.
In order to limit the scope of our discussion, we establish that prostitutes
constitute mostly females who engage in sex in order to make a living. From the
standpoint of the social order, those engaged in the practice of prostitution as a
wage-earning profession essentially treat the manifold and responsible nature of
a sexual relationship as analogous with a business designed to make money.
From this disparaging perspective arises another unmistakable premise:
That society for the present and foreseeable future has organized the relationship

between the sexes according to certain criteria, and has endowed that
relationship with those responsibilities that are believed to be useful, essential,
and tested to sustain that society. Some aspects of this, such as the duration of
marriage and the practice of courting, seem to have taken on well-established
patterns. When we also take into consideration the freely accepted needs for
companionship, for sustaining family life, and for advancing mutual respect, we
can easily understand how all these implications that occur simultaneously with
sexual relations are self-evident requirements of a society that aims with such
methods to safeguard itself.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
228-236, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XXV in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
This observation is in complete harmony with historical, legal, and
sociological considerations. Moreover, it is the only concept that allows us to
deal completely with the ethical problem of prostitution, which is the ancient,
unsolved question how it is possible that society, which engendered, furthered,
and tolerated this phenomenon always regards it as appalling and even
criminal. Based on our analysis we understand that society created in
prostitution an emergency exit, a means for avoiding problems of which
numerous of its citizens are guilty, but which society, from the vantage point of
its other-directed goals, is forced to cover with a banner of morality.
2. The Public and Prostitution
This social structure is a compromise in the worst sense of the word, since
two opposite tendencies lend form and structure to the social character of
prostitution: condemnation and endorsement. Accordingly, the psychology of
open prostitution as a mass phenomenon is reflected in people’s minds in very
peculiar ways. Thus, the attitude of the individual to this question will be
determined largely by his position on the following question: To what extent
does he accept or reject the primary demands of our current social order. The
position of an individual on the question of prostitution will teach us more about
his attitude toward the demands of the community, and will give a clearer picture
of his social adjustment, than he could give himself. In that way, the smug and
contented citizen will generally have absorbed the social ideal of a legitimate
marriage tempered by prostitution as a “self-evident” premise for his philosophy
of life. The person subscribing to conservative views, who is concerned with
maintaining the family as the core of the state and who seeks to strengthen and
increase its population will be vigilant to avoid the negative consequences of

prostitution. On the other hand, those tending toward the dissolution of the
family would regard the nature and implication of prostitution more
sympathetically, and possibly even further its cultivation.
These two types of individuals are difficult to separate clearly and to
examine objectively. The social context in which they exist becomes even more
vague when they themselves fail to affirm consciously their own attitude toward
the problems of society. In fact, in conducting this kind of investigation we are
forced to disregard the assertions of those being examined as to their attitude
toward society. This probably becomes even more necessary when we consider
their attitude toward the other sex from which their view on the problem of
prostitution is directly derived.
Our examination of misleading premises for judging prostitution has thus
far demonstrated that these can be divided into three types of false premises.
When pursued further, these false premises lead to worthless, fruitless, or
harmful positions as soon as the attempt is made to follow through with practical
steps.
The first type encompasses in general those authorities, critics, and
laypersons who, hostile and withdrawn, have already given up on seriously
cooperating in advancing society. In line with their attitude toward life, which
they never logically understood, and which for the most part is more an
expression of their emotions, they find in prostitution an affirmation of their
belief in the rotten state of the world. Their attitude will always be one that
stresses the so-called "necessary evil." They will underscore inborn deficiencies
and with animosity will view as useless all human endeavors. At times, these
fruitless and groundless views turn into strong condemnation under the cover of
critical ethical, moral, or religious beliefs. However, let us consider our position,
which is that the attitude of the individual in this group toward prostitution is
integrated and dependent on resolving antecedent questions regarding society. In
that case we shall find that such a person's pathos serves only a preconceived
notion and that all moralizing up to this time has not eliminated prostitution.
Even force has failed to accomplish this. We can understand, however, the
uselessness of all countermeasures when we accept that society requires just this
kind of prostitution. Society even creates it out of itself in that some members
exert a positive influence to further prostitution, while others attempt to impede
or condemn it. The applicable laws, as well the common morality in our society,
reflect this compromise position.
As objectively as the nature of prostitution may be regarded, it can only
spring out of a human condition that sees no objection to the proposition that the
woman is a means for gratifying sexual lust, an object, and the property of man.

In other words, the existence of prostitution is possible only in a society that has
set its goal the gratification of man's needs. It is, therefore, understandable that
feminists and defenders of women's rights regard prostitution as an affront to
women. This viewpoint, with which we are sympathetic, underlies the
presumption that was discussed above: The purpose of the revolution advocated
by feminists is the overthrow of the existing order of society with its male
prerogatives.
The inseparable connection of two problems afflicting humankind,
prostitution and sexually transmitted diseases, should at least raise expectations
of vigorous attacks against prostitution from those concerned with public health
and welfare, and from nationalists. We see such advocacy particularly in small
and vulnerable countries where great efforts are made to ensure a steady
population growth. If citizens in such countries are questioned about their views
on prevailing conditions, their responses tend, to some degree, to lean toward
radical social changes.
If that segment of society that supports prostitution were to be scrutinized,
we would undoubtedly find among it individuals who regard the status quo as
appropriate and unalterable. It consists of that large and closely knit stratum of
the population that has romantically been referred to as philistines. Since they
compose the largest part of the population that resides in cities as well as in the
country, their views are shared by local officials and administrators. They in turn
regard prostitution as an immutable institution and at best half-heartedly struggle
against venereal diseases. This group of people also includes large numbers of
physicians and fathers who, in hopes of ameliorating the sexual drive of their
charges, and in a kind of sexual fetishistic conviction, encourage youngsters to
engage in regular sexual activities by visiting prostitutes.
But, even among this group of advocates there is no lack of contempt for
prostitution. They even go so far as to promote sexual relations with prostitutes
while expressing their contempt for them in most inhuman ways. By doing so,
they reflect in the truest sense the psychology of a culture that cannot dispense
with a degraded institution of prostitution which goes counter to their social
system by hindering the procreation of their society.
Nevertheless, there are individuals who have a spiritual need for
prostitution, aside from the physicians and fathers mentioned above, who seem
to believe that they can eliminate serious conflicts among their charges by
advocating they follow a line of least resistance. Just as fruitless as those
intentions seem to us are the attempts by only recently matured boys who, with
so little effort, try to demonstrate their manhood by visiting prostitutes. The
mentality these individuals reflect can also be found in three groups of people

who are so intimately associated with prostitution that we can understand the
psychological problem of prostitution only after we had grasped the Individual
Psychology of those individuals.
3. The Customers of Prostitutes
The three categories into which clients fall and which we shall now examine are:
a. Those in need of prostitution.
This group includes the enormous number of a certain type of nervous
persons described by this author in the article entitled "Ueber den Nervoesen
Charakter" (On the Neurotic Character), and in particular in "The Homosexual
Problem."1 The pattern that applies to this group can be described as follows:
Their outward behavior often seems quite dissimilar. Among these are men
who are given to outbursts of rage tending to be domineering. To a certain
extent, they are very impatient and hypersensitive about making social contacts.
In all this they are noticeably cautious and usually choose some safe occupation.
They are conspicuous for their boundless mistrust and never make true friends.
They are eminently pathologically ambitious and jealous. At times they feel
themselves compelled to assume public offices, but carry out their duties mostly
with recourse to deception and intrigue. By pursuing prestige and by using
intrigue, they sometimes enter, often as if in error, into marriage. Then they treat
their wives and children with inconsiderate discipline, constantly gripe, are
always dissatisfied, and often return to a prostitute, or treat their wives like
prostitutes. They will fearfully avoid any difficulties or evade any they encounter
with guile. They fear being tied down to one person, feeling that it would mean
subjugating themselves. Polygamous tendencies predominate. They are guided
all their life by striving for cheap triumphs and allow themselves to be led by
diverse principles that always find blame in someone else. Always complaining,
always judgmental, they border on the type of person first described, who,
however, deals more consequently with society and rejects prostitution. Their
dissatisfaction also extends to women, whom they treat as some form of lower
human being. For them, as is also true for the uncompromising anti-feminist, the
woman becomes a means to an end. They use women where resistance to them
gave way to a superstition about the superiority of the male. It is this type of
person who created a need for prostitution, which he also supports. It is such a
person who is convinced that the sexual drive is dominant. This belief is often
highly bizarre and supported with some scientific explanation. In fact, the true,
and to him unknown, driving force for his world view, the premise for his
thoughts and actions, his masculine paroxysms, scurries around big problems in
life in order to gain cheap triumphs over spineless or repressed subjects.

1 In: The Urologic and Cutaneous Review, Technical Supplement, St. Louis,
Miss., October 1914. German: “Das Problem der Homsexualitaet,” Munich,
1918.
Closely related to the type described above, we have come to know certain
chastity fanatics who, for fear of women, make often ungratifiable sexual
demands which have the effect of allowing them to avoid problems. Clearly
defined types who fit this category of the supporters of prostitution are: the sons
from good families who perfunctorily are described as afflicted with a "moral
insanity" that presumably is incurable. Based on our experiences, however, these
individuals, not unlike those described above, and because of their insecurity and
latent sensitive ambitions, would prefer moral condemnation rather than suffer
an expected defeat by following an honorable pursuit. How closely these persons
are related to prostitutes, to which they are attracted, will soon become clear.
The same strong trend toward prostitutes can also be observed in alcoholics.
They, like the whole group of persons under discussion here, tend to make
sordid compromises, like to find excuses for their shortcomings, and are masters
in the art of avoiding serious responsibilities. Men who have criminal tendencies
often show the same propensity for prostitutes. We find that their criminal
tendency is based on their preference for evading solving difficult problems by
transgressing the rules of society.
Particularly strong is the connection between certain forms of neurosis and
psychosis and prostitution. At the same time, it should be noted that persons so
afflicted, as manifested by their illness, suffer from a feeling of inferiority, lack
of selfconfidence, are afflicted with a pathological drive for esteem, tend to be
irresponsible, and like to use psychological tricks and practices which, like
conquering a woman with money, flatter them. Psychologically related are those
characters who seek out as wives women who are their cultural inferiors, or who
look for prostitutes in order to still their fear of women, and to gratify a timid
lusting for dominance.
Certainly, the stream of visitors to prostitutes ranges beyond these sharply
drawn types. It should be remembered, however, that occasional or temporary
situations could draw other individuals into similar relationships where a
heightened feeling of inferiority is then quickly stilled following easy
gratification. In the same way, a girl unsuited for prostitution can become a
prostitute. In such cases, however, the desire to establish other social
connections will become apparent very soon. It is not these individuals but the
inexhaustible number of people “in need of prostitution” who form the main
pillars supporting the institution of prostitution.
b. The procurers.

One has to agree with us when we describe procurers of prostitutes as
persons lacking in social feeling and tending to seek cheap successes. They
regard women as a means to an end and as a way to gratify effortlessly the lust
for dominance. In this, they promote prostitution as a mass phenomenon. The
extent to which procurers foster prostitution cannot be overestimated. The
procurer functions as a pacemaker. He, or the white slaver, directs the prostitute
into the path of public prostitution, supports secret desires, and confiscates the
last ounce of responsibility from girls who, were they left to their own devices,
might be undecided as to their future. The psychological connection with those
in “need of prostitution” is unmistakable. The prostitute’s personality is directed
toward making an effortless living. They come close to becoming criminals.
They tend toward alcoholism and brutality, which are expressions of a
vulnerable weakness and compensation for an unsatisfied drive for esteem. The
attitude of the procurer toward society is noticeably critical, belligerent and
rebellious. His presumptive posture as the savior and protector of prostitutes
points to a craving to play the important person. He boasts of prison sentences
like a fencer of his scars and finds his rewards and consolation in the greater
respect paid him in like-minded circles. He thus creates or finds for himself a
world in which his pathological drive for esteem can dwell in fictitious ways,
and far from reality. We shall not be misunderstood, if we here again point to the
affinity to the “neurotic character.” In the final analysis, this examination throws
a strong light on the psychology of those who, faced with problems in their life,
seek an emergency exit by relinquishing their wives to others as the price for
their own advancement.
c. The Prostitute
The commonly accepted view of what drives prostitution has provided little
useful material to date. It is untenable to assert that necessity and misery are the
decisive driving factors. This assumption does not account in any way for the
choice of prostitution by poor girls who are likely to become its victims. Or is
the argument that it depends on a degree of poverty? In that case one
underestimates
-and I am not speaking specifically of morals or ethics--and certainly rejects the
social degradation commonly associated with the idea of prostitution. Whatever
one might have in mind, holding such mistaken views are completely different
social phenomena. For example, there are the instances frequently seen among
girls who live under pressure of great despair or misery and who will
occasionally, or perhaps always, sell their female “commodity” to the first
customer, either against their better judgment, or even without any question.
What is unique about these girls is their “industriousness” which goes so far that

even those prostitutes who had become rich will continue to pursue their
profession with the fervor of an entrepreneur. What iron force keeps such
persons in this profession? Is it not the same satisfaction that a businessman
gains from pursuing his affairs? Is it not the same need for esteem and the same
“expansion tendency” that we encounter in everyone, and in particular among
those whom we characterize as “neurotic?”
In the preceding section, we described those frantic attempts by which
certain people become prostitutes or procurers. We have come to understand
these deluding exaltations as a way of escape, as borrowed illusions of power.
These asocial manifestations reflect a fear of society’s customary demands
which individuals consistently reject while lacking selfconfidence in their own
abilities to meet normal social expectations. Then, there is the resorting to an
artifice by attempting to find in sexual relations an easy way to raise esteem.
This last effort at trying to enrich oneself with an illusion of having reached
complete manhood was pointed out earlier. What if these same psychological
drives were to be found in the character of the prostitute? What if it were these
drives that render a girl amenable to and lead her into prostitution?
Before we examine these questions and other explanations, we should
mention and discount as untenable, one other widely held theory on the psyche
of prostitutes. It is clearly excusable when lay persons who are ignorant of this
subject wish to abide by their social obligation to denounce prostitution as a
profession that operates at the abyss of lust, and defame prostitutes as
individuals permanently inflamed by passion. Professionals who examine this
subject can come to such conclusions only if they are blind, or regard this
subject merely superficially. However, since this view is frequently found in
scientific treatises, at times reflecting Lombrosos’ impossible assertion on the
existence of an innate prostitute character, we must point out that in carrying out
their profession, prostitutes lack all sensuous passions. This, obviously, does not
apply to romantic relationships a prostitute has with her procurer, or when she is
engaged in homosexual practices. Only in the last case can the assertion be made
that sexuality comes into play, and then too often in a perverted form, which is a
clear indication of the prostitute’s rejection of the female role. In her profession,
she only plays the part of a woman for her easily duped partner. For her part, she
is far removed from the female role. She is merely selling, and remains frigid.
And, while the customer in need of a prostitute feels his masculine superiority
over a woman, she is aware only of her trade, and of the demands made on her.
She degrades the man into a dependent means for her subsistence. Both arrived
at a fiction that deceives them into feeling personally predominant.
With this finding, we have come closer to the cardinal point of the

questions raised above. The rash trick, the conversion of sexual intercourse into
a monetary equivalency, characterizes the nature of prostitution just as does the
two other groups previously described. And, as is true for the men involved in
prostitution, the fiction of a gratifying triumph ensures the continuation and
persistence of this institution while remaining a primary temptation for those
who subscribe to it.
The capability, however, of a woman to transform an inherent female
function of her body and psyche into money can be achieved by only someone
who is convinced that the woman is inferior. This also is seen in the manner in
which the individual relates to society and in the prostitute’s way of life. In most
cases, corruption begins early in life when girls consider themselves victims of
the “superior” male, who remains the respected adversary, while the female is
found culpable. Little wonder that the woman waiting on the man is seen as
weak, the man as the enemy, and the relationship a fatal duplicity. In the same
sense, the greater the attempt to be like the man, to act as he does, and to
suppress female behavior and morals, particularly by the inexperienced woman,
the greater the effort to evade the female role, marriage, motherhood, and social
expectations. This manifests itself in the individual’s history and in the feeling of
worthlessness with regard to men. To find in prostitution a way out, and to gain
the esteem denied her through other means is characteristic for the profession of
a prostitute. It is a career chosen after other fruitless, or seemingly fruitless,
attempts at employment as a maid, governess, or a working woman. In these
endeavors, she always sees as her model the “active” male and not the “passive”
female.
In this developmental process, the widely spread poison of the superior
male has great significance. It permeates the family life of the potential
prostitute in which the father becomes a dictatorial tyrant, and the wife and
mother is transformed into a frightening role model. It raises brothers to enviable
levels and spurns the feminism in the girl. Belief in oneself dwindles and the
often still immature seducer faces a defenseless and scared person whose dread
of men has grown over time. If not that, then the seducer finds a person full of
anger over her fate as a female, who, probably for the same reasons, is in revolt
against the rules of her parents. This behavior prevents her from developing
normally, a course from which she is further deterred by the successful
seduction. The consequences of the seduction are also noteworthy: The result is
not to make corrections, but rather increases the victim’s feelings of inferiority,
causes a distrust in her own powers, and leads to a revulsion against the female
role. The consequences are a rush of activity in the form of a revolt against the
demands of society as a means of escaping difficult goals which appear to her

more easily attainable for men, and which seem to promise her esteem and
deliverance from a feeling of worthlessness. This may seem as faulty reasoning
to us, but just ask a prostitute and her procurer!
4. Prostitutes and Society
This closes the circle. Society is still incapable of enforcing more rigorously
its own rules and making it possible to abide by them. Then there are people
who, fearful of life’s adversities, seek an easy way out. Also, our culture is
imbued with ideals that tend to favor commerce and trade. Its victims are
tolerated and despised while trying to make a virtue out of a necessity. They are
thereby filling a gap in our normal social order for which they are both tolerated
and despised, persecuted and extirpated.
Chapter XXIV
Neglected Children1 2 [1920]
Not the least among the “blessings” the war bestowed upon the nation was
the extraordinary rise in the number of neglected children. This has become
apparent to everyone and has been viewed with horror. The published statistics
were significant and can only be surpassed by considering the fact that only a
small part of this tragedy became known. Innumerable cases remained sheltered
by families for months and years, until we finally were confronted not by
neglected children, but by criminals. Their number is large; the number of those
who never became a statistic is even larger. A change is hoped for from day to
day and all sorts of measures are tried. However, a large number of
transgressions are committed by neglected children which do not fall under the
purview of the law and such children never appear in juvenile courts. These
violators remain hidden, still doing extensive damage to their families, and their
nature remains unchanged. Of course, it is not appropriate when dealing with
their faults and transgressions to lose all hope, although, given the little
understanding with which this problem is addressed, not much hope can rightly
be expected. However, it must be pointed out that in the development of every
human being, particularly the young, not everything follows ideal norms, and
often there are deviations. When we look back at our own youth and to those of
our friends, we see a host of transgressions committed even by children who in
later years turned into halfway effective, and at times even into outstanding,
individuals. The extent to which transgressions are carried out by youths can be
seen in a cursory overview.
On occasion, I have tactfully conducted studies of students in schools that
would cause no harm to anyone. Students, without having them identify
themselves by name, were asked to write on a piece of paper whether as children
they had ever lied or stolen. Normally, every child admitted to small thefts. Of

some interest was one case where the teacher participated in the test and
remembered having committed a few thefts herself. Consider for a moment the
complexity of the question posed. One person may have a considerate and
understanding father who tries to do right by his child and is mostly successful in
that regard. Another child who might admit to having committed the same
transgression, except that he was possibly more inept and caused more damage,
is subjected to the full brunt of discipline and is forced to see himself as a
criminal. It should not surprise us then when the different ways that these two
youngsters are judged will lead to different results. It is the worst of all
pedagogical principles to instill in a child the feeling that he will never amount
to anything, or that he is a criminal by nature.3 These are beliefs that belong in
the realm of superstition, although there are many scholars who wrongfully
speak of persons born to be criminals. As sad as this may sound, there are no
current pedagogical methods for dealing with incipient or advanced cases of
delinquency. This should not surprise us, since these are matters that concern a
young child’s psyche, a field that still is understood by very few people.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, pages
237-244, 1920. Translated into English as Chapter XXVI in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925. This earlier translation uses the term
“demoralized” instead of “neglected,” mistakenly referring to an effect rather
than a cause. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
When we speak of neglected children, we normally think of school-age
children. However, experts will be able to point to numerous cases where neglect
occurred before schooling began. This cannot always be attributed to upbringing.
Parents should be aware that no matter how conscientiously they bring up their
children, the outside influences that impinge upon their child, and of which they
are unaware, are far greater than what they knowingly imparted. Actually, it is
the totality of circumstances, all of life and of the individual’s environment, that
affect the child. The child is influenced by the father’s problem in trying to earn
a livelihood, and he senses the hostility of life even if such matters are not
discussed at home. A child will form his own views from a rather narrow
vantage point, with a child’s perception, and based on a child’s experiences. The
resulting philosophy of life will become the child’s guideline, which the child
will apply to every situation. He will then act in concert with that view. For the
most part, the resulting conclusions drawn by the child are wrong because the
child is inexperienced, his logic undeveloped and subjected to false conclusions.
But, consider the enormous impression on a child whose parents live in

poor housing and under depressed economic circumstances, as contrasted with
the child whose feelings about the hostility of life have not been as sharply
defined. These two types of children are so different that it is possible to
distinguish them by their speech, yes, even by merely looking at them. As for the
second type, the one who finds it easy to befriend the world because he knows
little of its problems, such a child will manage in life quite differently. That child
will be full of selfconfidence and courage, something that can be recognized
even from the way the child carries himself. I have made a study of children who
live in workers’ quarters where I have found that they mostly fear being beaten!
These are experiences they endure in their families. Such children, who grow up
with a disciplinarian for a father, stepfather, or mother are saddled with fear that
they retain until they reach adulthood. We found on the average that in terms of
friendly outlook, the blue-collar worker does not make as good an impression as
the white-collar worker, who has more courage. In no small measure is this sad
fact attributable to having grown up in fear of life and of being beaten. It is the
most damaging poison to turn children into pessimists. It is a perspective they
retain for the rest of their lives, one that robs them of confidence in themselves
and keeps them irresolute. Later efforts to develop a courageous attitude require
much time and effort.
3 See Birnbaum, “Hoffnungslose Eltern” (Desperate Parents) in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, Number 3, Vienna,
1924.
The response of children who grow up in prosperous neighborhoods when
asked what they fear most is schoolwork. This shows that they fear neither
people nor their own environment. They see themselves in the midst of a life
where there are tasks and work to be accomplished, and where they have no fear.
This also allows us to draw the conclusion that conditions in schools are
untenable, and that they awaken fear in children, rather than instilling a joyous
and courageous attitude toward life.
Let us now address the problem of neglect that occurs before children are of
school age. It should not be surprising when, as a result of having been highly
inflamed by a troubling environment, children develop a fear of life, and regard
those close to them as, among other things, hostile. Consequently, they will
make a persistent effort to gain esteem so as not to appear as insignificant, a state
to which children are so often reduced. It is one of the most important principles
of education to take a child seriously, to regard the child as an equal, not to
demean or make fun of a child. The child will take all negative approaches as
depressing, a feeling that everyone who is weaker experiences. Quite the
contrary is the attitude of those who believe themselves to be physically or

mentally superior. We cannot even say exactly to what extent a child is affected
by his inability to attain what he admires daily in his parents and older siblings.
Such feelings must be taken into consideration by anyone who has developed the
ability to examine a child’s psyche, and who has seen that children have an
extraordinary craving for power and esteem. They seek greater self-
consciousness, want to be effective, and be seen as a significant entity--the little
“big shot” is only a special case among them--constantly wrestling for power.
The differences among these children can be easily explained. In the one case
the child lives in harmony with his parents, in the other the child exists in a state
of hostility and is antagonistic toward society. He struggles against succumbing
to a feeling of being insignificant and being spurned. This last stage is reached
when children start to defend themselves, and every child becomes defensive. At
that point the early symptoms of neglect may appear.
I once saw a six-year old horror of a child who had murdered three
children. This somewhat retarded girl carried out the crime as follows: She lived
in a village in the country, sought out smaller girls to play with, and then pushed
them into the river. It was not until after her third victim that she was discovered.
In light of the obvious circumstances, she was sent to a mental institution. The
girl gave no hint of being aware of what she had done, although she cried when
this matter was mentioned, but then turned immediately to some other subject. It
was with considerable effort that it was possible to learn anything about her
crime and her motives. For four years, she was the youngest child among only
boys and was quite pampered. Then a sister arrived and the attention of the
parents turned toward the younger, forcing the older sister to stand back a little.
She could not endure being in that position and developed hatred against the
younger sister. Since her younger sister was carefully supervised, she was unable
to get close to harm her, and since her sister was so small, the perpetrator would
have been discovered easily. The older sister, therefore, generalized her hatred
against all young girls, whom she presumed to be her enemies. She saw in every
one of these girls her younger sister, who was the reason she no longer was
being pampered as before. In this state, and with her mild case of mental
retardation that impeded the development of a social feeling, her hatred grew to
a point where she would kill.
Efforts to turn such children toward normalcy in a short period of time
often fail because of their mental inferiority, which is present more frequently
than is supposed. The only choice in such cases is to be prepared for a long
period of recovery, to treat the child tactfully in applying pedagogical principles,
which is not unlike training the child to become capable again to cope with life.
However, these cases, which occur with great frequency, are less interesting

because of the subjects’ mental inferiority. We are left to accept such cases as
sad antics of nature because these are children who will never fully adjust to
society.
The majority of delinquent youths are free of mental defects and often there
are among them highly talented children, who for some time had made good
progress and who had developed their talents to a certain degree. However, once
they fail, that failure turns into a fear of life that they cannot overcome. Every
case regularly shows the following character traits: An exceedingly strongly
developed ambition that remains tightly closed off; a sensitivity against any form
of unfair treatment; a cowardice that is not simply a matter of running away, but
is an escaping from life and its normal demands.
This bare outline presents us with the following picture: Only an ambitious
child is capable of withdrawing from a task that appears to be beyond his
capabilities, and to forge a new path as if to hide his weakness. This is the
normal route followed by a child neglected in school. We have always found
that neglect is associated with a failure which either precedes it or is in the
offing, and which leads to hopelessness. The appearance of neglect at first
manifests itself in an avoidance of school. Skipping school which, of course,
must be concealed, first turns into falsifying excuses from parents, including
their signature. What, however, is a child to do with his free time? It leads to
joining others who are similarly troubled and who are suffering from the same
fate. These are always ambitious children who would like to play a role, but who
no longer trust themselves to gratify their ambition by following normal
endeavors. They seek other ways to satisfy their needs. There will always be one
or another child who becomes the leader and competition and ambition are
stilled. Everyone has ideas about what could be done. According to the role
model presented by their leader, the followers develop an “honorable tradition”
for neglected children. They make an effort to think up acts they can carry out
masterfully so that they will be lionized by their neglected comrades. However,
they will always employ cunning and deceit since their cowardice hinders them
from acting openly. Once they enter this path, the deterioration continues.
Sometimes, mentally impaired children will join such a gang. They will
then become the target for harassment with the result that their pride will be
piqued to where they decide to carry out some destructive act. Some who had
become accustomed at home to follow orders, and who will not initiate any
actions themselves, will be ordered to do so. Often, one of the gang will plan an
action and a younger, inexperienced and inferior member, will carry it out. I
shall not raise other enticements that impact on such children, although these
should not be overlooked. For example, worthless books or movies begin to have

an effect during this growing phase. Movies could not exist were it not for the
ingenuity and particular cunning with which actors play criminals or detectives
and excite an audience. Aggrandizing cunning also reveals cowardice to face
life.
The forming of gangs is so frequent that they always come to mind when
neglect is mentioned. However, the neglecting of the individual child is also very
common. The fate of such neglected children, whether the mildest or most
severe cases, follows the same rule that applies to children in gangs, except that
the most immediate causes seem to be different. We should remember that the
destiny of the neglected children in gangs, described earlier, begins to blossom
when they suffer a defeat or when such is in the offing. This applies also to the
individual neglected child: It is always an injury to personal ambition, fear, self-
blame, and a sinking feeling of their striving for power and of their
consciousness of power that leads to seeking an escape. It seems as if these
children have been looking for another arena in which to exist. Often this
manifests itself in a particular form of laziness that cannot be regarded as innate
or as a bad habit, but as a means for avoiding having to submit to any kind of test
of his competence. A lazy child can always claim laziness if he fails a test;
failure is then always attributed to laziness. The child would rather blame his
own laziness than be accused of being incompetent. This attitude forces the child
to act like an experienced criminal in that he has to establish an alibi and turn his
laziness into evidence for his failure. He succeeds because with laziness he has
protected his ambition and as a result found spiritual relief.
We know only too well the problems of our schools. Classes are too
crowded and teachers sometimes are inadequately trained, or lack an interest in
teaching, having to suffer living conditions that are so poor that we should not
expect them to perform better. For the most part, however, it is the dark cloud
that hangs over this psychologically bewildered situation, circumstances that are
the cause of as hapless a relationship between teachers and students as in no
other area of life. If a student makes a mistake, he is punished or receives a
failing grade. It is the same as if a physician told a person with a broken leg:
“You have a broken leg! Good bye!” Education is not meant to be like that.
Although children in most instances find ways for dealing with this situation
themselves, think of the problems they face having to live with such unfilled
gaps in their education. They will reach a point where their deficiencies are so
great that they can no longer go forward. One should only see how difficult it is
for the best of them to progress, how the aggregate of problems and gaps in their
education raise painful thoughts: “I cannot achieve what others can!” How
ambition suffers and the person is tempted! In most cases even professional help

cannot quickly fill the gaps. The first genuine efforts of a child in such a
situation remain unrewarded and despite all his exertions, the fruits of his labor
blossom only after many months. Long before that, the child, his family, friends
and teachers are out of patience and the child has lost interest and enthusiasm.
Many such children make progress, but then there those who look elsewhere to
make their way.
Neglecting a person follows the same course. Here also feelings of
inferiority, of inadequacy, and of humiliation rage. I recall a boy, an only child,
whose parents made great efforts to afford him his education. At the early age of
five, he began to feel deeply insulted when his parents locked the drawers of
their chests when they went out of the house. He then acquired a skeleton key to
open the drawers and to plunder their contents. He was brought to this stage by
seeking independence and then developed a striving for power to dominate his
parents, contrary to the rule of society. To this day, he is now 18 years old, he
robs homes. His parents think they know all of his transgressions and his father
chides him often with: “What good is all this? No matter how many homes you
rob, I shall always find out!” The boy, however, prides himself in knowing that
his father is aware of only one in twenty of his robberies. He still robs thinking
that all it takes is being clever enough. This clearly demonstrates the frequently
expressed hostile behavior of the boy against his parents, which drives him to act
contrary to the common good. When he becomes an adult, this young man will
again be able to find psychological support for his misdeed, which he will carry
out without feeling any moral qualms. His father is a prosperous middleman.
When the son speaks of his criminal activities, he claims that his father attacks
him unjustly. After all, he would argue, in conducting his business the father is
engaged in the same kind of chicanery as he is, only on a much larger scale.
Here we see again the influence of the young man’s environment of which his
parents are unaware. A childhood recollection of this young man shows his long
held secret opposing his father. While on a walk with his father, the latter was
speaking to a business friend, and holding a lit cigar. The boy saw this as
demeaning and in revenge positioned his hand so that it knocked the cigar out of
his father’s hand.
Here is another case from a worker’s family. A six year old boy who was
born out of wedlock is taken back into the home of his mother, who had married
in the meantime. The biological father had disappeared. The stepfather, an older,
cranky man, is not interested in children except for his daughter, whom he
adores and pampers with gifts of candy, while the older boy looks on. One day,
the mother lost a large sum of money without a trace. When she continued losing
money, she became aware that her son was the thief. He apparently spent the

money he stole on candy which he occasionally shared with his friends, probably
to make himself seem important. You can see here again how this boy chose to
operate in another arena, still intent on winning and gaining esteem. The boy
continued stealing several more times and was subsequently severely thrashed
by his father. When I saw him, his body was covered with welts and scratches.
Despite the punishment meted out, the boy, of course, did not stop stealing. The
mother was incapable of securing her valuables and, therefore, made it easier for
her son to steal, but then how many parents are good at protecting themselves
against theft? An explanation for the boy’s behavior became clear when it turned
out that an elderly peasant woman had cared for the boy. When visiting
neighboring villages, she used to take the boy with her and occasionally gave
him candy. After the boy rejoined his mother, he experienced a different
situation and now finds himself seriously neglected. The younger sister is
pampered and receives gifts of candy, while he is ignored; she gets attention and
he is spurned. In school his performance is very good. You can see that when
under duress, his faults show up exactly where his weakness dwells. This is true
in many cases where delinquency is an act of revenge, which gives the child
some psychological relief.
Another case is that of an eleven-year old girl who was given up by her
parents at an early age and who grew up in the care of her grandmother. The
mother, who was Jewish, married shortly after the birth of her daughter and then
disappeared. When the father once came to visit the child with his new bride he
forbade her to call him “father.” The child grew up as a Jewess in a Catholic
home and was constantly at odds with her Jewish religious-school teacher, who
failed her after the first term. Shortly thereafter, the child began to steal and to
give stolen objects to her classmates as a bribe and as a way of boasting to them.
Her boastfulness, which was brought about by her poor performance in school,
also showed itself in her fondness for wearing brass rings on her fingers.
One more point must be made: The transgressions of neglected children are
not courageous acts. The transgressions are often executed in large gangs, which
further proves their cowardice. The main transgression resulting from neglect is
theft, essentially a crime of cowardice. But all crimes, by their very structure, are
an expression of cowardice.
If we wish to understand the context in which these children function and
their attitude toward society, we must observe two characteristics: a). Their
ambition as a sign of their striving for power and superiority, which is the reason
they seek ways to get ahead of others when customary ways are closed to them.
b). Their ability to relate to others is in some ways deficient, in that they do not
cooperate well, and are uncomfortable in a social setting. They tend to be loners

and are out of touch with the real world. Sometimes, they have no love left for
those close to them except for giving an appearance or adhering to a habit of
loving their families, and even that is missing in some cases. In the end, they
even act against their own families. They play the role of people whose social
feeling is deficient, who have not found the connection to others, and who regard
everyone as hostile. Mistrust is a frequently observed characteristic and they are
constantly on guard against another person overtaking them. I have often heard
from children in such circumstances that they had to be “shrewd,” meaning that
they had to be superior. Mistrust intrudes on all their relationships making living
together increasingly difficult. A cowardly deceit in neglected children grows
from a lack of confidence in themselves.
We are disturbed by an increase in neglect in our time and wonder what can
be done about that. Obviously, the step to take would be to intercede quickly.
Even in the most tranquil times, however, society has been unable to eradicate
neglect and criminality. The only answer was punishment and revenge, which at
best deterred, but never solved the problem. Society was only able to keep
neglect at arm’s length. But, consider the terrible fate of those who were driven
to crime by loneliness, and those who became criminals only because they lost
contact. This makes them into habitual criminals! It is also a sad state of affairs
when neglected children while under investigation are forced to live with other
neglected children and even with criminals.
One has to count on approximately 40% of criminals remaining undetected.
In the case of those neglected, this figure grows even higher. A short time ago, a
youth was convicted of murder and only the defense attorney knew that this was
the second time this person had committed murder. Among themselves,
criminals boast how often they were not found out. This naturally makes fighting
crime more difficult and encourages the criminal. It also allows him feel like a
hero, as appalling as this may seem.
The sad state of this affair is reflected in the position that society assumed
on matters of crime. Courts and the police are unsuccessful in their efforts, since
they approach this problem with methods that promise no radical improvement.
Foremost, the official agencies must become more people friendly. Institutions
must be established that will allow neglected children to return to a normal way
of life, institutions that will not shut them off from society, but rather make them
welcome. This is only possible when there is a complete understanding of what
makes such children unique. It will not do when just any person (such as a
former officer or noncommissioned officer) is given a leading position in an
institution for neglected children because of that person’s political clout. Only
those individuals should be considered for such positions whose social feelings

are strong and well developed and who have compassion for the children in their
charge. The essence of my presentation must be kept clearly in mind: In a
society such as ours where everyone can easily become an enemy of everyone
else, a condition prompted by our economic system, neglect cannot be
eradicated. After all, neglect and criminality are the product of our struggle for
existence, as carried out under our economic system. Its shadow falls over a
child’s psyche early in life, jolts his equilibrium, destroys his social feeling, and
engenders a craving for importance. It makes cowards out of us and
incapacitates our ability to cooperate.
To stem and eventually eliminate neglect would require the establishment
of a university chair for therapeutic pedagogy. Since there is generally so little
understanding about neglect, it is hard to believe that such a position does not
yet exist. Everyone who has an official function with regard to this issue should
be required to attend such an institution and declare what methods will be
employed to solve this problem. Such an institution should become a focal point
that can address every aspect of preventing and combating neglect.
In addition, and in affiliation with the schools, district counseling centers
should be established to contend with less serious problems. In serious cases,
such centers should help parents find ways to deal with this situation, since they
would otherwise be unable to find them.
Finally, teachers must become familiar with Individual Psychology and
with therapeuitc pedagogy so that they can recognize the signs of neglect. They
should then intervene helpfully, or counter the encroaching evil with tact and
with love. In addition, a model school should serve to provide practical training
for educators.
Index
A
above · 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 13, 14, 26, 34, 35, 40, 42, 48, 49, 55, 57, 59, 62, 63, 65,
70, 
71, 76, 80, 85, 90, 101, 106, 108, 110, 112, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 128, 135, 
136, 147, 158, 162, 169, 170, 172, 174, 176, 179, 181, 182, 185, 186, 187, 190
abuse · 35, 71, 88, 118 
accusation · 62 
accuse · 3 
achievement · 87 
activity · 2, 7, 9, 10, 28, 54, 55, 57, 87, 102, 103, 106, 114, 121, 147, 163, 191
active · 9, 11, 101, 109, 121, 144, 158, 172, 174, 190 
adapt · 31, 35, 128 
adaptation · 163 

addiction · 54, 114, 131 
addict · 10, 83 
adjustment · 53, 159, 184 
affect · 15, 20, 24, 32, 63, 96, 146, 193 
affection · 19, 41, 48, 124, 152, 175 
aggression · 10, 29, 33, 35, 39, 42, 46, 51, 54, 64, 68, 69, 81, 89, 90, 147
agoraphobia · 37, 44, 54, 62, 76 
alcohol · 20, 72, 73, 103, 112 
alcoholism · 54, 108, 188 
alibi · 100, 196 
ambiguity · 16, 44, 81 
ambition · 4, 16, 17, 19, 32, 33, 39, 52, 57, 66, 76, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 
104, 107, 111, 112, 117, 131, 136, 161, 195, 196, 197, 198 
ambitious · 13, 33, 58, 67, 74, 107, 111, 117, 160, 182, 187, 195 analogy · 48,
56, 103, 108, 146, 172, 173, 179 
anger · 5, 6, 41, 63, 67, 90, 104, 155, 159, 167, 190 
anxiety · 29, 30, 41, 54, 56, 59, 76, 79, 108, 110, 150, 160, 161 
anxious · 66, 113 
apperception · 27, 49, 101, 166 
arrangement · 6, 12, 14, 33, 34, 39, 47, 55, 56, 57, 59, 63, 64, 73, 114, 163, 174, 
183 
arrogance · 172 
art · 43, 63, 70, 76, 86, 122, 128, 130, 134, 135, 149, 159, 187 
artist · 16, 27, 30, 70, 76, 118, 121, 181 
artists · 166 
as if · 5, 10, 19, 22, 23, 24, 26, 40, 43, 44, 50, 52, 54, 73, 89, 93, 100, 101, 103, 
104, 106, 110, 121, 126, 127, 151, 155, 156, 159, 163, 165, 166, 167, 172, 173, 
176, 178, 179, 180, 182, 187, 195, 196 
assertion · 52, 63, 113, 159, 161, 189 
association · 27 
assumption · 3, 5, 13, 14, 23, 61, 65, 68, 90, 93, 112, 140, 144, 153, 171, 173, 
175, 189 
assumptions · 51 
asthma · 54 
attention · 3, 15, 16, 17, 29, 38, 40, 47, 51, 58, 70, 74, 101, 103, 111, 119, 126, 
128, 142, 146, 195, 198 
attitude · 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 31, 32, 33, 35,
36, 
37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, 51, 53, 54, 56, 59, 60, 61, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 

73, 74, 78, 85, 88, 89, 93, 94, 95, 97, 100, 101, 104, 105, 106, 108, 109, 114, 
121, 124, 126, 128, 139, 140, 158, 159, 162, 163, 166, 168, 169, 171, 172, 176, 
178, 181, 184, 185, 188, 194, 196, 198 
avarice · 31, 167 
avoiding · 124, 184, 187, 196 
avoidance · 51, 91, 111, 141, 143, 195 
awkward · 65, 128

B
beauty · 182 
becoming · 3, 8, 38, 41, 62, 71, 125, 165, 188 
being · 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 27, 29, 31, 35, 38,
40, 41, 43, 45, 46, 47, 52, 53, 55, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 74,
78, 
85, 91, 94, 96, 98, 100, 101, 104, 106, 108, 109, 113, 114, 116, 117, 121, 123, 
124, 125, 127, 128, 131, 132, 134, 135, 137, 138, 141, 143, 144, 147, 151, 155, 
156, 158, 160, 163, 167, 168, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 179, 182, 184, 
187, 192, 193, 194, 196, 197 
belief · 18, 19, 30, 41, 47, 77, 84, 87, 91, 99, 104, 110, 111, 124, 130, 133, 137, 
185, 187 
below · 42, 43, 49, 80, 158, 162, 176, 181, 182 
biting · 128 
Bleuler, Eugen · 1, 163, 176 
blind · 189 
Bloch, Iwan · 79, 80, 81 
blushing · 54, 94, 108 
boastfulness · 31, 198 
body · 5, 7, 11, 16, 21, 23, 58, 84, 124, 181, 190, 198 
Breuer, Josef · 144, 146

C
case · 5, 7, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
44, 45, 
46, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 78, 82, 84, 88, 
94, 99, 102, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 116, 118, 125, 127, 133, 
138, 139, 140, 142, 145, 146, 155, 159, 160, 161, 164, 168, 169, 171, 172, 174, 
175, 176, 179, 182, 185, 189, 192, 194, 195, 197, 198, 199 
cases · 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 38, 44,
45, 46, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 61, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72, 73, 74, 77, 85, 88, 89, 93, 97,
98, 102, 103, 104, 106, 108, 109, 110, 114, 118, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 135,
138, 139, 140, 141, 144, 145, 146, 147, 151, 154, 173, 183, 188, 190, 192, 193,
195, 196, 197, 198, 200 
castration · 173 
causality · 28, 52, 124 
caution · 15, 22, 34, 54, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 170, 182 
change · 20, 57, 81, 89, 94, 95, 110, 112, 124, 126, 137, 144, 161, 165, 169, 174,
192 
character · 1, 3, 10, 12, 20, 28, 31, 34, 37, 38, 42, 45, 48, 52, 65, 66, 68, 81, 82, 
83, 88, 90, 93, 98, 99, 100, 107, 109, 113, 120, 121, 124, 125, 126, 135, 146, 
159, 167, 172, 184, 188, 189, 195 
character traits · 1, 3, 20, 31, 32, 42, 52, 65, 82, 90, 93, 99, 109, 125, 135, 159,
172, 195 
characteristics · 7, 26, 27, 31, 34, 37, 41, 69, 88, 93, 94, 96, 99, 100, 101, 103,
108, 126, 141, 147, 161, 172, 174, 178, 181, 198 
Charcot, Jean-Marie · 146 
child · 4, 6, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39,
40, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 65, 66, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 
100, 101, 103, 111, 118, 119, 124, 125, 126, 128, 129, 134, 135, 158, 160, 161, 
162, 164, 165, 169, 173, 180, 181, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199
children · 3, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 46, 47, 58, 68,
77, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 94, 96, 97, 99, 101, 105, 109, 110, 111, 116,
121, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 133, 134, 135, 140, 141, 149, 152, 154,
161, 162, 167, 168, 170, 171, 180, 187, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199 
choice · 59, 94, 97, 105, 114, 128, 140, 163, 177, 189, 195 
Claudius · 179 

clean · 134 
community · 43, 57, 81, 93, 120, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 153, 184
comparison · 37, 114 
compensation · 8, 29, 35, 48, 93, 124, 164, 172, 174, 176, 188 
compensatory · 11, 35, 51, 91, 170 
competition · 84, 93, 195 
competitiveness · 31, 43 
complex · 9, 16, 41, 96, 99, 108, 121, 123, 147, 170 
compulsion · 12, 20, 38, 43, 44, 48, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 74, 103, 105, 106,
107, 
108, 110, 111, 113, 114, 145, 167, 174 
compulsive · 7, 8, 32, 43, 47, 53, 54, 55, 59, 99, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109,
111, 112, 113, 114, 167, 169, 172, 175, 179 
concentrate · 109, 138 
concept · 1, 17, 27, 28, 33, 40, 48, 49, 54, 79, 80, 93, 107, 114, 116, 118, 120, 
121, 122, 124, 146, 170, 184 
conflict · 10, 31, 40, 60, 92, 95, 98, 107, 124, 143, 147, 175 
conscience · 67, 131, 132, 135 
conscious · 15, 21, 34, 36, 38, 41, 53, 63, 76, 92, 93, 106, 108, 109, 136, 161,
173, 
183 
consciousness · 39, 49, 131, 135, 145, 159, 163, 166, 172, 179, 194, 196
constitution · 39, 49 
contact · 18, 43, 45, 101, 124, 126, 199 
contempt · 119, 186 
contrariness · 49, 172 
contribution · 60, 113, 153 
contrition · 154 
cooperate · 2, 42, 46, 61, 77, 98, 102, 113, 114, 198, 199 
cooperation · 1, 3, 12, 64, 96, 102, 107, 114, 123, 129 
courage · 6, 12, 31, 65, 87, 91, 93, 98, 106, 124, 159, 193 
courageous · 102, 116, 124, 194, 198 
coward 
cowardice · 24, 87, 93, 98, 99, 195, 196, 198 
craving · 86, 135, 173, 188, 194, 199 
craving for power · 135, 194 
creative · 15, 26, 70, 89, 117, 118 
creative power · 70, 118 
creativity · 35, 131 

crime · 12, 31, 54, 87, 94, 111, 153, 194, 198, 199 
criminal · 19, 52, 54, 71, 87, 116, 119, 135, 152, 184, 187, 193, 196, 197, 199
criminality · 88, 199 
critical · 9, 13, 59, 139, 150, 178, 183, 185, 188 
cruel · 131, 179 
cruelty · 30 
cry · 107, 152, 154, 180 
crying · 3, 6, 13, 65, 161, 165, 169, 180 
culture · 7, 15, 34, 35, 43, 46, 79, 85, 86, 96, 116, 128, 131, 132, 161, 186, 191
cure · 6, 34, 73, 106, 109, 129, 137, 139, 142, 143, 146, 167, 168 
cyclothymia · 10
D daydream · 24, 43 deaf · 71, 118, 145
deafness · 145, 152 
death · 3, 5, 41, 62, 105, 150, 151, 152, 169, 180 
defeat · 2, 5, 17, 18, 22, 33, 34, 43, 91, 106, 110, 130, 153, 154, 168, 177, 179,
181, 187, 196 
defense · 199 
defiance · 22, 24, 32, 38, 43, 45, 49, 78, 81, 89, 93, 109, 128, 160, 172
defiant · 19, 20, 25, 43, 135, 165 
deficiency · 28, 29, 140 
delinquency · 193, 198
delinquent · 127, 195 
delirium · 44 
delusion · 66, 68, 108, 130, 136
delusions · 42 
democracy · 134 
dependence · 94, 110
dependency · 35, 88, 91 
depreciation · 96 
depression · 10, 14, 33, 59, 106, 111, 143, 182
depressed · 13, 46, 101, 167, 193 
deprivation · 128 
depth · 163 
despair · 21, 94, 119, 152, 179, 189 
destruction · 9, 18, 133 
detour · 70
detours · 1, 21, 61, 67 
development · 2, 3, 13, 15, 16, 17, 20, 23, 25, 28, 32, 35, 43, 45, 52, 53, 57, 58, 
70, 81, 84, 86, 90, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 106, 108, 118, 119, 

120, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 132, 160, 163, 173, 192, 195 
diagnosis · 13, 109, 141 
dialectics · 98 
difficulty · 28, 68, 99, 145, 175, 179 
difficulties · 4, 13, 24, 84, 99, 100, 101, 123, 125, 155, 187 
discipline · 15, 125, 167, 187, 193 
discontent · 182 
discouraged · 9, 18, 52, 58, 85, 104 
discouragement · 6, 33, 66, 98 
disease · 4, 29, 81, 154, 169 
disparage · 30, 183 
disparagement · 11, 166 
disposition · 4, 30, 40, 52, 101, 106, 109, 113, 158, 170, 178 
distance · 33, 54, 55, 65, 70, 71, 74, 104, 107, 118, 168, 176, 182 distraction · 24 
distrust · 133, 172, 190 
dog · 176, 177 
dogs · 155, 176 
dominance · 12, 28, 30, 32, 35, 38, 44, 46, 62, 65, 74, 82, 85, 93, 117, 125, 130, 
131, 133, 134, 135, 141, 161, 163, 188 
dominant · 17, 20, 64, 65, 68, 167, 170, 187 
Don Juan · 164 
double vie · 52 
doubt · 3, 13, 20, 28, 32, 44, 46, 53, 55, 74, 80, 114, 158, 160 
doubting · 101 
dream · 12, 14, 55, 64, 65, 71, 75, 83, 118, 155, 159, 160, 162, 163, 164, 165,
166, 
169, 170, 171, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182 
dream theory · 12 
dreams · 6, 12, 13, 23, 29, 31, 36, 44, 47, 52, 54, 55, 71, 77, 83, 118, 122, 145,
158, 162, 164, 173, 180, 181 
dreams · 6, 12, 13, 23, 29, 31, 36, 44, 47, 52, 54, 55, 71, 77, 83, 118, 122, 145, 
158, 162, 164, 173, 180, 181 
drive · 42, 82, 93, 97, 101, 103, 121, 133, 135, 151, 179, 186, 187, 188 
drives · 7, 13, 19, 20, 33, 38, 48, 119, 171, 189, 197 
drug 
drugs · 54, 112

E
eating · 58, 59, 63, 65, 72, 73, 107, 124, 134, 160 
eating disorder · 107 
economy 
economic · 21, 29, 134, 193, 199 
education · 32, 81, 84, 129, 134, 135, 167, 194, 197 
educator · 15, 85, 88, 134, 172 
educators · 77, 97, 123, 200 
ego · 9 
egotism · 131 
emotion · 164 
emotional · 52, 63, 80, 121, 125, 140, 144, 146, 147, 163, 181, 182 
empathy · 11, 26, 140 
empathize · 4, 7, 17, 43, 110 
encourage · 11, 186 
encouragement · 6, 104, 135, 151 
enemy · 6, 12, 111, 116, 150, 152, 190, 199 
enemies · 93, 136, 153, 195 
energy · 38, 72, 98, 103, 129, 146 
enuresis · 5, 38, 107, 128 
environment · 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 16, 19, 23, 29, 35, 37, 39, 49, 60, 62, 73, 86, 90, 92,
94, 116, 121, 124, 126, 138, 139, 140, 171, 193, 194, 197 
envy · 31, 130, 167 
epileptic · 10, 117 
epilepsy · 5, 116, 120, 145 
equal · 10, 16, 32, 42, 46, 47, 48, 95, 98, 135, 171, 172, 176, 194 
equality · 22, 41, 47, 92, 96, 165, 172, 174 
equilibrium · 12, 145, 199 
error · 119, 187 
escape · 1, 5, 9, 13, 42, 43, 67, 88, 110, 113, 114, 142, 151, 155, 164, 189, 196 
ethics · 81, 122, 134, 172, 189 
evil · 167, 185, 200 
exaltation · 53, 94 
examination · 16, 17, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 31, 32, 74, 77, 85, 92, 105, 109, 112,
126, 137, 145, 152, 159, 185, 188 
examinations · 24, 138 

exclusion · 1, 41, 51, 100 
excuse · 10, 11, 14, 19, 24, 28, 43, 61, 67, 76, 114, 132, 151, 187, 195 excuses ·
10, 14, 19, 24, 61, 67, 114, 151, 187, 195 
expansion tendency · 52, 77, 189 
expectation · 17, 54, 168, 171 
expecting · 18, 62, 146, 164 
experience · 15, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 29, 31, 33, 34, 39, 40, 42, 49, 60, 66, 72, 77,
81, 84, 97, 104, 106, 108, 117, 118, 119, 125, 130, 132, 141, 143, 154, 159, 163,
166, 167, 168

F
failure · 6, 23, 28, 33, 38, 41, 55, 65, 86, 94, 102, 106, 128, 195, 196
failures · 3, 4, 8, 9, 13, 19, 51, 87, 127, 146 
fainting · 5 
fairy tale · 17, 47, 101 
family · 3, 4, 6, 17, 18, 20, 21, 32, 37, 38, 44, 46, 52, 53, 56, 62, 63, 65, 75, 86,
89, 92, 93, 100, 101, 102, 103, 109, 110, 111, 120, 121, 125, 126, 135, 141, 159,
161, 162, 184, 190, 197 
fantasy · 11, 14, 17, 49, 161, 163, 173 
fate · 3, 5, 14, 18, 22, 23, 24, 33, 34, 57, 87, 88, 91, 102, 115, 133, 146, 154, 160,
167, 190, 195, 196, 199 
father · 17, 23, 40, 45, 46, 47, 59, 78, 85, 86, 87, 89, 100, 103, 105, 106, 110,
111, 112, 113, 115, 118, 119, 128, 160, 169, 170, 171, 190, 192, 193, 197, 198 
fatigue · 43, 56, 73 
fear · 2, 6, 10, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 48, 51, 55, 58, 59, 62,
66, 76, 78, 87, 91, 100, 103, 107, 114, 119, 127, 130, 139, 150, 152, 158, 160,
161, 162, 167, 168, 171, 172, 176, 177, 182, 187, 188, 189, 193, 194, 195, 196
fear of being alone · 172 
fear of decision · 51, 66 
fear of falling · 161 
fear of society · 189 
feeble-mindedness · 144 
feeling · 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 21, 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 39, 41, 44, 45,
48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 56, 63, 64, 66, 67, 71, 78, 81, 86, 87, 88, 91, 92, 94, 99, 102,
105, 106, 109, 110, 113, 114, 115, 117, 119, 120, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 132,
133, 134, 135, 136, 141, 143, 153, 154, 155, 156, 161, 163, 164, 165, 167, 168,
171, 172, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182, 187, 188, 190, 191, 193, 194,
195, 196, 197, 198, 199 
feeling of community · 131, 132, 133, 135 
feeling of inferiority · 3, 4, 10, 21, 32, 35, 45, 53, 78, 81, 86, 88, 91, 92, 94, 105,
106, 110, 134, 161, 163, 164, 165, 174, 182, 188 
feeling of superiority · 9 
feeling of worth · 190, 191 
fellow man · 79 
female · 21, 22, 41, 48, 49, 58, 59, 80, 88, 93, 96, 99, 103, 104, 133, 159, 161,
162, 164, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 179, 181, 182, 189, 190 

feminine · 58, 158, 163, 164, 172, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179 
fetish 
fetishism · 39, 106 
fiction · 7, 10, 31, 35, 55, 161, 163, 164, 165, 167, 173, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181,
182, 190 
fictitious · 1, 7, 8, 13, 27, 28, 30, 35, 39, 42, 52, 64, 66, 69, 74, 92, 161, 163, 188
fictitious goal · 1, 27, 28, 30, 35, 52, 66, 92 
fictitious superiority · 8 
forget · 94, 112 
forgetfulness · 137 
form · 2, 3, 10, 11, 15, 17, 22, 31, 32, 33, 38, 49, 57, 60, 81, 82, 87, 88, 92, 99,
102, 110, 111, 126, 128, 134, 135, 139, 140, 141, 142, 146, 147, 154, 158, 159,
161, 165, 167, 174, 179, 184, 187, 188, 190, 191, 193, 195, 196 
freedom · 87, 126, 132, 153, 156, 158 
Freschl, Robert · 38, 78, 79, 82, 83 
Freud · 33, 40, 59, 140, 144, 146, 163, 164, 170, 173, 180, 181 
friendship · 8, 12, 32 
frigidity · 160 
future · 13, 16, 17, 20, 27, 32, 35, 37, 42, 47, 62, 91, 92, 94, 99, 106, 111, 123,
136, 138, 141, 147, 158, 160, 161, 166, 173, 183, 188

G
game · 94, 96, 151, 171 
games · 94, 102, 103, 133, 171, 174 
genital · 160, 173 
glance · 70, 84, 118 
goal · 9, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38,
39, 40, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 74, 76, 81,
85, 88, 91, 92, 93, 94, 103, 106, 111, 112, 117, 120, 122, 128, 131, 133, 136,
141, 144, 163, 172, 174, 178, 185 
God · 30, 117, 120, 132, 153, 162, 167 
Goethe · 84 
Gogol, Nikolay Vassilyevich · 70 
greed · 21, 46, 130, 131 
grief · 85 
group · 24, 74, 75, 96, 97, 113, 145, 155, 181, 185, 186, 187 
guidance · 20, 22, 178 
guiding fiction · 51, 174 
guiding line · 45, 64, 66, 69, 70, 74, 90, 92 
guiding principle · 49 
guilt · 33, 56, 57, 76, 81, 112, 113, 116, 117, 121, 153, 156

H
habit · 37, 38, 101, 196, 198
hallucination
hallucinations · 52, 54, 161
handwriting · 115
happy · 71, 134, 142, 151, 168
happiness · 14, 35, 90, 132, 133
hate · 38, 49, 67, 90 
hate · 36, 106, 136, 152, 153, 167, 195 
headache · 40
headaches · 40, 56, 73, 137, 159, 165 
heart · 6, 7, 22, 103, 117, 118, 120, 135, 160 
heredity · 4, 24, 54, 60, 97 
hermaphrodism · 162 
hero · 57, 107, 118, 120, 121, 135, 199
heroism · 117, 119, 120, 121 
hesitiation 
hesitating attitude · 14, 34, 42, 46, 54, 57, 59, 63, 66, 74, 94 
homosexuality · 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 174 
homosexual · 44, 47, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 104, 105, 106, 174, 189 hostility ·
9, 10, 11, 22, 35, 40, 43, 49, 77, 94, 172, 178, 179, 181, 193, 194 
hostile · 3, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 22, 31, 32, 35, 43, 46, 49, 92, 95, 106, 119, 124,
128, 144, 172, 178, 179, 185, 194, 197, 198 
human · 12, 16, 22, 26, 29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 56, 58, 61, 
63, 65, 66, 81, 82, 84, 91, 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 98, 102, 107, 110, 116, 117, 119,
120, 121, 122, 123, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 141, 147, 151, 154, 
156, 158, 170, 182, 185, 187, 192 
human nature · 26, 32, 46, 92, 110, 120, 123, 129 
humiliation · 2, 41, 155, 181, 197 
humility · 71, 115, 117 
hunger · 58, 59, 115, 152, 154 
hypersensitivity · 43, 44, 54, 75, 161 
hypnosis · 139, 142, 143, 144 
hypnotic · 64, 142 
hypothesis · 170 
hysteria · 39, 108, 114, 138, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147

I
idea · 6, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 27, 29, 47, 54, 57, 58, 64, 65, 77, 83, 99, 103,
107, 111, 119, 125, 136, 139, 143, 167, 175, 179, 180, 189 
ideal · 3, 8, 9, 15, 16, 31, 32, 34, 51, 65, 66, 69, 71, 79, 85, 92, 93, 102, 135, 174,
184, 192 
identification · 99, 100 
illness · 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 24, 32, 37, 41, 43, 44, 52, 53, 54, 55, 58, 61, 62,
63, 64, 67, 69, 72, 76, 102, 109, 110, 112, 113, 118, 120, 125, 137, 138, 139,
140, 141, 143, 145, 146, 147, 167, 169, 170, 178, 179, 188 
image · 11, 16, 45, 107, 117, 175 
images · 30, 166 
imagination · 31, 42, 43, 147, 176 
imaginary · 21, 45, 52, 163 
imitation · 77, 93 
impatience · 134 
impatient · 186 
impotence · 34, 55, 102, 109, 141, 150 
inborn · 185 
incest · 105, 135, 163, 170, 171 
incomplete · 21 
incontinence · 165 
indecision · 20 
independence · 16, 37, 87, 130, 197 
independent · 12, 31, 87, 124, 146, 151 
Individual Psychology · 1, 19, 26, 28, 30, 37, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 60, 61, 63, 66,
72, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 87, 92, 96, 107, 115, 122, 123, 124, 129, 132, 136, 137,
147, 158, 180, 183, 186, 192, 200 
individuality · 27, 44, 60, 66, 91, 127, 147 
indolence · 38, 87 
infantile · 42, 88 
inferiority · 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 19, 20, 21, 29, 33, 35, 41, 45, 47, 51, 54, 59, 75, 88,
91, 99, 105, 106, 142, 158, 160, 163, 170, 172, 173, 176, 179, 190, 195, 197
inferiority complex · 29 
inferiority feeling · 8, 29, 33, 51, 59, 158, 170, 179 
inner conflict · 115 
insatiable · 21 

insecurity · 35, 46, 48, 57, 63, 66, 86, 87, 91, 116, 128, 132, 158, 160, 167, 170,
171, 173, 187 
insight · 7, 28, 42, 49, 63, 84, 94 
insomnia · 56, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 137, 160 
intelligence · 113, 144, 183 
intelligent · 49, 110 
intention · 181 
intentions · 89, 116, 126, 132, 150, 178, 186 
interest · 16, 103, 105, 131, 192, 196 
intestinal disorder · 56, 124 
intolerance · 31, 43 
introspection · 174 
intuition · 26, 113 
irritability · 56 
isolation · 61, 106, 109, 110, 114, 121

J
jealousy · 133 
jealous · 187 
Jewish · 105, 198 
Jew · 69, 105, 198 
joke · 176 
joy · 117 
Jung,Carl Gustav · 33, 40, 80 
justice · 132, 134, 154, 155

K
Kant. Emanuel · 102, 121, 158 Kaus, Otto · 70 
Klages, Ludwig · 181 
Kraepelin, Emil · 68 
Kramer, Josef · 82 
Kretschmer · 7

L
language · 15, 68, 80 
laughter · 121, 127 
law · 28, 98, 105, 110, 111, 137, 168, 170, 192
law of movement · 28
laws · 27, 88, 97, 116, 120, 131, 185
laziness · 16, 17, 94, 196
lazy · 16, 17, 23, 127, 196 
leadership · 86, 149 
leader · 156, 195 
learning · 92, 149 
left-handedness · 5 
Lewandowsky, Max · 141, 148 
libido · 182 
life plan · 2, 21, 28, 29, 30, 31, 37, 39, 41, 42, 44, 48, 61, 94 
logic · 6, 9, 64, 65, 66, 104, 116, 117, 120, 128, 131, 134, 135, 171, 176, 193 
logical consequences · 6 
Lombroso, Cesare · 170 
love · 5, 10, 12, 19, 24, 30, 32, 33, 38, 41, 42, 44, 49, 51, 55, 64, 90, 92, 102,
103, 
109, 110, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 126, 130, 133, 135, 141, 152, 159, 
168, 170, 175, 182, 198, 200 
lying · 16, 17, 65, 87, 115, 117, 177

M
male · 21, 35, 44, 48, 49, 69, 80, 85, 86, 87, 88, 96, 100, 101, 103, 105, 133,
164, 165, 171, 173, 174, 179, 181, 185, 187, 190 
manicdepressive · 182 
mania · 1, 2, 5, 6, 10, 11, 164, 174 
mankind · 71, 130, 153 
marriage · 3, 18, 21, 28, 32, 33, 34, 44, 89, 100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110,
111, 141, 159, 161, 165, 166, 172, 184, 187, 190 
marry · 47, 104, 165, 166 
Marx · 29, 131, 134 
masculine protest · 11, 44, 46, 47, 48, 51, 158, 159, 161, 162, 163, 164, 166,
171, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181 
masculinity · 2, 32, 87, 89, 98, 159, 164 
masculine · 11, 35, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 88, 89, 97, 98, 128, 158, 159, 160,
161, 162, 163, 164, 166, 171, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 187, 190 
mastery · 86, 91 
masturbation · 47, 55, 56, 102, 105, 171, 174 
maturity · 9, 131 
May, Karl · 148 
megalomania · 9, 151 
melancholia · 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 13, 14, 54, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69
memory · 12, 28, 33, 55, 56, 65, 91, 133, 168, 169 
menopause · 45 
migraine · 54, 145 
mind · 14, 15, 17, 18, 22, 30, 32, 34, 39, 44, 45, 48, 64, 83, 84, 92, 94, 97, 107,
112, 116, 123, 124, 125, 127, 143, 161, 163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 169, 178, 179,
189, 196, 199 
mistrust · 8, 21, 22, 31, 74, 126, 130, 153, 187 
modesty · 31 
Moll, Albert · 161 
mood · 56, 66, 107, 113, 119, 167, 172, 178 
morality · 96, 135, 164, 184, 185 
morphine · 10, 54, 83, 108, 114 
mother · 4, 17, 18, 23, 28, 32, 33, 40, 44, 46, 47, 59, 62, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 99,
103, 104, 105, 110, 111, 135, 159, 160, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171,
174, 177, 178, 179, 190, 193, 197, 198 

motivation · 66 
motives · 16, 28, 115, 194 
movement · 7, 27, 33, 92, 104, 114, 132, 149, 155, 162, 178, 179 
murder · 63, 117, 120, 155, 199 
murderer · 115 
muscle tone · 6 
muscles · 75 
music · 24, 80, 120, 149 
musical · 80 
mythology · 56

N
nagging · 89, 111, 162, 167 
narcissism · 33 
nation · 132, 134, 150, 153, 154, 192 
national · 130 
nausea · 5, 43 
need · 9, 12, 14, 21, 28, 35, 41, 51, 54, 86, 91, 102, 106, 119, 121, 126, 136, 160,
170, 174, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190 
negativism · 44 
neglect · 24, 45, 129, 193, 194, 195, 196, 198, 199, 200
neglected child · 192, 193, 195, 196, 198, 199 
neuralgia · 145 
neurasthenia · 5, 56, 75, 114, 143, 144 
neurosis · 4, 5, 10, 18, 31, 34, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
58,
59, 60, 61, 64, 67, 69, 74, 75, 103, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113,
114, 
129, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 158, 160, 161, 163, 
170, 176, 178, 179, 187 
neuroses · 1, 5, 10, 11, 12, 42, 54, 60, 108, 109, 137, 139, 144, 145, 147 neurotic
· 1, 5, 12, 22, 23, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 39, 43, 44, 45, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
56, 58, 60, 61, 63, 74, 79, 89, 94, 95, 99, 101, 102, 104, 107, 109, 113, 114, 124,
127, 129, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 158, 160, 162, 170,
172, 174, 175, 176, 181, 188, 189 
nightmare · 182 
normal · 7, 10, 12, 23, 49, 53, 54, 59, 60, 70, 87, 98, 100, 102, 103, 104, 106,
107, 
108, 138, 140, 141, 143, 146, 167, 168, 171, 178, 182, 189, 191, 195, 199

O
obedience · 19, 31, 32, 43, 44, 49, 62, 81, 93, 132, 149, 150 
objective · 8, 28, 29, 32, 33, 84, 86, 106, 137, 183 
obstacle · 8, 53 
obstinacy · 30, 32, 46, 65, 140 
obstipation · 56, 128 
occupation · 12, 35, 128, 141, 143, 187 
old age · 124 
only child · 89, 125, 126, 160, 197 
opinion · 4, 27, 61, 79, 155, 162, 171 
Oppenheim (Hermannn and David) · 78, 82, 142, 145 
opponent · 9, 183 
optimistic · 20 
organ · 5, 6, 7, 15, 17, 43, 48, 52, 90, 91, 92, 135, 140, 143, 145, 149, 160, 162
organ inferiority · 6, 52, 143 
orientation · 30, 51, 147, 183 
overcoming · 19, 55 
overcompensating · 86, 87

P
pain · 34, 38, 40, 43, 55, 75, 90, 115, 141
palpitation
palpitations · 135, 160
pampering · 89, 102, 127, 160 
pampered · 23, 38, 43, 46, 91, 124, 195, 198 
pantomime · 5 
paralysis · 5, 39, 54, 77, 108 
paranoia · 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 54, 59, 61, 63, 68, 69, 82, 108, 176
paranoid · 9, 10, 11, 34, 68, 69, 167, 174 
parent · 102, 134 
parents · 5, 15, 17, 32, 35, 38, 54, 77, 84, 85, 94, 105, 109, 111, 115, 123, 125,
128, 129, 135, 140, 165, 190, 193, 194, 195, 197, 198, 200 
passivity · 11, 57 
passive · 67, 109, 111, 112, 153, 179, 190 
patient · 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 26, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42,
43, 
44, 48, 49, 53, 54, 55, 58, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 
76, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 116, 
123, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 
165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182
pattern · 4, 135, 141, 160, 161, 186 
peace · 22, 52, 69, 79, 81, 115, 137, 139, 145, 149, 152, 154, 156, 168 pedantry ·
55, 56, 74, 94, 108 
penis · 105 
perception · 16, 53, 83, 92, 99, 122, 123, 146, 169, 176, 181, 182, 193 perfection
· 31, 46 
personal superiority · 132, 135, 170, 181 
personality · 1, 2, 4, 8, 13, 20, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 38, 41, 42, 51, 52, 64, 69,
73, 
74, 81, 86, 91, 92, 98, 99, 106, 109, 110, 121, 143, 158, 181, 188 perspective · 3,
5, 6, 18, 20, 22, 23, 52, 53, 56, 60, 80, 85, 94, 96, 110, 124, 136, 
167, 183, 194 
perverse · 19, 98, 128, 163, 174 
perversion · 34, 43, 85, 135 
pessimism · 104 

philosophy · 24, 26, 88, 107, 133, 134, 135, 146, 184, 193 
phobia · 4, 44, 53, 138 
phobias · 56 
physician · 5, 25, 32, 37, 55, 58, 64, 65, 73, 74, 76, 101, 103, 104, 109, 112, 114,
123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 137, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 153, 161, 
168, 172, 173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 196 
pity · 156 
play · 5, 14, 35, 58, 74, 75, 83, 89, 94, 102, 132, 158, 162, 164, 165, 167, 177, 
188, 190, 194, 195, 196, 198 
pleasure · 31, 35, 38, 52, 71, 84, 90, 119, 128 
poet · 51, 71, 116, 118 
poetry · 56, 84 
politics · 62, 112, 132, 135, 149 
pollution · 56 
possession · 55, 133 
poverty · 35, 77, 189 
power · 2, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36, 41, 48, 49, 52, 58, 64, 66, 71, 93, 94, 100, 116, 
119, 120, 125, 126, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 155, 158, 175, 178, 189, 
194, 196, 197, 198 
practical · 17, 49, 51, 61, 70, 74, 81, 114, 118, 135, 144, 185, 200 
praise · 110, 127 
precocious · 162 
pregnancy · 89, 161 
prejudice · 88 
preparation · 20, 52, 86, 93, 104, 112, 136 
prestige · 3, 22, 51, 56, 62, 63, 69, 93, 102, 187 
pride · 30, 103, 120, 151, 196 
primitive · 80, 134, 160, 163 
problem · 2, 12, 13, 18, 19, 21, 23, 29, 45, 51, 55, 56, 58, 66, 70, 82, 87, 99, 105,
109, 116, 121, 123, 124, 126, 129, 138, 139, 146, 167, 170, 172, 173, 175, 176,
177, 184, 185, 186, 192, 193, 194, 199, 200 
problem child · 124, 129 
procrastination · 153 
profession · 19, 30, 60, 109, 138, 183, 189, 190 
prohibition · 155 
proof · 89, 124, 132 
prostitute · 118, 159, 187, 188, 189, 190 
prostitution · 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190 
protection · 73, 87, 91, 103, 147, 161, 166, 172, 176 

prototype · 160 
psyche · 11, 15, 18, 22, 26, 29, 30, 39, 48, 53, 56, 66, 81, 98, 124, 126, 131, 133,
136, 139, 140, 145, 162, 170, 173, 178, 180, 189, 190, 193, 194, 199 
psychic · 39, 42, 53, 109, 141, 144, 146, 162, 173 
psychology · 11, 16, 21, 26, 29, 30, 34, 40, 42, 52, 53, 70, 90, 95, 96, 101, 109,
121, 123, 131, 133, 136, 145, 147, 164, 167, 183, 184, 186, 188 psychological ·
2, 3, 4, 6, 16, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 37, 39, 41, 48, 52, 53,
56, 60, 63, 70, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 80, 83, 91, 93, 102, 104, 105, 106, 108, 110,
114, 121, 124, 125, 126, 128, 129, 131, 132, 135, 136, 140, 142, 143, 145, 146,
147, 155, 160, 161, 162, 165, 168, 170, 174, 175, 176, 179, 180, 181, 186, 188,
189, 197, 198 
psychosis · 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 18, 34, 39, 42, 49, 51, 53, 60, 61, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 83,
108, 129, 163, 170, 176, 187 
psychotic · 10, 12, 51, 52, 63, 64, 129, 176 
psychotherapist · 19, 42 
punctuality · 59, 166 
punishment · 17, 68, 73, 78, 87, 88, 89, 106, 116, 143, 150, 154, 198, 199 
purpose · 8, 14, 15, 21, 28, 34, 42, 49, 64, 90, 93, 95, 98, 105, 130, 131, 137,
163, 167, 170, 171, 179, 180, 185 
purposeful · 2, 69, 81, 113, 139, 146

R
race · 101 
rage · 5, 78, 159, 186, 197 rational · 86 
readiness · 69, 90, 101 
reality · 1, 2, 5, 6, 10, 20, 29, 31, 35, 36, 53, 54, 57, 60, 66, 69, 71, 88, 92, 116,
117, 118, 120, 122, 135, 136, 163, 176, 178, 180, 188 
reason · 1, 9, 10, 13, 17, 40, 48, 53, 64, 65, 68, 70, 77, 88, 93, 100, 101, 105,
108, 
109, 118, 121, 127, 139, 140, 167, 168, 177, 183, 195, 198 
reasoning · 49, 64, 114, 143, 146, 191 
recollection · 13, 39, 40, 44, 65, 119, 171, 178, 180, 197 
reflex · 146 
reflexes · 27, 90, 145 
rejection · 58, 61, 103, 104, 130, 153, 172, 190 
religion · 119, 172 
religious · 10, 107, 108, 111, 112, 131, 134, 152, 185, 198 
remorse · 155 
repression · 7 
repressed · 187 
resentment · 62, 68, 182 
resistance · 22, 61, 90, 110, 111, 128, 132, 133, 150, 153, 163, 165, 170, 179,
182, 
186, 187 
responsibility · 1, 8, 9, 11, 14, 24, 25, 36, 54, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 71,
73, 
74, 75, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 106, 114, 121, 123, 135, 136, 147, 160, 188
responsible · 4, 12, 24, 34, 43, 61, 62, 64, 74, 89, 121, 123, 183 
restlessness · 35, 115, 162 
retreat · 4, 12, 20, 46, 61, 66, 89, 110, 142, 152, 171 
retreating · 44, 59 
revenge · 6, 8, 19, 59, 63, 71, 94, 119, 124, 169, 170, 197, 198, 199 revolution ·
62, 71, 185 
revolutionary · 71, 118 
rigid · 21, 26, 53 
rigidity · 145 
role · 5, 7, 11, 18, 35, 38, 43, 46, 58, 59, 62, 66, 67, 75, 84, 85, 88, 93, 99, 101, 

102, 103, 104, 108, 125, 128, 141, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 168, 173, 178, 
179, 181, 182, 190, 195, 198 
rule · 29, 41, 55, 58, 73, 126, 134, 196, 197 
rules · 15, 16, 19, 21, 37, 39, 45, 72, 73, 96, 124, 134, 164, 187, 190, 191

S
sadism · 163 
sadistic · 43 
safeguarding · 1, 30, 61, 117, 134, 141, 176, 178, 179, 181 safeguarding
tendency · 61, 178, 179 
safeguards · 33 
safety · 110, 119, 161 
salvation · 115, 119, 150, 152, 154 
scheme · 13, 27, 43, 49, 80, 101 
Schiller, Friedrich · 71, 118 
schizophrenia · 174, 176 
school · 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 34, 40, 52, 53, 56, 66, 78, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
89, 92, 95, 97, 101, 102, 103, 124, 125, 129, 135, 141, 149, 168, 170, 192, 193,
194, 195, 196, 198, 200 
Schulhof, Hedwig · 38, 46 
science · 26, 29, 42, 107, 134, 154, 183 
second child · 126, 162 
security · 3, 31, 33, 43, 55, 56, 67, 91, 115, 121, 141, 160, 162, 166, 171, 173,
176 
seduction · 110, 190 
self · 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 21, 22, 24, 29, 31, 32, 41, 42, 47, 48, 53, 56,
63, 65, 76, 86, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 108, 110, 111, 112, 114, 116, 121, 123, 124,
127, 131, 135, 136, 150, 170, 172, 179, 180, 184, 188, 189, 193, 194, 196
selfconfidence · 13, 31, 48, 65, 86, 124, 127, 188, 189, 193 
selfesteem · 6, 12, 21, 41, 47, 56, 63, 86, 95, 124, 136 
self-evaluation · 1, 56 
self-preservation · 31 
self-worth · 3 
semblance · 45, 52 
sensitive · 4, 125, 127, 163, 187 
sex · 23, 25, 45, 99, 100, 104, 127, 161, 183, 185 
sexual · 17, 19, 35, 40, 42, 51, 52, 72, 80, 94, 96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 104,
106, 113, 127, 128, 144, 161, 163, 164, 173, 175, 177, 180, 183, 184, 185, 186,
187, 189, 190 
sexuality · 64, 94, 96, 101, 102, 127, 128, 135, 181, 190 
shame · 156 

shock · 13, 42, 110, 138, 139 
shyness · 47, 172 
sickness · 22, 154 
significance · 23, 34, 51, 58, 59, 77, 78, 93, 94, 101, 109, 111, 113, 124, 190 
significant · 7, 29, 30, 42, 55, 60, 66, 75, 87, 88, 93, 96, 97, 103, 124, 125, 126,
127, 128, 137, 141, 160, 162, 165, 166, 173, 180, 192, 194 
silence · 170 
simplicity · 73 
simulation · 141, 145 
sin · 102, 111 
skin · 142 
sleep · 6, 7, 11, 34, 43, 63, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 122, 152, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163
sleep disturbances · 74 
sleep · 65, 75, 76, 77 
sleepsleeplessness · 7, 13, 55, 59, 72, 73, 74, 75, 159 
social · 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27, 31, 32, 33,
36, 42, 46, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 68, 70, 79, 84,
86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 113,
115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 128, 131, 134, 135, 141, 144, 147, 153, 154, 159, 161,
163, 167, 168, 172, 175, 179, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 188, 189, 190, 191, 195,
198, 199 
social context · 1, 16, 27, 184 
social interest · 55 
social usefulness · 15 
socialism · 131, 134, 135 
society · 1, 3, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 19, 20, 23, 25, 36, 37, 42, 51, 53, 57, 60, 66, 71,
84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 93, 95, 96, 104, 109, 111, 113, 114, 118, 124, 131, 132, 133,
134, 135, 140, 166, 168, 172, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 194, 195,
197, 198, 199 
sorrow · 116, 130 
soul · 70, 90, 121, 131, 134, 135, 153, 155 
spasms · 108, 146 
speech · 67, 68, 113, 120, 167, 169, 172, 179, 193 
stage fright · 5, 54, 55 
status · 21, 44, 47, 62, 156, 186 
stealing · 78, 198 
Steinach, Eugen · 104 
Stern, William · 26, 62, 145, 148, 174 
stomach · 56, 62, 75, 76, 108, 124, 161 

stress · 183 
striving · 1, 4, 5, 9, 20, 22, 23, 29, 31, 32, 36, 43, 49, 51, 52, 53, 63, 93, 100,
110, 116, 119, 120, 121, 127, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 161, 187, 196, 197, 198 
stupi · 154 
stuttering · 39, 113, 146, 179 
style of life · 27, 32 
subjective · 6, 12, 26, 29, 52, 81, 88, 106, 141 
submission · 31, 118, 119, 133, 164, 168 
submissiveness · 21, 43, 115 
success · 8, 11, 38, 43, 137, 139, 140, 142, 144 
suffering · 4, 18, 28, 30, 33, 35, 39, 47, 55, 61, 63, 71, 73, 74, 75, 105, 112, 113,
118, 124, 128, 138, 144, 147, 153, 154, 167, 176, 182, 195 
suggestion · 47, 137, 139, 147, 181 
suicide · 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 23, 25, 27, 30, 54, 59, 63, 67, 135, 138, 155, 170 
superiority · 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 14, 18, 20, 22, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 39, 45, 46, 47, 49,
50, 52, 53, 55, 56, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 86, 92, 93, 95, 111, 113, 117, 126,
133, 165, 175, 177, 178, 182, 187, 190, 198 
superior · 10, 22, 34, 35, 54, 71, 103, 119, 126, 135, 164, 165, 166, 170, 172,
174, 178, 179, 182, 190, 194, 199 
superstition · 18, 19, 21, 167, 172, 187, 193 
suspicion · 23, 40 
syle · 27, 32, 68, 141 
symbol · 83, 120, 173 
symbols · 181 
symbolism · 80, 82 
sympathy 
sympathetic · 18, 151, 185 
symptom · 5, 40, 54, 58, 63, 68, 69, 107, 111, 128, 138, 140, 141, 143, 145, 147,
162, 179 
symptoms · 1, 6, 38, 41, 42, 44, 45, 49, 51, 53, 56, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66, 69, 72, 73,
74, 75, 76, 99, 107, 108, 109, 110, 113, 114, 125, 128, 137, 139, 140, 142, 143,
144, 145, 146, 147, 159, 167, 170, 172, 177, 180, 194
T tardiness · 55, 94
teacher · 16, 18, 22, 24, 77, 85, 103, 112, 122, 128, 133, 168, 192, 198 teachers ·
15, 17, 23, 87, 94, 129, 196, 200
teleology · 29, 170 
teleological · 30 
temperament · 20, 23, 37, 90 
tenderness · 32, 126 

tension · 4, 5, 29, 42, 46, 54, 76, 86, 108, 125, 126, 144, 179 
the question · 27, 28, 33, 61, 84, 90, 96, 97, 100, 104, 109, 120, 137, 143, 154,
158, 179, 184, 190, 192 
thinking · 32, 41, 43, 79, 132, 143, 159, 165, 167, 176, 178, 197 
thought · 7, 15, 16, 19, 26, 27, 38, 64, 66, 68, 79, 98, 103, 111, 112, 113, 127,
131, 150, 151, 159, 160, 163, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 174, 179, 180,
181 
time · 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 25, 32, 34, 37, 38, 40, 43, 44, 47,
52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 62, 64, 65, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 84, 85, 86, 94, 96, 97, 101,
104, 108, 109, 111, 112, 114, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129, 135, 136, 137, 139, 143,
145, 154, 155, 156, 161, 165, 166, 167, 169, 171, 172, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182,
185, 187, 190, 194, 195, 199 
timidity · 4, 18, 94 
Tolstoy, Nikolayevich · 71, 118 
training · 43, 91, 116, 195, 200 
trait · 10, 34, 52, 65, 88, 167 
traits · 9, 11, 21, 26, 27, 31, 41, 53, 63, 83, 87, 92, 100, 101, 109, 128, 131, 133,
160, 172 
transference · 2 
trauma · 29, 76, 141, 143, 145 
traumatic · 142, 145 
treatment · 14, 15, 17, 19, 32, 37, 40, 47, 55, 61, 64, 73, 75, 81, 104, 137, 138,
139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 156, 159, 160, 161, 164, 165, 169, 172, 173, 175,
177, 178, 180, 182, 195 
truth · 49, 54, 61, 108, 114, 115, 116, 119, 130, 131, 134, 136, 142, 144, 156
tyrant · 30, 134, 190

U
uncertainty · 94
unconscious · 14, 15, 34, 38, 41, 49, 53, 56, 75, 93, 101, 114, 161, 162, 170, 171,
174 
understanding · 1, 18, 19, 20, 26, 27, 28, 30, 37, 42, 51, 53, 70, 74, 77, 79, 80,
85, 
88, 92, 97, 98, 104, 109, 114, 118, 119, 121, 123, 126, 127, 129, 139, 140, 144, 
146, 152, 170, 174, 180, 192, 199, 200 
unfaithful · 40 
unfaithfulness · 68 
unhappy · 71, 118 
unhappiness · 105 
unique · 3, 13, 16, 29, 38, 44, 49, 66, 126, 127, 146, 189, 199 
uniqueness · 11, 37 
unity · 16, 20, 26, 56, 60, 91, 94, 120 
universe · 10, 91, 93 
upward striving · 91

V
Vaihinger, Hans · 31, 170, 180 
vain · 55, 121, 150, 152, 167 
value · 1, 4, 21, 39, 45, 59, 68, 86, 92, 134, 138, 143, 147, 165
values · 23, 94, 127, 156 
vanity · 31, 55, 117 
venereal disease · 186 
virtue · 155, 191 
vomiting · 43, 78, 140 
voyeurism · 105

W
war · 3, 73, 77, 84, 87, 98, 101, 108, 110, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 142, 143,
144, 146, 147, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 192 
wasting time · 127 
weakness · 4, 6, 10, 17, 28, 43, 44, 49, 52, 67, 87, 88, 99, 125, 132, 150, 175,
176, 177, 179, 188, 195, 198 
weapon · 4, 7, 28, 29, 41, 42, 43, 63, 67, 73 
Wexberg, Erwin · 78, 80, 82, 83 
Wild · 128, 155 
will to power · 93, 132 
willfulness · 140 
wish · 32, 36, 39, 40, 46, 79, 84, 90, 105, 118, 121, 125, 142, 160, 166, 172, 175,
176, 178, 180, 189, 198 
withdrawal · 5, 54, 174, 179 
woman · 18, 21, 22, 29, 32, 33, 41, 44, 45, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 97, 102, 104,
110, 111, 158, 160, 161, 164, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 176, 178, 182, 185, 187,
188, 190, 198 
work · 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 23, 34, 43, 51, 53, 54, 55, 60, 62, 63, 68, 70, 72, 73,
76, 78, 83, 87, 88, 90, 104, 111, 115, 126, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 156, 159, 194
world · 3, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23, 31, 32, 33, 35, 38, 42, 43, 44, 46, 52, 54, 60, 61,
64, 66, 70, 71, 74, 87, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 101, 102, 107, 109, 118, 120, 124, 132,
134, 135, 153, 154, 163, 167, 173, 178, 185, 187, 188, 193, 198

Y
yes-but · 52 
younger · 4, 17, 22, 32, 38, 44, 47, 58, 127, 135, 182, 195, 196, 198 youngest · 5,
41, 101, 126, 167, 194
youngest child · 5, 101, 126, 167, 194
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep
insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it
ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the
psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.

1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian
Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be
consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be self-centered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as
impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater

desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace
exaggerated self-protection, self-enhancement, and self-indulgence with
courageous social contribution.

