Portland State University 
Portland State University 
PDXScholar 
PDXScholar 
Applied Linguistics Faculty Publications and 
Presentations 
Applied Linguistics 
12-2016 
The Knowledge of Ideophones in Multilingual 
The Knowledge of Ideophones in Multilingual 
Contexts: A West African Pilot Study 
Contexts: A West African Pilot Study 
George Tucker Childs 
Portland State University, childst@pdx.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/ling_fac 
 Part of the African Languages and Societies Commons, and the Linguistics Commons 
Let us know how access to this document benefits you. 
Citation Details 
Citation Details 
Childs, George Tucker (2016). The knowledge of ideophones and multilingualism: A West African pilot 
study. Presentation, International Symposium on Ideophones / Mimetics, National Institute for Japanese 
Language and Linguistics (NINJAL), Tokyo, Dec 17-18. 
This Presentation is brought to you for free and open access. It has been accepted for inclusion in Applied 
Linguistics Faculty Publications and Presentations by an authorized administrator of PDXScholar. Please contact 
us if we can make this document more accessible: pdxscholar@pdx.edu. 

 
Ideophones are special. 
The knowledge of ideophones in 
multilingual contexts: 
A West African pilot study* 
G. Tucker Childs 
Portland State University, Portland, OR (USA) 
childst@pdx.edu 
  
Mimetics in Japanese and other languages of the world 
NINJAL Symposium 16, Tokyo 
17-18 Dec 2016 
 
 
 
 
* This work was supported by a Major Language Documentation Grant from the Hans Rausing Endangered Languages Documentation 
Programme, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. My thanks for that support and also to Jeff Good, Mark Dingemanse, 
Noriko Iwasaki, Friederike Lüpke, and Suwako Watanabe for inspiration, criticism and advice at various stages of composing the paper. 

(1) Motivation for the study 
The ubiquity of multilingualism and its somewhat uncertain 
characterization 
The claim for linguistic repertoires vs. languages 
How to evaluate and document a linguistic repertoire, economically 
and expeditiously 
Ideophones as functionally areal but formally local, thus a control for 
borrowings 
Testing the assumption: Is there any sharing in highly multilingual 
areas? Are ideophones less local than has been empirically shown? 
17 January 2017 
2 

(2) Overview of the talk 
  
Introduction and motivation for the study 
Background to the study: location, ideophones and areality 
Ideophone knowledge as a metric 
Evaluating multilingualism 
Methodology 
Findings and discussion 
Conclusion 
 
17 January 2017 
3 

Multilingualism in Foya, Liberia, 1970-72 
• At the intersection of three colonial histories: France, UK, US 
• Extractive industries, neo-colonialization, “globalization” 
• Kisi the historical language, the language of the farmers 
• Mandingo the language of markets and trade, 
• Resident pidgins: Liberian English, Krio, Guinea French 
• English the language of the schools in Liberia and Sierra Leone 
(American vs. British), French in Guinea 
• Other languages: Arabic, Fula 
• NGOs: UNESCO, UNDP, Israelis, Taiwanese 
17 January 2017 
4 

  
(3) the role of multilingualism in a community 
  
Tradition, tied to culture 
Needed in the marketplace for trade (tied to task) 
Communities of practice 
A survival mechanism, defense of the powerless 
At play in Foya, Liberia, in the “tri-state area”, 
fun, artistry, performance 
17 January 2017 
5 

(4) Mimetics and ideophones in print 
Mimetics in manga: 
http://www.japanpowered.com/anime-articles/manga-sound-
effect-guide 
 
Ideophones in folk tales: 
badamin, badamin; wasawusu; and krik, krik, krik 
Aardema 1975 
 
17 January 2017 
6 

(5) English ideophones, no special class 
 
higgledy-piggledy ‘in a messy way, without order’ 
willy-nilly? 1) whether one likes it or not. 2) without direction 
or planning; haphazardly. 
see Thun 1963: tick-tock, hurly-burly, and shillyshally 
galumphing ‘walking heavily or awkwardly– function often 
taken over by verbs in English 
 
17 January 2017 
7 

(6) Why ideophones? 
Their association with high levels of competency in a language, beyond the 
instrumental and immediately functional or simply linguistic (ACTFL guidelines) 
Register local identity, “Zuluness” in southern Africa (Childs 1998) 
Register local identity (Childs 1998) 
Ideophones acquired early (Doctor 1992); onomatopoeic forms acquired early in 
Japanese (Akita 2009) Spanish and English (Perry, Perlman and Lupyan 2015); 
sound symbolism aids learning (Lockwood, Dingemanse and Hagoort 2015; cf. 
Dingemanse et al. 2015) 
A functional category across all languages in the area (Sherbro, Mende, Krio, etc.) 
A robust category across those languages 
Resistance to borrowing: ideophones as lexical items are not borrowed, though 
their function may be (Childs 1994b) 
Perceptually salient (fun?) 
Ease of administration for testing ideophone knowledge 
17 January 2017 
8 

(7) Methodological desiderata for a 
multilingualism metric 
Results that are reliable and valid; results comparable across languages 
Extrapolation possible, sampling representative 
Buy-in from the community, active participation 
Sociolinguistically sensitive and informed, considers reigning attitudes 
and ideologies (including those of the researcher) 
No literacy required, fun and non-intimidating, more like a game - no 
test! 
Conducted in the volunteer’s language of choice 
Easy and quick to administer, easy to analyze 
17 January 2017 
9 

(8) A parallel to consider 
  
The Rapid and Anonymous Interview pioneered in Labov 1966 
i.e., the famous query requiring an answer of “the fourth 
floor”. 
Minimal intrusion, minimal equipment, minimal time 
 
17 January 2017 
10 

(9) A sniff test for Alzheimer’s, biomarkers 
and UPSIT 
A set of cards with scratch-and-sniff test on each. The patient scratches a little 
button and then smells. Like a kid's scratch-and-sniff book, there'll be different 
odors that are on each page. 
A low score on the UPSIT was able to predict memory decline in older adults 
about as well as the PET scan or a spinal tap (highly intrusive and labor 
intensive procedures). 
Explanation: odor signals coming from the nose processed in vulnerable areas 
of the brain, areas of the brain that degenerate early on in Alzheimer's disease 
Odor test scores also predicted which people most likely to develop dementia. 
Odor detection offers a quick and inexpensive way to help spot Alzheimer's. 
Other biomarkers: nerves of eyes 
17 January 2017 
11 

(10) Areality in (West) Africa 
• Areality is the rule rather than the exception (Heine and Leyew 2008, Heine 
and Nurse 2008) 
• A palimpsest of migration and conquest (e.g., Hair 1967, 1968, Ajayi and 
Crowder 1985) 
• Many linguistic features widely dispersed, e.g., S-Aux-O-V, labialvelars, 
‘meat’ = ‘animal’ 
• pan-West African: tag nyɛ/nye? ‘Right?’, hã-ã-ã-ã ‘extensive in space or 
time’ (Kisi, Bandi, Malinké, Mende, Bom-Kim, Sherbro, Soso; Krio, Liberian 
English, and even Guinea French) 
• pan-West African te-e-e  ‘extensive in time (with a consequent)’ 
• áwa ‘okay, right (assent)’ originally Soso/General Mande (?) 
• [sa ɾibe] ‘I’m coming (back).’ from French J’arrive. 
 
17 January 2017 
12 

(11) Maps of the area 
 
  
Atlantic the Atlantic languages 
Bolom / Sherbro = Greater Bolom  
Sherbro = Lesser Bolom 
17 January 2017 
13 

  
A. Limba 
B. Mel 
 
1. Temne-Baga 
 
 
a. Temne 
 
 
b. Baga Binari, Baga Koga, Baga Mandori, Baga Sitemu, 
 
 
Landoma 
 
2. Bolom-Kisi 
 
 
a. Bolom: Mani, Sherbro, Bom-Kim 
 
 
b. Kisi 
 
3. Gola 
C. Mansoanka 
  
Figure 1 The classification of South Atlantic 
 
17 January 2017 
14 

 (12) The monolingual perspective sees 
 
• second language (L2) users from point of view of the monolingual first 
language (L1) user 
• second language added on to the speaker’s first language, something 
extra 
• L2 user’s proficiency in the second language measured against the sole 
language of the monolingual 
• research questions account for L2 users’ lack of success in learning how 
to speak like a monolingual L1 user. 
  
17 January 2017 
15 

17 January 2017 
16 
(13) The bilingual perspective (“multi-competence”) sees 
 
• L2 users from the point of view of the person who speaks two or 
more languages 
• other languages as part of the L2 user’s total language system, 
each language potentially differing from that of someone who 
speaks it as a monolingual. 
• irrelevant whether L2 user’s final ability is identical to that of a 
monolingual native speaker 
• research questions about how L2 users use the other languages 
and how the languages connect in multilingual communities, not 
about how L2 users compare with monolingual individuals and 
communities. 

(14) The integration continuum of possible relationships in multi-competence 
(Cook 2003: 9) 
  
All points along a continuum 
Languages may be totally separate, overlap, or coincide 
Parts of the languages of a multilingual may have different relationships 
  
 
separation  
 
interconnection 
 
 
integration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 January 2017 
17 

Figure 2 The ACTFL spike 
 
17 January 2017 
18 

(16) Summary of techniques used by SIL 
  
A variety of techniques depending on the research question 
• oral interviews 
• self-evaluation tests 
• SRT (sentence repetition test) 
• SLOPE (second language oral proficiency evaluation) 
  
17 January 2017 
19 

Good’s paradox 
A problem in characterizing multilingualism / multi-competence 
• "How can we describe languages if we don’t know what a language 
is?” The problem becomes even more pronounced in multilingual 
settings … Logically, “multilingualism” implies more than one 
language, which, in turn, presupposes discrete languages, and gets us 
back into the same problem, but even worse. 
• How can we admit constructs of language into a characterization of 
what we don't want to make into a construct, i.e.,  either Language or 
a multilingual variety, and do so without admitting that such 
constructs exist? 
17 January 2017 
20 

(17) Some questions about African multilingualism 
  
What is African multilingualism? (Is it special?) 
How is it different from multilingualism in other parts of the world? 
What are the governing ideologies? Are they distinctive? 
What is the role of social factors in determining the extent to which an 
individual is multilingual, particularly gender and age? 
What is the role of local or ethnic identity? language and nationalism? 
What about the orientation of an individual towards the city and the 
country? 
Is there a non-multi-glossic multilingualism in Africa i.e., multilingualism 
w/o multiglossia, “monoglossic multilingualism”? Are languages not 
distributed as to functions, communities of practice, etc.??  
Does small-scale multilingualism still exist? 
  
17 January 2017 
21 

  
Ideophone 
Popular context 
Mende sentence 
Translation 
154.   liiŋ 
of being dark, overcast, or dull pɛlɛi bi gbiŋdingɔ liiŋ. 
Inside the house is actually dark 
155.  livaa 
of seeing something appear 
suddenly from a far distance 
ngi mɔtui lɔilɔ le i 
gbiyanga livaa kɔvihu. 
I saw the vehicle make a sudden 
appearance in the curve. 
 156. lɛgbɛlɛgbɛ 
of weakness when an object is 
ripe 
maani kpɛlɛ yɛnga 
lɛgbɛlɛgbɛ. 
The plantains have got weak and 
masticated under the sun. 
157.  lɛgbulɛgbu 
of being weak and feeble 
mangui gbɔwuilɔ i yɛ 
lɛgbulɛgbu. 
The mango got ripe, weak, and 
feeble 
 158. lɛpɛlɛpɛ 
of moving or lifting a heavy 
object slowly 
ndakpoi sia ti kɔwui lɛi lɔ 
lɛpɛlɛpɛ kɔ a gula. 
The guys mounted the box very 
carefully so that it does not fall. 
159.  lomɛ 
of walking silently or 
cautiously 
ndopoi sia ti yɛ a njia 
lomɛ. 
The children were walking 
cautiously. 
Table 1 A sample of Mende ideophones from Byrne 1993 
 
17 January 2017 
22 

  
(18) MTK sample discussion.mp3 
 
46. fio 
‘of swiftly moving around an object’ 
li bi pɛlɛi na gala fio bi komɛ. 
‘Go move right around that house quickly.’ (Byrne 1993) 
 
(Apologies for Krio-influenced Sierra Leone English, hopefully 
intelligible to non-native speakers of English.) 
17 January 2017 
23 

(19) Criteria for selecting ideophones 
  
• Iconicity. Onomatopoeic ideophones being the most iconic: the 
bleating of a sheep, the ringing of a bell, movement of air (featuring 
labials and labiodentals, e.g., fiyofiyo, fwaa) 
• Other formal features relevant? mix of Vs and Cs; vowel harmony; 
use of reduplication 
• Specificity of semantics: narrowness vs. breadth of meaning 
• Specificity of context of use, situational and linguistic 
• sensual appeal across five senses (ideophones preponderantly visual) 
• domains: color, physical dimensions (large-small), movement, sound  
• familiarity to subjects? 
17 January 2017 
24 

(20) Structure of the stimuli 
 
(Warm-up: Three practice ideophones; see Appendix A: Practice 
ideophones.) 
 
•Ideophone produced in isolation from a written list provided to the 
speaker (see Table 1). Ideophone pronounced twice by itself (out of 
context). 
•Ideophone used in one or more sentences, not necessarily the 
sentence provided in the thesis but sometimes another one felt to be 
more appropriate by Mr. Koroma. 
 
Subjects could listen to the recording as many times as they wanted. 
17 January 2017 
25 

  
Idph 
Popular context 
Mende sentence 
Translation 
14 
  bondi-
bondi 
 
state of being thin 
and small 
kwa lukui yale 
bondibondi. 
The monkey’s arms are very 
thin and small. 
7 
  bɛe 
 
sound of animals, 
esp. bleating of 
sheep 
nbalɛi a yee gula 
bɛe. 
The sheep is bleating. 
31 
  dɔmi 
 
underscoring dizzy 
or weak 
haata nya ngahu 
yale dɔmi. 
Today my body feels weak and 
dizzy. 
42 
  fesafesa 
 
of walking swiftly 
kina wai yɛ a njia 
fesafesa. 
The elderly man was walking 
swift and faster. 
30 
  dɔɔ 
sound of rain 
following 
consistently 
njei yejita wa yɛle 
dɔɔ. 
The rainfall today fell in a 
consistent and steady manner. 
Table 3 Ideophones from Byrne 1993 used in study 
 
17 January 2017 
26 

(21) The subjects characterized 
  
1. Speakers of Sherbro (and no Mende) 
 
 
5 
2. Speakers of Sherbro and some Mende 
 
 
4 
3. Speakers of Mende (and no Sherbro) 
 
 
5 
4. Speakers of Mende and some Sherbro 
 
 
1 
(All subjects spoke Krio and some spoke English.)  
(15) 
  
All of the speakers were well educated and ranged in age from 13 to 73.  
Nine females, six males 
17 January 2017 
27 

(22) Instructions to subjects (Consent form – see Appendix .) 
  
You will be asked to provide the meanings of this set of twenty Mende words, some of which you may not know, 
depending on your language background. Please, however, even if you don’t know, make the best guess you can at 
what the word means. There are no right or wrong answers. The words all come from Mende but may also be found 
in other languages you know. Again, in many cases you will just be guessing, but we are interested in what your 
guesses are 
  
The words can refer to almost anything but usually say something the manner or the way in which something was 
done. It can be the way something sounds or smells or tastes, the way it looks or feels, or even the way you feel 
about it. For example, the first practice word, bafubafu, describes the way a pipe is being smoked, the second, bau, 
describes the way someone bows insolently, and the third practice word, beleŋ, describes how disappointed or 
crestfallen someone is after making a bad deal. Some of the words may refer to sound you’re familiar with like the 
barking of a dog or rain falling, but most of them are not based on sound. 
  
Listen to them now. Let’s start with the practice ones first. [Show subjects how the device works.] As you see they 
are numbered Practice 01, Practice 02, and Practice 03 (located in “AM files” on the E drive). Start with Practice 01. 
Press the center part of the button once to hear the word pronounced by itself, then used in a sentence. You may 
listen to each recording as many times as you like. Simply press the button again. [Discuss.] Now let’s try the other 
two practice words. [Discuss.] 
  
Ready to begin? Remember that your responses will be recorded. After you play the ideophones on the recording 
device, you will explain what each one means. 
17 January 2017 
28 

(23) Some findings related to multilingualism 
  
Patterns of knowledge generally coincided with reported levels of linguistic 
competence 
Bipolar distribution of scores 
Mende speakers, especially older ones, got most if not all of them right 
Sherbro speakers who speak some Mende did better than those who did not 
Missing cell: Performance of speakers of Mende who spoke some Bolom 
(language shift) 
Ideophone knowledge seems to correlate with expected competence 
Useful in rural contexts such as Casamance and Lower Fungom, where 
ideophony robust 
 
17 January 2017 
29 

(24) Some findings related to ideophony 
  
Young people don’t know ideophones as well as adults 
Sound of a goat or sheep (bɛe) correctly identified by all (100%) 
Falling object ideophones (biŋ and gbai) (over 90%) 
Heavy rain falling (dɔɔ) (80%) 
Rushing air (fiyo-fiyo birds in flight) (73%) 
Areal patterns elusive but hinted at in shared knowledge across 
language boundaries 
Universality? Areality? 
17 January 2017 
30 

(25) Some improvements 
  
Better independent variable for knowledge of ideophones / 
multilingual competency 
Use ideophones from other languages in a multilingual area 
Combine and compare ideophone findings with language 
surveys and ethnographies 
Exploit the passive or absent researcher 
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) – 20 hours of carefully 
transcribed speech 
Include non-educated speakers in sample 
17 January 2017 
31 

(26) What methodology is best? 
  
A combination of qualitative and quantitative 
A combination of survey and ethnography 
Draw on both monolingual and multilingual models of competence 
(though how to do the latter unclear) 
Train and involve native speakers 
 
17 January 2017 
32 

(27) Further directions and research questions 
• Need to develop similar measures for Krio and Sherbro and ask, Do 
the same facts obtain with an extended pidgin (Krio, a second 
language for many) and an endangered language being shifted from? 
• Research socioeconomic asymmetries and see how they affect 
measures of multicultural competence 
• Develop an additional correlative for evaluating the validating 
ideophone knowledge as a measure of (socio-)linguistic competence 
• Discover how ideophones behave diachronically – likely exceptional 
there as well. Do ideophones resist change the same way sound 
symbolic forms do, e.g., Mithun 1982, Nuckolls 1999?  
• How can we represent multilingualism graphically? How can we map 
it?  
 
17 January 2017 
33 

References 
Available on request from the author, 
 
childst@pdx.edu 
 
17 January 2017 
34 

