
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 3

 
Journal Articles: 1910-1913
Elaborating on the Basic Principles of Individual
Psychology
Alfred Adler
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by Henry T.
Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2003 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 2565 Mayflower Ln, Bellingham, WA 98226. Tel
(360) 647-5670 or e-mail to HTStein@att.net . Web Site: www.Adlerian.us .
Published 2003 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-3-1
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Editor’s Preface 2003..............................................................................................
ii Chapter I:
Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter IV: Chapter V:

Chapter VI: Chapter VII:
Chapter VIII: Chapter IX: Chapter X: Chapter XI: Chapter XII:
Chapter XIII: Chapter XIV: Chapter XV: Chapter XVI:

Chapter XIX:
Chapter XX: Chapter XXI: Psychological Hermaphroditism in Life and 
the Neurosis [1910] ......................................................................1 Defiance and
Obedience [1910] ...................................................9 The Psychic Treatment of
Trigeminal 
Neuralgia 
[1910] 
...........17 
A 
Fabricated 
Dream 
[1910]
........................................................35 Adler’s Review of “On Conflicts in the
Child’s 
Psyche,” 
by 
C.G. 
Jung 
[1910]
...................................................................40 The Role of Sexuality in Neurosis
[1911] ..................................42 “Repression” and “Masculine Protest:” Their
Roles and Meaning for the Neurotic Dynamic [1911] ................................49 On
Understanding Resistance During Treatment [1911] ...........58 Syphilophobia
[1911] .................................................................66 A Declaration (Adler Breaks
with 
Freud) 
[1911] 
.......................74 
Organ 
Dialect 
[1912]
..................................................................75 Psychological Hermaphroditism and
the Masculine Protest – A Cardinal Problem of Nervous Diseases [1912]
......................83 
On 
the 
Theory 
of 
Hallucination 
[1912]
......................................89 
On 
Educating 
Parents 
[1912]
......................................................95 The Organic Substrata of Psychoneuroses
[1912] ....................106 Individual Psychological Treatment of Neuroses [1913]
........115
Chapter XVII: On the Function of Compulsion Conception as a Way of
Intensifying the Sense of Personality [1913] ............................130 
Chapter XVIII: Additional Guiding Principles for the Practice of
Individual Psychology [1913] ..................................................134 Individual
Psychological Findings From Research in Sleep Disturbance [1913]
.........................................................141 
The 
Neurotic 
Character 
[1913]
.................................................149 Individual Psychological Remarks on Alfred
Berger’s Hofrat Eysenhardt [1913] .........................................................157 
Chapter XXII: On the Role of the Unconscious in Neurosis [1913] ................170
Chapter 
XXIII: 
Response 
(to 
A. 
Maeder) 
[1913]
..............................................177 
Chapter 
XXIV: 
Dreams 
and 
Dream 
Interpretation 
[1913]
.................................183
Index 
.........................................................................................193
Appendix: “Basic Principles of 
Classical Adlerian Psychology” ...............................................216

i
Editor’s Preface
Editor’s Preface - 2003
The twenty-four articles contained in this volume cover a wide range of
topics. It would first appear that there is an absence of thematic consistency or
any pattern of development in the subjects that Adler addresses--he seizes upon
any issue that he feels to be important at the time. Yet there is no chaos in this
seeming whirlwind of mental activity. Each article reflects several theoretical
constructs of the bountiful palette of Individual Psychology. As a totality,
everything he writes about fits into one coherent, consistent whole. In a broad
sense, although he often seems to repeat ideas, if we study his sentences
carefully, we will always find yet another important, new nuance of meaning.
Adler’s article about Alfred Berger’s Hofrat Eysenhardt is especially
fascinating, since it deals with an author’s creation of a fictional character. When
I first discovered Adler’s writings, as a graduate student majoring in theatre arts,
I was astounded with the abundant parallels between Adler’s view of personality
structure and the dramatic theory of Constantine Stanislavksi, the great Russian
theater director. Stanslavski suggested that the actor and director analyze
fictional character using tools and terms remarkably similar to Adler’s constructs
for understanding real people. For example, Stanislavski’s construct of the
“superobjective” is nearly identical to Adler’s construct of the “fictional final
goal.” It is not surprising that two highly creative minds from different fields,
contemplating the dynamics of human behavior, would arrive at similar
teleological conclusions. Adler often commented that understanding human
nature was more of an art than a science.
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. More
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
I encourage the reader to patiently follow Adler’s early efforts to articulate
his full theory. It is a fascinating journey of positing , correcting, and refining his
insights into the mystery of human nature.
ii
Chapter I
Psychological Hermaphroditism in Life and in the Neurosis1 2
(On the Dynamic and Therapy of Neurosis)
[1910]
I. Facts concerning psychological hermaphroditism

From among the authorities who investigated the problem of
hermaphroditism in humans, almost everyone who dealt with this subject
touched on or emphasized the fact that among the derivative sexual
characteristics often, or even regularly, were found character traits and
psychological attributes of the other sex. These authorities include Krafft-
Ebbing, Dessoir, Halban, Fliess, Weininger, Freud, and Hirschfeld. Among
these, Freud in particular studied hermaphroditism in neurosis. He established
that in no cases of neurosis were hermaphodite traits absent. Since then, I have
been able to affirm this observation. It has proven to be the frequent sign of
irreconcilability with sexuality. In a short paper3 I pointed out the relationship
between prostitutes and homosexuality, and Fliess, even before that, expressed
the opinion that the male neurotic became afflicted from the suppression of his
female traits, and the female from the repression of her male traits.
A thorough examination of neurotics with regard to their hermaphroditic
traits had the following results: 
1. Physical characteristics of the opposite sex are noticeably frequently found.
Thus, female dispositions were seen in male neurotics and those of males in
females.4 Also, opposite secondary sexual characteristics, in particular inferior
genital organs, such as hypostasis, paraurethral, small penises, small testis,
cryptorchidism, etc. On the other hand there are among other characteristics
enlarged labia minora, large clitoris, and infantile sexual organs5 which usually
are accompanied by indications of inferiority in other organs. 
No evidence can probably be found that these physical manifestations originally
were connected with an opposite sexual psyche in the carrier, as Fliess assumes
and as Krafft-Ebbing explained, whereby the female psyche is more strongly
developed in the male, and the male psyche is stronger in the female. However,
it can be shown that the motility and physical development of children with
inferior organs and glands is not within the norm, and that their growth and
functional capabilities show deficiencies. Furthermore, illnesses and weaknesses
appear at the beginning of their development, but often later give way to robust
health and strength. 
These objective manifestations frequently give rise to a subjective feeling of
inferiority, thereby impeding the child's independence, increasing his need for
support and affection, and will often characterize his personality into his later
years. Weakness, ungainliness, awkward behavior, sickliness, childhood
disorders such as enuresis, incontinence, flatulence, stuttering, shortness of
breath, altitude sickness, eye or hearing deficiencies, inborn or early acquired
deformations, striking ugliness, etc. can cause a permanent feeling of inferiority

when facing a stronger person, in particular the father, and extending even
beyond the father's life span. Significant traits of obedience, subjugation, and
unbridled devotion, especially toward the father, apply to many children,
particularly those who have a tendency toward neurosis. This often places such
children in roles that seem unmanly to them. All neurotics have endured a
childhood in which they were filled with doubt regarding their manliness. To the
child, the renunciation of manliness seems synonymous with femininity6 thus
creating a wide range of original childish value judgments, according to which
every form of unbridled aggression, activity, ability, power, courage, freedom,
wealth, assault, and sadism is seen as manly; all inhibitions and shortcomings
(also cowardice, obedience, poverty, etc.) can be regarded as feminine.7
One can now easily see that the child for a time plays a dual role. On the one
hand he (or she) shows tendencies of being submissive to parents, teacher, and
caregiver, and on the other hand there are desires, fantasies, and actions that
express the child’s striving for independence, free will, and esteem ("the little
bigman"). Since the former more often are displayed by girls and women and the
latter more by boys and men 8 it should not be surprising that the child's view of
the world often turns into value judgments that are not unlike those of adults.
Thus, they view inhibiting aggression as feminine, and regard heightened
aggression as masculine. 
This internal schism in the child, a pattern and central for the most important
psychological phenomena, i.e. that of the neurosis, the erroneously called split
consciousness that actually is the starting point for doubt, can take many paths
later in life. As a rule, one will find that the attitude of the individual will at
times tend more toward the "feminine" and at times more toward the
"masculine" side, perhaps always alongside efforts and striving toward
reinforcing an image that arises from within; the male characteristics hinder a
complete unfolding into a feminine role; the female characteristics prove to be
an impediment to behaving fully as a male. This mostly leads to a compromise: a
female demeanor using masculine means (for example, a manly shyness and
submissiveness and a manly masochism, homosexuality, etc.); a male role using
female means (female emancipation tendencies, polyandry, obsessive-
compulsive neurosis as a female condition, etc.). Else, one finds side by side
what seem like uncontrolled "male and female" character traits. 
In neurosis, where there is a constant incongruity of such often excessively
reinforced character traits, examining and diminishing these tendencies, as well
as uncovering psychological hermaphroditism, is made possible by Individual
Psyhcology. However, as a precondition, the physician cannot bring his own

value judgment about male and female traits into the analysis. He must track
down the patient's feelings so as to be able to empathize with him.
1 Originally published as "Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben
und in der Neurose" in Fortschr. Med., Vol. 28, pages 486-493, 1910.
Republished in Heilen und Bilden, pages 74-83, 1914. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Adler, "Träume einer Prostituierten" (Dreams of a Prostitute), Zeitschrift für
Sexualwissenschaft, 1908. 
4 Later taken by Kretschmer as a sign of a "schizoid" form, which is quite
similar to what I described as a "nervous character." 
5 See Adler, Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen, Urban &
Schwarzenberg, Berlin and Vienna, 1907. 
6 By the way, this applies not only to the child, but to the greater part of our
cultural awareness. 
7 See "Der Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose" (The Aggression
Drive in Life and in the Neurosis) 
8 To the child being "bad" often means manly.
II. On the Intensification of Psychological Hermaphroditism. The Masculine
Protest as Final Goal9
As a starting point for the female tendencies of the neurotic, we
counterpoised, above, the feeling of weakness on the part of children when
confronting adults, which creates a dependency, a desire for affection, a
psychological and inner lack of independence and a feeling of subordination. We
also pointed out above how these traits, when there is an early discovered and
subjectively felt organ inferiority (motor weaknesses, ungainliness, sickliness,
childhood impediments, slow development, etc.), are expressed with greater
intensity, and how this then leads to an increased dependency. We also showed
how this intensified feeling of being little and weak (the root of micromania)
leads to aggression inhibition and thereby to manifestations of anxiety. From that
standpoint it then becomes easy to show how uncertainty about one's own
abilities creates doubts causing a vacillation that is influenced at times more by
"female" tendencies (fear and related signs), and at other times by those of the
"male" (aggression, compulsive-obsessiveness). The structure of neurosis
(neurasthenia, hysteria, phobia, obsessive-compulsive neurosis, paranoia, etc.)
shows us, and is manifested best of all by obsessive-compulsive neurosis, the
variedly intertwined "female" lines, carefully covered up and built upon by
hypertrophic "male" desires and striving.

This masculine protest develops compulsively as overcompensation
because the "female" tendency, seen from the perspective of a child's value
system, is regarded contemptuously as a childhood disorder and is held on to
only in a subliminal form and only because it offers outward advantages (love of
family, affords freedom from punishment, gains praise for obedience and
subjugation, etc.). All forms of internal compulsion in the normal person as well
as in neurotics can be derived from this attempt at a masculine protest. Where it
succeeds in gaining ascendancy, it obviously increases masculine tendencies
enormously, ascribes to them the highest, often unattainable goals, develops a
greed for gratification and triumph, spurs on all capabilities and egotistical
drives, increases envy, ambition, avariciousness, and creates an inner unrest that
makes unbearable any external pressure, dissatisfaction, and humiliation.
Defiance, revenge, resentfulness are its constant companion and through
extensively increased sensitivity, it causes continuous conflicts. Normal as well
as pathological megalomania and daydreams are created by such an overly
powerful masculine protest, and are felt as temporary surrogates for drive
gratification. However, even this dream stage falls under the dominance of the
masculine protest. Every analysis of a dream shows us the tendency to retreat
from feminine and to advance toward masculine tendencies.
9 See Schiller, Männerwürde: "I am a man," etc.
If the patient sees himself cut off from all personal success, if he fails in
gratifying his oft too far reaching masculine protest10 in one major direction,
which also constitutes the sex drive, the result is the outbreak of a neurosis
which has been in preparation for some time. He then tries gratification of his
masculine ambition along secondary paths, by shifting it to another person or to
other goals. Or, inhibiting and blocking out become more intensive and the
transformation of the aggression drive occurs as I described it in
"Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose." In terms of the structure of the
neurosis, all these variations take on great importance. In the patient's mind the
female, masochistic tendency suggests and creates the female, masochistic
picture of the neurosis. At the same time, the patient, feeling extremely sensitive
to sinking into "femininity," is being equipped to ward off denigration,
subjugation, derogation, and mudslinging. The weakness, the feeling of
inferiority, the female line, is covered up or masked with compromises, or made
unrecognizable by sublimation and symbolizing. However, these characteristics
gain in breadth and intensity, either permanently or temporarily, and appear in
abulia, in disgruntlement, in depression, in fear, pain, in fearful expectations, in
doubt, in paralysis, impotence, insufficiency, etc.

10 This applies equally to women as it does to men. The masculine protest
in the woman is mainly veiled and transformed and seeks its triumph with
female means. In analysis one often finds the desire to be transformed into a
man. “vaginismus, frigidity, and many well known neurotic manifestations stem
from this egoistic tendency. If one follows the "dynamic viewpoint" that I
introduced, one will soon recognize that all the manifestations of striving are the
same, to somehow distance oneself from the feminine direction in order to attain
the male direction so that the psychological localization of the neurotic
symptoms are seen at times as more female and at other times more male.
Accordingly, every neurotic symptom signifies a hermaphrodite. The neurotic
compulsion indicates the masculine protest; to succumb to the compulsion is
feminine. When the patient suffers from compulsive blushing (erythrophobia),
for example, the patient reacts with (male) anger and with displeasure at feeling,
or fearing, disparagement. However, the reaction takes place with female
mannerisms, with blushing or a fear of blushing. The underlying idea is: "I am a
woman and want to be a man." This is how the neurotic protects himself from
having to make decisions that seem dangerous by, among others, creating his
own obsession instead of assuming one that is foreign. See Furtmüller,
Psychoanalyse und Ethik, E. Reinhadt, Munich, 1912.
The feeling of inferiority whips up drives, increases desires immensely,
causes hypersensitivity, and creates a craving for gratification that is incapable
of enduring tension leading to a constant overheated feeling of expectation and
fear of what is to come. In this state of hypertrophic craving, in such mania for
success, in this mad display of the masculine protest, there lies the kernel of
failure, albeit also the predestination for genius and artistic achievements. The
neurosis appears where the masculine protest founders along a main line.
Apparently, the female traits become more prominent, although only under a
continuous rise of the masculine protest and pathological attempts for a
breakthrough to male sidelines. The outcome of such attempts varies. They
either succeed without gaining true gratification and harmony, or they fail as is
often the case in neurosis, forcing the patient ever further into the female role,
into apathy, into fear, into mental, physical, and sexual insufficiency, etc. which
are exploited as means for power.
The examination of a completed neurosis will, therefore, always uncover the
following traits and their dynamic qualities:
a. Traits that are valued as female 
b. A hypertrophic masculine protest c. Finding a compromise between a. and b.
The failure of the masculine protest in cases of psychological
hermaphroditism is supported, or even outright caused, by the following factors: 

1. An excessively strained protest. The goal in general, or in terms of the
patient's abilities, is unattainable. 
2. Overestimating the goal. Such overestimating (Don Quixote, for example)
occurs unawares and tendentiously so as not to disturb the patient's heroic role.
This naturally leads to disappointments. 
3. The female tendencies take over and inhibit aggression. Often at a most
important moment, or just before performing a task, the "female" feeling is
awakened in the sense of an exaggerated belief in authority, out of doubt, or
from fear, leading to humiliation or subjugation that is dependent on a constantly
building protest. It can also turn doubt, fear, etc. into a weapon causing
subjugation ad absurdum. 
4. An active, easily shifting, feeling of guilt11 stemming from childhood, an
outgrowth of the social feeling, that advances female traits and frightens the
patient with the possible consequences of his actions (Hamlet's nature).
In children, I must consider other reinforcements of the female line that
more or less exceed the physiological and regularly exaggerate the masculine
protest in the way that I described it. A carefully researched analysis of a
considerable number of male and female neurotics made it possible for me
generally to recognize these causes and their mechanisms allowing me to speak
with confidence of the general validity of these findings. This becomes even
more evident when by uncovering these causes a recovery from nerurois begins.
The following factors contribute to reinforcing female traits and, in
roundabout ways, secondarily reinforcing the masculine protest: 
1. Fear of punishment. Particularly effective are selfpity, skin hyperesthesia, a
strict disciplinary upbringing, and physical punishment. The following are
considered male reactions: indifference to punishment, a defiant indifference,
pain endurance, seeking out torment (seeming masochism)12, boasting by the
patient of his capacity to endure, erections, and sexual activity under the threat
of punishment which, at times, as a result of the individual's peculiar nature can
have been physiologically prepared for. (See Asnaourow, "Sadismus und
Masochismus," E. Reinhardt, Munich.) 
2. Looking for sympathy by demonstrating one's own weakness and suffering.
The masculine protest is manifested in delusions of grandeur (to compensate for
the female delusion of puniness), indignation at other people's compassion,
laughing instead of crying, cynicism, struggling against affection, etc. ("self-
ridicule"). Mixtures of these occur regularly. Childhood disorders such as
enuresis, stuttering, but also sickliness, headaches, loss of appetite, etc. can be
fixated by counting on sympathy or out of spite. Almost regularly, however,

there are compromises. The male reaction employs weakness as a way to anger
the parents, and with defiance holds on to disorders so as not to relent. This can
clearly be seen in efforts to continue bedwetting and other childhood disorders.
Many enuretic dreams show an attempt at trying to act out maleness (to urinate
while standing, using a urinal, urinating in a long stream, urinating numbers into
the sand.) Also, in a reaction to (1) above, often employing a subterfuge, acting
as if the toilet were there. 
3. False ideas about the sexual role, ignorance about the differences between
males and females, children’s ideas about the possibility of boys transforming
into girls and vice versa. Often there are obscure thoughts about being gay. As
long as the child is uncertain about sexual differences, doubt is created or
reinforced where there are particular physical characteristics, a faulty
upbringing, critical comments by others (when boys are dressed like girls, when
boys have long hair or girls with short hair, where there is communal bathing
with persons of the opposite sex, expressions by parents of being disappointed
with their child’s sex, etc.). In the same way confusion is caused by folk tales
about birth, erroneous ideas about birth (anal birth, pregnancy caused by kissing
on the mouth, by poison, or by touching.). Early perverse sexual experiences or
fantasies in which the mouth or the anus play a sexual role help to blur the
distinction between males and females leading to possible tendentious fixations. 
Homosexuality often is caused by an uncertainty about sexual roles.
Homosexual men in their childhood were able to think of themselves in female
roles. If, as always, the masculine protest follows then the sexual transformation,
aggravated by a constant feeling of uncertainty, takes place in the homosexual to
evade the feared female. 
In general, this can be understood only when one examines the masculine
protests. Obsessive masturbation, for example, like every other obsession where
the attempt is to act quasi-masculine, can be interpreted as a way of evading
one's responsibilities. The same tendency is found in seminal emissions and in
ejaculatio praecox. Haste, as well as accompanying manifestations (erection
problems, homosexual dreams), betray the hidden weakness. In the analysis of
dreams, attention has to be paid to nightmares, dreams of being constricted, of
falling and frightening dreams, those which depict a female line and are in a
category of experiencing defeat. Yet, in almost all cases the male tendency
forces itself through (screaming, fleeing, awakening)--as protest. 
Exhibitionist traits are promoted by the tendency to appear as a man despite
feelings of uncertainty about acting like a man. For girls or women to dispense
with female shame, it seems enough to reject female clothing. Narcissism
characterizes the same tendency for power. In fetishism the nonmasculine

tendency normally comes to the fore (displaying a preference for undergarments,
blouses, aprons, jewelry, braids, etc., rather than for one’s partner). However,
this is always accompanied by the male tendency to avoid domination by the
partner. Hand and shoe fetishism, originally a hermaphroditic expression, like
every other form of autoeroticism focuses on secondary matters and assumes by
the act of distancing from the male role its female, masochistic character.
Evading as a factor is always present before a presumably dangerous situation
arises. 
Originally, masochistic traits, as well as hypochondria and an exaggerated
sensitivity to pain belonged to the "female" trait of enduring. Like every other
psychological manifestation there are always other, secondary, determinations,
such as the extent of the suffering, etc., and evading fulfilling life's tasks in
anticipation of a defeat. 
Clearly, a child in portraying a female line will adopt the mother's traits, and in
exhibiting the male line will adopt those of the father ("I have my father's build,"
etc.) The masculine protest stirs up the wishes of the child who seeks to overtake
the father in every respect, comes into conflict with him, and thus, in time, arise
secondary traits of imaginary desires in the mother's direction (Oedipus). 
It is the function of pedagogy and of neurosis therapy to uncover this dynamic
and to raise it to consciousness. With this disappear the tendentious hypertrophy
as well as the combative antithesis to "female and male traits." A mature value
system replaces that of the child.13 Hypersensitivity gives way and the patient
learns to bear the tensions of the outside world without losing his equilibrium.
The individual, who earlier was "a toy for dark and unconscious emotions,
becomes a conscious master over his feelings, able to endure them."14
11 See Adler, "Ueber neurotische Disposition." 
12 See Wexberg, " Rousseau" in this volume. 
13 In the same way, the anti-social processes, the splitting of the consciousness,
ceases. 
14 Translator’s note: there is no attribution for this quotation.
Chapter II
Defiance and Obedience1 2
[1910]
For those of us who are engaged in Individual Psychology and thereby
possess such an important aid for comprehending the psychological conditions
and characteristics that develop from early childhood, the underlying
significance of pedagogy for the development of a healthy psyche is perfectly
clear. Every analysis illuminates the connection between the influence of

upbringing and the unfolding of neurotic manifestations. I have no doubt that
this direction of research will enormously extend the realm of pedagogy, and
conversely will draw out of the experience gained in education its most valuable
confirming evidence and support. The majority of the works in Individual
Psychology to date have naturally been written from the medical standpoint.
Nevertheless, those works take into consideration pedagogical questions to such
an extent, or placed them so much in the foreground, that they can also be
presented to non-medical persons, parents, teachers, and psychologists.
Individual Psychology's particular suitability for the development of
pedagogy arises from its view of the nature of character. I can report here only
on the results based on extensive experiences, particularly my own findings,
which reveal that certain character traits can be derived directly from a particular
organ system and its associated drives. Thus, curiosity stems from the optical
organ and its drives, later turning into a thirst for knowledge. The digestive
organs produce the character of gluttony, followed by a craving for food which,
when money becomes a factor, causes avariciousness. The skin in certain
particular places creates constant desires for touching and for gaining sensual
pleasure. Organs for excretion, originally devised only for voiding, at first work
in conjunction with other drive systems but then, by means of an almost prenatal
operation of organs, a transformation occurs initially introduced by a strong
subordination of the entire drive system to the goal of gaining power and then
for a stronger sense of personality. This takes place toward the end of the second
year. The child has become aware and employs his conscious self by adjusting
his life and drive to power.
The history of civilization, as is the case with the development of the
individual, reflects the same phases of development. Generally, the things that
gratify are given preference and become established; they are also those that
either correspond to a number of organ drives, or avoid displeasure.
Nourishment should not only taste good, but should also be pleasing to the eye
and nose. Clothing should not only keep the skin from being irritated and protect
against the cold and wet, but also be pleasing to the eye. A child's behavior at the
first developmental stage is entirely selfish, seeking only pleasure. His drive
system is governed in its expansion by an inner combination of action, by drive
interactions and occasional inhibitions, and by personal experiences and training.
Nevertheless, differences, the beginnings of idiosyncrasies, and ways of
thinking, can be discerned. Soon curiosity, and the need for nourishment, or
some other drive, becomes the primary axis in the inner life. Then weaknesses or
characteristic preferences of one of the drives (auditory, optical, smell) become
so prominent that a unique character form arises.

1 Originally published as “Trotz und Gehorsam” in Monatsh. Pddag.
Schulpol., Vol.2, pages 321-328. Republished in Heilen und Bilden, pages 84-
93, 1914. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
These characteristics, including plumpness, ungainliness, indolence, being
overly active, and whining, stem directly from an organ inferiority, and are
related to organ sensitivities, and to sharply delineated or weakened sensory
feelings. Because of the difference in drive expansion and drive gratification
these become evident as original and inborn drive directions which eventually
turn into a unique personality looking for esteem.
The influence of the environment and of social demands then come into this
thus prepared inner life. The greatest influences come from family life. They
introduce additional restraints for drive expansions and conflict with the child's
tendency for seeking pleasure. Here then are the roots of the common, that is to
say, the physiological defiance of childhood. The child should learn to adjust to
social activities and shed his playful desires for uninhibited organ activity. This
transformation succeeds easily only if the child accepts a substitute for what has
originally been drive gratification: either a love for the world around him, or a
way to gratify ambition. Then, without becoming impatient, the child can await
drive gratification since the adjustment was successful and the child is attuned to
obedience. Otherwise the child will bristle against family harmony, refuse to be
obedient, will go his own ways that are often contrary to educational goals, resist
the drive for nourishment and neatness, put up resistance to going to sleep and
later also to learning, and not too infrequently frustrate toilet training as well.
With quiet or noisy defiance the child can also become irascible, jealous, full of
impatience, and a disturber of the peace at home. Although at this stage of
development these are seen only as subtle hints, given certain conditions, they
become ever stronger indications until they form that person's character, often
predestining his fate and that of those near him.
***
I have found two conditions in particular that are determining in
intensifying the character of defiance. The first applies to children who, as a
result of inferior organs, are weak, awkward, sickly, retarded in growth, ugly, or
disfigured, and who, because of such childhood impairments, can easily have a
stronger feeling of inferiority resulting from their contacts with the outside
world, which they fervently seek to overcome with all possible means. I may
here also speak of an abnormal attitude whose character traits arrange

themselves around this feeling of inferiority, but incidentally, and often more
apparently (according to dialectic precepts), around an increased hostility toward
the outside world. Traits that correspond to the feeling of inferiority are fear,
doubt, insecurity, bashfulness, cowardice, an increasing need for support, and a
submissive obedience. Accompanying these are fantasies, even desires, that can
be summarized as self-disparagement or masochistic tendencies. Above this web
of character traits are commonly found--with the intent to rebuff or compensate-
brashness, courage and arrogance, a need for support, stubbornness, and
defiance. These are accompanied by fantasies and desires for hero-, soldier-, or
robber roles, in short, by delusions of grandeur and by sadistic tendencies.
The feeling of inferiority in the end culminates in a never failing and
always exaggerated feeling of being neglected and, with that, the Cinderella
fantasy is complete, complete also with attending wishful expectations of
deliverance and of triumph. Here also belong the frequent childhood fantasies of
secretly stemming from princely families, and of having been temporarily
banished from their "true" family home. The reality, however, puts a new face
on these seemingly harmless tales. The child's entire drive system is whipped up
and overwhelmed. Feelings of revenge and death wishes, for oneself and others,
become noticeable at the slightest signs of derogation, childhood impairments
and rudeness are defiantly sustained, early sexual maturity and desires break out
untamed. All this to demonstrate that the child is like an adult. The "big man", he
who can do everything, is the father, or whoever takes his place, the mother, an
older brother, and the teacher. He becomes the opponent who must be fought.
The child turns deaf and dumb to his directions, misunderstands all good
intentions, becomes mistrusting, and responds shrewdly to anything derogatory.
In short he is prone to be defiant. However, exactly because of that the child has
become totally dependent on the opinions and behavior of others.
Alternatively, the child, because of his disposition and life experiences, has
shed his aggressive tendencies, has learned his lesson from adversity, and seeks
drive satisfaction and his final triumph through passive behavior, subjugation,
and with genuine or devious obedience. Certainly, the flames of hate flare up,
often only in dreams or as nervous symptoms. These are signs for the
professional that the ground is fertile for a neurosis, or for forbidden actions if
the child fails to attain elating achievements or, alternatively, cannot simply be
indolent. If the attitude of the child weighs more heavily on the side of
obedience and subjugation the parents often express their good fortune for
having a model child, being unaware that his life, his love, and his occupation, if
he is not successful, can easily bring on a neurosis.
As I have initially shown, we can recognize in both of these main character

groups the effect of a wrong attitude, that in trying to overcome the feeling of
inferiority the compensation turns into protest and delusion of grandeur. In the
majority of cases traits of obedience and defiance blend and run together so that
a hypersensitive person will respond defensively in his thinking, fantasies, or
actions to the slightest signs of derogation. For a large number of children in this
category, many of whom when faced with adversity will become neurotic, it will
be said that they cannot endure obedience, or are obedient only when it helps
them to find love or the gratification of their ambitions.
I have shown that the second of the intensifying conditions for engendering
defiance comes from the subjective uncertainty that a particular child has for his
or her sexual role. This condition certainly does not come by itself but is closely
associated with the first. The search for one's sexual role usually begins at age
four. Curiosity in the child increases significantly. The absence of sexual
enlightenment becomes apparent in this particular regard. Ignorant of the
meaning of the appurtenances of sex, the child seeks to distinguish the sexes by
their clothing, hairstyles, their physical and mental characteristics, and in doing
so frequently is misled. In this regard various misuses reinforce such mistakes.
Thus the tendencies of some parents to dress boys in girls’ clothing, or to let
them wear arm or neck bracelets, is a wrong attitude traceable to the mother's
desire for a girl. Wearing hair long, a prominent chest development, a pale face
color, and malformed genitals can create uncertainty in a boy about his sex role.
Even if the child were to recognize the difference in sexual organs and their
meaning for particular sex roles, there often is a residue of uncertainty because
of suddenly arising thoughts of a possible transformation of the sexual organs, or
ideas engendered by threats from parents. In girls’ uncertainty about their sex
roles can often be increased because of looking like a boy or behaving like one.
In such cases comments by outsiders ("she is no girl") can have a strong
influence. Added to this is the cancer in our culture that gives strong preference
to masculinity.
At this point that same force as above sets in but with immeasurably greater
strength. Children who questioned their sexual role exaggerate what appears to
them as masculine characteristics, which, in the first instance, is defiance.
Obedience, subjugation, weakness, being small in stature, dull, and passive are
felt to be female signs, since the father, the male paragon, usually exhibits the
opposite characteristics. Victory is seen as masculine, defeat as feminine, and
there follows a hasty searching for the masculine protest, which strengthens
remarkably an attitude of defiance, strengthens it because the starting point for
this influence, the feeling of inferiority, is now allied with a particular feeling of
belonging to a minority which arises from the possibility of becoming like a

woman. To become a woman for this type of child with his feelings of neglect
and impairment means the expectation of constant annoyance and pain,
persecution and defeat.
Finding themselves in such a position, such children try psychologically to
make up for what they might miss physically and thereby immeasurably
intensify their masculine protest, and with that their defiance. How often
upbringing and education are unsuccessful under such conditions is known to
every caregiver and teacher. Words, teachings, and examples almost never
penetrate to the source of these character traits, the feeling of a presumed
hermaphroditism. These children want to know everything better, hold fast to the
idea of their uniqueness, tolerate no one above them and will not allow
themselves to be taught anything. In such cases, criminal instincts come to the
fore, selfishness, as well as tendencies to lie and steal. Here, love, not hate or
punishment, can have a more promising effect. Sometimes, in their constant
craving for triumphs, such children in later life possess those qualities that, under
favorable conditions, create important people, artists, and writers. For the others,
however, and it is only with these that pedagogy is concerned, for the children
who because of their wrong attitude will suffer pain, only Individual Psychology
is capable of effecting a change. The starting point, the wrong attitude, and the
end effect, the masculine protest, no longer are in consciousness and the entire
subsequent development has to take place in the unconscious, i.e. without an
accompanying understanding by the child, often without his knowledge.
The following are two medical histories that illustrate the early attitude
reflecting defiance and obedience. 
The first case history is of a male patient, 26 years old, a physician, who suffered
from nervous complaints (attacks of fear, agoraphobia, fear of tests, headaches,
having difficulties reading). I shall skip over the explanation for these conditions
by pointing out that they all serve the patient's unconscious wish to prove that all
the paths for making it through life on his own were closed to him. The actual,
but to the patient unknown, reason that demanded his proving was to be found in
his dissatisfaction with his marriage which he entered against his father's wishes.
Since he was now unable to carry out any of life's essential tasks on his own, a
separation from his wife also was impossible. As frequently as he came up with
reasons for leaving his wife, as often was he prevented from doing so because of
his old, defiant attitude toward his father. His defiance, structured as described
above, could be traced to his earliest childhood. He was a very chubby child who
was scoffed and laughed at by everyone in his neighborhood with comparisons
of his resemblance to a pregnant woman occurring frequently. His uncertainty
about his sexual role was considerably increased when his governess threatened

him with being transformed into a girl if he were to touch his private parts. 
There also was real or presumed neglect so that the ground was well prepared to
drive the boy from a feeling of inferiority to unbending defiance and excessive
ambition. He always wanted to be first, the smartest, and the outstanding boy.
The fact that he reached for high moral values along this path should not surprise
us. He also sought with unshaken truthfulness to attain purity and great wisdom.
On the other hand negative traits were not absent. He became domineering,
stubborn, and selfconscious and was quick to underestimate the knowledge and
experience of others. He married early so as to find triumph in his masculinity.
The more his father tried to deter him with good reasons from marrying, the
more defiantly the patient insisted on pursuing his plans, which he then soon
carried out. Because his wife failed to subordinate herself to him to the extent of
his unconscious expectations, and because she responded to his constant mistrust
and nagging with increasing recalcitrance, obviously to prove her "masculinity,"
he faced a setback that gave proof of his inferiority before the whole world, his
father and wife, i.e. he showed himself "womanly" (unmanly). Too defiant to
grasp this situation objectively, he found a way out in illness with which he
sought to protect himself from a reawakening of the old painful memories of
being scorned and humiliated. When this situation was explained to him his
condition improved to where he dispensed with the presumed advantages of his
illness, and, disregarding the opinions of those around him he gamely went about
putting his house in order. 
The second case is that of a female government official, 34 years of age. She
came to me for treatment because of excitability, heart palpitations, agoraphobia
and nightly outcries. The advantage the patient saw in these forms of illnesses
was that since they always made her the focus of attention she could only leave
the house accompanied by her sister and had to avoid any social responsibilities.
The unspoken intent in all this was to withdraw from all plans for marriage and
thereby avoid the "humiliation" of a female role. As a child she had the look of a
boy, obstreperous behavior, and suffered from childhood disorders such as
bedwetting and thumb sucking which proved to be signs of childish defiance
(struggle against adapting). She associated only with boys and took pleasure in
fights and in playing cruel games. In puberty her aggressive behavior on a
number of occasions brought her close to losing herself. This danger, and being
intimidated by her mother, led this sexually unenlightened girl to fear for her
"masculine role." Her personal experience regarding marital relations did not
make her sympathetic toward the role of a woman. Among her associates she
always saw the wife as inferior and treated like a subjugated person. She feared
the same fate for herself. Her disdain for marriage grew to a point where she

preferred to go through life as too ill and unsuitable for marriage. Because of her
heart palpitations she proved to herself and to others that suffering from a heart
ailment she could not endanger herself by becoming pregnant. Her flight from
social contacts and her fear of going out alone served to avoid becoming
acquainted with men. In this case, refusing to accept natural female tasks
brought the patient to where intimidation by the mother, whom she confronted
defiantly from earliest times when it came to eroticism, were obeyed dutifully.
Her attitude with regard to obedience served the same purpose as defiance, the
maintenance of a supposed masculine character. A good description of her boy-
like 
childhood 
follows 
later. 
(See 
"Kindheitserrinnerungen"-Childhood
Recollections).
***
I tried to present in a brief outline form that the character traits of defiance
and obedience rest on a child's unconscious and mistaken attitudes3. I can now
add that neither the school nor the home is capable of dealing with this problem
as long as they are unable to correct such mistaken attitudes. What then are the
measures the psychiatrist can ask the pedagogue to take?
In the first place, those that are preventive in nature. The child's upbringing
must be directed toward removing the possibility--whether the child is weak,
small in stature, or because of ignorance--of the child developing a feeling of
inferiority.4 Sick and weak children must rapidly be cured and strengthened.
Where public means are not available, the educational system must be
specifically directed to foster the ability for making independent judgments, to
make the child less dependent on others, and for the child to be able to choose
alternative goals. Uncertainty of one's sexual role is an extraordinarily damaging
condition that must be eradicated at the outset through focused indoctrination
and attitude development.
The equality of the woman must be a critical pedagogical requirement.
Humiliating remarks or actions that question the value of women in general
poison the child's spirit and compel boys as well as girls toward wrong ideas
about an exaggerated masculinity. Obedience cannot be taught if an attitude of
defiance is allowed to flourish.
A wrong attitude about defiance or obedience can easily be recognized in
the above cases. If one is involved with such a child the question of his or her
eventual fate forces one to take specific measures. Also, one must consider the
danger to the child if it succumbs to a nervous illness. In school such children
become noticeable by their dreamy or dull presence, they startle, tremble, or

blush when called upon, and their faces reflect anger either all the time or
whenever they have to take tests. If laughed at or punished their reaction is
unexpectedly strong. Sometimes they are models of obedience in school but
tyrants at home.5 Clearly, defiance must not be provoked by ridiculing the child's
helplessness, nor should obedience be ensured with promises of rewards that are
unlikely to be fulfilled. Where one encounters obedience for its own sake then,
as one finds in some religious practices, it is due to an extreme contriteness
rooted in an overwhelming feeling of inferiority coming close to a masochistic
sense of puniness that aims at celebrating some secret triumphs. Success in
treatment can be attained if the child's defiance and obedience can be revealed to
him along a line that shows his to be an abnormal attitude, that his set of values
regarding his or other people's prominence is false, that his judgment about men
and women is impaired, and when the obsessive mechanism that stems from the
psychological dual sexuality and incites a masculine protest can be explained.
The child will inwardly be freed and outwardly become self-reliant and will,
with his own no longer fettered powers, be able to pull himself up to
independent thinking and acting.
3 v. Kries was first to point out the "Einstellungsmechanismums" (Attitude
mechanism). 
4 Seen from that standpoint, the system of "Förderklasse" (special advanced
classes or classes for talented students) would seem particularly dangerous since
it must increase the masculine protest significantly, making it impossible for the
school to confine it. Whatever an individual child may gain from being in such a
class must be weighed against the damage done to the majority of students
whose defiance and bitterness is increased. 
5 I mean that they must reveal themselves most clearly when they are assigned to
write on a subject they can select themselves, or where the subject is not too
personal. They will then present or solve problems in a sense described above. A
teacher who makes such observations deserves much praise. At this point I
should like to express my gratitude to Professor Oppenheim, Dr. Furtmüller, Dr.
and Mrs. Kramer, and others for their helpful suggestions which came to fruition
in what follows.
If as a result of this a considerable degree of belief in authority is lost--and
the defiant child also defies only authority--we shall not decry it. After all, we
are steering toward a time when everyone will be independent and free, no
longer in the service of one person, but taking his rightful place in serving only
one common idea, the promotion of physical and mental progress.
Chapter III

The Psychic Treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia1 2 [1910]
Among the nervous symptoms that burden life, relieve the individual from
having to do anything and thereby greatly abrogate all social responsibilities,
painful sensations play a significant role. The degree of pain, often also its locus,
and how the patient assesses it, always play an integral part in any attempt to
determine the purpose of the pain. Specific organic inferiorities (sclerosis, eye
anomalies, sensitive skin, flat footedness, etc.), and ways of creating pain, such
as by swallowing air, can in most cases be readily diagnosed, revealing the
chosen impact of the neurosis and its effect.
Individual Psychology, however, requires specific indicators, and, possibly
more than any other method, demands a definite delineation of its area of
responsibility. At the outset it should be understood that Individual Psychology
applies only to psychological disorders. Similarly, the psychological findings
must not have been distorted by any mental disorders from which the patient
might suffer, such as imbecility, feeblemindedness, or deliria. The extent to
which a person's psyche is amenable to treatment is still an open question today.
Certainly, it yields to analysis, manifests the same principles as neurosis, and can
serve valuable lessons for the study of abnormal psychological behavior. I can
account from my own experience for cases of psychotic disorders where patients
had previously made no progress, but who improved and were cured as a result
of intensive treatment by Individual Psychologists.
If the field covered by Individual Psychology is to be fully utilized there
must first of all be the possibility that a psychogenic disorder can be recognized. 
Regarding the typical psychoneurosis, neurasthenia, hysteria, and compulsion
neurosis, scientists are so firmly convinced that these have a psychogenic origin
that criticism is only reluctantly advanced, and then only from one aspect. From
that viewpoint, only constitutional factors are advanced and all symptoms are
attributed to an inherited degeneration. Similar arguments are presented for
functional as well as psychological manifestations without any recognition being
given to the transition from an organ inferiority to a neurotic psyche. That this
particular transition need not necessarily occur and that other transitions, such as
to genius, criminality, suicide, and psychosis, are possible was demonstrated by
me long ago.3 I had reached the conclusion in that, as well as in other works, that
an innate gland and organ-system inferiority leads to neurotic dispositions when
the psyche is affected, i.e. when a child burdened by an inherited affliction feels
inferior with regard to those around him.4 What is decisive in such cases is the
child's individual assessment of his situation, that is as influenced by childhood
aberrations. When carefully examined a neurosis is not a matter of susceptibility

but an affliction caused by circumstances. For example, feelings of inferiority
and insecurity in a child can occur where external indications of degeneration
cause disfigurement or ugliness, or where they are the outward indications of a
deeply rooted organ inferiority, such as deformed ears and a hearing loss, or
cross-eyedness and color blindness, astigmatism, or other eye problems, etc.
Other organ inferiorities act in the same way, particularly if they are not life
threatening but are open to the development of psychological problems. Rickets
can affect growth leading to puniness or obesity; deformities caused by rickets,
such as flat feet, knock knees, and scoliosis can affect not only the child's
mobility but also self-esteem. Dysfunctions of the suprarenal glands, the thyroid
glands, the thymus, the pituitary gland, and internal genital glands, in particular
those of a less serious nature and more likely to draw aspersions rather than
needing treatment, can become portentous not only for the development of the
organ, but for the individual's psychological wellbeing by awakening and
sustaining a feeling of humiliation and inferiority. Diathesis, status lymphaticus,
and asthenic habitus5 can be harmful in both directions, as can hydrocephalus,
slight forms of feeblemindedness, and innate urinary tract and digestive organ
deficiencies.6 These can cause real symptoms as well as subjective feelings of
inferiority, which often come by way of childhood disorders such as enuresis
and incontinence, or are the result of physical needs, fear of punishment and
pain, and often also an exaggerated caution about food, drink, or sleep.7
Observing and finding evidence of this, of an actual or subjective radiation of an
organ inferiority, seems to me of the greatest importance because it shows us the
genesis of neurotic symptoms and particular character traits that utilize innate
organ inferiorities. In equal measure, it gives evidence of the secondary meaning
of constitutional organ inferiorities and of the primary psychogenic factors as
sources for the neurosis. The natural grounds for this tense relationship between
the organic and psychological can easily be seen: Its roots lie in the child's organ
inferiority, including the healthy child's, relative to that of adults. In the adult it
triggers a feeling, even if to an endurable degree, of inferiority and insecurity
which leads, where there is an awareness of an absolute, particularly consistent,
organ inferiority, to an unbearable feeling of inferiority, as I have often found in
many neurotics. The child in our culture, whatever the circumstances, wants to
be grown-up and will dream and fantasize those successes that by nature have
been made difficult for him. If near-sighted, the child will want to see
everything; if hearing impaired will always want to hear everything; if suffering
from a speech defect or if the child stutters he will always want to speak; and the
child will want to smell everything if he has innate mucous accumulation,

septum deviations, or enlarged adenoids.8 Children who are overweight and have
trouble moving about will always want to be first, which also applies to those
who were the second oldest, and to those born late. Who as a child was slow will
always be afraid of being late and can easily be made to hurry so that his entire
life will seem like a forced march. The child who has trouble jumping will most
likely want to be able to fly. This antithesis between physical limitations and
wishes, fantasies, and dreams, in other words, the psychological compensatory
striving, is so deep-seated that a fundamental psychological principle can be
deduced from it according to which a dialectic conversion takes place from an
organ inferiority via a subjective feeling of inferiority to psychic striving for
compensation and overcompensation. There is one restriction that must be kept
in mind: What we have here is not a law of nature but what might be regarded as
the seduction of the human spirit. 
The outward comportment and inner psychological behavior of the neurotically
disposed child clearly show traces of this dialectic change which becomes
apparent very early in childhood. His behavior, no matter how different in each
individual case, is evidenced by a desire in every aspect of that person's life to
"reach the top." Ambition, conceit, the wish to understand everything, to make
oneself heard at all times, to excel in physical strength, attractiveness, and
excellence in dress, to be the first in school and in the family, to attract attention
to oneself with good or bad actions, these characterize the first phase of an
abnormal development. The feeling of inferiority and insecurity easily becomes
apparent manifesting itself in fear and timidity, which are fixed neurotic
character traits. By establishing these character traits the child is guided by a
tendency that is closely related to ambition: I must not be left alone, someone
(father or mother) must help me. I must be treated with tenderness and love (to
which can be added: because I am weak and inferior). This attitude becomes the
guiding principle of that person's psychological underpinnings. A constant
irritable hypersensitivity, mistrust, and selfpity guard against the possibility of
being demeaned or humiliated. On the other hand, the child can become
extremely keen and so sensitive that he checks for any possibility of a setback,
prepares safeguarding measures, either by taking positive steps, in being alert
and prepared, or by leaning on someone. Such a child is constantly seeking pity
and sympathy by exaggerating pain, by simulating illness, or actually becoming
ill, fainting, and forming death wishes that in the extreme become an impulse for
suicide. The purpose is always to evoke pity or to take revenge for some slight.9
The neurotically disposed child will revolt against actual or presumed restraints
with hate and revenge, with wild anger and sadistic urges, with a tendency to do

the forbidden, and will constantly thwart any effort to correct him with
indolence, laziness and defiance. Such a child will make scenes out of eating,
washing, dressing, tooth brushing, going to sleep and learning. He resents being
told to use the toilet, creates "accidents," vomits when forced to eat or when told
to go to school, soils himself even with stool and urine, wets his bed so that
someone will attend to him and not leave him to sleep alone, has all kinds of
problems sleeping to evoke expressions of love, and will demand that his parents
take him to their bed. In short, such a child will resort to defiance or pity in order
to gain standing from those around him.
In most cases these expressions are obvious and fully consistent with one
another, whether derived from the person's daily activities and character traits,
from a neurotic's anamnesis, or from focusing on the dynamics of the patient's
symptoms. Sometimes one finds what seem to be "model children" who exhibit
compliance to an astonishing degree. However, there will be times when even
they betray themselves with unexplainable outbursts of anger, or a
hypersensitivity expressed in hurt feelings, a copious shedding of tears,
complaining about pains that seem to have no apparent cause, such as headaches,
stomach aches, aching feet, migraines, or being hot, cold, or tired. It then
becomes clear that obedience, compliance, modesty, and a willingness to submit
are means for attaining esteem, and for gaining rewards as well as a show of
love. I was able to show this to be true for the neurotic in the Dynamik des
Masochismus10. 
I must also mention a number of other manifestations in neurotically disposed
children closely related to what has been described above. All of these reveal a
penchant for causing problems for those in charge of their upbringing, and for
obstinately engaging in improper or disturbing actions, sometimes playful such
as feigning deafness, blindness, or being crippled, mute, clumsy, forgetful, and
crazy. In the same vein such children may make faces, fall down, or soil
themselves. Even normal children may have impulses such as these. However, it
requires a morbid ambition, defiance and a yearning for esteem for a neurotically
disposed child to adhere to and exploit such games and pranks for lengthy
periods of time. In the same way, such children, with the intent of being either
malicious or boastful, or to escape an oppressive situation, will act out symptoms
of illnesses or adopt bad habits which they had either experienced themselves, or
had observed in others and had been engaged in and practiced for some time,
such as hoarseness, coughing, nail biting, nose-picking, thumb sucking, sucking
air, touching their genitals or anus, etc. Even shyness and fear that has become a
fixture in their lives can be exploited for this purpose, for example, objecting to
being left alone, wanting to be alone, or forcing others to serve them. In all such

endeavors, as I have shown in my book Studie (Trans. note: On Organ
Inferiority), taking advantage of an inferior organ that corresponds to the activity
being played out is done regularly. 
From all these characteristics of a neurotically disposed child transitions take
place to symptoms of hysteria, compulsion neurosis, accident neurosis, accident
hysteria, neurasthenia, tic disorders, fear neurosis, phobia, and also to what
appear to be monosymptomatic functional neuroses, such as stuttering,
constipation, psychic impotence, etc. Based upon my experience, I regarded all
of these together as an integrated psycho neurosis. Whichever of these
manifestations had been innocently adopted in childhood as a reflex action to
win a line of least resistance for the stored up aggression drive becomes an
example, albeit mostly superstructured and richly endowed, for the neurotic's
symptoms. To what extent greater suggestibility (Charcot, Strümpel), a hypnotic
condition (Breuer), the hallucinary character of the neurotic psyche (Adler), that
is, empathy, comes into play will not be discussed here. The single attack, the
consistent neurotic symptoms, and the abiding neurotic character are all formed
under the influence of a studied infantile attitude, an attitude abnormally
established during the examination, an attitude abnormally formed by childish
fantasies, errors, and mistaken values. 
The child's fantasies certainly have not only a platonic value but are the
expression of a psychological impulse that absolutely dictates the child's attitude
and, thereby, the child's actions. The intensity of the impulse differs to varying
degrees, increasing immeasurably, however, in neurotically disposed children by
compensating for their increased feeling of inferiority. An analysis initially
surfaces memories of early childhood events (infantile experiences, dreams),
toward which the child had assumed a certain position. I have already pointed
out in "Aggression Drive" [l.c.] that "the meaning of infantile experiences must
be distilled to the point where the strong drive and its limitations (as desire and
restraint) become apparent." Furthermore, "clearly, the clash with the outside
world will occur with certainty where there is an inferior organ. It will force a
transformation of the drive, whether in the form (it is there: therefore) of
unpleasant experiences, or whether as a consequence of an increased desire for
culturally unacceptable things. The strongest expansion of the drive in the
neurotically disposed child springs dialectically from the feeling of inferiority.
The tendency to overcome weaknesses, the yearning for triumphs, can clearly be
recognized in the child's dreams and fantasies; the adoption of a hero role is the
attempt at compensation. 
In this deeper neurotic layer the analysis also will uncover sexual desires and
impulses which in rare cases are of an incestuous nature. Alongside it also

uncovers attempts at sexual activity involving strangers. Such observations,
which prior to Freud's fantastic analyses were quite unknown in child
psychology, will put a quick end to an assumption of the pure, innocent child,
and yet will help us understand, upon recalling the often furious drive expansion,
the compensatory counterbalance to the feeling of inferiority in the neurotically
disposed child. From an aspect other than sexual this inciting of drives also
becomes explicit. We learn to recognize the methods that individuals use in
order to somehow distinguish themselves, such as having urges to gorge
themselves with food, being driven to show off, be slovenly, exhibiting sadistic
and criminal tendencies, having a mania for dominance, be defiant, rage, read
books assiduously, and being extremely driven. These tendencies only become
perfectly clear when we understand the meaning of the early awakened urge for
dominance and its manifestations, and realize that when a child is at the stage of
revolting the taming of drives is impossible. 
The meaning of this early awakened urge for dominance is simply: I want to be a
man. It applies to both boys and girls, especially in neurotically disposed
children. In such cases this desire is so drastic that one must assume from the
outset that this tendency surfaced as a reaction to an unpleasant sensation of not
being masculine. In fact the neurotic psyche is caught in a dynamic which I have
described as psychic hermaphrodism with a subsequent masculine protest.11 The
fixation on the feeling of inferiority in neurotically disposed children, which
causes compensatory inflamed drives, is also the start toward a unique
psychological development that terminates in an exaggerated masculine protest.
These psychological processes give impetus to the abnormal attitude of the
neurotic toward the world. They impact on him, to a marked degree, character
traits, as those I described earlier, which cannot be attributed solely to either the
sexual drive or to the ego instinct but are manifested as the sum of the neurotic's
ideas of grandeur. For the most part they modify and inhibit the sexual drive and
often are inimical to the drive for self-preservation. 
This group of character traits is joined by others to clash with the unbridled drive
expansion. It is accompanied by anti-social gratifiers that include guilt feelings,
cowardice, indecisiveness, timidity, or fear of failure and punishment. I have
described this in detail in my work Ueber neurotische Disposition (l.c.).
Frequently one can find character traits such as masochistic impulses, an
exaggerated propensity for obedience, subjugation, and selfpunishment from
which one can deduce the psychic dynamic, as well as the early case history. The
greatest barrier to halt the expansion of drives evidently is social feeling. It takes
on the form of an admonition by which organ drives are subsequently inhibited.
As a result, the neurotic sees himself a criminal, becomes exceedingly

conscientious, and seeks to be fair. He operates, however, under the fiction that
he is actually bad, dominated by an uncontrollable sexuality, filled with a
limitless self-indulgence and capable of every sort of depravity and must,
therefore, exercise great caution. As a matter of fact, because of his
singleminded striving for personal power he becomes an enemy of society. 
The neurotic obviously exaggerates the arrangement of this fiction which serves
primarily to guard against defeats.12 The neurotic's safeguard tendencies help to
reinforce a third group of character traits which adhere to the rule: "caution."
Distrust and doubt are probably its most pronounced traits. But we find just as
frequently an exaggerated penchant for cleanliness, order, and frugality, as well
as a constant testing of people and of things so that the neurotic in most cases
never gets anything done. 
All these character traits stand in the way of initiative, hamper the development
of a social human being, and are closely aligned with an indecisiveness that
comes from a feeling of guilt. Everything is planned and all consequences are
taken into consideration. The neurotic is in a constant state of tense anticipation
of all the possibilities in any given situation and his peace of mind is always
disturbed by assumptions and considerations about the future. He is filled with
an enormous security system that pervades all his thinking and acting and
appears regularly in his fantasies and dreams. This defense mechanism requires
reinforcements that include admonitions, unconsciously arranging defeats, being
forgetful, tired, lazy, and conjuring up painful sensations of all kinds. Neurotic
fears, which play an enormous role in this security arrangement, are manifested
in various ways as phobias, anxiety dreams, hysteria, and, directly or indirectly,
as neurasthenia, which becomes a barrier to aggression. Practicing such security
arrangements sometimes can lead to greater intuitiveness and acuteness, or at the
very least give the appearance of having such talents. This is the basis in some
neurotics for believing that they possess telepathic skills, or are somehow
predestined and have powers of suggestion. It seems as if every neurotic is
superstitious. In this respect the character traits in this group relate to those of
the first group which stem from ideas of greatness. This forces one to conclude
that ideas of greatness are a means of protection against the feeling of inferiority.
I have become familiar with a number of other security measures, of which I
should like to emphasize masturbation as a way of securing against sexual
intercourse and its consequences. A similar purpose is gained by psychic
impotence, ejaculatio praecox, perversions, sexual anesthesia, and vaginism.
These manifestations are always found in persons who are incapable of giving of
themselves to others, to a community, because they wish to dominate everyone.
In the same way childhood failures, functional illnesses and pains are evaluated

and fixed when found suitable by the neurotic to support his doubts, and to keep
him from engaging in social activities. Quite frequently the imminence of
marriage or starting a career will be the impetus. At that point, because the
neurotically disposed individual failed to prepare himself to be cooperative,
security tendencies will surface in the form of ailments. Furthermore the
individual will arrange for warning signs in quite unrelated areas so that their
meaning and their relationships to apparent symptoms seem to be missing. The
neurotic, however, acts logically. He begins by refraining from social contacts,
constructs all sorts of barriers for himself, and by complaining of headaches,
etc., caused by tension, avoids his studies and work. He paints his future in
gloomy colors, hoards his money, and begins to hear mysterious voices that
whisper to him: How can a person such as you, with such faults and deficiencies
and with such bleak prospects decide on anything consequential? Above all,
what is taken for neurasthenia is replete with arrangements and security
tendencies that are never absent in neurosis, and that present the afflicted to us in
a state of withdrawal. 
A fourth group of indicators that characterizes a neurotic attitude is not unlike
Group I. Here, the tendency to be a man in action as well as in fantasies and
dreams often manifests itself in minor details, but is vocalized in a sexual jargon.
I discussed this aspect in great detail in my works Ueber neurotische
Disposition, and in "psychischen Hermaphroditismus" (l.c.). It is the neurotic's
destiny to have come from a situation of insecurity and, therefore, to have to
strive for security. The same insecurity is uncovered by analysis in the
neurotically disposed child's view of his own sexual role. Many of my male
neurotic patients in their childhood, and sometimes into puberty, had feminine
facial features, or secondary female attributes, to which they subsequently traced
their feeling of inferiority. In some cases they showed anomalies in their external
sexual organs, cryptorchidism, phimosis, malformations, hypoplasia, and other
growth anomalies to which they were able to relate. Photographs and pictures
from their early childhood gave evidence of the origin of their insecurity with
regard to their sexual role. Another contribution to the feeling of insecurity and
doubt was the practice ranging back over many years of having boys wear girls
dresses, laces, necklaces, hair locks, and long hair. In the same vein, doubt is
reinforced with threats of circumcision and castration, or warnings that the penis
would rot away or fall off when parents or caretakers detected their charges
engaged in masturbation. The fact remains that a child's strongest tendency is to
become a man, a goal symbolized for the child in the sexual organ of adult
males. The same yearning can be found in girls who probably regularly feel
inferior toward boys, forcing them into a compensatory masculine attitude.

Slowly, the neurotically disposed child loses a whole world of ideas, having
reduced all social relationships to terms of either male or female. Then there
remains a constant desire to play the male heroic role, often by the most peculiar
means, as is true for girls. Every type of activity and every form of aggression,
power, riches, triumph, sadism, disobedience, and crime is falsely judged to be
male, just as it is in the minds of most adults. Female characteristics are
toleration, acquiescence, suffering, weakness and masochistic urges which, when
symptoms of a neurosis, must never be seen as a final goal but always only--in
the form of pseudomasochism--as preparing the way for a masculine triumph,
and as a craving for esteem as seen in Group I. 
The character traits associated with this fourth group are those of the masculine
protest which includes compulsive exaggerated sexual feelings and desires,
sadistic impulses, sexual prematurity, compulsive masturbation, nymphomania,
adventurousness, strong sexual cravings, narcism, and coquetry. Feminine
fantasies that appear simultaneously (fantasies about pregnancy and giving birth,
masochistic impulses, and feelings of inferiority) serve to reinforce the
masculine protest, or to safeguard against its consequences often reflecting the
formulation against reprisals: " Do not do unto others what you do not wish done
to you."13 Compulsion per se is very broadly perceived and even the slightest
hint of being forced into a situation is strongly fought and resisted so that
perfectly normal relationships such as love, marriage and any form of adaptation
are regarded as unmanly, i.e. as feminine and consequently thwarted. 
Clearly the neurotic exhibits a significant number of interrelated character traits
which are designed to systematically enhance or inhibit one another. In the final
analysis they provide an insight into the neurotic's abnormal attitude which can
be traced back to exaggerations and false values regarding masculine and
feminine traits. If there is to be any criticism of this presentation it could only be
that it is too schematic and that it cannot possibly exhaust the overabundant
connections of individual traits and, therefore, can only offer one aspect, albeit
the most significant, of the neurotic's character. Nevertheless, I am convinced
that from that perspective it is useful and successful in establishing the existence
of a psychological disorder. If I now to turn to the problem under discussion,
which is whether trigeminal neuralgia is a psychological disorder, I can answer
affirmatively based on similar findings. The psychological structure of
trigeminal neuralgia in the cases that I had carefully examined is so uniform and
resolves so clearly into the described character traits that any criticism will easily
fall away. What is equally significant in this regard is that not only does
trigeminal neuralgia as an illness entail the main elements of a neurosis as
described above, but also that every single episode is in place of a psychic event.

I shall try to explain the correlation between the neurotic psyche and the neurotic
character to illness and to an episode. 
The patient, O. St., a 26 year old state official, told me that for his trigeminal
neuralgia a resection was being recommended. His illness, from which he had
suffered for the past one and one half years, had begun one night on the right
side of his face, and has since recurred daily in several attacks. Because of the
serious pain he has had to resort to a morphine injection every third or fourth day
which gave him some relief. He had also been treated with medication
containing aconitine, and had undergone thermal and electrical procedures, all
without success. He had also been given two alcohol injections which only
aggravated his pains. A lengthy stay in the south had brought him some relief
but even there he was subjected to daily attacks. At this time, having become
totally discouraged, and in order not to sacrifice his career, he had decided upon
the operation. It was only because his scrupulous surgeon could not assure him
of certain relief that he came to me for advice. 
At about that time I had already had extensive experience with the psychological
genesis of neuralgic attacks and trigeminal neuralgia and was also able to apply
findings that I had made earlier. The uniform formulation at which I arrived
through analysis and comparing individual cases was as follows: Trigeminal
neuralgia as well as single attacks occur regularly when an emotion of rage has
been linked in the unconscious with the feeling of humiliation.14 With this
formula it was possible for me to understand the attitude of the patient suffering
from trigeminal neuralgia and to recognize the symptoms of the illness as
equivalent to emotional states.15 What has been learned is that the patient had
expected humiliation, was lying in wait for it, and had enormously exaggerated
degradation as such. Some neurotics, to a greater or lesser extent, even seek out
humiliation and arrange for it in order to become convinced that they must
protect themselves since they are not given their due respect, are luckless, etc.
This is the general neurotic attitude and is clearly not only characteristic for
trigeminal neuralgia. If analyzed and related back to childhood pathological
situations it is simple to recognize clearly the psychic habitus of the neurotically
disposed child: a feeling of inferiority that is compensated by the masculine
protest overloaded with ambition and a rage for dominance. Analysis in this case
brings the following to light: 
1. Cryptorchidism - The patient made that discovery himself and felt inferior and
insecure wondering whether he could ever become a man with such a defect. In
addition, he remembered from when he was between six and eight years old
having attacked girls sexually with the intent of learning about sexual

differences. He also had emotional memories of children's games in which he
was the hero, at the very least a general, or the man of the house, which in this
case had the same import. 
2. There was the apparent or real preference given to the five-year younger
brother, who was allowed to sleep in the parents' bedroom. In addition, the
patient recalled trying to be admitted by the parents as well. In order to gain
these ends, the patient had several means available in his childhood. First there
was fear, fear of being alone, which on occasion he was able to express so
clearly (pavor nocturnes) that his mother took him to her. Second, he had
auditory hallucinations, which also could have been caused by fear (fear as a
security measure). Noises, which he assumed to have been made by robbers,
always came from the bedroom which gave him reason to go there and
investigate. At this point his playing at being a general or the father seemed
appropriate as a masculine protest against the uncertainty of his sexual role. [A
photograph taken when he was five years old shows him in a dress wearing
bracelets and a necklace]. The meaning of this childish behavior, the most
common escape from a pathological childhood situation, speaks with great
clarity: "I feel insecure; I have failed to reach the top; I don't have enough
respect [see how my brother is given preferential treatment]; I must be helped; I
want to be like my father; I want to be like a man." As a contrast--to what we
can see is a set of false values--it is necessary that the boy also gives thought to
an idea such as: "I do not wish to be a woman!" For the boy, the thought: " I
want to be a man" becomes tenable and supportive only with the contrasting
thought: "I could also be a woman," or " I don't want to be a woman."16 A third
way to compensate for being left behind his brother, to imitate the father, and to
learn how to fulfill his sex role and, thereby, ensure his masculinity, was in
being ill, particularly in pain. The analysis brought to light, as it does so often,
recollections of actual pains, of magnified pains and simulations. Our interest is
focused on the nature of the pain, in this case almost always toothaches. At this
point in the analysis we have come closer to understanding the reason that
trigeminal neuralgia is the neurosis that was chosen. The patient was a strong,
healthy boy who hardly knew any pains other than toothaches. We are forced to
presume that in the patient's life there existed a phase during which he identified
pain, the feeling of inferiority, with gaining an increase in esteem. 
At this point, the dynamics of this man's pathologically childish situation have
been uncovered. The possibility of being forced to play an inferior, painful,
female role has led dialectically to the exaggeration of his masculine protest.
Added to this must also be defiance and obstinacy which his mother shudders to
recall. I have already discussed ways that a child can express defiance when

eating, washing, brushing teeth, and going to sleep. It is most significant with all
trigeminal neuralgia patients that I can recall, and as supported by other
authorities, that their attacks occur while eating, washing, brushing their teeth
and when going to sleep. Attacks also occur when it is cold. 
Soon after the outbreak of his illness, my patient retreated to his mother in the
country, thus fulfilling an old childhood yearning. The mother outdid herself in
her care and love for her ill son, watched anxiously over his diet and made sure
he had warm water for bathing. Whenever during treatment he had to dine in
Vienna he suffered severe pains, but when he ate at home he felt well. When he
recovered sufficiently to return to his office he had to take an apartment in
Vienna. When he took a cold water bath the first time in his new home he was
again seized by an attack. 
Another series of attacks is associated with his need for recognition when in a
social situation. On such occasions attacks could occur when he was confronted
by real, presumed, or possible humiliations. In this setting he always had to play
the major role, could not suffer occasionally being left out of a conversation, or
listening to others. This intolerance is common with all neurotics. It is a pattern
easily recognized as having been formed during the pathological situation in his
childhood: the father, the mother, the younger brother and he, the inferior
person. The fear of society and of agoraphobia, displayed by other neurotics who
seek security from defeat with fear, and at times also with vomiting, migraine
headaches, etc., which are also steered by a fear of humiliation, in our case these
symptom are replaced by attacks. Other cases of trigeminal neuralgia also show
how those suffering from it try to exclude themselves from all social contacts,
using pain as an excuse. Not one of these individuals will deny that aside from
their pain they have problems with conducting themselves in a social setting. In
my other cases the onset of trigeminal neuralgia was preceded by other
symptoms such as migraine headaches, nausea, general ostensible rheumatic
pains,17 sciatica, blushing and hot facial flushes.18
Of the triangular situations that trigger attacks, the sexual aspect in the case of
our patient plays a significant part. Although his sexual behavior is totally
normal and satisfying, he exhibits a marked trait that is typical for a whole group
of neurotics. His romantic feelings become intense only when a rival is present,
i.e. as soon as love can be associated with the masculine characteristic of
robbing and fighting. This character trait runs through his entire romantic life
and clearly reflects the triangular situation from his pathological childhood. It
also shows that his eroticism was totally poisoned by his yearning for esteem.
When he lived in the south he met a girl whom he courted until he discovered
that she had only a very small dowry. This sufficed to quell his ardor. However,

his love was inflamed again when another man came on the scene as a suitor. As
his love grew severe pains began to set in. This occurred whenever he saw the
two alone, and when the girl smiled at her new suitor. 
During the course of treatment we were able to relate some of these attacks to
that relationship. For example, he suffered pains upon reading in letters from the
girl that she had enjoyed herself on social occasions. Several attacks were
connected with lapses of time between letters which he explained as caused by
the girl enjoying the company of others, etc. The patient also was beset by
daydreams and fantasies in which he allowed the girl to marry in order to incite a
subsequent divorce. This trend greatly intensified shortly before his falling ill
because of a remarkable incident. While on a short trip, a colleague of his had
seduced his mistress. He brooded about murder and mayhem. During this
emotional period another incident occurred. He began to suspect that the wife of
another superior was making advances toward him. Her husband also seemed to
have noted this and started to harass him in the office. To avoid damaging his
career, he submitted to his superior, but conducted a constant inner revolt against
him. During the night before his superior was to return from a vacation, our
patient suffered the first attack of trigeminal neuralgia which occurred with such
intensity that he raved and yelled, calming down somewhat only after a
morphine injection. He did not go to the office the next day but took sick leave
in order to undergo treatment. He informed every physician he saw, including
me, that he wished to be able to return to his office soon. All sorts of promises
were made to him particularly that the alcohol injection would quickly get him
ready for work. We saw the result of that treatment and know the reason it
worsened his condition: His true, unconscious striving was not to become well
enough to work, not to be forced to return to his office.19 There was one thought,
however, which he was unable to suppress: to emerge from this situation as a
man and a victor. He pursued this thought in the pure sense of infantile
pathology: "I want my mother!" When he was with her, his condition improved
somewhat. However, improvement did not occur before he suffered repeated
attacks, particularly at mealtime, demonstrating the life-threatening condition of
his illness, as well as the possibility of an impending death by starvation, which
made his frightened and startled mother even more amenable to his wishes. 
The analysis of one of this patient's dreams during the period of his treatment
indicates the most important demands of his unconscious wrong attitude, and of
his neurosis. His dream was as follows:
1 
Originally 
published 
as 
“Die 
psychische 
Behandlung 
der
Trigeminusneuralgie” in Zbl. Psychoanal., Vol. 1, pages 10-29, 1910.

Republished in 1920 as chapter VII in Praxis und Theorie der
Inividualpsychologie. First translated into English in 1925 as chapter VII in The
Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
3 Adler, Studie ueber die Minderwertigkeit von Organen. 
4 Adler, "Ueber neurotische Disposition" in Heilen und Bilden. 
5 Kretschmer selected and excellently described two types from this listing. 
6 Adler, "Zur Aetiologie, Diagnostik und Therapie der Nephrolithiasis," Wiener
klinische Wochenschrift, XX edition, No. 49 and "Myelodysplasie oder
Organminderwertigkeit?" [No longer in print in the current new edition, compare
introduction by the publisher, P. 
7ff] Zappert, "Enuresis und Myelodysplasie" in Wiener klinische Wochenschrift,
1920, No. 22. 
7 Jean Pauls Schmelzle superbly describes this fear of the night, explains the
"security tendencies" that will be discussed later, and makes it simple to presume
an inferiority of the urinary tract and digestive system. 
8 In all cases of organ inferiority the affected organ, by "qualifying inferiority,"
can change its technique and alter or increase its function, such as attaining
heightened senses or greater sensitivity to tickling in sensitive areas. The foot is
an atrophied hand yet its multiplicity of functions is evident on the ground.
Tickling sensations in the nose, throat, and air passages, and changes that occur
within, and an induced secretion from a desire to smell, play a significant role in
nervous asthma, sneezing attacks, and probably also in hay fever. We find a
delightful description of nervous nasal irritations and feelings of inferiority
associated against marriage and social as well as romantic relationships is
described so correctly that it is justifiable to assume that this gifted philosopher
had actually observed such a process and had, thereby, pointed to its basic
meaning as an attitude toward life. with them in Vischer's novel Auch Einer. The
author's inflating and skillful intensification of this "defect" to protect 
9 See Adler, "Drei Beiträge zum Problem des Schűlerselbstmords" in Heilen und
Bilden. 
10 Adler, "Der psychische Hermaphroditismus" in Heilen und Bilden. 
11 Adler, "Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und in der Neurose. Zur
Dynamik und Therapie der Neurosen," in Heilen und Bilden. 
12 In this regard the neurotic is like the character in Nestroy's play who says: "If
once I start; but I won't start!" He fears his own urge to act. Also see Ueber
neurotische Disposition, l.c.

13 In one case of a man suffering from asthma nervosum, who after
treatment has now been cured for some time, the man succumbed to definite
pregnancy fantasies as soon as he was ready to engage in any activity. These
pregnancy fantasies which were accompanied by feelings of oppression ran into
illusions of grandeur: He believed himself to have become a millionaire, a
benefactor, a savior of the country, etc. This was accompanied by gasping for air
as if he had run a race. The dynamic meaning of pregnancy fantasies point to the
endurance and suffering of a woman and are in a form of a self-criticism and
harassment: "You are only a woman! It serves you right to endure!" This is
followed by the masculine protest.--Additional reinforcement comes from the
pregnancy fantasy and the asthma suffering. They serve as a kind of anticipatory
repentance. Now he can be a man and is justified in being hostile toward those
around him. "I can take greater liberties now that I am ill." His illness proves
him true and becomes his "alibi." Skin and breathing ailments (exudative
diathesis) triggered the choice of neurotic symptoms. 
14See the formulation in "Aggressionstrieb" in Heilen und Bilden, l.c. -- Another
possible formulation is: situations in which those more courageous would have
become furious. 15 The superficial observations of some critics that my views are
"intellectualizing" deserve no comment. 
16 Among the more recent psychologists, Julius Pikler starts from a different
premise and arrives at similar conclusions regarding "contrast-thinking." Also
see Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, l.c.
17 See Henschen's theory on the rheumatic origin of trigeminal neuralgia. 
18 The cases of trigeminal neuralgia among the elderly, especially women, are
particularly complicated because of actual or presumed denigration attributed to
age. One of the most tragic chapters in our culture is the inhumane treatment of
older women. Among my patients, attacks were triggered by a lack of interest,
fear of ridicule, preferential treatment of others, their image in the mirror, their
clothing (that they might be derided), and spending money for fear of sinking
into poverty. Similarly, attacks are caused by the romantic relationships and
marriages of their sons for fear of having to share the love of their sons with
another woman. 
19 Notice here the agreement with the dynamics of the accident neurosis and
hysteria which also occurs only in those neurotically disposed.
"I find myself naked in a room with my mistress. She bites my thigh. I cry out
and awake with a severe attack of neuralgia."
The events that preceded this dream occurred the previous night. He had
received a picture postcard from Graz signed among others by his brother and

the girl who appeared in his dream. At supper none of the food appealed to him.
He also had a light attack. About the girl he told me that she had been his
mistress for a time but he soon lost interest in her and had left her. Not too long
ago his brother met the girl. The patient had warned his brother but, as the pair
of signatures showed, to no avail. This upset him even more since he normally
was able to influence his brother considerably, and, since the death of their
father, had in effect become like a father to him.
"Naked" -- He had a particular aversion to undressing himself in front of
women. This undoubtedly relates to his cryptorchidism.
"She bites my thigh."20 To this should be added that the girl had all sorts of
perverse habits which included biting him. To the somewhat leading question
whether he had ever heard of someone being bitten in the thigh he responded
with the stork fable. 
"I cry out" is something he does when suffering from a severe attack. His mother
would then come immediately from next door to calm him and then inject him
with morphine. 
We believe that the dream analysis makes everything quite clear and relieves us
of any further discussion. The patient responded to a feeling of humiliation with
thoughts that caused an attack but also opened the way for him to reach his goal:
to dominate his mother. The feelings and emotions generated by the dream
reinforced his tendency to stay away from women, and to flee to his mother. In
other words, he transformed himself into a domineering male. His emasculating
stigma, his cryptorchidism, falls away in the process and he can now show
himself naked. He is a man who needs not bow to anyone. He is relieved from
having to perform any services, but only by way of pain. He secures this feeling
of masculine superiority, just as he did his pathological childhood situations,
with fear and isolation.21
It is not often that the transition from the feeling of submissiveness and being
imbued with feminine characteristics to the masculine protest can be found as
easily as in this case. Appearances in particular can easily lead to assuming the
existence of primarily homosexual impulses. The neurotic's masculine role, in
both sexes, whether in reality or in dreams, is explained by the masculine
protest. If the rivalry is between two persons of the same gender victory is often
symbolized by a sexual act in which the neurotic, either in dreams or in fantasy,
plays the masculine role. In my experience, the problem of an active homosexual
should be seen in the same light. It differs only in that the sexual drive is placed
directly (not symbolically) at the service of lusting for power, of the masculine
protest. However, even the homosexual comes out of a phase of insecurity about

his sexual role to inversion. The passive homosexual more likely arranges giving
into feminine characteristics so that he can stir himself up afterwards, gain
recognition by playing at being jealous, make successful conquests, or by
practicing extortion22. Above all, however, he does not want to reveal his
mistakenly assumed lack of masculinity in normal romantic relations23. On the
other hand, it is for that reason that the basic problem in neurosis and in dreams,
the starting point for psychic hermaphrodism with its subsequent masculine
protest, has been blurred so that one is left dealing with fragments emanating
from this psychic dynamic for which one must first find the parts to complete the
whole. 
The treatment in our case was conducted under a lucky star. Other treatments
were unsuccessful and much time had passed. The patient's career was
increasingly threatened. Then the possibility arose that he would be transferred
to another office which certainly eased his feelings of denigration caused by his
hated superior. Treatment was concluded initially successfully and has been
continuing for several months. The one-time patient conducts his business in his
new office and lives separate from his mother. His friends and acquaintances
often express their surprise that his former violent, restless, and irritated nature
had changed so much, that he had become calmer and more amenable, and that
he no longer regarded his office activities as an imposition. This has special
significance for us: His former erroneous, domineering attitude had undergone a
correction that seemed to have eliminated not only his earlier attacks, but also
other forms of neurosis. His prestige-seeking tactics have been partly abandoned
and his social feeling has improved. 
Other cases of mine concern female patients who had passed menopause. They
fell quite ill in situations where they felt demeaned. They also were neurotically
disposed since childhood. Inferior organs, a sense of inferiority, and the
masculine protest were similar to the findings in the first case. Their whole life
was spent wishing to be a man and it was simple to trace back an insecurity in
their sexual roles when they were children. As a whole, however, the
interconnections were intricate and the attacks more frequent because the women
in these cases were at a more advanced age. The chances of realizing the
masculine protest seemed small. Adjustment for these patients was difficult.
Nevertheless, treatment had the effect of ameliorating the attacks significantly
both with regard to their frequency and severity. The treatment raised their zest
for life markedly and, I expect, will be successful in other similar cases as well. 
This then is the material that I can offer as evidence for the psychogenic origin
of trigeminal neuralgia. I recommend that every case be scrutinized based on a

study of the individual's character. I am as aware as anyone that occasionally
there are cases where the etiology suggests pathological-anatomical changes.
The course of such cases, however, differs from that of the usual cases known to
us and their resolution would not be traceable to a psychic event. Furthermore,
the absence of character traits that I have described would soon lead to the
correct prognosis. Even in those cases, such as in epilepsy, an attack could be
triggered by emotions caused by extreme rage. 
The second assumption, a toxic basis for neurosis, which rivals the psychogenic
theory of neurosis, can be dealt with in the same manner: the psychic resolution
of symptoms totally rejects that theory. Wherever toxins of whatever sort are
found in psychotic or neurotic cases they can only take effect through an
intensification of inferiority feelings that originated in childhood24, and from the
agitated masculine protest that followed, or from the emotions it produced. In
short, toxins can trigger a neurosis only in those disposed toward it by
awakening feelings of humiliation, just as an accident will have the same effect
insofar as it gives rise to accident neurosis, or toxins can persist until they
produce symptoms. 
An organic susceptibility should be looked for in a sympathetic reaction, a
heightened agitation caused by certain psychological irritations of nerves in the
vascular system. This would cause pains analogous to those from compulsive
blushing, migraines, chronic headaches, and hysterical and epileptic fainting due
to pathological consequences initiated by acute vascular changes. Another role is
empathizing with the security offered by an attack. The starting point is always a
neurotic disturbance of the psychological equilibrium. An involvement of the
vegetative system, sympathetically and parasympathetically, can unquestionably
be forced by emotions. Or, an additional role is played by a partial or general
inferiority of such a system. In such cases, as well as where endocrine glands
take part in the emotional process, it always has the purpose of diminishing the
emotionality. This can only happen by changing the lifestyle, by strengthening
the ability to cooperate.
20 Experienced psychologists will have no problems with this. We are
dealing with a patient whose illness tends to make him fearful of pain. Other
findings established his earlier empathy for pain experienced by women during
birth. This pain became more plausible to him when as a child he heard his
mother say that the stork had bitten her leg. "She bit his thigh" has the same
meaning here as having been degraded to the level of a woman, his mother's
relationship with his brother humiliated and emasculated him. Recall his
cryptorchidism. 

21 That is, with obviously "feminine" means. I had already pointed out this
mechanism which can easily mislead us to regard neurosis in general as a
"feminine performance." Upon examining the neurotic dynamics this mistake
will be avoided. "Female" final goals, just as "masochistic" final goals, are
untenable and are merely used as a pretext in neurosis. They are "feminine"
means for the "masculine" protest. 
22 This is like the earlier noted masochist who uses subjugation to gain love, i.e.
in the sense of seeking recognition, to arouse sexual desires in a woman. At this
point a number of perversions branch out where, by obviously overestimating
the person being courted, love is aroused and the suitor's conquest is assured. 
23 "Forced to flee, he thinks he is hunting." See Adler, “Das Problem der
Homosexualität,” l.c. 
24 Awakening a feeling of illness and a finding of deficiencies.
Chapter IV
A Fabricated Dream1 2
A Contribution to the Mechanism of Lying in Neurosis
[1910]
Among earlier authorities dealing with the problem of hysteria, almost
everyone highlighted the nature of lying of his patients. This seems somewhat
too strong if I may draw some conclusions from my own material. There was
always the underlying intent to humiliate the physician, to raise oneself above
him. The unacceptable idea that the physician could make himself feel important
should he succeed in curing the patient, which invariably prolongs treatment,
occasionally seeps through either during or after an uncompleted treatment with
the same intent to blame or demean the physician. Such behavior reminds one of
the revolt of the Helots. Among people who regard themselves as equals such
arrogance to consider another as subordinate would not exist. However, the
neurotic, as I have repeatedly discussed, sees a struggle in every form of
personal relationship, in an accidental encounter, in a social life, in a test, and in
his relationship with his family. No wonder that the neurotic's aggression drive
in all cases does not also encompass his relationship with his physician, leading
to a struggle. This, at times can bring about all sorts of rancor, insubordination,
defiance, aloofness, pointed reproach, comparison with other physicians, and the
like. One form of such aggression is the lie.
Some neurotics have a contentious attitude when they start out with their
physician, such as: "I don't believe that I can be cured, but I shall try it once
more." Such and similarly "pleasant" approaches are used by patients toward
their physicians. In other patients such aggressive drive develops over time, but

always against the physician. It is easy to detect that as neurotic symptoms
improve, the aggressive posture against the physician, as previously against
others, existed without the patient having been aware of it.
What is the neurotic's struggle all about? Whatever its nature it can be
resolved into a contrast of "above and below." The patient is in a position to gain
standing with whatever symptoms, be they those of masochism, sadism, fear,
obsession, depression, or heightened emotions. Even the emotions of doubt
bordering on vacillation and indecision are directed toward an overvalued and
overstretched goal and designed to avoid disillusionment. The masculine protest
permeates the neurotic who looks to rid himself of the feeling of inferiority, a
goal which justifies every means. One of these employed to gain superiority over
another is the lie.3
1 Lecture held in the "Wiener psychoanalytical Vereinigung" on 19 October
1910. Originally published in Zbl Psycholanal., Vol. 1, pages 78-79, 1910. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
It is well known that all children occasionally lie to make themselves
bigger, to avoid punishment or embarrassment. A fixation toward lying and
deceitfulness seems to arise when there is considerable defiance or significant
forfeiture of the aggression drive, analogous to the development of masochistic
tendencies: avoidance so as to gain superiority. A strong attitude of defiance
impedes lying.
This was the case that I have in mind. It concerns a 20 year old girl who
came to me for treatment of enuresis and smearing with excrement. What first
comes to mind is a mental defect, but the girl proved to be of normal
intelligence. Regarding the characterology which is primary for determining
neurosis4 it soon led to what I consider the essential finding: "hypersensitivity,
feeling of insecurity and inferiority, and a tendency toward defensiveness, which
in this case was a constant mistrust through which the patient tried to protect
herself from disparagement and disgrace.”
In this context there were traits of ambition, pedantry, as well as
characteristics that can be summarized as always wanting to be the first and to
keep others from making it. An immense defiance further provoked by a defiant
mother made it difficult for this girl to have any social contacts. When she was
to be held back in school she jumped out of a second story window, injuring her
spine. At the beginning of treatment she tried to upset its course with
assertiveness and arrogance but eventually came to terms with it so that
psychoanalysis progressed well.
Someone familiar with my work will understand that I view the traits

mentioned above as manifestations of an exaggerated masculine protest, the
behavior of a person who defends himself against being regarded as having
female traits. Further particulars of this male attitude soon became apparent. I
shall mention only a few of these here.
A frequently recurring dream relates to sexual intercourse with a man who
lies beneath her. I can explain this dream, which occurs frequently with girls, or
dreams in similar directions (the man dressed in women's clothing, castrating the
man, etc.) as a typical male attitude. The patient in this case expresses in sexual
jargon what has moved her all her life, the craving to be on top. The patient's
older brother in this case plays an ominous role. He was the mother's favorite
and could do things strictly forbidden to the girl. This seems quite common
where boys and girls grow up together. Among other incidents, the boy was not
punished for soiling his underwear while the girl for doing the same thing was
spanked and berated in the presence of strangers and servants.5 In various other
aspects this brother provided his sister with goals and direction and it is he
whom she wanted to overtake in intellect and strength. Along with those desires
run such other thoughts that she and not her brother should have been the first
born and that he should have deferred to her. She arrived early at the idea that he
would be preferred over her because he is a boy. She intended to make him look
bad in the eyes of her mother. She wanted to influence the mother and dominate
her, which was her ideal of the male triumph. The mother, with a similar
attitude, knew no other goal than to degrade her daughter so that the girl's whole
life was filled with silent as well as bitter vocal struggles with the mother. The
first dream was a "Snow White" fantasy. Above everything else, the girl strove
to play the role of her father. There was no sexual arousal with the father. She
did not allow herself to be kissed on the mouth by him or by other men recalling
her childhood fear that she might bear children who would spring from her
mouth.6
3 In general, the neurotic shows a strong antipathy toward lies since the
neurotic, just as Kant saw it, has the idea that lying leads to diminishing one's
personal worth. If he nevertheless lies he needs extensive ameliorating reasons,
or helps himself with amnesia. 4 In these cases consideration should be given to,
albeit, rare complications of an organic bladder defect. Regarding the connection
between organ inferiority and neurosis, see Adler, "Studies on Organ
Inferiority," (Appendix, Prospects for Anuretics), and "Myelodysplasia or Organ
Inferiority" Wiener me. Wochenschrift, 1909, No. 45. In the case under
discussion the change of the enuretic manifestation also argued against an
organic defect.

A dream in which she sat on a horse facing backward reflects a phallic
fantasy with a male attitude: If I have to be a woman, I want to rule, be on top
(psychological hermaphrodite with a male goal).
An obsessive routine to straighten out every object that hung crooked can
be explained by her desire to be a man and to have a straight down hanging
moveable sexual organ. This not unusual symptom serves a security tendency
and coincides with the masculine protest.
The meaning of enuresis was analogous with my other enuresis cases. The
attack always occurred after a deeply felt humiliation and alternated with anal
problems or headaches. Past enuretic dreams provided a clear explanation.
Usually urine was passed in the dream in the form of a fountain, i.e. only as can
be done by a man. I had previously pointed to this psychological betrayal in
dreams of enuretic girls as well as to sculptures of urinating males. At a later
stage enuresis symbolized the male defiance against the mother. Or, she tried
with laziness or fear to force the mother to be with her, to awaken her, or to have
the mother accompany her to the toilet.
Thus, if enuresis as a neurotic symptom was a fixation and symbolic of a
male tendency, it significantly intensified as the girl neared marriageable age. It
would have been difficult to imagine how unqualified she was for marriage or
motherhood. Nevertheless, thoughts of marriage occurred frequently. Dalliances
and flirtations with the intent of making fools of the man were practiced often. It
was apparent that she wished to have many children, but the desire was
ameliorated by her fear that they would inherit enuresis. Since she was small in
stature, she had desires for a very tall man. She increased the problem this
presented in that she assumed almost all men were sexually diseased. She was
terribly scared of infectious diseases and the possibility of being poisoned (along
with the above mentioned impregnation fantasy via the mouth). The fear that a
bridegroom might learn of her defect and afraid she might have injured her
hymen completed the artful security web that she had woven so that any honest
thoughts of marriage were out of the question. The unconscious lie about her
marriage desires became apparent the moment she was reminded how
tenaciously she held on to enuresis and soiling. One day her mother swore that
this girl would never marry. It is with clever malice that neurotics will not allow
those close to them to perjure themselves and, as in our case, will make certain
that the situation sworn to would not come true.7
5 The early enuresis as well as problems with her stool functions point to an
innate inferiority of the urinary and intestinal organs. This could also be
established in the mother and the brother. Fixing such inferiority manifestations

usually is possible through the characteristic of defiance (masculine protest)--I
have repeatedly made this point with regard to sleep disturbances. 
6 See exorcism of the possessed where small devils flee from their mouth.
I made an interesting discovery regarding anus picking. Itching, worms,
hemorrhoids, and fissures led me to conclude that inherited organ inferiority was
present. Also, there was the patient's earlier mistaken belief that the anus was a
sexual and birthing organ. She intentionally caused obstipation because she
feared that she could give birth to children from her anus.8 She was obviously
poorly informed about the structure of the female sex organ. She remembered
that for years she picked her nose just before falling asleep, always trying to
convince herself that she had no second nostril.
Picking her anus, always while half asleep, had the same purpose. She tried
to maintain the fiction that she had only one orifice. 
Soiling herself with stool relates to the expression in dialect "anschmieren," to
smear all over oneself, or to con someone. When a girl is "angeschmiert" it
means that she is held up as a fool or lied to. Our patient, who often heard this
expression in her childhood, took it literally and developed a third sexual
fantasy: to smear a girl with salve means to have sexual intercourse with her. In
her half-asleep state she is the man who smears. By the way, early on she
already had a tendency to smear, i.e. to lie. For some time she simulated cramps
and at other times acted deaf, always expecting to prove her superiority. In this
context comes the following dream: "For a long time I am standing in front of a
mirror. I take particular note of my nose which I look at lovingly. Suddenly I
begin to laugh very hard so that I awoke." 
"I am standing in front of a mirror," reminded her that she had never thought she
needed a mirror and never observed herself in one. Her mother had insisted she
use one which caused her to make a full reversal. She stood in front of a mirror
until her mother became angry. (A defiant attitude to make her mother look
foolish by being obedient, just as she acted with regard to the vow her mother
had taken above.)9 Also, the Snow White motive becomes apparent. She asked
whether she was ugly. The resolution of that idea is to be above her mother. 
"I take particular note of my nose and look at it lovingly." The nose, specifically
the nostril, is familiar to us from the literature. She also remembered picking her
nose. The recollection sees the nose as that part of the body that protrudes
straight out. The literature describes this obsessive handling in terms of the
contrast between straight and crooked, a fantasy clearly reflecting having a
penis. 
"Suddenly I begin to laugh very hard ... " The day before, the following event

had occurred: For a short period of time, the patient's brother had an affair with a
girl and had confided in the patient the various stages of that affair. When he
wanted to break up with the girl he asked his sister to inform the girl of his
intention, which she did over the telephone. During the telephone conversation
she noted that the girl became speechless followed by a pause and then
unrestrained laughter, "as she always did when she tried to smear (make a fool
of) someone." The laughter in her dream, therefore, meant "I make a fool of
someone" (i.e. a girl). 
Since soiling--smearing with excrement10--was one of the patient's symptoms of
her illness, I became particularly interested in that aspect. The interpretation was
as follows: 1. I want to be superior to my mother. 2. I am happy to be a man. 3. I
"smear" girls. The pathology of a childish situation had to be: I want to be
superior to mother and to soil her like father. 
When we arrived at the point in our interpretation where we recognized a
psychological dynamic as in the other symptoms, the patient jumped up joyfully
and shouted: "You see, that was no dream, that was a poem." 
She wanted to "smear" me also, that is, she could not bear the idea of another's
superiority any more than any other neurotic and wanted to demean me, to make
a woman of me, just as her childish fantasy understood it. Without becoming
indignant I explained to her the true situation and since then she has become a
true model patient. 
"Loyalty and harmony can only be found deep down." There are no lies in the
unconscious. Only the conscious state formed her as the masculine protest of a
psyche that feels female but hopes with a lie to escape disappointment.
7 Wulffen describes in his Sexualverbrecher, Sex Criminals, the woman as
generally the sex criminal. He states that actually the masculine protest is
developed in every woman and that in her innermost it keeps her from being
free. Wulffen's generalization is poetic license, a pars pro tot: Criminality is one
form of the masculine protest. However, its various forms are not the
equivalence of criminality. 
8 Even more prominent than Freud's analysis of "little Hans" was in my case the
desire to be a man that arose from the fantasies concerning the patient's stool and
anus. 
9 Such an attitude, often found in neurotics, is not worthy of being called
obedient. It serves the purpose of making sport of an authority, to denigrate it,
and to elevate oneself above another. 
10 A similarly degrading act seems to come from the criminal world, grumus
merdae, wherein thieves defecate where they committed their crime. Hellwig

(citing from Wulffen's Der Sexualverbrecher - The Sex Criminal) tells of thieves
who, after stealing, masturbated. This shows even more clearly the masculine
protest, the symbol of superiority over the inferior female who was robbed.
Chapter V
Adler’s Review of “On Conflicts in the Child’s Psyche,” by C.G. Jung1 2
[1910]
In his presentation of reports by an above average intelligent father on the
intellectual development of his 5 year-old daughter the author shows us again a
child who struggles for its future standing, and thereby provides valuable
confirmation of our knowledge of psychoanalysis. One can easily accept that the
observed tensions were appropriately captured and seen in context. A good part
of those manifestations that were clarified for us in the psychoanalysis of the
neurotic are found in the psyche of the little girl and thus provide us valuable
confirmation of correctly recognized childish and neurotic conflicts.
Jung's efforts at interpretation are astute as well as intelligently moderate.
The strict, critical yardstick by which the supporters of psychoanalysis measure
every new work, as well as the prejudices of the opponents who use every means
to demean psychoanalytical findings, in this respect seem to find it advisable to
discipline their ideas, as does Jung. He only describes, draws only cogent
conclusions, and where there are still open questions, such as on sex education,
allows assumptions to arise here and there so as to withhold his decision for a
later time.
Nevertheless he keeps himself strictly bound to the main threads of Freud's
libido teachings. The awakening stirring of love with regard to parents and the
changes and destinies of these tendencies are cleverly raised and used for a
biological justification of fear conditions, the explorer drive, and the attitude of a
daughter to her parents.
Regarding the psychological dynamic, Jung emphasizes the effect of the
explorer drive under pressure of the sexual drive toward the father. At this point,
in so far as it pertains to the uniformly directed material toward the father of the
child, we raise an objection. The explorer drive of that girl follows, as Jung
correctly points out, the usual line known to us from the infantile material of the
neurotics, as well as from analyses of child neurotics (compare Freud's "Kleiner
Hans"--Little Hans--and Adler "Disposition zur Neurose”--Disposition Toward
Neurosis), and which relates to the question: from where do children come?
Anna's explorer drive becomes very active while thinking about birthing. She
has a premonition of a future female role and relates--it is not clear from what
experience--the act of birthing with dying, a basic mood that harbors feartul
expectations as if something were about to happen to her. Jung's excellent

presentation allows for advancing one more step. How does the child arrive at
the phobia that contains the formula to be crushed? And to identify illness and
birthing? It is probably justified to believe that the exaggerated conception of
dangers threatening the woman through sexual intercourse and birth disturbs the
child. With all sorts of subterfuges the child tries to gain security through fear
and knowledge. Would it be possible to have children through a process similar
to a foster sister? This is the beginning of evaluating the male. The man is on top
and considers submerging the woman. How would it be if genitals could be
eliminated, planed away, or ride on top of them? In short, how can one make a
man out of a girl?
1 Originally published as “Über Konflikte der kindlichen Seele” in ZbL
Psychoanal., Vol. 1, p.122-123, 1910.
Analyses such as Jung's are the delectable gifts of psychoanalysis. Their
value lies not only in confirming questionable results but also in opening and in
securing new perspectives. Perhaps in pursuing his material on Anna, the above
viewpoint will force itself on the author.
Chapter VI
The Role of Sexuality in Neurosis1 2
[1911]
It is pointless to question whether a neurosis is possible without including
the sex drive. It is, after all, of equal importance in everyone's life. The question
thus becomes whether in the course of the sexual drive, running from beginning
to end, all the various symptoms of a neurosis can be discerned. In this context I
must answer with a short description, not of the unleashed sexual drive, but of its
development in the ensemble of drives. Biologically, it would be an untenable
concept that every drive has a sexual component, that is, the drive to eat, the
optical drive, the sensing drive, etc. Rather, one must assume that evolution led
to a structuring in the organic realm that we have to think of as a modification of
originally existing cell capabilities. Thus, the will and need to assimilate
nourishment led to a digestive organ; a sensing, hearing, and optical organ
resulted from a will and a need to sense, feel, hear, and see; reproductive organs
came from a will and need for progeny. The necessity to protect these organs
was so important that a two-pronged guard was instituted: the feelings of pain
and pleasure. Since these still did not provide sufficient guarantee for protection,
a third guarantor was created in an organ capable of prescience and foresight, a
thinking organ, i.e. the brain.
Nature's field of experimentation contains variations of all three security
factors. The impetus for protection comes from attacks in which lesser forces

give way to greater. Before long there appear peripheral defects, at other times
there is an increase in feelings of pain and pleasure in inferior organs. The most
variable part of the central nervous system takes over the final compensation. It
is doubly unfair to confuse the concept of the inferior organ with Havelok Ellis'
erogenous zone. Few inferior organs exhibit peripherally heightened feelings of
pleasure or react to tickling. Does one really wish to include among erogenous
zones, as Sader has attempted, an inferior kidney, gallbladder, liver-pancreas,
adenoid vegetation and lymph glands? According to recent research, otosclerosis
manifests a lack of sensitivity to tickling in the external auditory meatus.
Furthermore, where in the concept of erogenous zones would you place brain
compensation and overcompensation?
1 Originally published in 1914 in Heilen und Bilden, pages 94-103, as part I
of “On the Critique of Freud's Sexual Theory of the Inner Life: Lecture given at
Freud's Psychoanalytical Association in 1911.” Part II has been assigned to the
next chapter.
Secondly, this approach unfairly prejudices the concept of "erogenous
zones." Not that I would deny that certain perverse fantasies could consciously
and unconsciously attach themselves to inferior organs. I would accept this only
in later life when aided by erroneous sexual ideas, or when under pressure of
certain tendencies for security. In order to become erogenous, these zones
require a secondary drive confluence under pressure of false sexual theories or
conflicting superfluous security tendencies. The claim that a child is
polymorphously perverse is a hystero proteron, a poetic license. The "sexual
constitution" can be cultivated in a variety of ways by experience, upbringing,
and particularly by organ inferiority. Even early maturity can be repressed or
promoted. However, sadistic and masochistic impulses develop at first out of the
harmless interaction between the normally present need for dependence and
independence that arises whenever the masculine protest is questioned. It is
manifested in anger, fury, and defiance.
The sexual organ alone develops the sexual factor in life and in the
neurosis. As sexuality relates to all drives and to their causes, it applies similarly
to every other drive. Before the sexual drive reaches any considerable measure,
at about the end of the first year, the child is psychologically well developed.
Freud cited the belief of older authorities, including Czerny, that the child who
acts defiantly when being toilet trained often ends up neurotic. Contrary to other
authorities, he relates defiance to sexual feelings of pleasure when retarding
bowel movement. I have not encountered a clear case where this is true, but I
will not deny that children who are titillated by retaining their stool by posturing
defiance prefer this particular way of resisting. In such cases, however, defiance

is controlling and the organ inferiority, with regard to localizing and choosing
the symptom, is determinant.
I have much more often observed that such defiant children have their
bowel movement before or after reaching the toilet, or void next to it. The same
is true for such children when urinating, and also when eating or drinking. With
certain children it suffices to restrict their drinking and their "libido" rises
immeasurably. They need only to be told that regular eating habits are highly
regarded and their libido sinks to zero. Can such "libido measures" be taken
seriously or even dealt with forcefully and are they useful for making
comparisions? I have seen a 13 months old boy who had barely learned to stand
but who whenever placed in his seat stood up. When he was told to sit down, he
continued standing and looked around mischievously. At such times his six year
old sister called out to him to keep standing and the child sat down again. These
are the beginnings of the masculine protest while the child's sexuality, which has
been germinating, is constantly being exposed to its impacts and urges.
Also beginning noticeably early is a male preference. I have seen oneyear
old boys and girls who obviously prefer men. Perhaps it is the sound of the male
voice, the confident appearance, their size, their strength and calmness that make
the difference. I pointed to this critically in a lecture on Jung's “Konflikte der
kinderlichen Seele” (Conflicts of the Inner Child.)3 The child's psyche regularly
expresses a male preference. Recently I heard a two-year old boy say: "Mama is
dumb, the maid is dumb, Tonie (the cook) is dumb, Usi (sister) is dumb, Oma
(grandmother) is dumb." When asked whether his grandfather was also dumb, he
answered: "Grandpa is big." Everyone noticed that he had left out the father. It
was taken as a sign of respect. It was easy to understand that he declared all the
females in his surroundings as dumb and thought all the males smart. He
identified dumb with female and smart with male. Such humiliation helped him
gain self-esteem.
I have pointed out in several of my works that especially the children with
discernible organ inferiority, children who suffer from disabilities, who are
considerably insecure and who have a great fear of humiliation and punishment,
develop a greed and rashness that disposes them to neurosis. They yearn
prematurely for proof of their worth or seek avoiding injuring their sensibilities.
They are timid, blush easily, flee from all challenges to their abilities, and are
prematurely incapable of exhibiting a natural behavior. Sometimes they seek to
be fondled, and at other times want to do everything themselves. They shy away
from every sort of work, or are constantly reading. As a rule they are precocious.
Their inquisitiveness is compensation for their insecurity and leads to early
questions about the birth process and sexual differences.

As soon as a primitive knowledge of the sexual process has developed this
kind of intense and constant fantasizing must be seen as stimulating the sexual
drive. Here also the goal is to prove their maleness. I have underscored in my
"Minderwertigkeitslehre" [theory of inferiority], that sexual inferiority with its
more intense feelings of pleasure disposes toward early maturity. If, as so
frequently happens, the masculine protest and a heightened sense of pleasure
coincide, masturbation begins early, as do sexual desires. Notions of fear and
pain accompanying birth and sexual intercourse drive the masculine protest
further. Where fantasies appear in a neurosis about birth, ideas about castration,
or analogous thoughts about being inferior, shortness of breath, and being run
over, they are neither desires nor suppressed fantasies, but symbolically
perceived fears of subjugation against which the neurotic seeks to protect
himself, or which he evokes from his inner self as a warning.
A type not infrequently encountered, and one that until now I rarely had
included in my considerations, are sons primarily of psychologically strong,
masculine mothers, who have a deep-seated fear of women. In their fantasies the
masculine woman frequently plays the role in which she, the woman, is on top of
the man. Or, they have a symbolic penis captivus fantasy, i.e. they fear not being
able to dislodge themselves from the woman while having images of sex
between dogs. So as to be particularly attentive they now act excessively in
everything. Their own sensuality now appears huge, the woman turns into a
demon, and their mistrust grows to where they become sexually useless. They
have to put every girl under probation, secretly observe her, test her (Griselda).
Even with such a girl the naturalness of their relationship is lost.
3 As I now see, with success. See Hitschmann, Freud's Neurosis Theory, 2nd
edition, and Jung (Bleuler-Freudsches Jahrbuch 1913).
Then the following question arises again: Is what the neurotic shows us in
terms of the libido genuine? His early maturity is forced; his obsessive
masturbating expresses his defiance and is security against the demon woman;
his lust for love is aimed only at victory; his submission to love is only a game at
avoiding being subjected to the partner; his perverse fantasies, even his active
perversions serve him only to keep love at arm’s length. Although these are
substitutes they are such only because he wants to play the hero, and because he
fears being ruined if he follows conventional ways. This is particularly the case
because the so called "core problem" of the neurosis, the incest fantasy,
functions primarily to nourish the belief in one's own overwhelming libido and,
therefore, leads to avoiding at any cost every kind of "real" danger.
I shall now move on to an analysis of a recent case. The patient in question
has not yet been discharged. The structure of his neurosis, however, is so clear

that I can present excerpts from this case so as to clarify my point.
A 22 year-old draftsman complained of suffering from trembling attacks in
his hands for the past one and one half years. He also complained about frequent
nightly seminal emissions. The initial examination established that he lost his
father when he was five years old. During his last three years, the father was
hardly able to stand or walk by himself and was blind in both eyes. Only when
he was 17 did the patient learn that his father died of tuberculosis in the marrow
of the spine (Rückenmarksschwindsucht). The patient also was told that his
father's illness was caused by excessive sexual activity. This news arrived at a
time when the patient was engaged in excessive masturbation that led him to
become very fearful for his own future.
Regarding his own future the patient frequently had cause to be disturbed.
As a little boy he was weaker and smaller than his siblings and always looked to
his mother for protection. Because he was her youngest child, she in turn openly
pampered him. His nature was to be fearful and shy. Soon, however, he became
bossy and insisted on assuming the dominant role among his playmates, earning
him few friends. His thirst for knowledge soon became apparent in matters
concerning sex as well as in his work at school. He wished to become an
important man. He was the only one among his siblings who entered high
school. The following is a childhood recollection which reflects his masculine
protest at that time: Whenever he was lying in the grass and looking at the sky,
the clouds formed into a picture of his father. He, the feminine weakling lying in
the female position, above him his father, the male. Until the last few years, he
had female traits. As a child when performing in plays he often had to take
female roles wearing girl’s clothing. For a long time he slept in the same bed
with his two year older sister, thereby satisfying his sexual curiosity. In his
dreams he had incestuous fantasies directed at his mother and sister.
His mother was a strict moralist and the patient had several opportunities to
witness her disciplining his older brothers when they had love affairs. In her
children's marriages the mother looked primarily for material benefits and
plagued one of her daughters-in-law for many years hating her for having been
poor when she married her son. All in all, the mother dominated the patient in
every respect.
When he was nine years old our patient became aroused and started
touching himself. He frequently was sexually aroused when he was in the
company of girls. At age 14 when he began to masturbate every association with
girls was spoiled for him to the extent that he preferred to stay by himself. He
was convinced that his sexual libido was enormous and could barely be
contained. When he learned of his father's illness he immediately assumed him

to have been as sensuous as he himself, which shocked him greatly. He stopped
masturbating! Frequently, despite his fears of an erection, he allowed himself to
kiss a girl. He then tried very hard to avoid going anywhere that he might
encounter girls.
Was his libido actually as strong as he believed? Was it in fact so strong
that for his protection he had to invoke such fears as being in the company of
other people? Much argues against this assumption. He grew up in the country,
later he was alone in a provincial middle school where he had opportunities for
contacts with girls. Some of the girls went far enough to meet him halfway.
When he learned of his father's illness and of its alleged cause he immediately
stopped masturbating. Soon thereafter he began to have sexual relations but
rarely engaged in sex by reminding himself of the financial costs. After his
conquests, he discontinued seeing girls who had freely approached him for fear
of eventually being unable to disengage himself from them. He regarded every
woman as a demon, as exceedingly sensuous, and as someone who sought to
dominate him and against whom he might be weak. This is how he remained
strong. In all this, he despised women, considered them inferior, mistrusted
them, and assumed that they acted from egotistical motives.
Two years earlier he had met a beautiful but poor girl who had initially
attracted him. When marriage was being considered by both it led to his having
massive nightly ejaculations, and, when with prostitutes, experiencing either
ejaculatio praecox or impotence. He also became aware of trembling when at
work, making it difficult to complete his drawings. An examination showed that
his trembling and halting speech occurred only after he had sex or seminal
emissions the day before. The obvious assumption that he had seen his father
trembling and that he now wished to imitate him to frighten himself could not be
affirmed by the patient. However, he remembered a teacher at the middle school
who trembled and spoke haltingly. He assumed these to be manifestations of
older people who had engaged in excessive sexual activity in their youth. A
second reason that he cited came from a paper he read on seminal ejaculation
which caused trembling and halting speech. Further discussion led to concerns
about the impending marriage. His mother would be dissatisfied. His rich
relatives would scorn him. The girl would marry him only for material reasons.
She is sensuous and will reel him into sensuality. He himself is sensuous. The
consequences of his masturbation, ejaculations, and sexual activities were
becoming apparent. For all these reasons he retreated from the girl without really
knowing how to disengage himself fully. This vacillating is equivalent to a "no"
and is also a safeguard against other girls.
He began trembling during my examination so as to recall what was

threatening him. He trembles to avoid his original fear which is once again, as it
was with his mother, of being dominated by a woman. He trembles from fear of
having to succumb to the same fate as his father and his old teacher. He trembles
to escape the demon woman, his own sensuality, as well as that of the girl. And,
despite his own feelings, he trembles to satisfy his mother who is averse to his
marriage which, in the last analysis, would prove his dependence on a woman.
This explains his belief in his excessive sensuality, which he assumes is also true
for women. Furthermore, it explains his frequent erections and ejaculations
caused mainly because of his desire for a woman, his need of a woman, and
because in order to create her, he constantly thinks of sex. And I ask again, how
is one to evaluate the libido of this neurotic person in whose mind everything is
done, arranged, enlarged, distorted, a tendentious artificial and unnatural
product, existing as active and passive at the same time?
The following is a dream the patient had that reflects all these traits and also
entails the most significant tendency, the security tendency: 
"A girl, young and pure and full bosomed, is reclining naked on a sofa. I don't
know what she is saying. (He is thinking of a harlot and also remembers that he
becomes dizzy at the sight of a naked woman.) She tries to entice him. (The
demon woman.) I want to acquiesce but in the last moment I become aware that
I was about to ejaculate and kept myself from approaching her. (An attempt to
go it alone, without a woman. The entire dream shows the warning aspect of
ejaculation and sexual contact as the triggering event of tabes.)" 
The simple explanation given to him that tabes is a consequence of lues had no
effect. Only an understanding of his exaggerated security tendencies stopped the
trembling. 
What then is the core problem of this neurosis? His incestuous fantasy was just
good enough to hide his belief in his exaggerated criminal fantasies. Suppressing
masturbation, which was easy for him, had to be followed by an equal or better
security measure, which was his seminal ejaculations. He became "ill" only
when he faced marriage. He then began to fear again being "underneath", not
like the man, the father, "above," and to come under the influence of a woman,
thereby admitting to everyone his inferiority. I mentioned only as an aside that
he endured just as little to be under a man, such as his colleagues, whom he
constantly tried to belittle and with whom he fought, or under teachers who
appeared to him in dreams threatening tests, or under his supervisor who caused
him to suffer for his affliction. 
How does sexuality become part of a neurosis and what role does it play? 
It is kindled early and stimulated by an existing inferiority and a strong
masculine protest. It occurs and is felt either as enormously powerful to allow

the patient to protect himself in time, or is depreciated and eliminated as a factor
if this serves the patient. Generally it is not possible to consider a neurotic's
sexual impulses or those of "Kulturmenschen" (Note: literally, civilized people),
as genuine so as to deal with them, not to mention regarding them, in whatever
form they take, as an indication of either a healthy or psychotic person. Sexual
impulses are never causes but the substance and the means of personal striving. 
The true attitude of an individual toward life can be established on the basis of
the earliest remembered dreams and experiences, which proves they were
structured in accordance with a planned procedure. In our case, the patient's
earliest dreams occurred when he was about five years of age and were as
follows: 
The first: "A steer pursues me and wants to impale me on its horns." 
The patient believes that he had this dream shortly after the death of his father,
who was confined to his bed for a long time with his illness. If we draw a
connection between the fantasy image of his father in the clouds (God?) it then
brings to mind the boy's fear of death. The subsequent "reconstruction"
(Bierstein) takes into consideration his father's death from tabes which strongly
affected the patient. For a boy who grew up in the country the steer would
appear symbolic of a male, which means for him, being pursued by the steer, as
unmanly, i.e. the role of a persecuted female. Even those not willing to go this
far in an interpretation of the dream, would have to empathize with the child's
ominous feelings. 
The second dream continues these adverse expectations. He thought to have
crashed and fallen onto a hard surface. Dreams of falling always point to the
dreamer cautiously moving into a pessimistic situation fraught with bad
consequences from being "underneath." 
His believes his oldest recollection relates to his first day of school when he
hurried into the girls' school and was turned away, leaving in tears to attend the
boys' school. We may regard this as being similar to his longing not to be sick,
miserable, dead, and "underneath" like his father, but seeking his future in
consonance with a female role which he found in his strong mother (who was
generally regarded as acting like a man and running the household), healthy,
strong, and alive. 
The uncertainty, the lack of preparation for his male role with all its related
manifestations, which also apply to the pathologically nervous, thus became the
axis of his inner life. Necessarily, they then also correlated with the
manifestations of his adult sexual life.
Chapter VII
"Repression" and "Masculine Protest:" Their Roles and Meaning for the

Neurotic Dynamic1 2
[1911]
I may assume that the nature of "repression" as developed and described by
Freud is well known to this group. The causes of repression, however, and the
path from repression to neurosis are not as clear as is assumed among Freud's
followers. The number of illustrations that arise from attempts at explanations is
exceedingly large and often prove not to make the point, or incapable of making
the point. Not to mention those which flatly use analogies from physics or
chemistry, or refer to "congestion" and "increased pressure," to "fixation," or to
"flowing back to infantile ways," to "projection" and to "regression."
Already in the construction of the causes of repression by the Freudian
school the explanations are presented very summarily, employing dogmatic
clichés, or intuition, the basis for which would be useful to establish. The
problem of successful or unsuccessful repression becomes even more mysterious
when ascribed to the "sexual constitution," and the attempt at a simple
elucidation shows a lack of insight into current psychology. The causes of
"sublimation" or "substituting" also are not made comprehensible unless mere
repetition is accepted as fact. "Organic repression" appears as merely an
emergency exit, proof of a possible thought process dealing with changing
operations that has nothing to do with the theory of neurosis.
This brings us to consider repressed drives and drive components, repressed
complexes, repressed fantasies, repressed experiences, and repressed desires.
And above all those hovers the Deus ex machina, a magic formula, pleasure, of
which Nietzsche writes so beautifully: "All pleasure seeks to be eternal, seeks
deep, deep eternity." And Freud: "Human beings cannot forsake once-found
pleasure." Under that premise drastic images are created which every school text
must show: the boy who must suck at his mother's breast, the neurotic who, once
having tasted wine or been washed in amniotic fluids, will constantly search for
more, progressing all the way to the purer forms where the seeker can find no
pleasure with any girl because he is constantly looking for the irreplaceable
mother. If this were the kind of observation that created the method here, as
significant as the progress may have been, suitable for conceptualizing the
psyche operating in a real world and also in the future, and to cast it in an
inflexible form, then the devising of the concept of complexes was another step
to placing the dimensional perception above the dynamic. "Naturally this was
not carried so far that the principle, the panta rhei [constant flux], could not have
been brought in as an afterthought."
1 Originally published in 1914 in Heilen und Bilden, pages 103-114, as part

II of “On the Critique of Freud's Sexual Theory of the Inner Life: Lecture given
at Freud's Psychoanalytical Association in 1911." Part I has been assigned to the
previous chapter. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
The question to be asked is whether the driving moment in the neurosis is
repression or, as I shall state benignly for the moment, the different, i.e. the
provoked psyche, which when examined we shall find also entails repression? I
now ask you to be attentive. Repression takes place under the pressure of
culture, under pressure of the "ego drives," which call for assistance on thoughts
of an abnormal sexual constitution and on a premature sexuality. The question
is: from where does our culture stem? Answer: From repression. And what about
the "ego drives," a concept so pleomastic and so without content as are few
others? Don't these have the same "libidinous" character as the sexual drive?
If one accepts the "ego drives" not as something rigid, as something
individual but, according to Individual Psychological findings, as a tension and
attitude regarding the outside world, as a desire for status, as a striving for
power, for dominance, to get to the top, then one must consider theoretically as
well as practically two possibilities: 1). The desire for status can affect certain
drives by inhibiting, repressing, or modifying. 2). Above all, they must have an
intensifying effect. In our examination, however, the unchangeable, the
immutable for us is the established culture, the society with its institutions, and
our drives, which our purpose is to satisfy, must be content with appearing
merely as a means of providing direction so that at some future time they can
initiate satisfaction. Our eyes, ears, and skin have attained the unique capability
of extending our effective range beyond the bodily sphere and our psyche moves
toward premonition from the present, that is currently, beyond the boundaries of
such primitive means of satisfying drives. Here, increased tension is just as
necessary as repression. In this regard lies the need for an extensive security
system of which we can gain only a glimpse in the neurosis. Which means,
however, that the neurosis in the first instance is security!
Tensions begin, however, on the first day in the child's life and have such a
different effect on all physical and psychological tendencies that what we see is
never something original, unaffected, as something only to change at a later
time. Instead, what we see is what the child has added that corrects and modifies
what drives his life until in some fashion it adjusts to the outside world. During
the first phase in the child's psychological development there can be no
discussion of a permanent exemplary model, nor can identification be talked of
if the child looks to a model. This happens often to be the only way and the only
possibility for drive gratification.
Consider now the many different ways and tempos, the many varied

conditions and different times that gratification of drives has been achieved, and
when one considers the dependency of drives on social institutions and
economics, then one must arrive at a conclusion analogous to the above that
drive gratification, including its quality and strength, is always variable and,
therefore, impossible for us to measure. Do you recall in my lecture on
"Sexuality and Neurosis" that I came to the same conclusion based on my
observations of the sexual drive in the neurotic? That is, the apparent libidinous
and sexual tendencies in the neurotic, as well as in normal persons, allow for no
conclusion with regard to strength or composition of the sexual drive?
How then does the child adjust to a particular, familiar environment?
Remember in how many different ways a child's organism expresses itself,
especially during the first few months when an overview is most likely possible?
Some children never get enough to eat, others act quite moderately when eating,
some reject changes in foods, others want to eat everything. The same applies to
seeing, hearing, excreting, bathing, and to children's relations with other persons
in their environment. During the first days already the child is calmed when
picked up. Influences during a child's upbringing that pave the way have long
range consequences. These early accommodations entail judgmental feelings
toward persons around the child. The child either feels calmed, secure, loved,
and is obedient, etc, or feels insecure, frightened, rebellious, and is disobedient.
If intercession is early and if intelligent methods are employed, the result is a
condition that can be seen as carefree, happy, and conciliatory. The child then
hardly becomes aware of the compulsion entailed in every form of upbringing.
Mistakes made in upbringing, especially where organs are not fully developed,
cause the child frequently to be disadvantaged and to feel unhappy so that it
searches for security. Generally two predominant directions remain open under
such conditions: too great a subjugation or rebellion and a tendency toward
independence. Obedience or defiance--the human psyche is capable of working
in both directions.
These two direction-giving tendencies modify, change, inhibit, and arouse
every drive to the point where anything innate that turns into a drive can only be
understood from that vantage point. As Macbeth's witches put it, "Fair is foul,
and foul is fair." As soon as defiance comes forcefully into play, grief turns to
joy, pain changes into pleasure, life is abandoned and death seems desirable.
Whatever the other loves will be hated, what others reject is valued highly.
Whatever the culture prohibits, to whatever parents and caretakers object,
exactly that becomes a heatedly desired goal. A thing or a person gains esteem
when others suffer from it. They constantly hunt others and yet believe they are
being persecuted. Thus grows greed and a hankering after things, which in our

society is analogous to the murderous struggle of everyone against everyone
else, the start of envy, avarice, of vanity and ambition. Interpersonal tension is
too severe for the neurotic, his drive-needs are pitched to such heights that he
constantly chases restlessly after triumphs. This explains clinging to old
childhood impediments such as thumb sucking, enuresis, soiling, biting nails,
stuttering, etc., and one can easily speak of defiance when such ostensibly
"libidinous" impulses are adhered to constantly.
The same applies to so-called early masturbation, of early sexual
prematurity, and premature sexual activities. I knew of a 17 year-old girl from a
good home who had engaged in frequent sex since the age of 14, and was frigid.
Whenever she had a fight with her mother, which was constantly, interrupted
only by short pauses, she knew how to find a sex partner. Another girl wet and
soiled her bed every time her mother humiliated her.
Poor progress in school, forgetfulness, gaining no pleasure from work, a
need to sleep, are protest indicators in neurotics and are valued, (and I did not
use ”enjoyed”), in battling an opponent. Sigmund in Wagner’s Walküre
describes a part of that psychology: "No matter whoever I met, whether I courted
a friend or brother, I was always spurned. Disaster surrounded me. Whatever
good counsel I gave, others thought it mean, whatever I thought was bad, gave
others pleasure. I encountered feuds wherever I went, wrath pursued me
everywhere. If I sought after delight, I only awakened pain: Therefore, I must
call myself Wehwalt, pain rules."
Thus develops the character of the neurotic which I described in full detail
in "Disposition zur Neurose."3
Whence stems this craving for recognition, the pleasure in contrariness, this
defiant clinging to mistakes and the security measures against too much and too
little (see the description of pseudomasochism in the "Psychische Behandlund
der Trigeminusneuralgie," in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie,
published by Bergmann, 1920). In the last case of the cited article the patient
engages in self-depravation only to assert himself later or elsewhere. 
As you know, I have named two transient points in psychological development
that I have made responsible for this, and which I shall mention here only
briefly. One of these exists in the germination of a considerable feeling of
inferiority that I have observed primarily in connection with inferior organs. The
other is more or less a clear indication of an earlier fear of a female role. Both
explain so conclusively the need for rebelling and the defiant attitude that
neurotic traits always develop, whether the individual is considered healthy or is
under treatment as a neurotic, or whether he makes a name for himself as a
genius or as a criminal. 

From this point forward, feelings are falsified. No longer are there simple and
natural relationships but a clawing after presumed triumphs that seem to lie
enticingly in the neurotic’s future and which constantly sustain his pathological
attitude. The neurotic lives and thinks much further into the future than does the
normal person, and mostly avoids being tested. Often the neurotic's character
hides and it is possible that, as I speak of it, it can be regarded as a character trait
belonging to an eccentric. What does the neurotic say about his character traits?
Some are aware of them even if they don't know their full extent. Many once
knew them but as a result of ambition and vanity had forgotten them. They
protect themselves from these; they dispute egotism by acting contrarily. A
humiliating egotistical drive, for example, avariciousness, lust for revenge,
meanness, cruelty appearing removed from valuable ethical motives always
accompany this behavior. Therefore, the neurotic possesses an "addiction to seek
status" which must have taken charge! 
I presented a good example of such a drive displacement in a lecture at the
Philosophical Society of Vienna (see Chapter III in this volume)4. It concerned a
case of stuttering, a suffering that in every respect is constituted by the
mechanism of the masculine protest. The patient delivered a gift of 100fl. in the
7th District of Vienna for charitable purposes. He was expected to be punctual
for dinner at a good restaurant in the inner city. He already was quite hungry
and, quite out of sorts, walked the long distance to save 12 Heller, as was
discovered during subsequent analysis. As in the case of all neurotics, he desired
everything, all the money, all the women, and the conquest of everyone and
constantly sought to humiliate others. He craved the esteem paid to him. He
could live like an aesthetic when it earned him esteem, could study zealously
when that is what it took to humiliate others; he could be charitable when it was
being recognized, but was penurious in little things when he thought it was not
being noticed. If someone achieved something it bothered him and where
someone was favored he attacked. He struggled rudely with his father and did
not shrink from threatening suicide to get his way. Stuttering was directed at his
father, it paid him back, and gave my patient greater freedom to act. At the same
time it guaranteed him against marriage. He broke off every relationship with the
excuse that he could not marry as long as he stuttered. 
This manifestation of "long series of love affairs," as Freud called it and which
he incorrectly related to the "Oedipus complex," in reality resulted from the
desire to conquer all women (like Don Juan). The patient was afraid of two
possibilities that he sought to avoid: 1) he feared being dominated by a woman,
serving her, and being forced to give up other women; 2) in his egotism, of
which he was only subconsciously aware, he feared that he would not be a good

husband and father and would, therefore, be punished. Uncovering these protest
characteristics becomes the first phase in my analysis, which usually is followed
by an improvement, but regularly also by resistance that is exhibited by an
attempt to humiliate the doctor. 
One of my patients came to me from Hungary for treatment. As revealed in
analysis, he came to me because he could not endure the thought that his sister,
whom I had cured, had spoken well of me. You will say that he was in love with
his sister and you would be correct. However, he was in love with her only when
she spoke well of a man. At the beginning he was polite, almost humble and
modest. He was filled with righteousness and veraciousness. When I
demonstrated to him his vengefulness, malice, lying, and envy he raged for a
long time but finally admitted to everything and declared that he would have to
remain under my treatment until he was cured, even if that would take several
years. When I told him that he would stay for as long as I considered it desirable
he sat there contemplating for some time. Then he asked, smiling: "Did anyone
under treatment by you ever take his life?" I responded: "Not yet, but I am
prepared for that at any time."5 Among his other symptoms the patient also
suffered from insomnia. He urged me to discuss this symptom, explaining that
he would be satisfied were he again able to sleep. The analysis progressed
smoothly and the patient had regained his regular measure of sleep before he
informed me of this. 
Did this patient repress his character traits? Not at all. His full masculine protest
clearly was apparent, although in ways that caused not too much internal or
external offense. Freud similarly described the result of an unsuccessful
repression. Traces of the repressed drive impulses are always clearly
recognizable in the neurosis, an area in which Freud himself had made a
significant contribution. They can be recognized not only in the fantasies of the
neurotic and in his dreams, but above all through psychological analysis which
reveals the large and small disharmonies and incongruities in his psyche, and
which allows us to categorize them. 
Of course, the task is still far from complete after uncovering the neurotic
characterology. It is important, however, because knowledge of it sends a
warning to the patient. Based on my experience, the difficult part of treatment
then normally leads to the two transient points of the neurotic's psychological
development, and to the sources of the neurosis: the feeling of inferiority and the
masculine protest. 
We now come to the question that you have been eagerly anticipating: What
causes the neurotic to become ill? When does his neurosis manifest itself? Freud
paid less attention to these points. Yet we know that he assumes it was caused by

an event that strengthened the repression and newly feeds the old psychological
conflict. It cannot be denied that there are obscurities here. Perhaps today's
discussion can resolve them. 
Based on my experience, the neurotically disposed person, who actually suffers
constantly, responds with an acute and chronic attack to every prospect or every
feeling of humiliation. That attack provides us with the point in time from which
we date the start of the neurosis. When new drive-repressions occur they are
collateral manifestations that appear under the increased pressure of the
masculine protest, under pressure of the urge for esteem, and the tendency to
establish safeguards. 
I shall demonstrate this from a case cited in my last lecture. Our patient
remembered that he first began to tremble when playing the violin just as he was
to have proposed marriage to his great love, Albertine. He, therefore, stopped
playing the violin. We now have learned that Albertine was an excellent pianist
which frequently must have brought to our patient's mind that he would have
liked to have accompanied her if he played the violin better. After their marriage
there would be concerts at which his wife would outperform him. All his life,
however, he had feared possibilities where his wife would be superior to him. I
have never met a neurotic who was not possessed by such a fear. I cite only the
case of Ganghofers, which was published by Alexander Witt in the 4th volume
of the first edition of the Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, and also an analogous
case from Stendhal’s remembrances. Both cases concern childhood memories in
which a woman steps over the child. Fantasies, which at times reach the stage of
pseudomasochism, involve giant females, Walküre, and women who tie up boys
or beat them. Tales of female monsters, mermaids, nymphs, women with male
genitals, or boyhood recollections such as those of Leonardo da Vinci are
frequently encountered and find their similarities and parallels in the just as
frequent birth fantasies, thoughts about castration, and desires for female roles.
The last desire often appears significantly weakened and diminished and is
resolved in the question: what would a girl feel?
As you will recall, our patient also had an analogous childhood recollection of a
maid standing over him.6 It was not repressed and also not forgotten, but it
seemed to have been retained without any connection with his present or former
psychological condition. It was stripped of all meaning. Was it possibly an
effective agent? No one can assume that. His case history contains recollections
of an energetic mother, a widow, who managed a large estate, who managed
without a man, and who was said to be like a man. The mother who coddled, but
also punished him was clearly superior to him. When the yearning then
awakened that this weakling child with a female disposition, often laughed at

and punished for wetting his bed, would become a man, when he in ideas,
dreams, and defiant bedwetting gave expression to his masculine protest, he was
helped by his memory of having often participated in female roles in plays, of
accompanying his sister on his first day in school and running into the girls'
school and then in tears refusing to enter the boys' school. Then there were even
more intense situations that drove him further into the masculine protest. His
pubic hair took long to appear and his genitals seemed smaller than those of his
peers. He raised his goal even higher, wanted exceptional accomplishments, to
be the first in school and superior at his office, until he met Albertine whose
superiority he feared. He had depreciated all girls and women, including his
mother, and out of fear approached them with the same attitude: they lacked in
understanding, were not independent, and were frivolous. (See Hamlet: “I have
heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath 
given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, 
you amble, and you lisp. You nickname God's creatures, and make your
wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on 't; it hath 
made me mad.7” 
They also had a bad odor. 
Incidentally, this "component of odor" to which Freud repeatedly had attributed
particular importance as a libido component, increasingly seems to me a neurotic
swindle. A 54 year old female patient, who from fear of bearing children became
seriously neurotic, had the following, unmistakable dream toward the end of her
treatment: "I unpack eggs. They all stink. I say 'pfui, these stink!'" Her husband
was expected to return the following day. She already deprecated all medical
resources in Germany and Austria. A neurotic actress began to talk about love
affairs. She said: "In no way do I turn away from them. I am actually amoral.
There is only one thing. I have found that all men smell badly, and that turns me
off." We, however, see it as follows: With such an attitude one can be quite
amoral without any danger. In "Lehre vom Widerstand"--"Theory of
Resistance,"8 you will find a collection of such cases. Male neurotics react
similarly. It is revenge against the woman. Europeans and Chinese, Americans
and Africans, Jews and non-Jews, accuse each other of smelling. A four-year old
boy, whenever he passes the kitchen, says "it smells." He is on a warpath with
the cook. This is also true of our patient. We should like to call such
manifestations depreciation tendencies, which seem analogous to the tale of the
fox and the sour grapes. 
What is the origin of the depreciation tendency? It comes from fearing injury to
one's own sensitivity. It is, therefore, also a security tendency introduced by the

craving for esteem. Psychologically it is at the same level as the desire to be on
top, to celebrate sexual triumphs, to fly, to stand on a ladder or stairway, or to
stand on the gable of a roof ("Builder Solness"). In neurotics there is a close
association between the tendency to depreciate the woman and to have
intercourse with her. The feelings of the neurotic express this very clearly: I
want to disparage the woman through sexual intercourse. I have called this the
neurotic's Don Juan character. It is no different from Freud's "series of lovers",
which he analyzes wonderfully. The depreciation of the woman, the mother, as
well as all women, leads some neurotics to turn to prostitutes,9 which saves the
effort of depreciating her and also provides the satisfaction of seeing his relatives
burst with anger. The boy sees or has a premonition that it is a male thing to be
on top. Mostly it is the mother against whom he seeks to establish the pathos of
distance. With her he tries to play the man in order to depreciate her and to raise
himself. He scolds her, hits her, or laughs at her, does not listen to her, tries to
order her around, etc. Whether and how much libido is involved in such games is
totally indifferent. He also turns against other girls and women in his masculine
protest, mostly following the line of least resistance by choosing servant girls or
governesses. Later he will masturbate and have noctural emissions, not without
failing to establish security tendencies against the demon woman. 
This applies also to our patient. When he failed to reach his goal with his
mother, to master her, he turned to the maid, with whom, at age six or seven, he
had better success. He saw her naked and when she was dressed reached under
her skirt. Until the present, this was his primary sexual aggression, his main
activity. He attained coitus only with prostitutes; then he found it necessary to
prove to himself that he was unable to marry. This was followed by impotence
and emissions. Fear of his unbounded sexuality set in along with the danger of
paralysis, bringing to mind the trembling in old age. Or better put, trembling and
stuttering along with emissions and impotence because these safeguarded him
from marriage. 
Perhaps he would have broken off the engagement in time and would have saved
himself from neurosis had not a third person entered into the equation. That was
too much for his pride. Now he was unable to stand aside, but he still did not
want to enter into marriage. His "libidos" striving, the desire to possess
Albertine, filled his whole consciousness, but his unconscious self told him "no"
and forced him to turn away from marriage by arranging for symptoms that
argued against marriage. Just as powerful in his consciousness was the thought
that he could marry only when he obtained a good job. Concurrently, signs of
illness came to the fore, making it impossible for him to advance in his
occupation. 

What did our patient "suppress"? Possibly his sexual drive, his libido? He was so
conscious of it that he continuously thought to protect himself from it. A
fantasy? In short, his fantasy was that the woman was above him, the woman
was the stronger. All my preparatory work was necessary to bring to light the
connection between these, as well as similar fantasies, and the neurosis. And
now it turns out that this fantasy itself is merely a nightmare, created and
adhered to by the patient in order to maintain his self-esteem in devious ways!
Did he suppress libidinous feelings toward his mother? Does that mean that he
became ill from an Oedipus complex? I see many patients who are well aware of
their "Oedipus complex" without being able to recover from their illness. If one
were first to credit the masculine protest then one could no longer justly speak of
complexes, fantasies, or desires, but would also learn to understand the apparent
"Oedipus complex" as a small part of the overpowering neurotic dynamic. While
this by itself is insignificant, in this context it becomes a revealing stage of the
masculine protest10, one which also affords opportunities for important insights
into the characterology of the neurotic.

3 Later in the Nervösen Charakter 3rd edition, Bergmann publisher,
Munich, 1922. 
4 Adler is referring to “Der Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose,”
Chapter III in Heilen und Bilden. “The Aggression Drive in Life and in
Neurosis,” has been translated as Chapter XI in Volume 2 of The Collected
Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
5 The goal of every psychotherapeutic tactic is to "disarm the patient," i.e.
to make the neurotic's pathological methods seem ineffectual. 
6 It means: "The woman is stronger than the man!" Always entailed in first
childhood recollections, just as in fantasies about a future occupation, are the
individual's formed philosophy of life, or world view, regardless whether this
concern is genuine, fantasized, or reconstructed recollections (Birstein). See
Adler "Zur Schlafstörung" - "On Sleep Disturbance" in Praxis und Theorie der
Individualpsychologie.
7 The Yale Shakespeare, “The Tragedy of Hamlet,” page 84. 
8 Praxis und Theorie
9 See Adler, Neurological views on Berger's "Eysenhardt" in Praxis und Theorie.
10 A situation to be conceived symbolically.
Chapter VIII
On Understanding Resistance during Treatment1 2
[1911]
The most understandable, yet poorly understood, symptoms of neurosis
consist of a complex of ever present manifestations: obstinacy, willfulness,
contrariness, hostility, and a combative attitude, as well as cantankerousness,
unapproachableness, and dominance. Also in this category are the clinical
concepts of negativism, seclusion, and autism (Bleuler). Patients never fail
trying to explain their attitude logically, not even in psychosis. Such fixations are
always indicative of an inability to cooperate, which is the only correct scale by
which behavior can be measured against the norm.
A patient's contrary attitude toward others can really only be understood in
light of his wrongful tendency toward isolation, a powerless, discouraging
compulsion to dominate, and vanity. While the disparaging posture assumed by
patients often is cloaked in humility, obedience, love, or feelings of inferiority,
the result is always futile and has a negative effect on others. Such behavior, of
course, is expressed toward the physician who, in light of these symptoms, is
thereby afforded an opportunity to understand the patient's personality. He can
then develop the patient's ability to cooperate by disarming him of his weapons

of attack and by explaining and enlightening him regarding his utterances and
bring him closer to understanding his condition.
A patient who had undergone Individual Psychological treatment for two
months asked one day whether she could arrive at four o'clock instead of the
scheduled three o'clock appointment. As much as patients in such and similar
cases may plead the importance of their request, it is fair to presume that the
requested postponement is a sign of increased aggressiveness, and a protest
against the physician. It would be unfair, and would be against the grounds for
the treatment, to give psychological support to the patient by assenting to her
request without making an effort to explore the underlying reasons.
She then explained that she had to go to the dressmaker at three o'clock, a
somewhat weak excuse that might only somewhat be supported by considering
the length of treatment, and the consequently fewer hours of free time available
to her. Since I was busy during the period she asked to see me, I suggested a
session between five and six o'clock. However, the patient refused to make an
appointment for that time with the explanation that her mother was free at five
and expected to meet her at a girl friend's home. Again hardly a sufficient excuse
which only supported the conclusion that the patient resisted treatment.
1 This material first appeared in the Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol. 1,
1911, Pages 
214-219, under the title: "Beitrag zur Lehre vom Widerstand" (On the Theory of
Resistance). Republished in 1920 as chapter X in Praxis und Theorie der
Inividualpsychologie. First translated into English in 1925 as chapter X in The
Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
Freud had repeatedly stated that analysis had to start at the point where
resistance became apparent, and that resistance often, or always, related to
transference. Since, in our view, the psychological relationship differs on these
two points, and often is misunderstood, we should like to explain it in light of
this case.
What first has to be considered is the point during treatment at which
resistance had become apparent. In this case, the patient had been talking for
several days about her relationship with her brother. She had noted that
sometimes when alone with him she experienced an unexplainable feeling of
disgust. Yet, she had no aversions against him and enjoyed going out with him
socially and to the theater. Now she avoids offering him her arm when on the
street for fear that strangers might assume that she was his mistress. At home
she converses with him and allows him to kiss her, something he likes to do

frequently. She herself kisses passionately, and at times experiences a real
mania to kiss. Lately, however, she had become much more reticent with her
brother because her sensitive nose detected that her brother had terrible bad
breath.
The patient's psychological relationship with her brother is quite clear. She
finds herself with emotional feelings against which she takes immediate
protective measures. If those emotions are primarily feminine (to allow herself
to be kissed, to take her brother's arm, to seek out male company), she responds
with the masculine protest which she presents with an inconspicuous logic.
What does she then do to maintain her culturally masculine attitude toward
her brother? She unconsciously makes a false evaluation, becomes extremely
perceptive and foresighted, and at times she is right..3 Clearly, the fear she
expressed of being taken for her brother's mistress when she takes his arm can be
understood only by those with a similar attitude toward a sibling. However, she
is right in her feelings about her brother's affliction with halitosis! Yet, it is
surprising that no one else whom he had kissed as often as his sister had become
aware of this. Our patient in her attitude had made a revaluation unfavorable to
her brother that clearly shows her purpose. Others, given this situation, would
3 Even a maniac can sometimes be right. When I am asked by a patient to
explain a procedure, which is quite a common request, and I find a spelling error
in the text, I am probably correct in pointing this out, no matter how often. In
such a case, however, we are dealing with my procedure, not finding spelling
errors. See, Adler: "Fortschritte der Indiv. Psycholog." in Internationale
Zeitschrift für Indiv. Psych., II edition, Vol. 1, Vienna, 1923.
only hear, 'No'! 4
Should anyone question the possibility of romantic feelings between a
brother and sister I would not even point to the enormous literary fund in history
and criminology or to pedagogical experience, but would stress that I do not
regard such feelings as particularly deep. It is as if as children the two siblings
were playing at father and mother and the girl, given her neurotic masculine
attitude, would always protect herself in order not to go too far. The brother had
long ceased being merely a brother to his sister and now plays the role of the
future suitor. She, however, is living with him in an imaginary world and one in
which she tries to show her capabilities, and how she plans to protect herself.5
By the way, all incestuous impulses point to an inability to cooperate.
Consequently, the patient, who often has a strong sense of family, will halt at the
boundary of the family.
How far this patient is able to go, however, is governed by her recollections

and by traces of feelings of forgotten events. The total impression imparts to her
the message: "I am a girl; I am not strong enough to control my sexual drive;
even as a child I had little willpower; my fantasy involved playing with
forbidden things; I could not even control myself with my brother! I will be
dragged through the mud and mistreated. I will be sick. I will bear children in
pain, and I will become a slave! I must be on guard at all times and must not
succumb to my drives. I must not subject myself to a man, I must mistrust every
man by acting like a man!" Her female sexuality will become her enemy and this
enemy will be enormously strong and capable of all kinds of deceits. This is how
the neurotic creates in his or her imagination a caricature of the sexual drive
that is worth combating. The male neurotic similarly fears what seem to him
feminine impulses such as tenderness, a desire to subject himself to the woman
who appears in his love life, and whom he caricatures in order to assault. In
order to prove the presence of unmanly, that is, feminine traits, all sorts of
analogies are dragged in stemming from other than sexual relationships.
Psychological traits as well as past weaknesses, sluggishness, a loss of
willpower, and childhood defects will make the same point and are explained by
the masculine protest.6 I have discussed elsewhere that real accidents are staged
or arranged, that defiance (especially by girls who defy warnings by their
mothers) enables girls to use their own sexual activities as a masculine protest
against their parents as well as against feminine shyness. It lets male neurotics
cling to feminine softness and aboulia (frequently in cases of "neurasthenia"), as
well as to impotence for fear of love. All these arranged and often caricatured
false internalized perceptions find a place in the web of the psyche as a warning
to call up the masculine protest to evoke a powerful safeguard against
subjugation.
4 Wrong judgments, whether in terms of over-or under-evaluating, are of
the greatest importance with regard to the psychological dynamic, and apply to
life and to neurosis. Individual Psychology, which makes a clear distinction
between intelligence and common sense, should regard such judgments with the
keenest interest. The story of the fox and the sour grapes presents an instructive
example. Instead of becoming conscious of his own inferiority, the fox devalues
the grapes-and thus stays in good spirits. He has simply adjusted to his
megalomania. This kind of psychic process serves particularly to maintain the
fiction of a "free will," and, in that context, to retain one's personal values. The
same purpose is served by over-evaluating one's personal achievements and
goals, which are driven by a flight from one's own dark feelings of inferiority
and are arranged, and stem from an exaggerated tendency to protect oneself

against the feeling of being "underneath." This arrangement, as I have repeatedly
demonstrated, is exploited by neurotic women and men to its utmost with an
exaggerated masculine attitude. I have shown likewise that a patient's senses, his
hearing, smell, vision, external and internal pain, are consciously overloaded and
made to serve these tendencies, whereby he then becomes at one both judge and
culprit. Compare this with Schiller's epigram: "Well said, Schlosser, we love
what we have and desire what we do not have! Only those rich in spirit can love;
those poor in it covet!" Once a patient understands his attitude he corrects it by
bringing his evaluations in harmony with reality. His adjustment and
cooperation begin with a feeling of being in balance.
5 This thinking ahead, this anticipation followed by safeguarding measures is a
primary function of dreams and creates the basis for what seem telepathic and
prophetic phenomena. It is also the essence of every type of prognosis. The poet
Simonides once in a dream was warned by a corpse against embarking on a sea
voyage. He stayed at home and learned later that the ship sank. We may assume
that this famous poet, who was so pointedly warned against taking this trip,
might have decided to stay at home even without the warning in his dream.
We have thus arrived at the conclusion that the patient at this time is in no
danger of committing incest. Rather, in her tendency for security she reached
further than would have been necessary. In doing so she served a primary
purpose for her masculine attitude: To shape her future independently of men,
and not succumb to the feminine role.
The depreciation of one's partner is a regular manifestation among
neurotics. It can be quite obvious, as it is in our case. It can, however, also be
deeply hidden, and there will be some who, upon reading this, will
unsuccessfully search their material to confirm the general validity of the
assertion I just made. Yet, we so frequently see in neurotics manifestations of
masochism and "feminine" traits, excessive tendencies toward subjugation, and
an openness to hypnotism. The frantic longing for the great, strong man before
whom one can bow down has always captivated our attention! How many
neurotic patients are filled with admiration for their physician and shower him
with praise! It is almost like a love affair. However, problems follow.7 Not one
of these patients can stand adjustment, arguing: "I am such a weakling! I am
incapable of subjugation! I must guard myself by all means in order not to
succumb!" Like someone about to make a high jump, the neurotic takes several
steps back and crouches so that with increased momentum he can fly above
another person.
6 I had a number of patients who, when suffering from attacks, liked to

mention their periodicity, not unlike a theory of Fliess, and with that point to
their feminine "nature." Thereby they revealed to me that they were under the
spell of the overwhelming question, am I a man or woman? The theory they held
calmed them; it said to them that every person is both male and female! During
analysis I regularly meet with references to the periodicity of attacks that are
even used to resist the physician. The patient, however, always has a hand in
periodic attacks. Relapses and cyclothymia always occur when new problems
are encountered.
One of my patients often spoke of being amoral and ready at any time to
engage in an affair. It is only out of aesthetic considerations that men are
repulsive to her! Another patient, who had come to me to be cured of impotence,
had been hypnotized by a charlatan. Upon leaving him the hypnotist told my
patient that by placing his watch fob on his brow he could fall asleep. The
patient was not cured of his impotence, but the experiment with the watch fob
succeeded every time. Since then that patient had undergone treatment by
several physicians. Every time that treatment or medication failed he asked to be
hypnotized, which none of the physicians was able to carry out. At that point the
patient would pull out his watch and apply the fob to his brow to demonstrate
how he fell asleep. The message he meant to convey was: You are unable to
accomplish what a mere charlatan can do, not even what a watch fob can attain!
As soon as the patient, who had always been very distrustful and who had only
thought of depreciating men and women, had recognized the secret of his
psyche, the watch fob lost its powers.
In conducting Individual Psychological research into this denigrating
attitude toward men, I am always taken back to a pathogenic childhood situation
in which the child wanted to be "above" the father. The child would explore,
actually or in fantasy, all possible avenues of attacking the father, brothers, or
teachers. However, I am no less certain that the neurotic character of the
neurotically disposed child, his exaggerated envy and ambition, also strongly
fosters a striving for power.
From that vantage point the double role assumed by the neurotically
disposed child in his attitude toward women can be understood more easily and
can be proven with the available material. On the one hand, the woman--like
everything else that cannot be possessed immediately--is extravagantly idealized
and endowed with magic qualities and powers. Mythology, folk lore, and folk
customs are filled with female giants--as in Heine's "Loreley"--against whom the
man appears puny, or is hopelessly lost. The neurotic quite frequently harbors
frightful traces of such infantile attitudes, conscious or unconscious fantasies,
hidden memories (Freud), or reminiscences of women who towered or walked

over him (see Ganghofer's biography and similar reports by Stendhal). These are
visions that are to be understood not as dreams but as signs betraying the
individual's lifestyle. In time, the psyche's superstructure will manifest itself in
some form of shyness of women, in a fear of being tied down to one woman and
unable to disengage from her. It is against this compelling psychic relationship
in which the man is threatened with becoming subjugated to a woman that the
neurotic directs his safeguarding tendencies, reinforces his masculine protest,
increases his ideas of greatness, and out of his unconscious safeguarding
tendencies denigrates all women. Quite frequently there appear in fantasies and
in conscious thought two female characters, Loreley and (Wiswamitras), the
beloved ideal, and the coarse woman, the mother (Mary) type, and the prostitute
(see O. Weininger). In some cases there is a melding of these two types, the pure
hetaera. In other cases one type moves sharply into the foreground as a feminist
or anti-feminist.
7 See my discussion on pseudomasochism in "Die psychische Behandlung
der Trigeminusneuralgie” (The Psychic Treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia) in
this volume (chapter 3).
As early as at the age of six months children begin to grasp at things and are
not easily dissuaded to give them up. Soon, compelled by a striving for power or
from a feeling of community, they begin to reach for people who are good to
them. Jealousy as a safeguard is associated with the tendency to be possessive.8
If a child is prodded further to expand his safeguards (uncertainty about his
gender role) there can often develop early sexual maturity and timidity. I have
also concluded that regarding the relationships of such children with their
parents and siblings there already exists at this young age the later appearing
neurotic trait of seeking the goal of a godlike superiority, and also the quest for
protection from defeat with a hesitating attitude and an aversion to cooperation.
In and of itself, the forms that early childhood experiences take are of no
great consequence. They are not causes but landmarks. The individual from his
perspective of power acknowledges them, remembers them, or ignores them.
These experiences themselves are recognized and given prominence only
because they are conspicuous and meaningful manifestations within the dynamic
of the neurosis, and are useful as mementos or as means of expressing the
masculine protest. "I am a weakling when it comes to women! Already as a child
I subjected myself to a woman out of love." Hidden behind that thought is: "I
fear women." This fear of the "demonic" influence of the woman, her "puzzling
nature" and her "powerfulness," is followed by denigrating her or fleeing from
her. What follow is psychological impotence, ejaculatio praecox, fear of

infection from syphilis, and a fear of love and marriage because of an inability to
cooperate. If the masculine protest manifests itself in the pursuit of active sex,
the neurotic finds worthy of his "love” the totally depreciated woman, a
prostitute, but also the child and a corpse9, or, alternatively, he turns to the
strong woman whom he seeks to deprecate. Analysis then shows that this person
is motivated by a feeling that he can dominate the denigrated woman more
easily, or by the thought that he can actually dominate the strong woman. This
then is how the masculine protest can transform the fainthearted into a Don
Juan.10
8 In the case of a hebephrenic I found this means of safeguarding extremely
strong. She had an overwhelming tendency to cling constantly to everything that
belonged to her, be that a man, a child, clothing, hats, her own toys, visitors, but
also her home and places in which she had dwelled for some time. The model of
a dominating mother and her own obsession symbolized, for example, by her
passion for cemeteries where she took great pleasure in walking daily, explains
this. Understandably, her dominance led to resisting her physician, especially
because his explanation threatened her dominance. 9 The object incapable of
resisting, of deceit, and dominance.
I have never encountered a male neurotic who did not in some form make
the point, and also tried to prove, that women are inferior. At times they may
also make the same point with men. The struggle with a rival in matters of love
stems from the latter tendency11 and relates primarily to jealousy. The female
neurotic even more regularly denigrates both men and women.
Our patient, now that a male physician is treating her, will always strive to
denigrate this newly arrived male figure. This is true even more so when she
discovers that he rises "above" her in knowledge. In our case "resistance"
became apparent after I would give her any significant explanation on the nature
of protest that is inherent in her neurosis. She would respond with "because in so
many matters you are always right." It is she, however, who wanted to be right!
Therefore, when in her dreams or in daytime fantasies she conjures up frivolous
or depraved sexual images involving me or her brother, it should be interpreted
as a neurotic exaggeration meant to protect herself from such encounters. This
"love transference" to the physician is, therefore, spurious and should only be
seen as a caricature which excludes being regarded as "libido," and in no way
should be seen as a "transference." It simply is an attitude, a habit that stems
from childhood and represents one way to attain power.
The ensuing course of this patient’s illness was typical. It began with a final
struggle to depreciate the physician. She wanted to know and be able to do

everything better. Not a session would pass during which she would fail to raise
objections and make the most flagrant reproaches in an attempt to upset the
physician.
Individual Psychology has all the necessary means to terminate a patient's
distrust of others. Patience, foresight, and anticipation ensure further progress in
treatment that consists of uncovering every pathogenic childhood situation in
which the masculine protest is rooted. A friendly relationship with the physician
will afford both patient and physician full insight into the neurosis, will uncover
false emotions and erroneous assumptions made by a neurotic disposition, and
will keep the patient from wasting his energy. The patient learns from the
Individual Psychologist a way to find himself, the ability to cooperate, and to
gain control over his hypertensive drives. All this for the first time in his life!
Alleviating resistance against the physician promotes this. What remains of the
social feeling in the neurotic and those psychologically afflicted will allow the
physician to connect with his patient.
In strange ways our resistance theory is analogous to remarks uttered by
Pestalozzi in "Lienhard und Gertrud" regarding another developmental failure:
"People who have long been neglected will discover an unbearable burden in
everything that is proper and orderly. You will find when you look not just
superficially but deeply, and if you take them seriously and not merely play
games with them, that they will try to resist you, deceive you, and will seek to
hide from you. You will find that the person who has long and seriously been
neglected will nurture hatred and animosity against those who attempt to
dislodge him from his condition and will oppose him like an enemy."
10 To have sex with several (two) women at one time, or one after another,
but with none for ever. Only the feeling of a fleeting victory without resistance is
tempting. 
11 See the corresponding attitude of the patient in "The Psychological Treatment
of Trigeminal Neuralgia" in this volume (chapter 3).
Chapter IX
Syphilophobia1 2
An inquiry into the meaning of phobias and hypochondria in the dynamic of
neurosis.
[1911]
I have rarely encountered a case of neurosis which did not markedly
manifest a fear of syphilis. At times this symptom is at the forefront, often the
only apparent symptom, and the reason a person seeks medical treatment. At
other times it is interwoven with numerous other symptoms in manifold ways. In

most cases it involves patients who have never been infected with syphilis.
However, even neurotics who have once been infected manifest this type of
phobia, although they more often replace it with a fear of gonorrhea, lice,
vermin, tabes dorsalis, and paralysis, or they fear for the future of their yet
unborn children. Their interest in syphilis disorders is intense and they pursue
this theme in discussions and in literature. Not infrequently this interest is
evident itself in drawings, paintings, and inventiveness, as in the case of Felicien
Rops.
It is common knowledge that people afflicted with phobic disorders and
hypochondriacs are cautious and it would not be worth noting if they did not
share this characteristic with every neurotic. A careful analysis of their
condition would quickly establish that phobic and hypochondriac symptoms are
particularly suitable to protect those afflicted with defeats in life. In fact, it
would seem that cautiousness is almost superfluous since it can be fully
supplanted by a phobia, just as fear is replaced by safeguarding. It is only that
phobias reach back to another phase in human development and are, therefore,
more powerful and more extensive in their effect than caution.
The condition that now arises is a great challenge and demands
considerable understanding from the neurologist. Since phobias spring from
safeguarding tendencies which provide adequate protection to the patient, he can
afford himself the luxury of becoming careless when lightly provoked. In fact,
every person afflicted by syphilophobia will provide proof of how careless he
can be. There is not even a hint of the psychological connection of this
"voluntary ambivalence," as Bleuler would, unjustly, term it. It is part of the
psychology of the hermaphrodite with an ensuing masculine protest and the
controlling, that is the watchful ("sentimental" as Schiller would say!), condition
of the neurotic's psyche which creates the impression that "I can be so careless
that I know no bounds! That means be careful." This is coercive psychological
impetus for those possessed of phobias. It is allowed to surface regularly, either
because instances of carelessness are recalled, or the person, and this is more
significant, arranges it in some small measure.
1 First appeared in Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol. 1, pages 400-406,
1911. Republished in 1920 as chapter XI in Praxis und Theorie der
Inividualpsychologie. First translated into English in 1925 as chapter XI in The
Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
This neurotic arrangement includes, for example, the constant or
occasional rejection of protective measures. As an excuse for such

"irresponsible" behavior one often hears such seemingly contradictory
statements as: "Such measures are useless!" or "I am incapable of using them,"
and many similar expressions.
It cannot be denied that these objections raised by seemingly irresponsible
neurotics have some justification. However, such justifications should apply to
everyone! It should, therefore, not be difficult to believe that the syphilophobic,
who is in this category, can also be different and capable of applying protective
measures.
This behavior entails the same reasoning that I have described repeatedly in
my earlier works: The patient plays with danger and pursues punishment only to
envelop himself more securely in his safety net in order to confront more
drastically other dangers from the outside world as well as his own inferiority. A
patient who came to me for treatment shortly after having become infected with
lues3 expressed this condition as follows: "Now that I have caught lues my fears
have been assuaged. For ten years I have waited for this disease with fear and
trepidation!" What in fact relieved him was his release from love and marriage.
Most of those afflicted with syphilophobia actually apply their safeguarding
tendencies directly to the danger from which the infection arises. They protect
themselves against infection from all possible sources, near and far. They avoid
touching people, drink from only their own cups, abstain from company, and can
use only their own toilet. A more extended protective arena includes
masturbation, ejaculatio praecox, seminal emissions, and psychological
impotence. People thus afflicted also strengthen certain character traits, such as
avarice. This significantly deters them from the path to love. Their aesthetic and
ethical principles are enormously weighted. They see, hear, and sense blunders
and mistakes everywhere, which is not unlike characteristics of those afflicted
with washing compulsion. Girls suffering from syphilophobia often flirt to an
extreme and, not unlike male patients, are repelled by love and marriage. They
attempt to rationalize their aversion to love and marriage by objecting to the
odor from men, their uncleanliness, their flattery, and their lying, all
characteristics, they claim, which would make men impure for marriage. Not
infrequently these women will express fear of becoming infected by men in
marriage. Other safeguards include vaginism and frigidity in women and, among
both women and men, homosexuality and perversions.4
3 Editor’s note: the currently used term is “syphilis.”
When analysis has reached the point of understanding these connections
and recognizes the patient's fear of syphilis as a form of self-protection, a
hallucinatory impulse, and that he is sensing an impending danger and the

penultimate consequence of an ill-considered action, that is, an imminent
infection;5 at that point syphilophobia abates in many cases. A radical cure of the
neurosis--and in many cases the analysis has to be completed--requires a
profound grasp of the unconscious underlying facts and emotions. The final
result of such an analysis is as follows:
1. Syphilophobia is never the only form of protection but works in tandem
with all or most of the neurotic safeguard tendencies. 
2. All safeguard tendencies are initiated, that is to say announced, by an anxious
anticipation. 
3. This anxious anticipation is the result of a feeling of inferiority and insecurity
resulting from an organ inferiority, and stems from a fear of being subjected to
permanent inferiority. This role, acquired in childhood and primarily held fast in
the unconscious during the developing stages of the individual, is characterized
by the attitude of a fugitive who has failed to establish contact with the rest of
humankind. 
I have discussed in other articles in this work the forms of this neurotic dynamic.
They concern various attempts at a personality protest that react to the
perception of having to play an inferior role, a relationship expressed literally
and figuratively as "below and above." 
A very prominent characteristic safeguard measure for those afflicted with
syphilophobia is the fear of women. The medical history of such patients shows
mothers and fathers who have a strong masculine inclination and whose
largerthan-life presence oppressed their child and contributed to their neurosis.6
The degenerate children of brilliant parents are an excellent example of this
theory. The neurotic serves himself by depreciating men and women in order to
escape his own feelings of inferiority. 
Just as clear in its true meaning is an exaggerated belief in cleanliness, which
also derives from a safeguarding tendency and manifests itself in a washing
compulsion, and a concern about stains, dirt, and dust. Along these lines, bowel
movements and urination become ritualistic, not infrequently leading to
obstipation as a sign of a cleanliness compulsion, and, like the other symptoms
listed above, to ways for expending time. There is also an intent to have others
become involved with one's self as with one's bowel movements. Organic
inferiorities are frequently found in the intestinal and urinary tracts, often
appearing in the individual's medical history as hemorrhoids, fistulas,
hypospadia and enuresis. Frightening traces of incidents associated with these
ailments are retained in memory, and are recalled to preoccupy the patient. 
Depending upon how early attention was drawn and focused, there is a constant

fantasizing about problems concerning illness, death, pregnancy and birth (even
by men). These fantasies are fixed on sores, spots, and swellings which become
symbolic, as are thoughts about castration7 and the small size of genitals. The
perception of not having fully attained masculinity leads to extremely
exaggerated domineering, sadistic, and erotic compensatory impulses. The
tendency to depreciate is closely connected to an uncommonly strong mistrust
that constantly searches to find fault in others and impedes any continuing
friendship or romantic relationships. A further problem is mistrust assumed in
childhood, originally stemming from a feeling of inferiority, the most prominent
form of basic insecurity, that leads to inaction.
Syphilophobics draw from commonly experienced events a conviction of their
overpowering eroticism. This conviction fortifies their resolution and constantly
intensifies the phobias it evokes. If this does not fully suffice to protect the
patient, it is followed by psychological impotence or other safeguard measures.
Added not infrequently to these are other phobias such as agoraphobia,
erythrophobia, etc., as well as other hysterical neurasthenic and compulsive
manifestations that make the patient socially inept and save him from love and
marriage. In one case I noted that the patient, in combination with other
manifestations, had sneezing attacks during which he acted like the hero,
unknown to him, in Vischer's Auch Einer. 
Women afflicted with syphilophobia reflect the same attitude as men. They
depreciate men as strongly as afflicted men depreciate women. The meaning of
phobia as a safeguard becomes very clear especially when a patient, who has to
become serious about marriage, takes flight because he mistakenly identified an
exanthema on his skin, or more often a gonorrheal discharge. Signs of organ
inferiority such as paraurethral canals, phimosis, a diminutive penis,
cryptorchidism or small testes, and an enlarged labia minora often cause
consternation, but these rarely are sufficient justification for the individual to
take flight.8
As is so often the case in neurosis psychology, analysis provides an explanation
that is contrary to the belief held by the patient. The patient claims to fear lues9
and therefore abstains from sexual intercourse. We can prove, however, that he
fears women (respectively, men) and for that reason arranges the syphilophobia.
In such cases the hostility toward the other sex always comes through and can be
traced back to earliest childhood. I had previously referred to the use of this
problem made by literary and scientific authors (Schopenhauer, Strindberg,
Moebius, Fliess, Weininger), and now would like to note briefly the ubiquity of
the phobia of women found in poetry and art. In view of the sharp contrast by

which the problem was presented, my attention was drawn in particular to the
poet George Engel [Die Furcht vor der Frau (The Fear of Woman), and Der
Reiter auf dem Regenbogen (The Rider on the Rainbow)], as well as to the very
thoughtful work of Philipp Frey in Der Kampf der Geschlechter (The Battle of
the Sexes). 
Schopenhauer, in his Aphorismen zur Lebensweisheit (Aphorisms on the
Wisdom of Life), expresses himself as follows: "Together, the cherished
principles of knighthood and venereal disease have poisoned life. The
frightening influence of venereal disease is actually far more extensive than
would first appear, in that it is not merely physical but also moral. Since Cupid's
quiver also contains poisoned arrows, the relationship between the sexes has
become strange, hostile, and even devilish in nature. It entails a sinister and
frightful mistrust. The direct influence of such a change in what is basic to
society extends more or less to the rest of all human relationships....” We
probably will cause no harm to the penetrating vision of this great philosopher
when we relate to women in general his original "hostile" impulses against the
strong mother. The fact that Schopenhauer justifies our description of
syphilophobia in other aspects is well known. I should like to emphasize the
trepidation and surprise with which he regarded the power of the sexual drive,
his hypersensitivity, his mistrust, and his strongly expressed tendency to
denigrate men and women. Is it not significant that he named his dog "Mensch?"
(human being). His denial of life has the same meaning as a denial of the sexual
drive, which also applies to syphilophobia. The motive is the same as it is with
our neurotics: The struggle against the strong woman, the fear of woman, and
the fear of descending "below." In the finale of his philosophy he thought that
compassion would bridge this gaping contrast with social feeling, just as
Nietsche paid social feeling his ethical tribute in Wiederkehr des Gleichen (The
Return of Sameness). August Strindberg, one of the strongest masculine
protesters, in his Buch der Liebe (The Book of Love) wrote about the weapons
of love as follows: What are the weapons available to woman with which she
can best defend her weaker self so as not to become subordinate to him and lose
herself?" I refer to the neurotic fear that men have of the woman who is "above,"
to the secret wish of all neurotic women to be above, which I have mentioned
frequently in my writings. 
I should like to mention a number of paintings that have been derived from the
same psychological dynamic. The impulse that lies within them so clearly points
to a fear of the woman that we should not be surprised to encounter the phobia
problems discussed above. Numerous of the finest works follow the
Kampaspa10--Delilah or Salome--motive. When seen superficially they often

represent only the abstract triumph or the power of love, or the problem has been
reduced to where only the physical aspects (the large woman-small man, the
woman on top-the man below) point to the fear of the woman. It is not difficult
to ascertain that the Madonna motive is easily adaptable to this theme. The
denigration of the woman in an art practiced primarily by men11 is among the
reactions to this natural fear. Just as in the case of phobics, a whole series of
paintings can be presented, whether from one or more artists, that all point to the
safeguarding tendencies described above. This is quite noticeable in the
extensive treatment of problems in the works of Rops. The identification with
the problem of neurotics needs no further proof than to draw your attention to
the following paintings: "La Dame au Pantin," "Sphinx," "Pornokrates,"
Cocottocracy," "L'Alcoholiste," "Mors Syphilitica." When Baudelaire declared
that: "I cannot conceive of a beauty without the associated calamity," it sounds
like the text for these paintings. It also describes the feelings of the
syphilophobic. And in his Les Fleurs du Mal, Baudelaire proclaims:
4 In the case of perversions, as I have pointed out in another context [see:
Das Problem der Homosexualität] there is a double psychological mode to be
uncovered. The first is perversion as seen in masochism, to tie down a partner by
subjecting oneself to him or her. The second is perversion at an extreme degree
of subjugation in order to sever a relationship with a partner, to instill fear in
oneself, to flee from other partners, to break up a marriage, etc. This becomes
quite transparent if masochism remains in fantasy. This is associated, as revenge,
with frequent sadistic utterances, fantasies, and revulsion. There is also a
tendency to dominate and harass. The tendency to eliminate what in normal
sexual relations may seem to jeopardize one's own ambitions is always present. 5
Hallucinatory impulses, that perceive the final consequences of an infection in
the form of tabes, paralysis, headaches and absentmindedness, constitute often in
frightful but protective ways the condition of the hypochondriac. 
6 It is as if a young tree planted close to matured trees is being crowded and
impeded in its growth. 
7 Freud later embraced this fully. 
8 Wenger confirmed these findings in an interesting article. (Wiener med.
Wochenschr, 1928)
You roam over the dead, Oh beauty, you laugh at them, You who have
chosen fear as your loveliest ornament. Your most cherished decoration, murder
and horror, Boastfully tell of your pride. 
You are the moment that flitters past us, 
The flame, crackling and fading. 

The man ardently embracing a beautiful woman, Is like the dying who embraces
his own grave.12
The artist, as I have frequently portrayed him, is made of the same
substance as the neurotic. He is accompanied throughout his life by his
organically diverted insecurity.13 He never feels completely at home anywhere.
His uncertainty, whether acting or before a test, his stage-fright, and his fear of
not being able to reach the end, these are the same safeguards, taken to an
extreme, as the neurotic's retreating, his fear of heights and agoraphobia, and his
trembling before the most powerful masculine triumph, love. Fearful to him are
not the heights, but the depths, and while he craves to get "above," he trembles
at being "below." He is protected from neurosis, from which he is often partly
afflicted, by his strong and active social feeling. Syphilophobia is but a fragment
of the safeguard tendency that is to protect him from falling "below," and which
he, therefore, portrays in such gruesome ways.14
10 Kampaspa, Alexander's mistress, riding on Aristotle. 
11 Here, obviously, is one of the reasons for the superiority of men in art which is
that the most far reaching problems in painting and sculpturing stem from the
psychological impulses in men. 
12 Cf. the related discussion in Gustave Kahn Das Weib in der Karikatur
Frankreichs (Women as drawn in French caricatures) from which these quotes
were taken. 
13 Cf. "Psychischen Kompensationen" in Adler's Studie über Minderwertigkeit
von Organen.
In practice my experience has shown that the following portrayals can
easily be grasped, based on what was presented above: 
1. A recently married businessman who lived happily with his wife complained
that for the past several days he had been tormented by a fear of contracting
lues.15 He said he was unable to sleep or work. He was worried about sleeping
with his wife, kissing her, or using the bathroom for fear of infecting her as well.
When questioned about his concerns he said that shortly before he was afflicted
by this phobia, he had kissed a strange girl on the train. His phobia was cured
after two sessions during which it was explained to him that he had tried to
protect himself with syphilophobia from engaging in affairs. However, his
susceptibility to further attacks was hardly affected by this since his fear was that
his true nature would be uncovered and he would no longer be equal to his wife. 
2. The dream of a physician who had been in treatment for some time and who
suffered from seminal emissions: 
"I dreamed that I was present when the Turks besieged Vienna and I anticipated

their defeat and flight. I knew in my dream, from having read this story, when
the Turks would be defeated. In order to get into the action I took a rifle and
hoped to capture Kara Mustapha with the help of several companions. At the
appointed moment Kara Mustapha and several others appeared riding black
horses. My companions fled the scene. I saw myself confronted by an
overwhelming force and also wanted to take flight but then was shot in the back.
I became aware of dying." 
Analysis showed an attempt at anticipating while dreaming, and concerns about
contracting lues followed by tabes dorsalis and death. The idea came to him via
Turks and polygamy. This young physician knew from his reading about an
exanthemata outbreak. The rider on the black horse ("That is, the grim
Thanatos") is death. The shot in the back, aside from tabes dorsalis, also refers to
having suffered defeat from another man and an attempt at expressing a
masculine protest by reaching for a rifle. Finally, the masculine protest comes
through by way of cautiousness: Away from prostitutes! That means getting
away from those women most accessible to the patient. Another protest extends
to many wives, Turks, harem!
The second dream shows similar tendencies which I analyzed in an article
"Träumen einer Prostituierten" (A Prostitutes Dreams) in Zeitschrift für
Sexualwissenschaft, 1908, Volume 2. In his Warnung im Traum (Warning in
Dreams), Lenau treats the same problem:
14 One neurotic showed a definite aversion to painting. He explained it as
follows: "Painting places everything that belongs next to another above
another."
Now there is no longer a house to see. With fearful glances 
He beholds graves all around 
Staked with solemnly beckoning crosses. Then she turns in moonlight 
To relieve him from his torment: Veiled and with ashen countenance She
embraces him--Death
I shall provide no detailed analysis here. Where a patient manifests
syphilophobia it is certain that hidden there is the fear of the woman,
respectively of the man, and in most cases a fear of both.
A Declaration
Chapter X
A Declaration
[1911]
I hereby advise the readers of this periodical that as of today I am resigning
from this journal's editorial office. The publisher, Professor Freud, is of the
opinion that the scientific differences between him and me are such that the joint

publication of this periodical, in his view, seems inappropriate. I have decided,
therefore, to resign voluntarily from the editorship.1
Dr. Alfred Adler
1 Published in Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol. 1, page 433, 1911.
Chapter XI
Organ Dialect1 2
[1912]
In 1910 I wrote a paper on the "Psychological Treatment of Trigeminal
Neuralgia" (Praxis und Theorie) in which I discussed a frequently found human
tendency: to capture or express the psychological overpowering or dominating of
one person by another with a sexual image. In certain nervous persons the effect
of such an "inner slogan" (Robert Kann) goes so far that the sexual organs
assume an appropriate aggressive stance. Popular expressions often employ such
imagery. Examples of this can be found in commonly used words and in satire
such as, ravishing, overwhelming, maiden speech, Schicksalschwanger (Note:
literally, fated pregnancy).
This allows me in criticizing Freud's libido theory to advance another step
and point out what is accepted today even by his opponents: The sexual behavior
and feelings of the nervous as well as the healthy person cannot generally be
regarded as exclusively sexual, not to mention the individual's general
psychological behavior. The Swiss psychoanalysts in particular have ascribed to
this interpretation in the broadest possible way.
The psychological process of this spreading of one mental, sensing, willing
sphere, for example the will for power, to a second, for example the sexual
process, obviously occurs in order to strengthen emotions directed toward
intensifying the feeling of personality. The person then talks, thinks, and acts as
if he or she had in mind the last stage of a sexual encounter. However, there is
no question but that to this person--other than what results from a neurotic or
psychotic delusion, or occurs in dreams, myths, and fables--it is perfectly clear
that the final goal is attained not by a mental image, not through pictures, which
can only be regarded as a modus dicendi. These are accepted as forms of speech,
as a dialect, while, on the other hand, acting and thinking must remain focused
on the way things really are. As Vaihinger expressed it, we are, thereby, faced
with a true "as-if" construction, a fiction, a mental trick, but we must still explore
the purpose of sexualization, or what is meant by other forms of organ dialect
relating to thinking or feeling. Understandably, our concept of organ dialect is
also to be taken as an "as-if" construction since it also extends to feeling and
acting, and not merely to language.

1 Originally published as “Organdialekt”in Heilen und Bilden, pages 130-139,
1914. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
The general answer I gave above, i.e. that these tricks are directed toward
intensifying the personality feeling, also requires a description of the ways this
goal is attained. One of the ways runs along artificially created tracks, that is, it
departs from the original goal and creates a substitute. Behind "feigning
affection," "giving oneself to the arts," to be "smitten by the muse," as in
"crossing swords" with a scientific adversary there can lie a diversion from the
original goal which we can assume was taken for reasons of safety and to avoid
the straight path toward love, or a fight (the fear of having to make decisions). In
other cases, this "drive inhibition," or dependency, establishes the resonance
needed to boost one's personality. The person then with impressive speech,
ideas, and actions, uses false emotions to ensure his goal. Thus, whenever a
sexual encounter is associated with a defeat, I think of the woman as a sphinx
and the man as a transgressor. A second way is more straight lined and comes
about when one's fantasy heightens the temptation of a certain goal by
concentrating on particularly relishing objects such as pouting lips, manliness,
the paradise of childhood, etc.
Incomprehensible qualities thereby are simplified, are explained in
comprehensible terms, augmented, sharpened, and also exaggerated. When
properly explained they will sound "natural." Whatever it is that affects an
individual in particular, or whatever it is that drives him to his own use of organ
dialect, stems from his past history, especially his primary interest, and his
physical disposition so long as it matches and compensates a final goal. Thus,
people who have keen eyesight will show even in the way they express
themselves a richness in visual perceptions, insights, powers of observation, etc.,
as was only recently again ingeniously demonstrated by Pfordten.3 In general,
the reflection of inferior and more sensitive organs influences human
perceptions. In the case of nervous symptoms this connection becomes very real.
Thus, nervous asthma (an inferior breathing apparatus, Czerny's exudative
diathesis) can aid in giving expression to a distressed situation, in that it "takes
one's breath away;" constipation can also lead to stinginess, nervous trismus
(nervous spasms of the jaw muscles), by convoluted thinking, but also obedient
to the inner "slogan," may lead to holding back on one’s earning ability and
possibly also on conceiving.4
3 O. v. d. Pfordten, Weltanschauung und Weltgestaltung (Deutsche Revue,
1912) in a polemic against the concept of Weltanschauung [world view,
philosophy of life] said: "There is no certain evidence to show who first coined

this term. It is said that Goethe first used it. It would fit well his thought process,
which was based on intuition. In any case, his works, in particular Part 2 of his
Faust, are filled with such words as schauen, anschauen, Anschauung (viewing,
looking at, view). Therein lies a onesidedness, since words have their sous-
entendus that cling to them, ancillary ideas that are involuntarily awakened
however they may be defined. Anschauung (view) always has an optical aspect
as well as a contemplative character." Goethe's near-sightedness is well known.
This may well be the basis for the visual talents of poets. Also see, Adler,
Organminderwertigkeit in ihrer Beziehung zur Philosphie und Psychology
[Organ inferiority and its relationship to philosophy and psychology] in which a
reference along this line is made to Schiller.
The intensified effect of such fictitious thinking, speaking, and acting can
easily be seen. It is also understandable that in this context sexual similitude will
be found more frequently because, among other reasons, the masculine impact
(the masculine protest) promotes such turns in the guiding ideal (Leitideal).
The extent to which language and creativity of poets is achieved by
overcompensating for inferior eyes, and how they then deal successfully with
difficulties, can easily be shown. Thus Goethe's theory of colors undoubtedly
points to an original but sensitively appraised visual inferiority. Somewhere
Jules Verne writes about a journalist whom he describes as the embodiment of
his eyes. This, as well as greater psychological feats, might possibly be seen in
Freud's terms as an increased sensuous aptitude, as an erogenous visual zone.
When, however, we regularly find indications that these well endowed organs
and their superstructure are related to internal inferiorities indicating
deterioration, sickness, and inherited family weaknesses, then, contrary to the
unlikely assumption of greater sensuality, there are even stronger reasons to look
for for an explanation based on organ inferiority. It then behooves us to put aside
a libido theory and in its place adopt the theory of organ inferiority and accept
the consequences. Then the failing in Jules Verne's later years of his fantastic
eyesight becomes a piece of evidence that weighs heavily against hundreds of
unsupported speculations.
The effect of such easily understandable and thereby more tangible
accomplishments of an organ dialect can best be seen in the way symbols,
comparisons, and similes are employed by orators and authors. In the following
excerpts from Schiller's Maria Stuart (2nd act), chastity is described as a fortress
and sensual desires presented as French courtiers. The English are rendered as
ensuring security. The striking trend in Schiller's thinking, the overestimation of
women as seen in the Jungfrau von Orleans, Maria Stuart, and in numerous
poems, at times accompanied by strong stirrings of the masculine protest ("Ich

bin ein Mann" [I am a man]), leads also in this citation to the victory of a
woman. The problem of man--woman is presented here in the context of martial
heroics which creates a particularly effective result:
Kent: ....know then, 
The chaste fortress was introduced, The beauty, burning with 
Desire --- The lord marshal, the high judge, The Senegalese alongside ten other
knights Of the queen defended the fortress, And France's courtiers attacked.
4 Encroachment on the affected organ can regularly be found when the
slogan is proclaimed. It is superfluous to assume a "displacement." The
expressions that are acted out from feelings and emotions give voice to an
attitude; it speaks.
... For naught! The assaults were repulsed And desire must retreat.5
The intensified aggression drive, therefore, brings thought, action, and
speech to a degree of compensation that exceeds the original power (of the word,
the deed, or the thought) so that a higher goal can thereby be attained. We have
seen in the use of the spoken language how drawing on human organs for similes
gives a greater emphasis to speech.6
It should, therefore, not be surprising to learn that for greater psychological
effect, aside from speech, similar tools are employed, using an organ dialect,
which dispense with language for communicating and instead expresses itself in
mimicry and physiognomy, in mannerisms to convey emotions, in the rhythm of
dances, in religious ecstasy, in pantomime, and in the arts, especially in music.
The communality of cultures, the similarity of human actions, and the many
ways for stimulating organs, makes such means for communicating easily
possible. And while these means are not as unambiguous as words, they convey
the stronger resonance of metaphorical speech, betraying thereby the tendency to
employ tricks where the spoken word fails to gain dominance and superiority
beyond normal limits. Thus by dint of our inner strength of personality we can
assert influence so that the usual forms by which we express action as well as the
ways by which we become aroused conflict with each other in human
relationships. However, the employment of tricks is in itself evidence of a more
determined attack which the controlling force of all progress (Trans. note: a
Greek term, here), the inner need, is capable of attaining. The theory of organ
inferiority and its consequences (feeling of inferiority--insecurity
-compensation and overcompensation--greater drive for higher goals--greater
desire for dominance) can itself teach us the meaning of the tricks and can make
us understand that we attain only half measures because the will is in contrast
with an underestimation of our abilities. It is the fear of making decisions that

leads insecure people to adopt halfway measures.
This observation also points the way to understanding the more obvious
signs of a disturbed inner life and how based on bodily deportment and
expressions (body language), once again through organ dialect, tricks are used to
assert one's personality. As early as in childhood an inferior organ will make
itself known through feelings and expressions exploited by the will to power that
will remain with the person who has not been cured for the rest of his life. The
digestive organs, the breathing apparatus, the heart, skin, sexual organs, the
motor organs, the senses, the nerves along which pain travels, the bladder,
depending on the organ’s quality and usefulness, are aroused to express the
desire for power. They show the form of hostile attack or assault to which they
are subjected, whether to stand or take flight, or restrain aggression, both in
conformity with the patient's life line and his secret life plan. Brief examples of
organ dialect can be demonstrated in the following: Defiance can be expressed
as a denial of normal functions and normal ways of living (by bedwetting, nail
biting, nose picking, messiness, sloppiness); envy and craving can be expressed
with pain; and dominance through hypersensitivity, fear and nervous organ
diseases. Sexual arousals at times are created by similarly directed forms of
expression. Analysis shows sexual arousal to be a special type and
accomplishment of the aggression drive. The original and basic significance of
sexuality, however, which the Freudian school always tries to claim, is nowhere
to be found in the manifestations and expressions of an ailing inner life.
However, taking flight into an expansioin of the concept such as: trying to
ascribe an asexual meaning to the concept of "libido" (in German, Liebe [love]),
or trying in accord with our views to gain some understanding afterwards by
striving for some unnatural symbolic sexual formulation that does not provide
greater understanding in the long run is not promising and whimsical.7 Given
philosophers’ and scientists’ penchant for approaching reality as closely as
possible, one measure of genuineness is the ability to rid oneself of mistakes and
to openly recognize tenable views.
5 Trans. note: With apologies to every poet who translated this verse. 
6 See Adler, Individualpsychologische Behandlungen der Neurosen in Praxis
und Theorie on the intensified or emotion triggering arrangement in neurosis.
Among the authorities who in their understanding of the basic principles
have demonstrated significant accomplishments in dealing with problems
discussed here we must cite first of all Dr. Ludwig Klages. In his Problemen der
Graphologie and in Prinzipien der Charakterologie (Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1910)
he reported on significant results based on his theory of forms of expression. As

early as in 1905, this researcher developed ideas in his work on Graphologische
Prinzipienlehre [principles of the theory of graphology] showing individual
modes of expression that we, with the author's concurrence, wish to include here
for their importance and classic form (Graphologische Monatshefte, Munich,
1905, p. 7 and 8):
As long as counterforces do not thwart them, an analogous movement
accompanies every inner activity. This is the basic law of expression and
interpretation.
In terms of their most general indicators, the following, for example, must
correspond to movements, i.e. striving corresponds to advancing and reluctance
to retreating; an inner advancing corresponds to a decreasing of movement,
while an inner standstill is reflected in a disruption of movement. With feelings
of resistance, inhibition, and tension come those functions that are considered
opposed to physical resistance and that might awaken intensified feelings of
contact (one might think of involuntarily making a fist).
7 See Hinrichsen, "Unser Verstehen der seelichen Zusammenhänge in der
Neurose und Freuds und Adlers Theorien" [Our understanding of the inner life
connections in neurosis, and Freud's and Adler's theories] Zentralblatt für
Psychoanalyse, Bermann, Wiesbaden, 1913.
Out of innumerable subtle conditions, language lets us know its form of
existence, the extent to which it can change form, shape, color, processes,
temperatures, or odors. It conveys to us, insofar as it applies, that, for example,
an inner 'softness,' as something soft; 'weightiness' as something weighty;
'gloominess' as gloom; 'coldness' as something cold; bitterness' as something
bitter.8 It finds these formulations so that these conditions will be apparent to us.
Of the greatest importance to psychology, but disproportionately more
difficult to evaluate than abstract metaphors, are those that describe the inner
processes as they relate to particular body organs. This is done by attribution:
thus, 'biting' irony is associated with the teeth and their functions, or by referring
to a pedantic situation with the phrase 'bone dry' in association with bones.
Similarly, a talkative person has a 'loose mouth.' Among such phrases the most
meaningful is the age-old adage of separating the 'head from the heart,' which in
innumerable combinations expresses the consequences that come from feeling
and pathos as contrasted with intellect and will. Other such usages are to 'lose
one's head' for not being in control, while 'heartlessness' shows the lack of
kindness.9 Aside from certain bodily feelings (more on that follows) such organ
attributes contribute to the greatest variety of symbolic perceptions10 which are
closely intertwined with philosophical and religious teachings of the past and

can even point to particulars of customs in antiquity. The expression now used to
denigrate 'blackmailing,' for example, relates back to a no longer existing
practice of painting one another black on certain occasions. 'Lefty,' originally a
person who is lefthanded, has become also synonymous with someone who is
clumsy. The phrase 'the power of the imagination' brings to mind the almost
forgotten magic that people once took literally as having the power to transmit
by concentrating either something good or bad (for example, an illness) onto
another person. One can see that concrete metaphors harbor physiognomic
treasures, but to raise them takes considerable study. The last three cited
examples bring up a third characteristic grouping which has much to teach us.
Among those not meant to be figurative are those specifically named.
8 As much as we can select for every particular condition a variety of other
symbols, although not as pregnant, language certainly has selected its own
symbols from a spiritual necessity. For that reason we find the same condition is
symbolized in different languages with similar images. "Melancholy" in Latin is
"gravitas mentis" [Trans. note: this works better in German since the word is
"Schwermut" or, literally, a heavy mood.] The almost similar word, somberness,
is "sombre" in French. Even when other countries prefer other symbolic
qualities, there are none that associate lightness, elation or mobility with sorrow;
nor is darkness, baseness, or immobility associated with happiness. 9 (Trans.
note: this footnote contains words or phrases related to feelings associated with
parts of the body. I shall translate those for which we have similar words or
phrases and skip those that depend on German for the association with no
English equivalents known to me.) Further evidence of this is taken from a large
number of words or phrases as follows: Feelings are expressed as coldhearted,
warm-hearted, heartfelt, softhearted, heartless, kindhearted, heart-rendering,
openhearted, heartbreaking, lighthearted, to have a heavy heart, to have one's
heart in the right place, to take something to heart, to pour one's heart out, close
to one's heart, to look into another's heart, broken heart, loose one's heart, carry
someone in one's heart. Intellect is associated with sharp mind, clear head, open
mind, headless, keep one's head, and break one's head. Obstinacy, self-control,
and irritation are reflected in hardheadedness, pigheadedness, thickheadedness,
to hit one's head against the wall, squareheaded, to keep one's head up, to loose
one's head, to be a hothead.
In the past, when a person was so frightened that his 'blood turned to ice'
physicians naively assumed that it actually coagulated. Even when referring to
'blanching' it expresses a deficiency of blood in the skin. Folk tales consistently
follow up on characters 'who went abroad to learn fear' by pouring cold water on

them. 'Dark moods' and to 'see things black' has other than mere metaphorical
explanations. A person who is agitated actually has his vision blurred, and a
lengthy depression can rob our world view of any color so that whatever is light
is never light and darkness is even darker, if not actually seen as such, but at
least believed to be that dark. Unquestionably, many regard as correct those
things that are done on the basis of prompting from the heart. Expressions such
as 'it breaks my heart' are too specific to be taken as a mere simile. The same
applies to expressions that relate to breathing, such as 'taking my breath away' or
feeling 'relieved.' Common usages are replete with well-founded observations
that can serve to illustrate the basic law of expressions.
The expression that someone is inclined toward another probably is not
seen, as the origin of that word would suggest, i.e. a person leaning forward in a
friendly gesture. The same applies to words such as leaning toward something,
forthcoming, meeting halfway, etc. Words of opposition evoke corresponding
feelings, such as leaning back, holding back, declining, etc. Finally, there are
words expressing grief, concern, and ill will. Inner tension is reflected in the
named body part. The anxious person feels 'beaten down' since he is 'burdened
with anxiety,' anxiety becomes a great weight. His posture is such that observers
see him with his 'head hanging low.'
10 Thus the head is analogous to the mind because it ranges above the body and
seems to dominate it much like the mind and the will control the spirit.
Continuing along these lines, the author then came to the following
conclusion: "There is a general similarity in ways of expressing oneself by
gesturing and in acting." Many comparable observations eventually led me to the
following conclusion: the ways of expressing oneself, acting, emoting, one’s
physiognomy and all other psychological phenomenon, including those of the
sick, are analogous to the subconsciously established and active life plan.11
11 This work was completed at the time that Hofrat S. Exner lectured on
emotional declarations as physical expression.
Chapter XII
Psychological Hermaphroditism and the Masculine Protest - A Cardinal
Problem of Nervous Diseases1 2
[1912]
Enormous progress was made in the treatment of nervous diseases with the
breakthrough of a uniform theory that nervous diseases were caused by
psychological alterations that had to be treated by affecting the psyche. The issue
was finally determined with the intervention of such reputable scientists as
Charcot, Janet, Dubois, Breuer, and Freud, among others. Also, from France

came experiences gained from hypnotic experimentation and hypnotic treatment
that proved the transformability of nervous symptoms and the impact they had
on the psyche. Despite the progress made, the successes from these treatments
remained in doubt so that even well-known authorities, unaffected by the
theoretical findings, attempted to treat neurasthenia, hysteria, compulsion and
anxiety neuroses with conventional shock treatment and hydrotherapy. For many
years, the only result of this expanded knowledge was an accumulation of
shibboleths that were to explain the meaning and nature of the complex neurotic
mechanism. For some, the key to understanding lay in the "sensitive weakness"
or "diminishing tension." For others the key was "suggestibility." "A
vulnerability to shocks," "hereditary affliction," "degeneration," "pathological
reaction," "psychological imbalance," and similar concepts were to disclose the
secret of nervous diseases. For the patient the result was simply a meager
suggestion therapy, mostly fruitless efforts "to talk him out of his illness," and no
less fruitful attempts to prevent permanent psychological damage. Nevertheless,
these therapeutic procedures often led to "traitement moral"3 when the patient
was under the care of world-wise and intuition-gifted physicians. However,
among laymen grew a preconception fed by premature conclusions, based on
having observed an increasing number of accidental neuroses, that the neurotic
suffered only from "auto-suggestions," was guilty of conscious exaggeration,
and could be cured if he were more determined to overcome the symptoms of his
illness.
1 First published as “Psychischer Hermaphroditismus und männlicher
Protest: ein Kernproblem der nervösen Erkankungen” in Praxis und Theorie,
(1920) pages 11-15. Translated into English as Chapter II in The Practice and
Theory of Individual Psychology (1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Editor’s note: “moral treatment.”
It was Joseph Breuer who thought of questioning patients regarding the
meaning and development of their symptoms in such cases as hysterical
paralysis. He and Sigmund Freud at first conducted their interviews without any
preconceptions and established the apparent memory gaps which prevented both
the patient as well as the physician from gaining insight into the cause and
development of the illness. Attempts at uncovering the forgotten material by
applying psychology, examining the pathological traits, fantasies and dreams led
to the origin of psychoanalysis and its method of approach. Thanks to this
method it was possible for Freud to trace the roots of nervous illnesses to earliest
childhood and confirm the existence of a number of psychological mechanisms

such as repression and transference. During treatment, formerly subconscious
impulses and desires regularly were revealed as was the case for the most varied
forms of nervous illnesses. Such findings also were made by other authorities,
often working independently of each other, using psychoanalysis in their
treatment. Freud himself sought to find the causes of nervous illnesses in
changes observed in the sexual drive as well as in a particular constituency of the
sexual drive, a theory frequently attacked, but one that is not inseparable from
the psychological method employed.
As the basic principle in the application of the Individual Psychological
Method, I wish to assert that all nervous symptoms in each individual case can
be traced back to one "common denominator." The validity of such a reduction,
carried out together with the patient, is established by the fact that the
psychological profile that results coincides with an actual psychological event
stemming from the patient's earliest childhood. In other words, the psychological
foundation, the pattern of the nervous illness and its symptoms, has been passed
onward unchanged from childhood. Over and above that foundation, however, a
many branched superstructure evolved over the years, the individual neurosis,
which is not amenable to treatment unless a change is effected in the foundation.
The superstructure absorbed all tendencies affecting development, character
traits, and personal experiences, among which the following are to be
highlighted: the residue of attitudes toward singular or repeated failures in
significant human endeavors--the immediate cause leading to the outbreak of a
neurotic disease. From that point forward all thoughts and actions of the patient
are directed toward rectifying his failures, to pursue mostly useless triumphs,
and, above all, to secure himself against new failures and fortune’s tribulations.
In this he is aided by his neurosis, which becomes his support mechanism.
Anxiety, pains, paralysis, and nervous doubt prevent him from actively
becoming engaged in daily affairs. Obsessive compulsion in the form of
obsessive compulsive thoughts and actions give him, on the one hand, the
appearance of lost activity on the useless side of life, on the other hand,
legitimatized by his illness, the excuse to remain passive.
In the application of the Individual Psychological method, I was myself
compelled to resolve the sources of childhood diseases and thereby came upon
causes that could be traced to negative effects of the organism and to adverse
family situations. Beyond that, however, causes came to light that in part aided
this damaging environment: the familial organic constitution. Regularly and
inexorably I was confronted by the circumstance that inferior organs, organ
systems, and glands with internal secretions put the child at the start of his
development into a position in which the otherwise normal feeling of weakness

and dependency is enormously exacerbated, culminating in a deeply sensed
feeling of inferiority.4 Organs initially slowed in their development or defective
may cause any of the following: a condition of weakness, sickliness,
awkwardness, ugliness (often resulting from external degenerative symptoms),
clumsiness, and a host of childhood defects such as twitching of the eyes,
crossed eyes, lefthandedness, hearing and speech impediments, stuttering,
speech defects, vomiting, bedwetting, and stool anomalies. As a result of such
conditions the child frequently suffers from setbacks or is subjected to
humiliation and punishment which has an adverse social effect. The
psychological profile of such a child soon shows a noticeable intensification of
what usually are normal traits of helplessness, a need for affection and
dependency which deteriorate into anxiety, fear of being alone, timidity, fear of
strangers, a hypersensitivity to pain, prudishness, and a constant fear of
punishment and of the consequences of every action. In short, character traits
that appear, particularly in boys, as seemingly feminine traits.
Soon it becomes apparent in these neurotically disposed children that their
feeling of neglect plays a principle role in their lives. In that context a
hypersensitivity appears that constantly disturbs the psyche's equilibrium. Such
children want to possess everything, eat everything, hear, see, and know
everything. They seek to excel everyone else and carry out every task by
themselves. Their fantasies play with exalted ideas: They seek to save others, see
themselves as heroes, believe themselves to be of aristocratic origin, feel
persecuted and oppressed, and have Cinderella visions. The ground has been
prepared for a burning, insatiable ambition that predictably will be frustrated.
This is followed by awakened and reinforced bad instincts, such as avarice and
envy that grow immeasurably because the child is incapable of waiting for the
gratification of his desires. The child pursues greedily and restlessly every
opportunity to triumph. He becomes unteachable, irascible, despotic toward
younger children, lies to adults, and watches everyone with tenacious mistrust. It
is clear that in such cases of egotism a skilled educator could improve a child's
condition; a poor educator would exacerbate it. Under favorable circumstances
an unquenchable thirst for knowledge will develop or a precocious child will
begin to flourish. Under unfavorable conditions criminal tendencies will be
awakened, or we shall see the profile of a worn out person who will seek to hide
his retreat from life's demands under a well contrived neurosis.
As a result of direct observations made during early childhood traits of
submissiveness, dependency, and obedience, in short, indications of a child's
passivity are complemented, and in neurotically disposed children very bluntly
so, by hidden traits of defiance and rebellion,-- that is, signs of resentment. A

careful investigation shows the presence of a mixture of passive and active
traits, but in all cases the predominant tendency is to break away from feminine
obedience and to assert masculine defiance. There are enough indications for
believing that the defiance is a reaction, a protest against the coexisting impulses
of obedience, or to counter enforced submission, and that its purpose is to
provide the child with quicker drive-gratification, esteem, attention, and
privileges. When this fatal point in the child's development has been reached the
child will feel threatened with being forced to submit. He will then obstruct such
a possibility in every activity of his daily life, whether eating, drinking, falling
asleep, carrying out stool and urinary functions, or keeping physically clean. The
demands of social feelings are stifled. The striving for power unfolds mostly in a
desolate and paltry pretentiousness and in attempts at gaining the upper hand.
4 See Adler, Studie ueber die Minderwertigkeit von Organen, Munich, 1927, and
its continuation in Adler's "Ueber neurotische Disposition" in Heilen und Bilden.
Another, possibly the most dangerous type of neurotically disposed child,
exhibits these contrasting tendencies of submission and active protest in a
narrower context, such as in differentiating means and ends. Such children
appear to have conjectured something of the nature of the dialectic of life and
seek by limitless submission (masochism) to gratify their desires. It is they who
can least endure humiliation, lack of success, compulsion, or patience, and
above all, the failure to triumph. Like those with similar attributes they shy away
from having to act, make decisions, and from anything strange or new. Being
aware of their fatalistic weakness, they establish an alibi with a self-concocted
illness in order to isolate themselves from the demands made by the community.
This apparent double life, which is actually a disguised halt or a retreat, that
in normal children is contained within normal bounds and also forms the
character of the adult, in the case of the neurotic does not permit a singleminded
pursuit of a useful goal, and inhibits the person's decision-making capability
because of fear and doubt.5
In other forms of neurosis, individuals take refuge from fear and doubt in
compulsive behavior and in a ceaseless pursuit after successes, always
suspecting attacks, prejudice, and injustice. They desperately try to play the role
of savior and hero, not infrequently squandering their strength on inappropriate
objects (Don Quixotism). Insatiable and lusting after a semblance of power they
search for evidence of love without finding gratification (Don Juan, Messalina).
A harmony in their striving always eludes them because their two-fold nature,
the apparent double life of the neurotic ("double vie," "disassociation," "split
personality") is firmly embedded in a feminine and masculine part of the psyche,

both of which strive for one uniform personality but seem to fail purposely in
their attempt at a synthesis in order to rescue the personality before colliding
with reality. At this point Individual Psychology has to intercede instructively.
With intense introspection and greater sensitivity it has to safeguard the mastery
of the intellect over divergent and hitherto incomprehensible, unconscious
impulses.
5 In the social role, from which a singular person cannot be isolated, doubt
always means "No."
A deeply rooted feeling that permeates the spirit of a people, a feeling that
from earliest times has awakened the interest of poets and intellectuals which,
powerful but in consonance with our social values and symbols, is expressed as
"masculine" and "feminine,"6 impresses itself in early infancy on a child's mind.
To a child, therefore, the following, with some variations, would be regarded as
masculine characteristics: strength, greatness, wealth, knowledge, victory,
coarseness, violence, cruelty, and action. The opposite of these would be seen as
feminine.
A child's normal need for affection, a neurotically disposed person's
exaggerated submissiveness, the feeling of frailty and that of an inferiority
protected by hypersensitivity, the awareness of one's natural inadequacy, and a
sense of being constantly neglected and prejudiced against, all contribute to
feeling feminine. Active striving, whether of boys or girls, the pursuit of
gratification, the stirring up of drives and passions are the masculine protest that
is added to the equation. Thus, grounded on a false premise that results in false
values, but richly fed by our social environment, there develops in the child a
psychological hermaphroditism that is "dialectically" supported by internal
contradictions and from which develops a dynamic, the baffling urge toward a
strengthened masculine protest, as a solution to the existing disharmony.
The masculine protest is exacerbated first of all by the unavoidable
emergence of sexual awareness which feeds a disharmonious system with sexual
fantasies and sexual urges, causes sexual prematurity, and, from fear of "female"
bondage, can lead to all sorts of perversions. Sexual awareness in particular,
however, 
exacerbates 
psychological 
hermaphrodism 
in 
children 
and
consequently increases psychological tension if the child is uncertain of his
sexual role, or is not made aware of it.7 In such cases the natural insecurity,
vacillation, and doubt will become fixed, and both poles of the hermaphrodite
will be strengthened. The problem for the individual of controlling the
expanding split consciousness will increase immensely and can be resolved only
by manipulating neurotic symptoms, psychologically retreating, or by isolation.

The devotion and effort expended by the physician, patient and educator can
founder on this problem. Only Individual Psychology can shed light on these
unconscious processes and
6 The proverb "a man's word is his bond" comes to mind, as do expressions
of poets (Schiller's "manliness." -- "Frailty, thy name is woman!") Also similar
sentiments from such outstanding authors as Moebius, Fliess, Weininger, etc. 
7 See Adler "Der psychische Harmaphroditismus im Leben und in der Neurose."
In Heilen und Bilden, and in Adler, Das Problem der Homosexualitaet, Munich,
1918.
correct a defective development. Much of what has been covered here was
sometime later presented as a "castration problem."
Chapter XIII
On the Theory of Hallucination1 2
[1912]
Among the thousandfold neurotic arrangements driven by the final goal of
a fictitious superiority, which is grounds for a greater likelihood to hallucinate,
there also occur neurotically expedient hallucinations.
An examination of the actual brain and nerve stimuli, which normally are
assumed to be the seat of sensations, awareness, and occasionally memory,
reflexes, and motor impulses, does not extend beyond the theory of vibrating and
undulating nerves, and of their chemical transformations. To look for more than
plausible and always unprovable connections is a miscarriage of logic that is
permissible only in folk psychology. The structuring of a psychology based on
mechanical, electrical, chemical, or analogous impulses is so incomprehensible
that we prefer to reach for the other hypothesis. It assumes that in the concept
and nature of "life" there exists a psychic organ that has to be taken into account,
that does not subordinate but coordinates, that grew from small beginnings,
responsive to stimuli, and ultimately reached its final form.
Whenever we examine this psychic organ we always find it acting in
response to internal and external impressions, and not only engaged in reacting
but always preparing whatever activity in which the person becomes involved.
However, it does not exhaust itself only in willing but also in systematically
arranging impulses, our conscious and unconscious awareness of them and how
they relate to the world, and in anticipating and guiding the will in a direction
characteristic for the individual. Always in motion, that direction is
undeviatingly toward improvement, augmenting, and intensifying as if all
impressions one has about one's personal situation are the cause for greater or
lesser feelings of unrest and insecurity. Constantly wakeful needs and drives

impede the sleep of the psychic organ. In every one of its manifestations we can
identify restlessness as past history, reaction to one's surroundings as the present,
and in a person's fictitious goal the future. In all this, mental watchfulness does
not operate as dispassionate preparedness that might associate uninhibited
memories with tendentiously experienced impressions to arrive at an objective
result. Anyone not trained in Individual Psychology might fail to recognize even
the most obvious differences and will never become aware of even the most
determining individual undercurrents. For such a person, for example, fear is
fear. But, in studying human nature, it is much more important to establish
whether it is a fear that means running away or a fear that seeks another's
assistance. Were I to examine such a person's ability to remember, or his
capacity for memorizing, his receptiveness or responsiveness I would still not
know where he is going. The primary question in Individual Psychology when
observing a psychological phenomenon is: What are the consequences? Only the
answer will reveal to us what we can expect to find and will permit us to
understand the individual. For that reason, experimental psychology by itself is
unable to teach us something about a person’s aptitude or worth because it can
never disclose if someone uses his psychological resources "for good or for
evil," quite aside from which, many individuals are talented in taking tests
without having a talent for living their lives. In the same way, the successful
accomplishment of a test will depend on the context of the social relationship of
examiner to the person being examined, as well as on that of the person tested
and the test subject.
1 First published as “Zur Theorie der Halluzination” in Praxis und Theorie,
pages 36-40, 
1920. Translated into English as Chapter V in The Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology, 1925.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
Every conception or perception is a complicated activity where the
pervading psychological situation plays a significant role, to a large extent
influencing the direction and degree of mental concentration. Even simple
perception is not gaining an objective impression or a mere experience but a
creative activity involving premeditation and reflection which causes the entire
personality to vibrate. Perceiving and conceiving, however, are not principally
different acts. They relate to one another like the beginning and tentative end of
a process. At any given moment everything that we need and hope for to
approach our individual goal flows into a perception. Even the degree of
pleasure or pain we feel at that point is necessary to promote the effort to reach

the imagined goal. It even spurs us on. Consequently, perceiving is a creative act
that allows us to imagine things, people, and memories from a particular vantage
point that would not have been possible if we had become aware of them
directly. A case in point is seeing oneself as part of a particular memory. This
creative act of an innate psychological capability that has unfolded and is fully in
contact with the outside world also is the basis of hallucinating powers. It is the
same psychological force that makes for creative activity in perception,
conception, memory and hallucination, albeit to varying degrees.
This quality, which can generally be termed a hallucinatory component of
the psyche, can probably more easily be recognized in childhood. Its
inconsistency with logic, which is a function of and essential to a social life,
forces us to restrict, yes, even eliminate pure hallucination from consideration.
The psychic power that actively operates within hallucination remains in the
framework of the socially valid and easily provable functions of perception,
conception and memory. Only where the ego has risen beyond the community
and approaches isolation such as in dreams, or when it seeks to overpower
others, or when in a state of deadly insecurity languishing in a desert having
suffered the tortures of a slow death does set itself free in the comforting fata
morgana of neurosis and psychosis. It is in this condition of isolated human
beings struggling for prestige, their ties having come undone, that the soul
stumbles along the path of those lost to the community, the unreal world, and
builds for itself a second world in which hallucination has validity because logic
no longer matters so much. Most of the time there still is sufficient social feeling
in force so that hallucinating is felt as unreal. This is primarily the case in
dreams and in neurosis.
One of my patients who, due to a venereal disease had lost his eyesight
from an atrophied optic nerve, suffered continually from hallucinations which, as
he said, tortured him constantly. The common assumption that the
diseaseassociated condition of his eyes leads to an irritation that affects the optic
nerve does not address our problem. There is no question of eye irritation,
however the unique, specifically categorized effects, which in their sum are felt
as pain, force us to assume the existence of an equally effective tendency that
subsumes this irritation to serve its purpose. Along this line of reasoning one
arrives at a psychological explanation. Research conducted to date pursued the
question: What are such hallucinations? The answer is a non sequitur: irritation
in the optical area. With regard to all basic facts concerning life and nature, such
as the fact of life itself, organ assimilation, electricity, etc., we make certain
assumptions with regard to their nature that cannot be specifically named or
identified. In hallucination we see a psychological expression, discernable in

perception and memory, contradicting the logic and reality of social life, the
nature of which, up to a certain point, also is not disclosed to our understanding.
We thus learn from this investigation that the hallucinating person has distanced
himself from social feeling, and by evading logic, and throttling his reasoning, is
striving toward a goal other than what is familiar to us.
This goal cannot easily be discerned from the hallucination. Like any other
psychological phenomenon torn out of context it also has various meanings.3
The true meaning of a hallucination, where it is going and why, questions posed
by Individual Psychology, can only be understood from an examination of the
individual as a whole and from his personality. As this resolves into an
individual's expression in a particular situation, it also has validity for the
hallucination.
In the case we are considering, the individual's eyesight was lost, but the
capacity to hallucinate increased. The patient continuously complained about
"perceptions" which to us did not seem distressing, for example, when he saw
colors or trees or snow that pursued him into his room. We should point out that
all his life this patient was a tormentor who had tyrannized his whole household.
From studying his early history we got the impression that here is a person who
gained standing by setting the tone and demanding that his family constantly
occupy themselves with him. Since his blindness this was no longer possible in
the normal course of his business activities or in his role as the overseer at home
except by constantly pointing to the tortures he suffered from hallucinations. He
had changed the means by which he attained his goal. With “arousals that
emanated from his optic area” he created additional hallucinations which gave
him the opportunity to totally subjugate his wife. He hallucinated that gypsies
robbed and mistreated his wife. Out of cruelty and probably also as revenge for
having lost his vision, he constantly awakened his wife from her sleep to
persuade himself that his hallucinations were false, and also to prevent his
tormented wife from being taken from his side.
3 Some fanciful interpreters, such as the sexual psychologists, adhere quite
superficially to a double-meaning phenomenon and talk in that context about
depth psychology.
Just as this patient, after having all his powers wrested from his hands,
regained the upper hand by means of an intensive preoccupation and the
development of his capability for hallucinating, I saw a number of other
hallucinating patients who suffered as a result of similar tendencies. An
interesting and instructive case that came to me some time later was that of a
man from a good family, fairly well educated, but conceited, ambitious, and

fearful, who experienced a business failure. Lacking the strength to turn his
problem around, or to live with it, he took to alcohol. Several attacks of delirium
and hallucinations brought him to the hospital that gave him the excuse not to
carry out his life's work. Such a turn to alcohol is frequently seen and seemingly
makes sense--just as does laziness, criminality, neurosis, psychosis, and suicide--
as an escape mechanism for insecure and ambitious people anticipating a defeat,
and as a revolt against the demands of society. When this patient was released
from the hospital he was finally completely cured and abstained from alcohol.
However, as his past became known he acquired a notoriety that made his family
turn away from him. This left him no other choice but to make his living as a
poorly paid laborer. Soon thereafter hallucinations set in, disturbing him in his
work. He was almost constantly confronted by an unknown man who grimaced
at him, sardonically bothering him in his work. He did not want to believe this
figure was real. By the way, he was quite familiar with the meaning and nature
of hallucinations from his time as an alcoholic. In order to rid himself of his
doubts he one day threw a hatchet at the figure. It nimbly dodged the weapon but
then subjected the patient to a severe thrashing.
This peculiar reaction naturally brings to mind the thought that our patient
at times was capable of mistaking a real person for his hallucination. This is not
unlike a description in several passages of Dostoyevsky's work Doppelganger.
We also learn from this case that it is not enough to simply bring a person
to abstinence. It is also necessary to remake that person, else he will stoop to
find another escape route as in this case where hallucination and other disturbing
consequences ensued. Furthermore, just as in the first case where the individual's
situation prevented him from allowing himself to be removed from the circle of
his family,--his prestige would have suffered as a result,--in the second case the
fear of having to admit failure in life--that is, the same concern for prestige--led
him to declare himself ill, and to seek admission to a hospital. This is the only
way that this case can be understood. Hallucination in this case, just as
alcoholism previously, provided comfort and an excuse for the disappearance of
ambitious and selfish hopes. This case can only be concluded successfully if out
of isolation and discouragement this person could be restored to society.
We also can see how alcoholism, with its ability to produce hallucinations,
provided the means and aptitude for the subsequent development of
hallucinations. Without alcohol as a preliminary stage another preoccupation,
another neurosis, would have set in.
The third case stems from the post-war period and concerns a man who,
after having been exposed to the familiar inhuman and horrible war experience,
became ill with disorientation, extreme irritability, and anxiety accompanied by

hallucinations. At that time he had a medical examination in connection with an
application for a disability pension that he felt was due him because of his
limited ability to earn a living. He told the physician that, particularly when
walking alone, he frequently saw a figure appear behind him, which frightened
him greatly. This manifestation, along with a marked absentmindedness had
made it impossible for him to find as good employment as he had previously.
The complaint about a diminished livelihood and the loss of pre-war skills
is very often found among war veterans. There is no doubt that due to many
years of incapacity many former soldiers had lost skills possessed before the
war. Nevertheless, some of those skills could have been regained. In many
instances, however, there seems to be no effort made toward regaining former
skills. There are enough cases where all hope has been given up that it defies a
simple explanation. A study of the individual histories in such cases discloses
that these people had neurotic characteristics, that they had always recoiled from
decision making, and that now, facing a new test, they succumbed, just as they
had in the past, to a neurotic stage fright. This "hesitating attitude" is further
exacerbated by the lure of a disability pension, a privilege they fervently sought,
and one that would relieve them of any further efforts and trials. They looked for
this pension as a form of affection and caresses, and at times as confirmation that
they were right and others wrong. The monetary compensation comes into
consideration only as a measure of their suffering. Therefore, a patient's neurotic
symptoms must increase to where his ability to earn a living markedly suffers.
Suspicion that the individual might be simulating symptoms is negated by
his early history. Often that is the only way to obviate such suspicions. Our
patient had no friends and no romantic relationships. He lived with his mother
and was withdrawn, even breaking up his relationship with his only brother.
Only the war reintroduced him to a community, but this also failed to win him
over. When a grenade once burst near him signs of anxiety appeared and the fear
noted earlier induced hallucinations. His illness made it possible again to
withdraw from a social group that was unpleasant to him. His attitude toward
society became even more hostile. This secret atttitude toward revolt became
apparent in his work, which in effect represents an affirmation of social
cooperation. Even more than before, having turned against cooperation, he
probably began to feel himself that his work no longer was satisfactory. His
absentmindedness was proof that he no longer paid attention to his work. It was
society, however, whose enemy he had always been, that was to suffer for this.
In the form of a pension it was to pay him tribute as if he were the victor. When
he wanted to be sent home from the front he defied logic and sought salvation
through hallucination. He held on to it even after the war until he had attained

the symbol of his victory, a pension.
In this case also, a cure could be expected only with better adjustment to
society. Even if the symptoms were to disappear, as happens without any
treatment in less tense situations, it would only be a sham success.
Chapter XIV
On Educating Parents1 2
[1912]
Is it possible that there are still educators who attribute to words alone
ameliorating powers? One is tempted, based on all pedagogical teachings and
experiences, to answer that question in the negative. However, one would do
well to credit the human psyche with enough shortcomings to recognize that
somewhere there is someone who, though consciously renouncing the
proposition that words alone can educate, nevertheless will presumptuously
ascribe so much importance to his words as to regress to talking instead of
educating.
However, children from the earliest age exhibit the tendency to resist the
word as well as the authority of parents and teachers. Some aggressive attitudes
that stem from feelings about one's surroundings are so familiar to us that they
do not appear to be rebellious. However, paying close attention to aggression in
the child can develop the necessary sensitivity to understand that a child often
feels at odds with his surroundings and seeks to develop in contrary ways. It is
then not too difficult, if organic defects can be eliminated, to trace all the so-
called childhood impairments and inhibited psychological developments to a
failed aggression against one's environment. Defiance and irascibility, sibling
envy and envy of adults, the appalling traits and manifestations of pre-
adolescence, but also fearfulness, bashfulness, cowardice, and the tendency to
lie, in short, all the emotions that interfere with the harmony of the child in the
home and school should be seen as heightened expressions of the child's
antagonism toward his environment. This also includes pathological
manifestations such as speech defects, eating and sleeping disorders, bedwetting,
and nervousness such as hysteria and indications of obsession.
If anyone needs convincing of the correctness of these assertions he or she
needs only to observe how rarely a child is capable of complying with "words,"
or reacting quickly to an admonition. More instructive perhaps are indications of
"negative successes."
It seems that it is often not difficult to have children, as well as adults, do
the right thing by giving contrary instructions. The only danger in this is that it
undermines all social feelings and does not advance independent judgment.
Besides, a "negative dependency" is a greater evil than obedience.

1 Originally published as “Zur Erziehung der Erzieher” in Monatsh. Pädag.
Schulpol., Vol. 8, 1912. Reprinted in Heilen und Bilden, pages 113-129, 1914.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
In conducting these examinations and by trying to find a cure for failed
aggression one will soon learn that two points above all come under
consideration. Only the social feeling can ameliorate what I believe to be the
natural conflict of the child with his surroundings. Also, the child's urge for
esteem, which considerably increases this conflict, must have some free range
along cultural lines, must be encouraged by confidence in a joyful future, by
respect and by tender care, without upsetting the social feeling.
These are the points that everyone who puts pen to paper must keep in mind
when writing on education and raising children. Furthermore, it must not be
difficult for such a person to uncover childhood emotions in the lives of adults as
if the childhood stage continued into adulthood with only more serious
consequences and personal danger. As for those who only preach they must be
prepared to be decried at the outset, or only be heard and then forgotten. The
anecdote of two friends who once got into an argument about a woman whom
one described as fat and the other as skinny is only too accurate. Our spiritual
life, as the historian Lamprecht said, has reached such a high state of
nervousness and irritability that every sound opinion or expression will be
countered by an opposing argument. And that is only the more favorable
consequence. If under such conditions some kind of balance has been established
between an author and a reader then some timid recognition, or some insight, has
providently been attained. This applies in particular to the educator or caregiver,
but also to the physician. The fruits of their social successes bloom late.
Unfortunately, there are people everywhere who think of themselves as natural
born caregivers, teachers, or physicians and who then happily play at doctoring
children and the sick.
The best advice to parents is to learn from children. First of all, whatever
seems good and smart in a child must be recognized, albeit without
exaggeration. But, as teachers, we must ask for concessions from parents. They
must divest themselves of many preconceptions; we must also ask that they
become more astute observers, and that they look on discipline as an educational
tool for us on only rare occasions. It must also be recognized that the attention
paid to and the interest shown in the well being of the child have become
significantly greater, except where the misery of the poor has snuffed out all
compassion or destroyed the coherence between parents and children. More than
at any time before there is now a greater concern for physical development.

There is knowledge to differentiate between recalcitrance and illness, and there
is an attempt at understanding childhood hygiene more in line with modern
views. We are also beginning to see a shedding of belief in the magic of the rod,
and are becoming skeptical of the fable that punishment strengthens the morals
of children.
But, we teachers should not get on our high horse. We should readily admit
that our science provides no universal rules, and that its development is
incomplete. Furthermore, the best that we have to offer cannot be thought up or
invented, but is derived from objective observations. Also, pedagogy cannot be
studied as a science but as art, and many a teacher first was an artist before
becoming a scholar.
A good upbringing lasts forever and ensures a firm bulwark for life. Who
would not want to provide that for one's children? There never is a lack of will.
What is probably most disturbing to the tranquil development of a child is a lack
of agreement between the parents, and onesided, often unconscious, aspirations
and intentions of the father or the mother. It is these, the parents, that I shall now
address.
How often do we find that one or both parents failed in the full
development of their mental faculties! What matters is not their intellect, but
their social maturity, their powers to observe development, and becoming aware
of changes in the lives of their children. Already the child's school experiences
and day to day relationships with peers often foster conflicts that degrade respect
for the parental home. If there is an attempt to retain that respect, no less by
force, the child can easily succumb to either open or secret revolt. He sees his
parents so often to be in the wrong that his esteem runs toward a defiant
yearning: for everything contrary to the parents' wishes. When this becomes
extreme it can easily be recognized in the child's behavior which seems to say
that the parents should never be right! Parents who look into the past often are
hindered from moving forward. They often adhere to dogmas and obsolete
educational ways because in their daily struggle for existence they isolated
themselves and their family. Social progress passed them by and they are left
with the outmoded ways of upbringing that were passed on to them. Then the
child comes home from school and brings with him new ideas that daily sharpen
the contrast with his parents. Even the differences in values come into play. At
home the child is seen a genius, at school his utterances are regarded as fresh and
foolish. Neglected at home, the child makes his way in school. Or, he exchanges
an unfeeling home situation for the understanding he finds among his peers and
teachers. This aboutface in relationships is encountered often and makes the
child either more insecure or, alternatively, gives him a sense of greater security.

There has to be harmony between the demands made during child rearing
and the development of a person in becoming a member of a community. It is
the children learning only in school to adjust to the world outside their home,
encountering new and hardly anticipated problems, who are in the greatest
danger. At best the parents then can only get the child totally subordinated to
giving up his independence. However, the school, as well as the association with
schoolmates, not to mention with adults, will come into conflict with this
helpless and dependent child, will reject the weakling, make him ill, or else first
shake him up. In the process a weakly suppressed defiance in the child will grow
beyond all measure and rage into all sorts of wrong doings, or else cowardice
and timidity will take root.
If the isolation of the family shows such shortcomings it would seem that
some simple advice would rectify the situation. That, however, is far off the
mark! Careful observation has shown that the parents, or at least one parent, are
unable to change their often subconscious attitude toward society and that they
try time and again to gain within their family the esteen they failed to earn
outside. How often such behavior has resulted in open or hidden tyranny can be
gleaned from the medical records of children who eventually succumbed to
nervous illnesses. At times it is the father who, afraid of his own bad instincts
which he forcefully subdues, overzealously tries to eliminate any such traces in
his relationship with his children. Or, it is the mother who constantly laments her
unfulfilled youthful fantasies and who makes her children a sacrifice for her
ungratified affection or capriciousness. Or, the father, seeing himself cut off
from his longed for goal in life, now spurs on his child with fearful haste to
realize his dreams. Here, a mother who appoints herself as guardian angel for her
children, even after they already had grown up, follows them every step of the
way promoting fear and cowardice. She bewails as dangerous every sign of their
selfassertion, possibly only to prove herself indispensable to them, or to keep her
lackluster marriage "for the sake of the children," or perhaps to avoid having
more children.
In what follows I shall try to describe several typical situations. In all
instances we are dealing with parents who attempt to escape their own sense of
insecurity by employing exaggerated educational gimmickry. Their whole life is
infused with cleverly devised "security measures."3 Applying the latter they
intercede in the educational process and make their children just as insecure and,
like themselves, make the child womanlike, in the worst sense of the word.
They, thereby, plant the seed for the stormy reaction of the "masculine protest,"
which could greatly spur meanness, ambition, sexual precociousness, and
criminal tendencies. In spite of the continuing breakdown of their educational

efforts, such parents see themselves as born teachers, often hiding behind the
notion that they have taken all the possibilities into account. They overlooked
only one thing: to develop in their children the courage to become independent,
to teach them that they are not infallible, and to open the way for them.
Tenaciously selfish, of which they are not conscious, they bar the way that leads
toward their children's development until the children are forced to walk over
their parents.
Sometimes the disaster becomes apparent to the parents, who ascribe it to
"fate" and beyond their understanding, and then give up trying. In such cases one
has to intercede carefully. After all, these are people suffering from an emotional
condition. Lecturing will always be seen as offensive. Some of these parents,
with considerable skill and by means of secretly undermining, can create a fiasco
by applying pedagogical advice so as to make a fool of teacher or physician.
Any success can be assured only by applying great sensitivity, unshakable calm,
and by anticipating problems that might arise with parents as well as children.
And now to discuss such parents and the problem of educating them.
3 The psychiatrist must count them among the "nervous," whether or not
they are under treatment. Their exaggerated sensitivity, their fear of humiliation
and disgrace calls forth the above mentioned "security tendencies," which I have
frequently described as significant neurosis characteristics.
I. Harming children through authority

I have come to the firm belief that the human psyche does not endure
constant submission. This is true whether it pertains to the laws of nature, which
mankind attempts to overcome by force or guile, or to love and friendship. Least
of all does it apply to raising children. The struggle to be free and independent,
to be on top, obviously includes that overpowering drive that lifts all of mankind
into the light. Even the ancient pious and holy men had their hour of inner
turmoil until blind submission to the powers of nature ceased, the lightning bolt
was wrested out of the hand of the gods by one man, and a universal
understanding built dams to reign in the raging powers of the seas, the rivers,
and mankind grasped power into its own hands.
Careful observation teaches us the following about the origin of this
struggle to rise to the top: The smaller and weaker a child may feel in his
environment, the stronger will be his desire, his haste, and craving to be the first;
the more insecure and inferior he feels regarding his caregiver, the more
turbulent his longing to overcome, to gain recognition, and to attain security. In
every child there are traits of insecurity which can be traced in his character for
the rest of his life in the ways the child seeks to protect himself. At times these
character traits are perceived as active and other times as passive. Defiance,
courage, anger, dominance, and inquisitiveness are active security tendencies by
which the child seeks to protect himself against being dominated and from
"being underneath." The most obvious passive security tendencies are fear,
shame, fearfulness, and subjugation. It is not unlike the growth of organisms,
such as plants, where some push through all resistance and strive upward; others
duck under and crawl fearfully along the ground until they hesitatingly grasp at
something and rise. All are seeking to gain the sunlight. The organic growth of
children is not by accident similar in their striving upward and in their drive for
recognition.
As stated, there are parents, and perhaps we all are like them, who have not
fully grown up. Somewhere their growth was stunted, bent out of shape, bent
downward, and still within them is the powerful push and yearning to rise above.
The outside world disregards them, but within their family their word is law.
They are the most ardent defenders of their authority and wherever anyone
defends authority they always mean that to be their own, not anyone else's. They
are not always brutal tyrants, although they have the capacity for that. They will
also use flattery and cunning in order to dominate others. They are always full of
standards and principles. They know everything and must know everything
better and their superiority must always be acknowledged.
The other family members are duty bound to manifest to outsiders the
honor and importance of the dominant person. Only the most favorable aspects

of their family life can be presented to outsiders; all other aspects must be
protected through lying and dissembling. The intellectual and physical progress
of the children has to serve the reputation of the father or the mother; every
reproach in school and all the insignificant childhood pranks are overblown into
parenticide and forever persecuted. The father or the mother for his and her
entire life plays the emperor, the infallible pope, the trial judge, the worldly
wise. This constantly challenges the weak child to run a losing race. Always
ashamed and intimidated, punished, cast aside, and tortured by thoughts of
revenge, the child slowly loses the courage to live, or else finds refuge in
defiance. Everywhere the growing youth sees the image of the parent as
authority, threatening and demanding, wafting in his conscience and keeping
alive the feeling of guilt so that nothing comes out other than cowardly
submission followed by anger or defiant revolt and, eventually, repentance.
The child's future unfolds within this conflict. His actions will be paralyzed;
the restraints imposed on him will seem unbearable. People who grew up under
such conditions can easily be recognized in later life. Their lives are full of
halfway measures. Their inner life is always filled with two conflicting emotions
wrestling for dominance over their soul that can resolve at any moment either
into a fear of taking action or having to act. The most representative type among
such people, the psychological hermaphrodite, always sees things as more or less
and fears any kind of relationship that may seem coercive to him.
II. Harming the child through fear of having more children.
Who can but overlook the great responsibility parents assume when a child
is born. The uncertainty about earning an adequate income, consideration for
their own health, these are concerns that so often consume parents when they
think about supporting and raising their children. No different are the pains and
qualms for parents of children who are ill, malformed, or poorly developed.
Added to these are other concerns. There are concerns related to one's own past
illnesses or a history of illnesses in one's family, such as neuroses, mental
illnesses, tuberculosis, or eye and ear infections. Then there are thoughts about
how easy it is for a child to become a cripple, to become mentally retarded, or
become a criminal, and also of the likelihood for the mother herself to break
down under the pressure of giving birth and nursing the baby. Should one burden
oneself so heavily? Is it fair to expose a child to such a dangerous future?
Such objections are often posed with uncanny logic. And yet, some of those
questions have not been fully answered even to this day. 
However, because of such unanswered concerns, the problems cited above lend
themselves well to scare tactics. As soon as such a problem, which can only be
solved by social means, is raised within the family or brought up by an

individual on his own, it must necessarily lead to harm. We need only point to
the disagreeable and unfavorable results from using prophylactics. Also, one
should consider that artificial means of pregnancy avoidance require a behavior
that exacerbates any existing nervousness. No less significant is that usually the
most cautious people seek to avoid having children and that in the process they
create a complex security system which extends to all their relationships in life.
If in such marriages there are as yet no children then the couple's concern with
protecting themselves will make their whole life seem bleak. They will spin all
sorts of hypochondriacal musings that even go so far as to question their good
health. Matters of comfort and luxury will play an important role in their life,
will raise their egotism enormously, and will establish an unbreakable barrier
against their having children. If a child arrives under such conditions he will find
himself in an unfit environment that will endanger his mental and physical well
being. Each parent will try to place the burden of upbringing on the other so as
to deter further children by proving how difficult it is to raise them. Everything
related to raising the child will be seen as torturous; the mother often will refuse
to nurse the child, and the disturbed sleep and lack of entertainment will
constantly be lamented. All sorts of nervous symptoms will arise, such as
headaches, migraines, and tiredness giving evidence that any additional children
will be dangerous, usually for the mother. Alternatively, the parents exaggerate
their responsibilities in ways that could only hurt the child. They are constantly
preoccupied with the child, listen for every breath taken, anticipate all kinds of
dangers, awaken the child from his sleep, and transcend every rule to a point
where good sense becomes nonsense and doing right a plague. Everyone who
meets such parents will observe how terrible it would be for them to have a
second child. Sometimes after the birth of a child nervousness can grow to such
enormous proportions that it clearly points to a fear of another pregnancy. 
Eventually in the life of an only child all the faults typically of only children will
clearly come to light. The child will become abnormally fearful, will lie in wait
for any chance to take advantage of the anxious parents, play on their worries,
and put them at his service. Defiance and the need for support will grow
immeasurably. Such children are marked by an obsession with becoming ill
since it is through illness that they can most easily become master of any
situation.
III. Harming the "favorite" and the "Cinderella" child.
Undoubtedly, even with the best intentions, it is not easy for parents to
dispense their love and care equally among several children. 
What, however, is the effect of a persistent, deep seated attitude on the part of
parents, and what, in the final analysis, does this mean with regard to the

sensitivities of children seeking equality, or having to cope with once awakened
mistrust. 
Even under the most favorable circumstances, beginning with early childhood,
younger children will feel left behind an older sibling. The urge in a child to
grow tempts constant measuring against his surroundings and comparing
strength with siblings. As a rule, the youngest child is under greater
psychological impetus and develops a greater craving for recognition,
possessions, and power4. As long as this striving is contained within the bounds
of culturally accepted ambition one can expect that it will lead to a most fruitful
development. Not infrequently, however, these characteristics are highly
magnified, causing among other signs jealousy, meanness, mistrust, and
coarseness. The natural advantages of the older child press like a burden on the
younger and force the latter to adopt greater protective measures to establish a
somewhat more level playing field. 
The same is true where one child is favored over another. It creates a fear of
being neglected that affects all emotions so that the person imbued with the
fantasy of being a "Cinderella" eventually becomes timid and taciturn. The
neglected child psychologically shuts himself off and at the slightest cause acts
hurt, a reaction that then turns into a state of persistent hypersensitivity and
irritability. Despondent and lacking in confidence, such a person looks to the
future, tries with all sorts of tricks to protect himself from anticipated illnesses,
and becomes fearful of every test or decision. His energy is depleted from being
constantly afraid of not being able to make it, of being disgraced, and of being
punished. More serious cases turn so dramatically against the child, defiance
becomes such a prominent barrier in his development that the child seems to
accept as justified his neglected state in terms of the other children. When such a
child then becomes involved in some impropriety or prank and the parents or
teacher in anger say: "We have always known that it had to come to this,” then
the proper refrain should be: "Known? No! You have caused it to be this way!"
Sometimes such "neglected" children act disconcerted only when with their
family and close acquaintances; however, when among strangers they no longer
hold back and act as if under pressure of having to live up to a bad reputation. In
such cases it may require only to keep the child away from those with whom he
reacts badly. In very serious cases, however, it may require taking the situation
in hand by acting directly on the child, removing, raising to become
independent, and providing the child with Individual Psychological pedagogical
treatment. 
Often the cause of neglect lies in the child's gender. Frequently the boy is
favored over the girl, although sometimes the opposite is true. Our social mores

in many ways are more advantageous for men than for women. Girls perceive
these conditions quite early and there is a common feeling of being neglected.
Girls either want to do everything boys do, or they seek as females to make up
for their neglect and protect themselves against humiliation and derogation by
being hypersensitive and defiant and adopting character traits that can only be
rationalized as protective measures. They become miserly, jealous, malicious,
vengeful, mistrusting, and at times try with deceit to seem harmless despite
having criminal tendencies. These are not female traits but an expression of
protest by a child who has become insecure in her innermost self. It is the
subconscious inevitable force to attain the same status as the man; in short, it is
the masculine protest. This is not just a case of being neglected but the often
glossed over unfairness of being ignored. In time, of course, if this
hypersensitive child becomes intolerable, if she constantly disturbs the harmony
of the home, further develops her bizarre, stirred up character of protest, her fear
of being neglected will come true. Then, if this nervously disposed child is
punished, more strictly disciplined, and shunted the result will often be seen in
stiffened defiance. 
Alternatively, everyone around such children falls prey to them. They will have
become uncontrollable, a person for whom every relationship becomes a
struggle and every desire is a hungering after triumph and the defeat of another.
That is how the child is driven to the edge of a neurosis, into criminality, and to
suicide. True, there are instances where such a course also leads toward
ingenious creativity. Out of this feeling of being disregarded, insecure, from
fearing a future role, and from fear of life itself, there develops a powerful need
for esteem, for love, and for kindness that can never be fully satisfied, certainly
not immediately. At the last moment, this nervously disposed child is frightened
away from any undertaking and yields to a timidity that bars any convincing
action. All forms of nervousness burgeon here and, when they sprout, they feed
the fear of making decisions. Or, the pent up emotions breach all moral and
psychological barriers, and impetuously force action that too often leads along
the forbidden path toward criminality and vice. 
As for the favored child, the spoiled and coddled child, harm comes to such a
child from having learned to misuse his prematurely gained powers early. As a
result his drive for esteem is so little restricted and so hard to manage that the
child feels slighted by every unfulfilled desire, even if caused by the demands of
life themselves. Thus the parents work hard in order to attain conditions for their
favored child that imbue him with the same irritability and hypersensitivity that
we find in the neglected child. However, this becomes apparent only when the
child is in school or away from home. Then we can see that the same insecurity,

the same fearfulness and anxiety about life seen in the neglected child also
characterize the favored child. At times these traits are hidden behind insolent
behavior and irascibility. Since such children had become used to finding
support in their surroundings, to assigning serving roles to parents and siblings,
they continue to look for it when among strangers. If they fail to find it, they
withdraw, intimidated and angry. 
Both forms of upbringing thus lead to heightened emotions and threaten constant
dissatisfaction, pessimism, Weltschmerz, and irresoluteness. It is not uncommon
that pampering is found where there is an only child. It is easy to see how often
harm from pampering is associated with fear of having any additional children.
Exaggerated parental authority also has a stronger effect when it cannot be
distributed among several children but is focused on one child. 
Particularly in the case of pampering there arise a number of problems that can
be overcome only if the parents are especially observant and have an
exceedingly fine talent for raising children. This is the case where there are sick
or crippled children. Who is not touched by the idea of a loving and devoted
mother nursing a sick child? And yet, a surfeit of affection can easily be devoted
especially to children who are constantly ill or where siblings had died. The
child feels comfortable with the idea that his illness can ensure "security" in life,
that it will provide him with greater love, protection, and afford him many other
advantages. There is a straight line that leads from the early years replete with
indulgences that will have an impact in later years--to be allowed to sleep in the
parents’ bed; to be constantly under their care; to be relieved of all concerns--to
a loss of all hope and a desire for acting independently. Robbing children who
suffered a setback by nature of all belief in life is even more infuriating because
it can often only be avoided with great effort. A parent's or caregiver's devotion
to upbringing and to pedagogical discipline must be so strong that they are able
to ignore whatever personal pain it may cause helping a crippled or illfated child
to attain the courage to live and act independently. 
The preference given to attractive and well-developed children in most cases is
based on understandable motives of parents and caregivers. However, since
subconscious and uncontrollable feelings of pride come into consideration such
partiality often goes too far. In cases of healthy and well formed children one
must also avoid, for that reason, the mistake of being too strict, something one
might be tempted to do by an exaggerated feeling of fairness. 
There is a form of partiality that weighs more heavily than any other. It is
derived from existing social conditions, often greatly furthered by parents and
caregivers to the point where both the favored as well as the neglected child
suffer. I have in mind the considerable advantages ascribed to the male sex. Such

partiality significantly influences the behavior of parents and the harm done is no
less if girls in the family are not neglected. Life and our social order make girls
feel so inferior that the psychologist without exception can expect such feelings
that spring from neglect: the wish to be equal to the male, to resist every form of
force, being considered incompetent, or allowing oneself to be dominated. 
Even where there has been a most favorable upbringing the girl, but also the boy
with female tendencies, will feel insecure, apt to be sullen, reluctant,
irreconcilable, and experience a mostly unsure feeling of fearful expectations.
Fitting into one's gender role is accompanied by intense fantasizing. There
comes a phase during which there is an inability to differentiate (Dessoir) in
which emotions regularly arise that betray an urge to transform oneself into a
male. These include a desire to seem strong, big, tough, rich, dominating,
powerful, and knowledgeable. It is accompanied by feelings of fear expressed
psychologically as an inability to tolerate force, obedience, submission and
cowardice--in short, "female" traits. Children who take longer and have obvious
problems identifying their gender role--psychological hermaphrodites--will react
with negative compensatory traits against the increasing feeling of inferiority.
Boys as well as girls will develop signs of defiance, cruelty, disobedience, as
well as embarrassment, fear, cowardice, cunning, and malice. Often these are a
mixture of stronger or weaker aggressive tendencies that I have named the
"masculine protest." This brings about an inflamed desire in children, richly fed
by subconscious fantasies, to seem masculine and to demand immediate
verification from those around them. The other side of such demands is never
missing: the fear of making decisions, fearing defeat, fearful of being
"underneath." These children produce the future "makers and shakers" in the best
and worst sense. They constantly make demands, are never satisfied, are hot
tempered, and have an actively combative nature, but never lose sight of the
need to retreat. Their social feelings constantly suffer. They are rigid egotists,
are also often capable of concealing their selfishness from themselves and from
others, and are constantly working at debasing all values. We find them among
the social elite, but also in the gutter. The majority fall prey to neurosis. 
The primary psychological characteristic of such people is the struggle against
the other sex, an often violent, often silent, but bitter battle intermingled wth
indicators of fear. It is as if in order to attain their hoped for masculinity the
defeat of someone of the opposite sex is necessary. One should not think that
these traits are openly visible. They usually hide behind ethical or aesthetic
considerations and reach their climax during the years after puberty in an
inability to love and a fear of marriage. 
What can parents and caregivers do to avoid this harm that arises when a child

belittles women and their tasks? The differences when evaluating the
achievements of men and women cannot be ignored in a society that places such
a high regard on values. However, parents and caregivers can ensure that within
the home evaluating people does not become obtrusive. Then, fears about a
woman's future will not be inflamed, and emotions will be calmed. Therefore,
the woman and her tasks and responsibilities cannot be denigrated in the home,
as is so often the case where the man usually encourages masculinity, or where
the mother is disdainful of her position in life. Boys should not be imbued with
pride in boyhood, nor should a girl’s envy of boys be promoted. Above all, a
child's doubts about the sexual role should not be nourished but, beginning in
infancy, the child's integration into his or her sexual role should be furthered by
appropriate pedagogical measures.
4 This is described in greater detail in "Individualpsychologische Erziehung"
(Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie).
Chapter XV
The Organic Substrata of Psychoneuroses1 2
[1912]
After only a period of brief observation it becomes apparent that it is
generally the nature of the neurotic, more so than would be the case for a more
or less normal person, categorically and principally to attempt to impose on his
surroundings a personal superiority in some, often peculiar, form. When the
cause of this tensed striving is ascertained, it regularly turns out to be based on a
feeling of insecurity and inferiority that cannot be called anything other than
deliberate. In other words, it is not a blind urge, an aimless flight from
disparagement of any kind, which is what the analysis of the neurotic
phenomenon shows, but a way, a modus vivendi, that is to turn away from
insecurity; however, one that will not stand up to the reality of life.
In the rarest cases the patient feels so strong about this that one could speak
of a philosophy of life, perhaps even of a private philosophy. As soon as one has
discerned the direction of the neurotic's striving the more apparent become his
attitude, habitual behavior, and gestures. The dynamics of this are obscured to
the patient, even though his actions and occasional gestures give the impression
"as if" he had a goal in mind. Thus, hysteria at the arrival of a favorite sister will
appear as irritation when she openly effuses love. A neurotic, who since
childhood had competed with his older brother, will attempt suicide before
taking a job for which he had expressed gratitude to his brother only shortly
before. A female patient suffering from agoraphobia will become as fearful as
seems necessary in order to put her family at her service and dominate them.

Patients who are compulsive masturbators and who tend to be perverse will
display sufficient libido as required to carry out their abnormal sexual activities.
Bouts of pain such as migraines, neuralgia, and heart and stomachaches are
always motivated and occur whenever necessary to protect a threatened
personality. Similarly, fainting spells and psychogenic epileptic episodes always
occur in situations which the patient--given his psychological situation--must
avoid in order to protect his dominance. As soon as the physician is able to
empathize with a patient, it becomes possible to predict quite accurately an
oncoming attack based on the patient's psychological needs. In the same way
tremors, or similar incapacitating phenomena, will stop if the neurotic can, for
example, avoid working. The same occurs with students before an examination
when memory loss often is the beginning of a neurosis. In all similar cases the
patient is physically under an aggression inhibitor which always is planned and
systematic and which can give voice when the right questions are asked.
Generally one finds in cases like these that the patient's psychological directions
and expressions in principle have become uniform so that they can generally be
regarded as hesitating, as a "hesitating attitude."
1 Lecture recorded at the International Congress for Psychotherapy and
Medical Psychology in Zurich, October 11, 1912. First published as “Das
organische Substrat der Psychoneurosen: zur Ätiologie der Neurosen und
Psychosen” in Z. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., Vol. 12, pages 489-491, 1912.
Republished in Praxis unde Theorie, 1924. 2 New translation by Gerald L.
Liebenau, 2002.
From the standpoint of a psychic dynamic these manifestations should be
regarded as "safeguards" which the patient over time slowly adopted because
with their aid he has best been able to protect his personality. One might say that
physically they respond with a "no" while the mouth incessantly responds with a
"yes" to impending life's problems. However, just this dichotomous reaction of
the neurotic, the basis of the "double vie," shows us that here is a person who has
been searching under trying circumstances for a way that leads to greater
heights, a way that almost always runs along a hard-to-fathom, convoluted route.
This inescapable impression, as well as the reality of a principally adhered
to phenomenology which, with its predictable aborting before an insurmountable
goal, is reminiscent of the technology of a machine. This, along with the
excluding and the psychological devaluing of possible alternative actions, is the
portrayal of a person who left himself no other recourse than fleeing into illness.
This forces us to the conclusion, which is constantly being reaffirmed, that
neurosis is an attempt to attain a highly charged personality ideal, while the

belief in one's own significance is shaken by a deep-seated feeling of inferiority.
In order to act, two prerequisites are necessary: 1. A rough evaluation of
one's own capabilities and, 2. a goal that takes into account those capabilities as
well as what is feasible, given the realities of this world. As for a neurotic's
ability at self-evaluation, we can say with confidence that originally it was
minimal. As to the goal itself, we know it was set too high. I have discussed
neurosis--or put differently, what pertains to unconscious goals--in great detail in
my book Ueber den nervösen Charakter (Wiesbaden, Bergmann, 1912). I
concluded that this unconsciously set goal, always in effect, springs from a
tendency for compensation or security,3 and that a goal-directed guideline is
adhered to more categorically and more dogmatically than are guidelines
followed by a healthy person. Furthermore, along these guidelines, following
unavoidable paths of a neurotic readiness, characteristics, and symptoms, there is
the attempt to attain security in a chaotic world in which insecurity is presumed
and, therefore, felt, and to rise from a feeling of insecurity to a sense of one's
own self so as to attain the fulfillment of one's ideal personality.
As long as one is unaware of this goal striving, this adoration of a selfmade
idol, it is easy to make the erroneous assumption of a teleological dependency of
the psyche. This is an error that can be ascribed to the fact that the first step in
every action already entails goal-setting. This applies equally to the élan vital,
the "life stream," which flows compelled by a fictitious final goal harbored in the
unconscious in its original form since it was ensconced in childhood. I am
particularly gratified that in discussing this psychological phenomenon I can cite
next to my findings and viewpoints the fundamental theories of Vaihinger and
Bergson, and that I can point to manifold similarities in Klages' presentations.
3 This corresponds to Vaihinger's theory that this goal, even though
irrational, is essential for neurotic action. In order to be able to act--which is the
only thing that matters--the psyche needs a device by which to transfer the goal
into the unconscious.
Having clarified goal-setting and its characteristics in the neurotic's psyche,
I must discuss the origins of those characteristics. As already stated, what causes
them in children thus disposed is found in a particularly deep-seated inferiority
feeling. Only an explanation of their origin and development is now required.
Since 1907 I have maintained (Studie über Minderwertigkeit der Organe, Urban
and Schwarzenberg, Vienna) that an organ inferiority familiar to us from
pathology is the stimulus for a feeling of inferiority. From this intensified
insecurity in children I was able to deduce a relationship between one's own
inadequacy and the magnitude of external demands,--that increased stress, which

among other consequences gives rise to neurotic attempts at trying to
compensate. Such demands would include all infantilism and organ inferiorities,
constitutional anomalies, embryonic deterioration, problems with internal gland
secretions, etc. It would be too extensive were I to describe the psychological
profiles of constitutionally inferior children in their first years of life.
Summarily, it can be stated that they experience problems in life much more
severely and that these can be significantly exacerbated by a poor upbringing
that entails either too much disciplining or pampering. A whole host of troubles
threatens such a child with pains, frailty, childhood and developmental
disabilities, ugliness, plumpness, and diminished intellectual development. The
apparent feeling of neglect--mostly as a result of disaffection--is followed by an
actual, and then seemingly justified, neglect forcing the child to adopt
psychological devices and ruses. The child's natural competitiveness for esteem
is driven to extremes; the goal for personal striving is set far too high; the psyche
has an inordinate tendency toward scheming, plotting, and dreaming. The
extensive employment of fictitious support mechanisms forces analogizing and
symbolizing, and every step taken by the child reflects his excessive cautiousness
and exaggerated craving for esteem. All naturalness is lost; there is a constant
measuring of oneself against others. Expectations reach their greatest heights,
and the most innocuous decisions take on life and death proportions. The child is
always looking for support and always demands that others subordinate
themselves to him. Mistakes become helpful since others must now intercede.
Fear becomes a weapon for attack since others must now come to his aid.
Shyness, clumsiness, and plumpness become a pretense for putting others at his
service. Everything becomes an excuse, just as an illness turns into a necessity in
order for his pride and megalomania not to suffer for lacking achievements and
for what could have been achieved. I shall not delve further into a description of
this enormously fascinating psychological condition that I discussed
substantially in my Nervöse Charakter.
My only remaining task is to portray those pathological instances that cause
such a sharp increase in the desire of all children to be more than their
caregivers. What I have observed in individual cases affects all possible systemic
anomalies and, understandably, for the most part the less severe forms, the
lymphatic system that consequently results in physical weaknesses, adenoidal
vegetation, etc. I have also observed forms of diathesis affecting the respiratory
and digestive organs as well as the skin, the hypo-and hyper-functioning of the
thyroid gland, the epithelium, the gonads, and the pituitary gland, with regard to
rickets, hydrocephalus, and dysplasia of the blood-forming organs. These are
accompanied by innumerable pathological manifestations that signify a physical

or mental inferiority. Furthermore, all organ inferiorities that inhibit growth and
physical beauty can, along with those cited, heighten the feeling of inferiority
and thus force stronger tendencies toward compensation. Frequently one finds
that deficient sensory organs, often associated with an organic hypersensitivity
or functional anomalies of the excretory organs, relate to childhood enuresis or
involuntary bowel movements. Very significant is the dearth of strong training in
manhood with the result that all girls, as well as boys with feminine features,
with dysplasia or hypoplasia of the genital organs, suffer from a heightened
feeling of inferiority. The same result comes from a faulty upbringing as I
described in my article "Zur Erziehung der Erzieher" (Monatshefte f. Pädagogik,
issue # 8, Vienna, 1812).
From among the many subterfuges and constructions that take place mostly
in the unconscious, and that relate to what has been discussed here, two are
particularly easy to understand and to study: safeguards and bypasses. I shall
attempt to unveil the underlying mechanism in a simple case of anxiety.
The case involves a 32 year-old woman who had become pregnant after
eight years of marriage and who then experienced a difficult birth. In the early
stages of her pregnancy the patient suffered from sleeplessness and an anxiety
state. All that time she stressed how much she longed for a child and how
distressing it was for her to have relatives occasionally give her advice and
remark about her childlessness. Her first case of anxiety occurred when her
husband, a traveling salesman, was about to depart on a business trip. In fact the
trip was in doubt at one time. The night before he was to depart he had to wake
up several times to calm his wife who, driven by vague feelings of fear, called
for him. Her condition can be explained by the physical changes caused by her
pregnancy, which she saw as having totally womanized her and made her feel
inferior. As a reaction she constructed anxiety that made it possible to put her
husband at her service more than before. He now had to exercise greater
restraints, including his sexual desires that became dependent upon his wife, i.e.
restricted. As for his impending trip he no longer could count on the sexual
freedom that he had enjoyed before.
The last circumstance deserves closer examination since it can enlighten us
on the extent and significance of this patient's "libido." After a long courtship his
wife presumably married for love, entering marriage in no way sexually
inexperienced. Nevertheless she strongly objected to sexual intercourse and
remembered having suffered for weeks from a nervous trembling that was not
unlike her present condition. She also had anxiety attacks similar to those in her
present state.
At this point I can correct a Freudian methodological error which, given its

false premise, had to bear serious consequences. My explanation for the
indications I saw in my patient, as well as others that came to light consequently,
is that she had long been dissatisfied with her female role, and had tended to
follow all kinds of ways and bypasses to evade the consequences of a role she
never accepted. After eight years of marriage, and having become quite
confident that she would be saved from pregnancy, she saw the possibility of
reaching male equality by less obvious means: She literally gained dominance
over her husband, her sister and her mother, who lived in the same house. She
also successfully fended off sexual relations, which reminded her constantly of
her female role. She was able to devalue sexuality to the point where she was
unaware that her husband had crossed the line of infidelity on his business trips.
Of the character traits she developed to support her leading role, that is in light
of her desire for male equality, the following can be noted in particular: She
became presumptuous with her family and relatives, belittled them with
criticism, and with her parsimoniousness which, because of her growing wealth,
steadily increased her prestige within her impoverished family. Corresponding to
our theory of the "masculine protest" it is understandable that she remained
constantly frigid. When forced by her pregnancy to enter further into her female
role she needed stronger compensation and found leverage by imposing greater
responsibilities on her husband. She could accomplish this, however, only with
an arrangement of fear. As a result she suffered from anxiety.
What now followed proved the correctness of our findings. Until the birth
of the child the anxiety attacks in conjunction with our sessions disappeared.
What last caused her feelings of inferiority forcing her toward safeguards and the
masculine protest was a childish physical debility that became especially
noticeable in her relationship with her sister, five years her senior and her
father's favorite. Serious material deprivations suffered by her family during her
childhood had the same bad effect. She felt these deprivations and consequently
regarded her well-off relatives with constant envy. An inferiority of her urinary
tract explained the childhood disorder of enuresis. I don't dare to wager the
extent to which anomalies of the reproductive organs played a part, but in this
context wish to point to the late pregnancy, the patient's abnormal size, and an
early noticeable hair growth on her upper lip.
When her child, after a difficult birth, had been only a few weeks old the
patient called on me again with complaints about new anxieties, lassitude, and
depression. I shall skip over the course of the examination and come directly to
the result of the analysis. The patient now still acted in the context of a
masculine protest in that she tried to protect herself from a second child with her
current symptoms. With her anxiety--I have never established the difference

between anxiety neurosis and anxiety-hysteria--she found the key for her
situation. Because of her suffering no one could expect her to undergo another
pregnancy. Her tiredness established in her mind, and proved to everyone else,
that caring for one child already was too much for this mother. Her depression
required her husband to be constantly on the alert not to cross his wife. In other
words, since the goal to be like a man had become absolute, everything that
would bring her closer to that goal was within the realm of the possible. It
became more powerful the greater the gap toward attaining equality with the
man.
The followers of Freud see as the decisive moment in all cases of neuroses
and psychoses a mystical, dark enveloped, innate sexual constitution. It would be
simple to incorporate this in the given case: The secondary male sexual
characteristics (her size, moustache, late pregnancy, difficult birth) would
correspond to a male psychosexual constitution. In order to approach Freud's
idea more closely it would be necessary to make some small adjustment: The
patient would require a stronger innate homosexual component. This would call
for rearranging all the revelations that had come out of analysis so that the
homosexual attraction for the sister would surface from the unconscious.4
Up to a point this would be possible. Both sisters loved each other after an
early period of hostility, however, without having encroached on the sexual
realm. In the sense of Freud's terminology, in terms of the concept of
sublimation by which all human relationships can be traced to a sexual image,
for the sake of discussion it would be possible to approach this idea. I also have
no doubt that it could have been possible to convince both sisters--I had cured
the other not long before and had discharged her from treatment--that in that
sense they were homosexually in love with each other. Unfortunately, both
showed that if they wanted to succeed in this world finding objects for their lust
for power they were dependent on one another. Each sought to dominate the
other through love and a singular pursuit of duty until the older, who, given her
circumstances, was much more restricted, broke the ties and terminated her
obedience to the patient. This change, which occurred not unconnected to the
pregnancy, and could be compared to a vanishing of the power equilibrium, led
our patient to construct anxiety. This also allowed her to use anxiety, which she
recognized as a means of coercion from the time of her older sister's illness,
against her husband as well. In other words, at this moment to force the
domination of the sister, anxiety had to enter as a stronger guarantor of security
than was possible using love or intimidation.
Let us assume in this case that the patient had gone as far as practicing
homosexuality. In the context of this case the sexual impulse could only be

understood as a means for power. Would that have cured the patient? In no way!
Other patients come for treatment at that state of homosexuality and
demonstrate, in addition to this neurotic symptom of inversion or a perversion, a
whole host of other symptoms.
4 The original, effectual attitude of the resulting inferiority manifestations
would still remain in force. And, after the superfluous excursion into the sexual
problem, the inferiority feeling as the driving factor would still have to be
included.
Another possible argument following Freud's reasoning is that the patient
had become ill from trying to suppress homosexuality. However, the facts that
even after having overcome it she was still unable to get well, and was unable to
tolerate it, suggests complete confusion in Freud’s theory, and loses credibility
control as soon as we mention the false premise on which this theory is based.
Let us examine the second basic error in Freud's etiology of neurosis, the
so-called "core complex of neurosis" (Kernkomplex der Neurose), the incest
complex.
Both girls' father stood intellectually and in significance far above the
mother, who suffered from occasional attacks of dipsomania and at such times
consumed enormous quantities of alcohol. Family life was at its worst and the
emotionally disturbed family tradition, according to which everyone tried to
dominate the other, flourished. No wonder the two girls were drawn to the
father, who coddled the older. It should also not be surprising that both girls--
and this then became the core of their impending illness--had little interest in the
role of wife or mother, and why they preferred, as far as that was possible, to
fulfill their leading subconscious fiction of a male transformation. In this the
older girl, whose medical history I described in my book5, was more successful.
Our patient, on the other hand, who was more fragile by nature and who vied for
dominance with a five-year-older sister, had no other recourse than to find more
powerful means to gain her goal. She, therefore, adopted such means and
ensured her advantage with guile, pretending forbearance, in need of support and
then shackling those around her, and by striving for prosperity with exaggerated
avarice. However, with those weaker than she, in her struggle with her mother or
with the maid, she openly revealed her lust for dominance. With her husband she
was kind and friendly until she was certain he was under her control and then
she enjoyed crossing him and embittered his life with nagging and quarreling.
Let us now assume this patient had led a normal sexual existence. Would
she then have become ill? The question is totally irrelevant. How could she have
led such a life? She had long been neurotic and was entangled in her security

tendencies trying to carry out her symbolic transformation into a man. Thus, the
symptom of an abnormal psychosexuality had to surface and has to be seen in
light of her total neurotic guiding and lifeline as a part of her neurotic system. It
is not a natura naturans but a natura. It is not a beginning but is on the way
toward her fictitious fifth act. It leads toward her unconsciously created finale in
which her male personality ideal is to reach fulfillment. 
Summation
5Ueber den nervösen Charakter, Bergmann, Wiesbaden, 1912
1. The childhood history of every neurotic contains memories or some
feelings of a negative self-assessment in conjunction with a goal set exceedingly
high. This goal gives direction to all the patient's physical and mental exertions,
feeds his fantasies, and has the effect of coercing the direction of his life and
thoughts.
2. The original negative self-assessment of the neurotic is based on
physically transmitted feelings of weakness, suffering, and physical and mental
insecurity. It creates an important psychic pathway for the psychological
development of the child and makes clear the relationship the child had
established with his environment. The self-assessment, therefore, is a response
that the child has given to the problems of life. Within this self-assessment in
terms of a relationship lie all perceptions of the child's wretchedness and
insecurity, all conceivable and conceived results of measuring up, and the
guidelines for the future.
3. The child's insecurity is the result of objective and subjective occurrences
that, naturally, never are clear and pure. The probability of subjective faulty
causes (for example, the belief in a limitless transformation) can never be
excluded. It is necessary constantly to keep in mind the child's inability to
conceive a realistic worldview.
4. The objective reality that is being considered here relates to: a. the child's
normal frailty and insecurity; 
b. particularly when pathologically aggravated, such as with innate
inferior organs. 
5. Subjective factors affect the standing of the child within the framework 
of the family, with respect to the father, the mother, and siblings, the child's 
impressions and evaluation of life's problems and of the future. In this evaluating
and in anticipating the future, with this attitude of preparing for life, for dealing 
with the world outside, there also are traces of the child's objective insecurity 
derived from experience, as well as hints about his future. 
6. The insecurity of the child, the larger of the constitutional inferiorities, 
entails a goal and guidelines to satisfy the longing for security and for ideal 

achievements. The more negative the child's self-assessment the higher the goal 
set, the stronger the child adhering to it in principal, the more categorical the 
guidelines formed, and the more apparent the onesided characteristics with 
coinciding psychological tendencies. The child's attitude will be more unusual 
and also more peculiar whether imitating or contesting his environment, or 
whether eventually assimilating a useful attitude--under presumed or actual 
pressure of circumstances--until it satisfies the neurotic system by which the
child 
feels himself master of his situation. 
7. This is then how in this evolving life plan the extent of isolation, family 
tradition, and conscious as well as unconscious maxims from his upbringing
have 
their impact. Regarding the last it should be noted in particular that the pressure 
of a strict upbringing, but also coddling, are causes for the child feeling insecure,
especially the child who is already disposed toward insecurity. 
8. From among children disposed to rigid neurotic systems the ones 
particularly prone to accidents are those whose final goal, that is the fifth act, in 
an abstract sense approaches godlikeness. Children so imbued rely especially on 
appearances and they deem as essential to protect their personality ideal from
the 
pressures of the world the adoption of the most unusual attitudes and detours, as 
well as the strongest safeguards, peculiarities, signs of illnesses, neurotic and 
psychotic manifestations. Likewise, planned constrained aggression becomes 
necessary in order not to make risky decisions, and to avoid expected defeats. 9.
Among the realities that influence a child's feeling of insecurity 
childhood illnesses are uppermost. They affect the psyche through a host of 
troubles, through pain, fear of death, fragility, puniness, plumpness, retarded 
physical and mental development, ugliness, deformation, impaired sensory 
organs, and childhood impairments. From such a basis of inferiority feelings the 
child so disposed drives toward his overextended goal with an unstoppable élan 
that becomes his continuing rhythm for life. From this impassioned but rigid 
rhythm spring the great achievements of those rare individuals whose 
overcompensation succeeded, as well as the more common meager 
accomplishments of those afflicted with neuroses and psychoses. 
10. The organic substrata of psychoneurosis and psychosis should be 
sought in the inferior germ plasma out of which constitutionally inferior organs 
develop. Specific external threats are lues,6 alcoholism, incessantly forced 
submission, overachieving, and mass squalor. The neurotic system is
exacerbated 

by a family tradition of anxiety and by family members suffering from anxiety.
6 Syphilis. Chapter XVI
Individual Psychological Treatment of Neuroses1 2
[1913]
After having made the observations described in the chapter above,3 the
following is an overview of the nature and treatment of neuroses.
Etiology
A. Inferiority Feelings and Compensation
It would be somewhat perilous to treat the extensive field covered by
psychotherapy in an abbreviated form, particularly since many of its values are
threatened on principle by controversy. I also do not wish to forego citing the
bases for my views, as well as my experiences, which since 1907 have been
presented for public examination. In 1907, I presented evidence in my Studie
über Minderwertigkeit von Organen that inherent constitutional anomalies
should not only be seen as signs of degeneration but often also as the impetus for
compensatory achievement and over-achievement. These anomalies also
correlate with significant manifestations to which the greater psychological
activity contributes significantly. In order to overcome tension, this
compensatory psychological effort often follows different or new paths. To an
observer the direction taken appears well traveled and fulfilling, and designed to
cover a perceived deficit in most amazing ways. The most common means by
which children attempt to hide inferiority feelings is by creating a well prepared
compensatory psychological superstructure replete with security measures that
seek to regain lost superiority either in the feeling of community or in the
neurotic modus vivendi. Whatever now deviates from the norm is recognizable in
greater ambition and increased precaution. However, all devious practices and
arrangements as well as neurotic character traits and symptoms derive their
standing from earlier experimentation, experiences, stresses, affiliations, and
imitations not unlike those found in a healthy person. These manifestations
speak a language which, when properly understood, evidently identifies a person
struggling forcefully for esteem, a person who, driven by uncertainty and a
feeling of inferiority, is either aspiring ceaselessly for godlike dominance over
his environment, or is trying to avoid dealing with the problems in his life.
1 First appeared as “Individualpsycholgische Behandlung der Neurosen.”
in: D. Sarason (Publisher), I.Jahreskurse für ärztliche Fortbildung, pages 39-51,
1913. Republished in Praxis und Theorie, 1920. Translated into English as
Chapter IV in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology, 1925.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 

3 Adler is referring to “New Leading Principles in the Practice of Individual
Psychology.”
Aside from this particular source, this neurotic behavior entails a whole
host of sensitivities and the potential for agitation that do not cause neurosis, but
are its consequences. In a short treatise, Der Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in
der Neurose ("Heilen und Bilden), I tried to explain this heightened emotionality
and show how, either when serving some purpose or trying to avoid danger, it
often turns into an apparent aggression check. What usually is called a
"disposition to neurosis" (Neurotische Disposition, ibid) already is a neurosis.
Only when there are actual causes, when there is an inner need driving to apply
stronger tactics, do the appropriate neurotic symptoms appear more positively
and become evidence of an illness. These symptoms can submerge as long as the
patient is in an agreeable mood, and as long as he is not pressed to prove that he
developed properly and has social feeling. Giving evidence of being ill with all
the expressions that accompany an illness is necessary: a) to serve as excuses
when life denies the individual the triumphs he seeks, b) to defer making
decisions and, c) to place attained goals in a better light since they were achieved
despite suffering. These and other tactics clearly show the striving of the
neurotic for the appearance of superiority and not for what he really is.
The result in every case can easily be discerned. In order to protect his
fictitious goal-governed actions, the neurotic maintains what for him are typical
guidelines that he follows literally out of principle. In this way, the neurotic
personality attains its established form by applying particular character traits and
suitable and tried emotional expressions, by uniformly developing symptoms,
and with a neurotic perspective of the past, the present and the future. The
compulsion for securing superiority is so strong that, aside from what appears on
the surface, every psychological phenomenon under comparative psychological
analysis also displays another trait: escaping from a feeling of weakness in order
to gain the upper hand, lifting oneself from "below" to "above," and, by using
tactics often difficult to execute, becoming superior to everyone else.4 With the
security of forming a worldview and ascribing to it some pedantic order, the
neurotic will cling to any rule and helpful formulation, the most important of
which will correspond to primitive antithetical schemes. He thus allows as valid
only those feelings that relate to an above and a below, and as far as I could tell,
regularly tries to relate these to what appears to him a realistic contrast between
the "masculine and feminine." With such a falsification of conscious or
unconscious judgments, as if actuated by a psychological battery, an emotional
disturbance is created that is always appropriate for the patient's lifeline.

4 This explanation significantly restricts the meaning of the "unconscious."
Since a deeper understanding of the "surface psyche," which, if naively observed
clearly does not illuminate the unknown, shows us that the patient truly attempts
to carry out his intent but fails to understand that intent and, therefore, strives for
superiority "consciously" as well as "unconsciously."
To those traits which the neurotic perceives as "feminine"--all passive
behavior, obedience, softness, cowardice, thoughts of defeat, ignorance,
powerlessness, tenderness--he tries to give an exaggerated turn toward
"masculinity" thereby generating hatred, defiance, cruelty, and egoism, while
attempting to be triumphant in all his human interrelationships. Alternatively, by
markedly emphasizing his weaknesses, he will burden others with having to put
themselves at his service. This course will also always increase enormously his
precaution and prescience and give him grounds to evade threatening decisions.
The patient will avoid at any cost any problem that calls on him to assert
"masculine prerogatives," which would include any challenges in his profession
or in love where he would fear "effemination" (which also applies to the male
gender) through defeat. He will then always seek a life style that deviates from
the straight path, one that will afford detours to avoid constantly feared mistakes
and defeat. Consequently, there will always be a falsification of the sexual role
which seems to confer on the neurotic traits of the "psychological
hermaphrodite," which he then actually begins to believe he possesses. Seen
from that perspective neurosis could be suspected of having a sexual etiology.
Actually, however, the struggle that we find in the area of sexuality also applies
to the total human psyche. The original feeling of inferiority presses for detours
(in sex it is masturbation, homosexuality, fetishism, algolagnia, the
overestimation of sexuality, etc.), that seek to eliminate all erotic
experimentation, so as not to lose its orientation toward superiority. As an
abstract and, at the same time, concrete goal the neurotic is served by the
formula: "I wish to be a complete man!," a compensatory outlet for what at the
basis is an inferiority feeling that is regarded as feminine. The scheme that has
been apperceived, and that is being followed, is a hostily apprehended,
thoroughly antithetically planned, childish falsification. We can regularly
identify as neurotic goal-striving two unconscious premises: (1) human
relationships under all conditions are a struggle for superiority, (2) and females,
considered inferior by nature, provide a measure of male prowess.
These two unconscious premises, which can be unveiled in both men and
women, establish that all human relationships become distorted and corrupted,
that unanticipated stronger emotions and emotional disturbances arise, and,
instead of a desired natural relationship, there is constant dissatisfaction which

seems occasionally assuaged only after the symptoms have intensified, and when
the existence of an illness has been successfully demonstrated. That is to say, the
symptom replaces the neurotically inflamed craving for superiority along with
the emotions that pertain to it. Emotionally, the patient feels more certain of
having won a sham victory over his environment than were he to have engaged
in an honest struggle, had projected a strong character trait, or had offered
resistance. Understanding this language of symptoms has become my primary
prerequisite for the successful psychotherapeutic treatment.
Since neurosis has the aim of assisting the individual in gaining the final
goal of superiority, and since the feeling of inferiority seems to preclude direct
aggression, we always see a preference for circuitous routes that are less active,
at times masochistic, but always entail self-afflicted tortures. Mostly we find a
mixture of psychological impulses and symptoms of illnesses concurrently either
during a period of illness or following one after another and which, when torn
out of context of the illness, sometimes appear contradictory, or are reminiscent
of a split personality. In this context the result is that the patient can decide to go
in two contradictory directions to attain his ideal situation of a fictitious
superiority, or, governed by his goal, will argue his position either correctly or
incorrectly and judge and feel accordingly. The neurotic under all circumstances
will be identified by and should be expected to display such viewpoints, feelings,
recollections, emotions, character traits, and symptoms that are presumed to be
present based on his recognized life style and goal.
With some persons, the neurotic will force obedience and submissiveness,
"gain submission through hysteria," and with others he will display weakness,
fear, passivity, a need for tenderness, etc. toward the same end. He will come
prepared with all sorts of mementos, horror stories, emotions, and a display of
empathy. He will act not unlike the obsessive-compulsive neurotic who claims to
follow principles, rules, and proscriptions that seem only to inhibit him, but
which in reality invest his personality with feelings of godlikeness. The goal we
see in neurotics is akin to an ideal "retirement pension" that is fought for just as
tenaciously as the accident-prone neurotic will fight with whatever proven
means to gain his purpose. The same holds true where more advantageous
positions can be won with strong emotions such as rage, anger, and jealousy,
often represented by attacks of pain, fainting, or by epileptic seizures. (See
"Trotz und Gehorsam" in Heilen und Bilden). All neurotic symptoms are
designed to safeguard the patient's personality and his acquired life style. In
order to prove his ability to cope with life, and protect himself against
anticipated and always to be prevented threats jeopardizing his plans for the
future, perceived out of his feeling of inferiority, the neurotic will develop as an

aid and as an outsized safeguard all required arrangements and neurotic
symptoms. In developing these safeguards a significant role is played by
physical impairments that are triggered by tension experienced every time the
patient faces a problem that challenges his lack of social feeling.
B. The "Arrangement" of the Neurosis
The feeling of inferiority, grown out of real impressions that are later
tendentiously adhered to and reinforced, compels the patient from early
childhood constantly to establish goals for his striving which range well beyond
all human limits, approaching idolization, and force him to go through life
following rigidly drawn guide lines. Under such compulsion any differing
attitude, even if more necessary and practically justified, is excluded. It is as if
every neurotic had constructed his own small stall, always of a different shape
and size, in which he constantly hops around fearfully careful not to cross the
threshold. All human relationships no longer are perceived objectively, but are
viewed as "personal" and controllable. The neurotic system, the life style of the
neurotic, spans these two positions. This compensatory, psychological
structuring, this neurotic "wanting," considers all personal and alien experiences,
albeit distorting them tendentiously and falsifying their values, but also, if these
fulfill his neurotic intent, he will take into account whatever truths they entail.
As a result, in most cases the neurotic shows occasional outstanding
achievements in a narrow field. This is where his neurotic apperception does not
contradict the laws of reality and perhaps, as in the case of artists, does them
greater justice.
When more closely examined, it becomes understandable that all these
guidelines coming from various directions are replete with warning signs as well
as with signs of encouragement, reminders, and challenges to take action. This
allows us to speak of a widespread safety net. One will always find that the
psychology of the neurotic is superstructured over a threatening situation
reaching back into childhood. This is true even if over time it has outwardly
changed and adjusted itself more to reality than might have been presumed from
the child's normal development. It is no wonder, therefore, that every
psychological phenomenon of the neurotic is permeated by this rigid system
from which, almost allegorically, guidelines and the style of life repeatedly
project. This then is the neurotic character, the neurotic symptom, the demeanor,
every tactic employed by him, the evading and deviating whenever decisions
threaten the neurotic's godlike feeling, his view of the world, his behavior toward
a spouse, and his dreams. Regarding the last, I had already described my views
in 1911, views that are in harmony with those of mine on neurosis, that the
primary function of dreams is solving an impending problem, making

preliminary tests, and giving warnings and encouragements compatible with the
neurotic style of life. I developed this thesis more thoroughly in "Traum und
Traumdeutung" (Dreams and Dream Interpretation), particularly how dreams
magically produce feelings, emotions, and moods designed to protect the style of
life from common sense.
How do we explain this striking similarity among psychic manifestations
that appear to be infused by a one-directional stream flowing upwards toward
masculinity and toward a godlike feeling? I already pointed this out in my
neurological study ("Ueber Zahlenanalysen und Zahlenphobie," [Neurolog.
psychiatr. Zeitschr. 1905] which, from the standpoint of those times, was
regarded as incomplete and falsely oriented.
The answer can easily be discerned from my work, cited above. The
hypnotizing goal of the neurotic forces his entire psychological being toward this
uniform position. And, once his style of life has been recognized, the patient's
condition will be what had been anticipated, given his premises and history. The
strong force toward a uniform personality was established by an inner need and
by the tendency toward creating safeguards. The path he followed was
unalterably guaranteed by a pattern appropriate to his character traits, emotional
readiness, and symptoms. At this point, I should like to add some remarks about
"emotional disturbances" and "emotionality" to prove that their subconscious
arrangement is a neurotic tool and device to preserve the style of life.
For example, a patient with agoraphobia who, by a tortuous route trying to
raise his esteem at home and forcing those around him to serve him, or who does
not wish to lose the longed for resonance experienced in the streets and in other
public places, will unconsciously and emotionally join into a "junktim"5
thoughts of being alone, meeting strangers, shopping, going to the theater,
attending parties, etc., with fantasies of suffering from a stroke, a sea voyage, or,
in the case of a woman, giving birth in the streets, which harbor infection and
germs found in the streets. The overblown safeguard coefficient, as contrasted
with the possibilities open to the imagination, can clearly be seen from this, as
can the tendency to exclude all situations that do not guarantee the possibility for
dominance. One can sense from this an intent and can follow it to its final goal,
which is to find situations that lend themselves to dominance, and thereby
recognize the life line.
Similarly, the neurotic precaution of a patient suffering from anxiety attacks
who is using illness to avoid taking a test, becoming involved in a love affair, or
engaging in any particular undertaking, will in his mind associate his situation
with an execution, a jail sentence, a limitless ocean, a live burial, or death. In
order to avoid the consequences of a love affair such a person may resort to

conjuring up connections such as: man and murderer or killer, woman and
sphinx or demon or vampire. Every possible defeat will often become more
threatening when related to thoughts of death or pregnancy (sometimes this
applies even to neurotic males) and the emotions thus conveyed force the patient
to avoid a particular task. It is thus possible for a mother or a father for a time to
fantasize being a lover, a bride, or a groom until the marriage bond is so firm
that it will protect against marriage problems. Religious and ethical feelings of
guilt, as is so often the case in compulsion neurosis, frequently are so construed
and exploited that they attain a godlike feeling of power. ( In order to understand
the fiction of godlikeness, we must transform, for example,: "If I fail to pray in
the evening mother will die," into the positive statement: "If I pray she will not
die.") Insignificant or long past committed improprieties are deplored in order to
display a superior conscientiousness, but also to render more important matters
unimportant.
Next to "apprehension" and "suspension" as means to safeguard the
overblown personality ideal and to secure the neurotic path, one can frequently
find inflated "expectations." The last inevitably produces disappointments
invariably followed by what seem obligatory, strong emotions of grief, hate,
dissatisfaction, jealousy, accusations, etc. A significantly large role in such cases
is played by demands that are made, ideals, dreams, castles in the air, etc. The
neurotic, by being able to make such associations with any person or situation
demeans everything and raises his own superiority. The great significance of
love in human relationships, and the neurotic's search for super-human influence
and standing in matters of love, is so frequently accompanied by disappointed
expectations that the patient can apply them to evade sexual problems and a
partner. Compulsive masturbation, impotence, perversion, frigidity, as well as
fetishism, is regularly manifested in vain people who are tormented by enormous
tension caused by problems that call for social feeling for their solution.
5 "Junktim" is a tendentious connection of two thoughts and emotions that
actually have little if anything to do with each other in order to heighten
emotions. It is similar to a metaphor.
I should briefly mention a third construction to prevent defeat and a serious
feeling of inferiority. It is the anticipation of sensations, feelings, apperception,
and empathizing. These constructions are significant in connection with
threatening situations where they serve to prepare, warn or encourage a person.
They are manifested in dreams, as hypochondria, melancholia, and
hallucination.6 A good example is seen in the dreams of children who wet their
bed and who in their dreams see themselves on the toilet so that, uninfluenced by

their common sense, they can express a frequently vengeful and defiant enuretic
attitude. Thus, being startled into wakefulness, a child can force another to serve
him. Similar examples are cases of tabes, paralysis, true epilepsy, paranoia, heart
and lung diseases, etc. which can be exploited for fear, and as safeguards.
In order to present a graphic, albeit only schematic, portrayal of the unique
orientation of the neurotic (and psychotic), I propose to encapsulate the common
view of neurosis in a formula which I shall then compare with another formula
that more closely represents the view expressed above, and one that is more
realistic. The first would appear as follows:
Individual + experiences + environment + life's demands = a neurosis.
(Note: Listed under "individual" in this formula are "heredity, physique
(clinical) (Kretschmer), alleged sexual components (Freud), intro-extroversion
(Jung)". Listed under "experiences" is "sexual and incestuous experiences
(Freud)."
According to this formula the individual would be regarded as impaired
because of inferiority or heredity, or because of his "sexual constitution,” his
emotions, and his character. Furthermore, experiences, the environment and
outside demands would burden the patient until he is forced to "take refuge in
illness." This viewpoint obviously is wrong. It could not be sustained even with
the aid of another hypothesis which is that the neurosis would restore an actual
lack of gratified desires, or the "libido." 
An appropriate formula would be the following:
6 As a result of studying war-neuroses, almost all authorities have fully
accepted these views. Also see "Traum und Traumdeutung" in which are
discussed feelings and emotions resulting from a life style which, by the way,
are similar to those experienced in life generally.
An individual method for self-evaluation (Individual + Experience +
Environment) + X = Personal superiority ideal. In this formula X would be
replaced by an arrangement and tendentious construction of experiences,
character traits, emotions, and symptoms. The essential question asked by the
neurotic is not, "What must I do in order to adjust to the demands of society so
that I can attain a harmonic existence?" but, "How do I structure my life so that
it will gratify my tendency toward superiority and transform my unalterable
feeling of inferiority into a feeling of godlikeness?"
In other words, the only firm or fixed point in that person's mind is the
personality ideal. In order to approximate this godlikeness the neurotic
undertakes a tendentious evaluation of his individuality, his experiences, and his
environment. However, since this does not nearly suffice for him to attain his
desired style of life and arrive closer to his goal, he will provoke experiences and

exploit them so that they can be applied more easily to serve his plan--to feel
neglected, cheated, or as suffering--and thus facilitate a basis for sought-after
and familiar aggression. The fact that he constructs so many and such varied
character traits and emotions from real experiences and opportunities can be
derived from my description above. In the same way, the patient grows into his
symptoms, which are formed by his entire range of experiences and psychic
tensions as seems necessary and useful for raising his feeling of personality.
There is no trace of a predetermined autochthonous teleology that can be found
in this modus vivendi, projected and clung to by means of a self-determined
ruling goal. The neurotic style of life is maintained only by a compulsion for
superiority, by carefully avoiding seemingly dangerous decisions, by carefully
tested meandering along few, clearly defined guidelines, and by employing an
abnormally expansive net of safeguards. Only then is the style of life
teleologically instituted. Accordingly, any question concerning maintaining or
losing psychic energy is meaningless. The patient will always have created
enough psychic energy to remain on his path toward superiority, to express his
masculine protest, and to strive for godlikeness.
His way of looking at things, that is, his perspective has become faulty. The
goal of superiority, goaded by his feeling of inferiority, permeates all his desires,
thoughts, feelings, and actions, and forces him into a terrain where objectivity is
alien, a region we call neurosis. The symptoms, governed by the final goal, are
the forms of expression ruled by vanity. At the beginning, or periodically, vanity
stands behind the patient and drives him forward. After the inevitable defeats
(how is it possible for our poor world to gratify the expectations of the neurotic?)
he is confronted by it, and is driven back: "When you cross the Halys River you
will destroy a great empire (the world of conceit)."
C. The Psychic Treatment of Neurosis The most important aspect of
therapy is to uncover the neurotic system or the life plan. The neurotic system
can only be fully preserved if the patient succeeds in abstaining from critiquing
or scrutinizing it. The course of the neurotic mechanism, partly subconscious
and contrary to reality, can mainly be explained by the patient's unwavering
tendency to reach his goal.7 The antithesis to reality in this system, that is, with
logical social demands, relates to the individual's limited experiences and to
different interrelationships8 in early childhood, when his life plan was created.
Insight as well as understanding of a life plan can best be gained by artfully
reaching deep into that person and by intuitively empathizing with his nature.
This will bring about unintentional comparisons between oneself and the patient,
and between different perspectives of a patient with similar outlooks of other

patients. Experience has taught me three tactics that I apply to bring order to my
observations of symptoms, experiences, styles of life, and the patient's progress.
The first of these presumes that the life plan was instituted under aggravated
conditions (organ inferiority, family pressures, pampering, rivalry, a family
history of neuroses) and turns my attention to look for the same or similar
childhood conditions. The second is to assume that these empirically won
fictitious conditions actually exist. I then note these accordingly, which I shall
explain with the example below. The third approach seeks to locate the strongest
social feeling in every accessible expression.
From my remarks it should become apparent that I expect my patient to
display the same attitude, and always the same, which, in accordance with his
life plan, he had assumed toward other people earlier in his life, and still earlier
toward his family. When the patient is introduced to his physician, often even
before that, he displays the same array of feelings as with other prominent
people. That the transference of such feelings, or resistance to them, takes place
at some later time is only illusionary. Actually, it is the physician who only then
becomes aware of them. Often this awareness comes too late and only after the
patient, enjoying his secret superiority, terminates treatment, or, through an
aggravation of his symptoms, creates an unbearable condition. That the patient
must not be hurt need not be mentioned to physicians trained in psychology.
However, this can happen without the physician being aware of it, or harmless
remarks can tendentiously be misinterpreted, if the physician has failed to see
through to the true nature of his patient. Therefore, it becomes particularly
important to hold back at the beginning and to gain a full understanding of the
patient's neurotic system as soon as possible. As a rule, this can be done already
on the first day by a physician with some experience.
7 See "Zur Rolle des Unbewussten" (On the Role of the Unconscious).
"Intelligence" does not seem to protect against this tendentious veiling of the
facts. The godlikeness also plays peculiar tricks with the therapist. 
8 A relationship such as to a mother or father can logically be established
mistakenly with regard to another person.
Still more important is the necessity to deny the patient every possibility of
becoming aggressive. At this point I can only give a few hints on how the
physician can prevent being treated by the patient. For instance, no absolute
promises should be made, even in the safest cases, that the patient will be cured,
only that a cure is possible. One of the most important devices in psychotherapy
requires ascribing to the patient, who has been won over as a collaborator, the
responsibility for becoming well, and for the success of treatment. The custom of

relating fees to successful treatment creates enormous difficulties for the patient.
In every respect one must at first act on an assumption that the superiority-
lusting patient will exploit every commitment of the physician, including with
regard to the duration of treatment, as a means to gain the upper hand.
Therefore, the obligations of the physician as well as patient regarding visiting
hours, commitments, fees, gratuitous treatment, the physician's confidentiality,
etc., should be dealt with immediately and then should be strictly upheld. Under
all circumstances, it is to the physician's great advantage to have the patient visit
him at his office. Where the physician can foresee the possibility of aggregating
conditions, it will make his task considerably easier to warn the patient at the
outset of such possibilities as fainting spells, pain, or agoraphobia. Usually such
incidents will then not occur, which corroborates our theory concerning the
marked negativism of neurotics. Where there has been some success in treatment
it would be very mistaken to express satisfaction or boast about it, since it does
not take long for a condition to take a turn for the worse. It is far better to openly
address problems without displaying impatience or annoyance, and to adopt an
unemotional scientific approach.
In complete accordance with the above is the basic principle, without strong
objection and thorough explanations, never to allow a patient to attribute to the
physician a superior authoritarian role of teacher, father, savior, etc. Such
attempts represent a patient's first steps, with ways to which he had previously
become accustomed, of placing a superior at his service, demeaning him, and
then compromising him through defeats engendered by him. Trying to protect
oneself by claiming superior rank or having greater rights always is
disadvantageous with neurotic patients. Openness should be shown but always
with caution against being drawn by the patient into any ventures. Even greater
caution should be exercised against placing the patient in any form of service,
making requests of him, having expectations, etc. To demand secrecy from a
patient shows a lack of insight into the nature of the neurotic. On the other hand,
strict confidentiality on the part of the physician is praiseworthy and
commendable.
While this and similar measures dictated by the same behavior must at first
establish a proper relationship of equality, the process of uncovering the neurotic
life plan takes place in a friendly and unencumbered atmosphere. However,
throughout this process it is advisable to let the patient take the initiative. I have
always found it most beneficial only to search for and uncover in all of a
patient's forms of expression and thought processes the operating neurotic line.
At the same time, and without being intrusive, I try to teach the patient to work
toward the same end. The conviction held by the physician regarding the

uniqueness of the neurosis and the direction it is taking must be so firm that he
can persuade his patients to predict disturbing arrangements and constructions,
to identify these, and explain them. He should persist in doing this until the
patient, shaken by what he has learned, gives them up only to replace them with
new ones, mostly even better hidden. It is hard to say how often this process will
repeat itself. Finally, however, the patient relents. This will come much easier
the less the situation leads him to feel that he suffered a defeat at the hands of the
physician.
Just as the "arrangements" lead toward a feeling of some kind of
superiority, certain subjective defects are exploited and retained for the same
reason, which is that they deepen the feeling of inferiority and thereby stimulate
and induce further safeguard measures. Such defects, along with associated
tendencies, must be revealed to the patient.
The patient's primitive apperception scheme by which he basically
evaluates and tendentiously arrays all impressions along such lines as
abovebelow, victor-vanquished, masculine-feminine, nothing-everything, etc.,
must always be revealed to the patient and debunked as immature, untenable,
and as tendencies for continued struggle. This pattern also shows that neurotic
traits are similar to what can be found in primitive cultures where necessity
compelled the use of such tactics for reasons of security. It would border on the
fanciful to suspect from such analogies anything more than mimicry, or a
repetition of phylogenesis. The power-strutting and giant-defying that is so
impressive about primitive people, but also found among geniuses, that is, to
raise oneself from nothing to a god, to create from nothing a world-wide empire,
is in the neurotic, as in dreams, an easily recognizable bluff, even though it
causes much misery. The fictitious victory, which the neurotic gains with his
tactics, exists only in his imagination. The patient has to be confronted with the
viewpoint of the other party, most easily done in a love affair or a perverse act,
where that party often also considers himself or herself victorious.
Simultaneously, step by step, one must proceed with unmasking the unattainable
goal of superiority over all, indicate the tendentious veiling of such a goal, show
the all-dominating directionsetting power, and point out the patient's lack of
freedom and his hostility toward everyone. Just as clearly will be shown, as soon
as sufficient material has been uncovered, that all neurotic character traits, the
neurotic emotions and symptoms, partly serve as means to pursue the prescribed
road, and partly to safeguard it. In all this it is important to understand the way
emotions and symptoms are formed, which, as explained above, may act so
quickly because of an often nonsensical "junktim" that also operates according to
a plan. The junktim often is revealed by the patient quite unintentionally. For the

most part it has to be discerned from his analogous explanations stemming from
his early history, or from dreams.
The same inclinations in his life style are reflected in the patient's
worldview, in his attitude toward life, in his observations and in the way he
groups his experiences. Falsifications and arbitrary acts, markedly biased
actions, fears and obviously unrealizable expectations are encountered at every
step but they always serve the patient's secret life plan with its glorious fifth act
in mind. Many blunders and inhibitions must be uncovered which can be
accomplished, however, only painfully and with an increasingly greater
understanding of the tendency toward a uniform life plan.
Since the physician stands in the way of the patient's neurotic striving, he
will be perceived like a barrier or a fence trying to prevent the attainment of the
ideal of greatness through neurosis. For that reason, every patient tries to demean
the physician, to rob him of his influence, conceal from him the true situation,
and will constantly find new twists designed to oppose the psychotherapist. One
must remember that the same hostility threatens to poison the relationship with
the physician that the patient has with every other person in his life, although far
more obscured. This hostility must be noted carefully because in a well-directed
course of treatment it will disclose most clearly the patient's tendency to assert
his superiority using the neurosis. This is particularly the case the more the
patient improves--when there is no progress there often is an atmosphere of
peace and friendship; only the attacks continue--since he will then be more
persistent in questioning the success of treatment by not arriving on time,
wasting time, or by staying away from treatment. At times there appears an
obvious hostility which, like all other tendencies to resist, can only be eliminated
by pointing out the uniformity of his behavior to the patient. I have always found
hostility toward the physician by members of the patient's family advantageous
and sometimes I have even carefully tried to provoke it. Since in most cases the
tradition of the patient's entire family is similarly neurotic it would be to the
patient's advantage to uncover and to hold up such behavior as an example. The
consummation of the task of changing the nature of the patient can only be
accomplished by him and by him alone. Toward this end I have found it most
advantageous to sit on my hands fully convinced that, as soon as he discovers his
life line, there is nothing that I could have said or added that he, as the sufferer,
does not already know.
Should the physician have problems with a particular neurosis, the
following question would clarify the situation significantly: "What would you do
if I were to cure you?" The patient usually would then name what the neurosis
had discouraged him from doing. I have also found it very valuable to act as if I

were engaged in a pantomime. For a while, I would pay no attention to what the
patient is saying but would try to ascertain his deeper intentions from his
behavior and movements. The contrast between what is seen and what is heard
will be felt very strongly and the meaning of a particular symptom will be
clarified.
One of many examples of this is a 32-year-old woman who came to me
with her 24 year-old fiancé and complained of fear from the demonic influence
of another suitor. She was afraid he could harm her marriage. Her symptoms
were anxiety, heart palpitations, uneasiness, sleeplessness, and apprehension.
When I applied the pantomime tactic it became clear what the fiancé would have
to do. He would have to try harder. The fear this woman felt from the other
suitor is this ambitious woman's way of establishing closer ties to her younger
fiancé in order to protect herself from disappointments in her marriage and from
neglect. This case also tells us from where the suitor's "demonic power" stems. It
should not be considered as real but as having been derived from an attitude
created by this woman's ambitious goal.
Supplement [From the Psychic Life of a 22 year-old Man]
The following is taken from the case history of a neurotic that is similar to
the one presented above. A 22 year-old man came to me because of compulsive
masturbation, manifestations of depression, a disinterest in work, and a timid and
embarrassed behavior. First, analogous to the above situation, the more
extensively the patient examined his own worth, whether arbitrarily or under
pressure from having suffered defeats in life, the harder he had to work on
arrangements (with regard to corresponding experiences, character traits,
emotions, and symptoms). This explains the neurotic attack as well as the choice
of neurosis that is the chronic attack; both must pass the test the patient will
apply for usefulness in terms of his life plan. From a differential diagnostic
standpoint an insight into this connection is of the greatest importance. However,
this calls for a psychotherapist who is well trained in organic neurosis as well as
in pathology because mixed forms are frequently found.
I shall assume provisionally for the sake of the reader's understanding, as in
certain mathematical problems that can only be solved by using this device, that
this problem is solved as far as possible in a short presentation, and prove the
correctness of the solution based on the facts presented. Consequently, I shall
start with a provisional premise that the patient's modus vivendi is striving for a
goal of perfection, superiority, and godlikeness. From my unrestrained
conversation with the patient there soon developed a solid basis for my
assumption. He described broadly his patrician family, their exclusiveness, their
"noblesse oblige," and that an older brother had been scorned for marrying

below his station. This exalting of his family is understandable but also seems
necessary since it contributes to increasing the patient's own esteem.
Incidentally, he seeks to dominate family members either with kindness or by
feuding with them. An outward manifestation shows the same urge to get to the
top: He was very fond of climbing on the roof of the family home and then
walking right up to the edge. However, he would not tolerate it if any other
family member dared to go that far. Only he! In his childhood he became very
agitated when he was spanked, fought against any coercion, and would not
tolerate anyone trying to influence him. He would always do the opposite of
what others asked of him, especially when his mother asked something of him.
He was in the habit of singing and humming in public to prove his contempt for
the world (that is, he arranged his feeling of superiority). Among his first
dreams after he started with me was one warning him not to be cowed by me. He
is careful not to step on anyone's shadow, a common superstition, so as not to be
infected by that person's stupidity. Positively interpreted it means, "I am smarter
than all others!" He does not grasp door latches with his hands in strangers'
homes, but opens the doors using only his elbows. It means that "everyone else
is dirty and only I am clean." Such views also are the compelling motive behind
his washing-compulsion, his cleanliness mania, the fear of infection, and the fear
of touching. He fantasizes becoming an aviator or a millionaire so that he could
make everyone happy (he, as opposed to anyone else). A dreamer! What comes
of all this is a person who has a very high self-assessment.
If one examines this case more carefully, however, what can be derived
from this patient's spasmatic efforts and peculiarities is the impression of great
dissatisfaction and insecurity. It turns out that he constantly refers to himself as a
weakling, describes in great detail his "feminine" constitution making the point
of always having been reproached for it, and that as a child he was tormented by
those who doubted that he would ever become a real man. He was also deeply
affected by suggestions that he would have been better off as a girl. The fact that
a neurotic system had to develop early in his life, replete with a corresponding
emotionality, was evidenced by traits that soon became apparent. He displayed
defiance, rage, dominance, and cruelty, all with a view toward becoming
manlier, but directed specifically against his mother and sister. These traits
became significantly more pronounced when, for example, he was expected to
play the female role in a minor theater production. At such times he would fly
into a rage. He became keenly aware of the late appearance of body hair and
being afflicted with phimosis (an organ inferiority!) which caused him great fear.
Doubt in his ability to play the male role was deep-seated and forced him into
exaggerated manliness that went in several directions, including professing

narcissism, which closed him off from being cooperative and experiencing love
and marriage. Since he sought only situations in which he was the first, and
because this uncertainty excluded normal sexual experiences, he began
masturbating, which remained his way of finding gratification. As much as he
wanted to demonstrate his superiority, when we examine his premise we
encounter a deep-seated and serious feeling of inferiority. In order to feel secure,
however, he was forced to construct his lifestyle so that he could take a wide
detour around sexual passions. This then provided him with the appropriate
sexual direction for his system: masturbation. This he then firmly fixed in the
form of a compulsion so that it safeguarded him against any threatening contact
with a woman. He developed headaches in case his rejection was resisted, or
suffered from somnolence to ease him over an unpleasant situation. In order to
give added weight to his fear of women, he compiled a host of experiences that
argued the ruinous role of women. Favorable experiences he might have had
with women were ignored. Whatever possibilities for love or marriage remained
were excluded as a matter of principle. He insisted that he would marry only
royalty, or established similar impossible ideals that he himself regarded as
unattainable.
Aside from masturbation, when half-asleep he tried a number of other
artifices. The most socially disturbing among these were his propensity to
change jobs frequently, and his total disinterest in work. The meaning of these
manifestations can easily be discerned: the "hesitating attitude." While it was
applicable to his work, it also was useful for keeping him away from marriage
problems. The construction of ethical and esthetic patterns certainly had insured
him against prostitution and "free love." These are advantages that should not
blind us from the neurotic tendencies they entail.
At the same time, this arrangement of a "hesitating attitude” with its
innumerable fatal and inherently conditioned experiences (that resulted from
tardiness, laziness, procrastination, etc.), also afforded him a second
safeguarding construction: the intensification of his sense of family which
always brought him back to the strongest possible relationship with his dogmatic
and domineering mother. It had always been the problems in his life that forced
his mother to devote her whole attention to him, which, in fact, was a way to
secure for himself a woman over whom he ruled despotically. He understood
perfectly how to tie her to him and to make her readily tractable with masterful
descriptions of his depressions, sending letters that he adorned with pictures of
revolvers, flinging hostile charges against her, and, occasionally, expressing
tenderness. These methods were the weapons and the tactics by which he
dominated his mother. Since in his relationship with his mother he excluded

sexual problems, it was analogous to his lifeline, a way to gain dominance. In
order to avoid other women, he attached himself to his mother. In some cases
this might be regarded as the caricature of an incestuous relationship, in other
cases, involving persons of a different nature, this type of life style might be
regarded as an "incestuous-like" relationship, an anxiety-motivated ruse that
must not deceive the physician.
Psychotherapeutic treatment must, therefore, demonstrate to the patient, on
the basis of his planning when awake and occasionally also from his dreams,
how out of habit he constantly tries to attain his ideal life style until, at first from
negativeness but later on his own free will, he will be able to change his life
style and, therewith, the structure of his life, establish contact with his
community, and become responsive to reasonable social demands.

Chapter XVII
On the Function of Compulsion Conception as a Way of Intensifying
the Sense of Personality1 2 [1913]

Part One
Summarily, I contend that every compulsion neurotic functions to avert all
external compulsion by heeding only his own compulsion. In other words, the
compulsion neurotic struggles so hard against any form of cooperation, against
every other will, and against any outside influence to the point where he regards
his own will as sacred and irresistible. This alone reveals that he thinks first and
foremost of himself, which can also be gathered from his life in general, despite
the deception he practices.
A particularly instructive example is the following case. A 40-year-old
woman complains that she is unable to do any housework because she has lost
the capacity to accomplish even the simplest tasks. She, therefore, is compelled
to repeat to herself everything she has to do, and only then is she able to carry it
out. For example, if she has to place a chair at a table she has to say: “I should
place a chair at the table!” Then she can accomplish that task. Thus, for her to be
able to do anything, the patient in this case must make another’s will, the
responsibility to carry out (a female role!) housework, her own.
If one recalls the delightful work of Furtmüller in Ethic und Psychoanalyse
(Munich 1912), he will be familiar with the procedure just described as one of
the pillars of ethics. In compulsion neurosis, this is the main pillar that allows the
patient to prove to himself his quasi-godlikeness in light of which every other
influence appears to be invalid.
In this regard I shall mention briefly how the compulsion to wash becomes
a way of demonstrating that everything else is unclean; how compulsive
masturbation undercuts the sexual attraction of a partner; and how in peculiar
ways all the heavenly powers seem to avail themselves to the individual who
prays compulsively. “If I fail to do this or that, if I say this or do that, if I fail to
offer this prayer or say those words, then this or that person will die.” The
meaning of this will become immediately clear when I present this formulation
in the following positive terms: If I do or fail to do this, when I allow my own
will to become effective, then that person will not die. This provides the patient
with bogus evidence that he is the master over life and death and becomes
godlike.
1 Originally published in Praxis und Theorie (1920). Translated into
English as Chapter 
16 in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology (1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.

On this subject it can also be said that even obsessive doubt and neurotic
anxiety have a practical application in neurosis. They permit a patient to
maintain his lifeline and to nullify every outside influence (such as it relates to
his work or behavior) and to discount all the expectations of others. As I have
pointed out in my earlier works, one will always find that in a neurosis
compulsion doubt and anxiety represent security, which allows the patient to
believe himself to be at the top, masculine, and superior.

Part Two
A 35-year-old female patient, who suffered from loss of energy and
compulsive brooding, and who constantly doubted her practical abilities,
introduced herself at our first meeting as an enthusiastic art admirer. She was
deeply impressed by (a) a self-portrait of the aging Rembrandt, (b) Signorelli’s
frescoes of the Resurrection, and (c) Giorgione’s Three Ages (also known as the
Concert).
Clearly, the patient’s interests lie in old age and in the future. We may also
assume that we have a person here who has problems maintaining her stability,
and who fears that the loss of her youth would seriously upset her. This
describes a person who, from an insecure position, seeks to gain some stability
for which artifices, which are the neurotic symptoms, appear necessary. One
could also gather from our description that this is a beautiful woman.
Now she has to forfeit her youth, her beauty, her power, and influence!
There are only two possibilities open to her: The first is to turn back to find a
new lifeline, a situation in which she would again be troubled by her old illness,
and would be prompted to visit a neurologist! The other possibility is to intensify
her symptoms, give them greater prominence, and, thereby, gain power. Patients
who follow this course usually are brought to a physician by someone close to
them.
A position of superiority adhered to with pedantry, fear, and force always
exposes a feeling familiar to us from insecure and anxiety-ridden patients. In this
case, we shall come to suspect that this woman, who had denied that she was
dissatisfied with her feminine role when this was suggested to her, had arrived at
her neurosis by way of the masculine protest.
At the session the next day the patient declared that Vienna social life
exhausted her. She found that she could rest much better in the country. In this
context it is easy to see that her fatigue was a tendentious arrangement for the
purpose of making it seem that relocating to Vienna was untenable.
If we connect with one line the arguments we heard over the past two
sessions we arrive at the following picture: We have an extremely ambitious
woman who insists on always playing the premier role. She is not satisfied with
her wealth of talents and trembles with fear at no longer being able to compete
socially in a big city. She looks at her future with concern and is busy
anticipating her impending fall from a prestigious social position. From past
impressions useful to her purpose, and from the usual problems of life, she

formed the highly emotionally charged idea that she is not suitable for a practical
life, i.e. the life of an aging housewife.
Therefore, through neurosis and with neurotic symptoms, in this case
compulsive ideas, the feeling of helplessness and fatigue, she endeavors to
succeed in evading an inevitable “truth,” which is that age degrades a woman.
This is truer in her case, a woman who earlier in life was already at the mercy of
men, and who lived a life of luxury. Instead of engaging her in a wide-ranging
discussion, I offered instead evidence to the effect that as she would begin to feel
her feminine role more strongly, she would more forcefully relinquish the game
of playing along. As a result she became distant and for four days retired while
she had her period.
On her second day of treatment she told me the following dream: “On her
table is Oscar Wilde’s Dorian Gray. Inside the book is a white, artistically
embroidered large piece of silk. I ask myself how this piece of silk came into the
book.”
The first part of the dream confirmed what I had uncovered as the cause of
her aggravated condition. The portrait of Dorian Gray begins to age. White silk,
silk embroidered curtains, and similar objects have particular value for this
patient. A book on the table means a book authored by me. Her valuables, her
precious possessions, are found in my book! This astonishes her. The thought
comes to mind whether I would write about her fear of aging. Her old attitude of
reserve emerges as a practical way for her to increase the distance from her
physician.
The struggle against the feminine role, along with the overestimation of a
once-desired male-oriented profession (artist), the denigration of the role of
housewife, as well as the natural process of marriage, love, aging, and decisions
of all kinds that threaten the superiority ideal, bring on a compulsion to intensify
the neurosis. Neurosis is composed of individual and useful, psychological and
physical artifices which in the aggregate, and through their interaction, can
uphold the fiction of uniqueness, of power, and of free will. Shutting out all
external demands is made possible by the gain in power derived from having
ascribed legitimacy to the illness.
A strikingly beautiful person faces particular problems in life, and there are
not many who know how to deal with them. Most of them constantly anticipate
unheard of triumphs, expect to attain all they desire without effort, and obviously
run into contradictions with the real world. This applies in particular to comely
older females when they fail to find a relationship that does not depend
exclusively on the powers of their beauty. When the loss of their attractiveness
threatens, the old lust for power emerges in neurotic and thoroughly harmful

forms.
Similarly, handsome men who have come to expect everything from others
because of erroneously drawn conclusions based on their attractiveness can
easily come under suspicion for having female characteristics, or for lacking
male traits.
Handsome, attractive, and physically healthy persons often are found
among criminals. The same is true for problem children, and applies also to
perverse individuals. These persons stem from the countless number who were
pampered as children because of their good looks. Perhaps among the failures in
life there are also noticeably ugly people, a circumstance that leads some
authorities to believe in innate psychological defects. It is easy to see, however,
that ugly people fail also because of our culture’s exaggerated view of physical
beauty that caused them to acquire an inferiority complex, something that would
apply equally to strikingly beautiful children whose expectations fell short. This
then is how a typical social problem influences the fate of an individual.
Chapter XVIII
Additional Guiding Principles for the Practice of Individual Psychology1 2
[1913]
We believe:
I. Every neurosis can be interpreted as caused by a culturally failed attempt
to free oneself from the feeling of inferiority so as to gain a feeling of
superiority.
II. A neurosis does not produce a socially functioning individual nor does it
resolve a particular problem in that person's life. Instead, it originates in the
small family circle where it forces isolation on the patient.
III. The larger community is either totally or partly excluded as a result of a
combination of hypersensitivity and intolerance. This leaves only a small circle
within which the neurotic can act deviously to achieve superiority. At the same
time, while maintaining an appearance of trying to cooperate, the neurotic
devises safeguards and ways to retreat from demands made upon him by the
community as well as having to make decisions.
IV. Having averted reality for the most part, the neurotic leads a life filled
with illusions and fantasies. He uses various subterfuges that permit him to avoid
life's demands while striving toward an ideal situation that would exempt him
from community service and responsibility.
V. These exemptions and the privileges that stem from being ill and having
to suffer provide him with a substitute for his original risky goal of gaining
actual superiority.
VI. Thus the neurosis and the neurotic psyche represent an attempt at

avoiding all community constraints by means of a counter-compulsion. The
latter is designed to effectively confront a unique situation in the neurotic's
environment and to counter any demands made on him. Firm and binding
conclusions can be drawn about the neurosis and neurotic psyche from the
counter-compulsion's manifestations, the form it takes, and, therefore, from the
neurosis that has been selected.
VII. The counter-compulsion has the character of a revolt against the
community. It acquires its material from appropriate emotional experiences or
observations that preoccupy the person's thoughts and feelings, but also from
insignificant matters, and is well suited to distracting the patient from problems
in his life. Thus, depending upon whatever a situation requires, anxiety,
obsessive-compulsive 
conditions, 
sleeplessness, 
fainting, 
perversions,
hallucinations, symptoms of illnesses, neurasthenic and hypochondriacal
conditions, as well as psychotic symptoms can be fashioned to serve the
individual as pretexts.
1 First published in Praxis und Theorie (1920). Translated into English as
Chapter 3 in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology (1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2002.
VIII. Even logic is subject to the dictates of counter-compulsion. This
process can go so far as to nullify logic, as in a psychoses, and replace reason
and common sense with a private logic.
IX. Logic, aesthetics, love, human kindness, cooperation, and language
arose out of the need for human social existence. Opposed to this is the
automatically assumed attitude of the power lusting neurotic striving toward
isolation.
X. Curing a neurotic and psychotic requires an alteration in his upbringing,
correcting mistakes made, and his eventual unconditional return to human
society.
XI. All of a neurotic's desires and striving are dictated by his need for
prestige. He is always grasping for pretexts to leave problems in his life
unsolved and is automatically opposed to developing social feeling. What he
says and what he thinks have no practical meaning. His rigid actions are
reflected best in his attitude.
XII. Once the postulation of the indivisibility of the individual has been
uniformly accepted--which we are compelled to accept because, for one, it is
reasonable, but also because of Individual Psychology's recognition of the
existence of a compulsion toward an integrated personality--we are then helped
by making comparisons as a primary method to gain a picture of the way an

individual attains superiority. As counterpoles for making comparisons we find
the following contrasts particularly useful:
1. Our own attitude in a situation similar to that faced by the patient who is
under pressure. This requires a therapist to be endowed with a significant gift of
empathy.
2. A knowledge of the patient's attitude and anomalies in his background
dating to earliest childhood. Significant factors include the standing of the child
in his environment, his mistaken, often generalized, evaluation of himself, his
unbending and deep-seated inferiority feeling, and his striving for personal
power.
3. Other individuals, particularly those who are clearly neurotic. In those
cases it becomes apparent that one person may attain his goal with neurasthenic
problems, another may employ fear, hysteria, neurotic compulsion, or psychosis.
Character traits, emotions, principles, and nervous symptoms, all pointing
toward the same goal, often contradictory in meaning when torn out of context
function to provide protection from the impact of demands made by society.
4. It is these societal demands, such as cooperation, human kindness, love,
social integration, commitment to the community, that are avoided by the
neurotic either to a greater or lesser extent.
One learns from such Individual Psychological examinations that the
neurotic, to a greater degree than the average normal person, has arranged
himself psychologically to be striving for power over his fellow human beings.
His yearning for superiority also affects outside demands, those of others and
commitments to a community, which are persistently and broadly rejected by
claiming "illness." Recognizing these basic facts as they pertain to the neurotic
provides such an extensive insight into the workings of his psyche that it can be
accepted as a useful working hypothesis to explore ways of healing. Eventually a
comprehensive understanding of the individual will be achieved that will reveal
the actual illness-causing factors and the extent of their impact.
The question that troubles the normal person most deeply when exposed to
this argument is whether a fictitious goal based on an emotional feeling of
superiority is stronger than one based on rational deliberation. We find, however,
that this transposing of an ideal occurs just as frequently in the life of a normal
person and is commonly found in entire nations. War, political abuse, crime,
suicide, excessive penance, and arrogant criticism all surprise us similarly, and
much of our suffering and pain is created by ourselves and endured in the cause
of some idea.
That a cat, without having seen how it is done, is prepared to catch mice at
its earliest stage of development, is at least as remarkable as the neurotic's

ability, dependent on his nature, his means, his standing, and his self-evaluation,
to evade all demands made on him, finding them impossible to endure, and
either secretly or openly, consciously or unconsciously searching constantly for
excuses to escape them, often even creating pretenses himself. He eliminates
from his daily life all relationships that he considers--less by reason and
understanding and more based on feeling--disturbing to his sense of power, or
possibly unmasking his feeling of inferiority.
The reason for the neurotic's intolerance of demands made by society,
derived from his history as a child, lies in a permanent hostile attitude toward his
environment that he has practiced over many years. Without any justification for
such a generalized and continuing reaction, this struggle is forced on the child by
a belief that has been physically or psychologically transmitted, and one that
causes the child constant and at times acute feelings of inferiority. The object of
such a combative attitude is the conquest of power and status; the goal is an ideal
of superiority that has been created out of a child's incompetence and by
overestimation. 
Its 
fulfillment 
promises 
general 
compensation 
and
overcompensation, and in its pursuit there is victory over social and
environmental constraints. As soon as this struggle takes on sharper forms, it
creates an antagonism against constraints of every type, against pressures that
arise from one's upbringing, from reality and from society, from outside powers
and from forces that spring from one's own weakness. This antagonism extends
to all the normal demands made of an individual, whether at work or with regard
to his personal hygiene, eating, bowel and urine functions, sleep, illnesses, love,
tenderness and friendship, loneliness or social obligations. All in all, the picture
emerges of a person who does not wish to be cooperative, a spoilsport, a person
who has never become a fellowman, who has never taken roots, a stranger on
this earth. Where this antagonism is directed against awakening feelings of love
and camaraderie fear of love and marriage ensues that can take a great variety
of ways and means.
At this point note should be taken of several kinds of constraints of which
the normal person is hardly aware but which are almost regularly averted by a
nervous or psychotic condition. These include the need to acknowledge, to listen,
subordinate oneself, to speak the truth, to study or to take tests, to be punctual,
to place one’s trust in another person, a car, a train, a house, a business, one's
own children, one's spouse; to commit oneself to another person, to a home, a
job and to marriage; to acknowledge another's viewpoint, to be thankful, to have
children, to act one's own sexual role or to feel erotically tied to another person,
to get up in the morning and to go to bed at night, to acknowledge the equality of
others and particularly of women, to have a sense of proportion, to be loyal, and

to stand being alone. All the idiosyncrasies against such constraints can be
conscious or unconscious, but in their totality are never fully grasped or
understood by the patient.
These findings teach us two lessons: 
1. In the neurotic, the concept of constraint has been enormously extended and,
even where logical, encompasses associations that would not be regarded as
constraining by the normal person. 
2. The antagonism against constraint is not its final manifestation. It points
beyond itself, always abiding and festering, always heading toward a combative
posture and, in an apparently dormant state, shows us the striving of the neurotic
for superiority over another and the tendency to assault the logical consequences
of human coexistence. "Non me rebus, sed mihi res subigere conor." This
passage from a letter sent by Horace to Maecenas also evidences where such an
inflamed lust for status leads: to headaches and sleeplessness. 
The following case illustrates these principles: 
A 35-year-old patient complained for years of suffering from sleeplessness,
brooding and compulsive masturbation. The latter act seems particularly unusual
since the patient is married, has two children and seems to live in a harmonious
marriage. Among other tormenting problems he also reported having a "rubber
fetish." It seems that from time to time and in every exciting situation the word
"rubber" forces itself over his lips. 
The results of an extensive Individual Psychological examination were as
follows: starting from a time of extreme depression during childhood when the
patient was a bedwetter and when, because of his clumsiness, he was regarded as
"stupid," he had pursued ambition to the point of megalomania. Outside
pressure, which actually was considerable, presented him with a view of a
thoroughly hostile world and permeated him with a pessimistic outlook for the
rest of his life. That attitude affected any demands made on him which he
regarded as an unbearable imposition and against which he revolted by wetting
his bed and being clumsy. This persisted until, for the first time in his life, he
encountered a teacher who clearly personified a decent human being, and who
encouraged him. Now he began to transform his defiance and anger against
those who made demands on him and he mitigated his aggressive attitude against
society as a whole to where it became possible for him to stop wetting his bed,
and changed to become an excellent, "talented"3 student, who strives for the
highest goals. He dealt with intolerance, as would a poet and philosopher, by
reaching into the transcendental. He developed an emotionally charged idea that
he was the only living being, and that everything else, especially other people,
was merely an apparition. A parallel to the ideas of Schopenhauer, Fichte, and

Kant cannot be dismissed. The deeper intent, however, was to achieve security
by devaluating everything, to escape "scorn and doubt" by magic, just as an
insecure child would try to divest facts of their potency. This is how the eraser
became a symbol and a sign of his powers. It afforded him the possibility to
erase all things visible. This matter then seemed open to exaggeration and
generalization and thus the word "rubber" became a winning solution for any
problems he encountered in school and at home, and later served him to respond
to demands from any man or woman, a wife, or a child. 
He arrived at his goal of an isolated hero in an almost poetic manner, fulfilling
his striving for power, and renouncing society. However, his constantly
improving worldly status did not further tempt him to renounce altogether actual,
eternal communal feelings. Not much was lost of the logic that binds us, or from
eroticism. Thus he escaped the fate of contracting a paranoic disease. He went
only as far as a compulsion neurosis. 
His eroticism was not founded on what was left of his communal feeling. Rather,
it was guided by the striving for power. Since he associated the concept and
feeling of "power" with "rubber" he sought and found a cue for deflecting his
sexuality in the image of a rubber girdle. No longer the woman but the rubber
girdle, that is, not a personal but an impersonal object, affected him. Thus,
secure in his intoxication with power and his tendency to deprecate women, he
became a fetishist, a shadow boxer, exhibiting traits that are found regularly in
incipient fetishism. Had his belief in his own masculinity been even weaker we
would have found indications of homosexuality, pedophilia, gerontophilia,
necrophilia, and similar manifestations.4
His obsessive masturbation reflects the same basic character. It also serves him
in his perceived need to flee the constraints of love and female "magic." He has
no need for a woman!
His sleeplessness is directly attributed to his obsessive brooding. His insatiable
ambition drives him to spend his nights solving daytime problems. He, a second
Alexander, had achieved so little! At the same time his sleeplessness robs him in
other ways. It saps his energy and activity. It legitimatizes his illnesses. What he
has accomplished thus far was done, so to say, with one hand tied behind his
back, in spite of his sleeplessness. What could he have done had he been able to
sleep! However, he is unable to sleep and, with his nightly obsessive brooding,
he has found his alibi. Now his uniqueness, his godlikeness, has been saved. All
blame for his alleged deficiency now falls not on his personality, but on the
mysterious, fatal circumstance of his sleeplessness. This illness is not a
disagreeable accident. Its persistence is not his fault but is due to the
incompetence of physicians. If his greatness needs to be proven, the burden rests

on the physicians. As is evident, he has no insignificant interest in being ill and
he will not make it easier for the physicians because he is fighting for a
favorable position in which his vanity is safeguarded from accidents. His
neurosis pleads for ameliorating conditions. 
It is interesting to note how in order to safeguard his godlikeness, he has solved
the problem of life and death. He still feels as if his mother, who had died 12
years earlier, were alive. However, there is a notable insecurity behind this
presumption, which is stronger than a tender feeling usually expressed shortly
after the death of a dearly beloved person. This doubt in his bizarre presumption
does not stem from an unbiased logic. It becomes clear only after insight is
gained through Individual Psychology. If all is a sham then his mother could not
have died. If she is alive, however, then the sustaining idea of his uniqueness
subsides. He has failed to succeed in solving this problem just as he has with his
idea of the world as a concept. As for death as an inevitability, he has his doubts.
All the symptoms of his illnesses today legitimize his demand for all kinds of
privileges as these pertain to his wife, to his relatives, and to his subordinates.
His own esteem can never be hurt because in light of his sufferings he is always
larger than life and can even undertake difficult tasks which he can terminate at
any time by pointing to his illnesses. He can also be more. With his supervisors,
whose fullest satisfaction he earned, he is always the most conscientious,
arduous, and loyal worker. However, he constantly aims to be superior to them,
just as he tries to do with his physician during treatment. 
The patient's supercharged striving for having the feeling of power over others
caused him to become ill. His feelings and perceptions, his initiatives and
actions, and even his logic, were taken over by his self-imposed obsession to be
superior to all. His humanity and with that also his love, friendship and
integration into society were stifled. Healing could only have been achieved by
renouncing his tactics for gaining prestige, and through an unfolding of social
feeling.
3 "Talent" is the result of training derived from some sources of power
toward which the inferiority of sensory organs and feelings of inferiority provide
the impetus (see "Studie"). Inner freedom from neurosis, the transformation of
talent and increasing talent can be achieved by delving more deeply into
Individual Psychology. "Genius may only be diligence!" (Goethe). 
4 Freud would then have tried to establish which memory traces caused one or
the other symptom. The main point, however, the compulsive goal to create, and
with that the neurotic dynamic, would not have eluded him.
Chapter XIX

Individual Psychological Findings from Research in Sleep Disturbance1 2
[1913]
A patient who had long suffered from recurring fainting spells which were
meant to establish his dominance over his family and, as analysis showed, in
particular over his mother, awoke on two successive nights from fright and
sleeplessness. He was unable to fall asleep again until three o'clock in the
morning. Briefly, the patient's situation was as follows: He was to undertake a
trip to Karlsbad accompanied by his father and mother when the trip was
postponed for 14 days because his father had encountered unexpected
difficulties. The night after this change in plans the patient awoke from fright
and called for his nurse next door. Soon after she arrived, his mother appeared,
just as the patient had assumed she would. The patient asked for bromide, which
he had been taking during an earlier treatment, and then, after having stayed
awake from one o'clock to three o'clock, he fell asleep again. The same
occurrence was repeated the following night.
During the first night, the patient recalled a typewriter; during the second he
also remembered the cities Görz, Budweis, and Gojau. The last he thought was a
city, but could not recall where it was located. Before that he had a dream which
he described as follows: "It seemed to me that we had received the news from
Karlsbad that my mother's favorite brother had died. I dressed in mourner ‘s
clothing and boasted about it." Analysis showed that the dream reflected the
wish that the favored brother--his brother who was the mother's favorite--would
die. However, the transference of the scene to Karlsbad points to the father,
whom he seemed to worship, but still wanted dead so that the mother, whom he
disliked, would exist for him alone. This puzzle becomes clear on accepting the
idea that possession of the mother has become the object of his struggle, the
symbol of his dominance and his reason for living. For many years all that he did
not have, and possibly could not have, he believed attainable by dominating the
mother. Every defeat he perceived was captured by the image of having been
robbed of his mother. Because every sexual motive is missing, and since the
dominance of his mother has become a symbol of his dominance, he has been
obsessed--how can this be called anything else--by the idea that by possessing
his mother he could become ruler, emperor, and God.
1 First appeared in "Fortschritte der Medizin," Vol. 31, 1913, Pages 925-
933, under the title "Individualpsychologische Ergebnisse..." Translated into
English as Chapter 13 in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology
(1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.

The typewriter that came to mind during his sleepless night belongs to his
brother, who refused to have him use it, even for practice. Indeed, when the
brother once traveled to Paris he took the typewriter with him, just as he had
recently taken their mother to find a summer home.
I do not contend that in order to trigger an attack of fright an accumulation
of causes perceived to be humiliating are always necessary. In most cases this
appears to be the case, but often such multiple causes also present difficulties
when they are examined to ascertain what connects them, and in trying to
understand the causes that triggered them. In our case we find first the
disappointed expectation and postponement of the journey; and second, the trip
the brother had taken with the mother. These are two evident causes that are
internally connected (as opposed to the feeling of superiority of the patient over
the favorite brother). We also learn how he sees the deferential treatment
bestowed on the brother, and how he reacts to him with aggression and death
wishes.
With his epilepsy-like attacks when he felt himself defeated, the patient
attained what he was after which is that his mother express concern for him.
However, she would then again desert her unpleasant patron. At this time the
process of his illness seemed to have abated. With his nightly attacks, caused by
fright, he reached the same results. In fact, he gained even more! His mother is
forced to come to his room and remain with him until his bruised sensibilities
were restored. This is the interpretation of his thoughts about the typewriter. It is
the reason for his fear and the arrangement of insomnia.
That his attitude was designed to attract others to him is supported by his
request the following day for me to visit him, instead, as usual, for him to come
to my office.
Another reasonable question that can be asked is why he resorted to an
arrangement of fright, and how he came to construct insomnia. 
We can derive the first answer from what was learned from a personality
analysis. As a child his only fear was of locomotives and their whistles. He
exploited that fear by forcing his mother to come to him so that he could bury his
head in her lap. Otherwise he was always a courageous boy. This leads to the
assumption that his nightly fears were related to the locomotive. Did we not
learn that he wanted to travel to Karlsbad, and that his brother had taken a train
ride with their mother?
During his second sleepless night, the patient envisioned, aside from the
typewriter, the towns of Görz in Istria and Gojau, the latter, as it turns out, being
located near Budweis. He had once been in Görz while traveling from Venice on
a visit to his mother in Karlsbad. At that time he arrived at one o'clock at night in

Budweis, had a two-hour wait in the station, and continued his trip at three
o'clock that morning. This time he was able to travel in a sleeper compartment
where he fell asleep at three o'clock in the morning. The period from one to three
o'clock, however, was also the time when he was awake from fright during the
two sleepless nights. In other words, his two attacks were repetitions of his trip
to Karlsbad. He seemed to have been afflicted by a condition in which he could
not wait to travel with his mother alone to Karlsbad. This impatience also is
reflected in his incessant complaints about the hot weather by which he clearly
wants to say: I must get out of Vienna! 
At first he was unable to recall a town named "Gojau." When he checked its
location he found that Gojau is connected with Budweis by a little traveled rail
spur. I am indebted to Dr. v. Maday who pointed out an association with death,
which seems appropriate in this context: The rail spur ends at a station called
"Black Cross." 
The fact that the patient awakened at one o'clock in the morning, that is, at the
same time that he had waited sleeplessly for the train to Karlsbad, certainly
indicates that while sleeping he traveled in his thoughts to Karlsbad, a trip that
he once took without his mother. This time, however, using an infantile
arrangement of fear in association with planned insomnia, he tried to assert his
personal ideal: His mother had to come to his room. His psychological condition
might be described as follows: If I did not have to wait (for the subjugation of
my mother, the death of my brother and father), I could travel alone with mother,
just like my brother. His wish for preferential treatment, such as he was given as
a child when she blocked his ears with her hands to keep out the noise of the
train whistle, harks back to Karlsbad when he suffered insomnia. He
remembered that with fear and sleeplessness he could control his mother and
thus might be able to persuade her to take the trip. 
Among other lessons this case teaches is that the guiding personality ideas
reaching toward their goals do not rest even when asleep. They take on, as one
might say, substantive forms, just as dreams pass into the psyche, in order to
take preparatory steps to explore ways of fulfilling the guiding idea. As is
always the case when in a state of great uncertainty, this preparing is based on
experiences. Because they seem most suitable to the total personality, the most
abstract experiences, those that are closest to the kernel of the guiding idea, are
sought after for immediate help, more for the warning or encouragement they
give, and less for their actual effectiveness in situations of danger. However, in
some way they actually must also be effective since they would otherwise be
abandoned. This subjective evaluation need not be objectively valid. The
neurotic arrangement that is thus created must be in accord with the neurotic's

fictitious end goal. In the case above, it sufficed that the patient saw his standing
rise in the eyes of those near to him. He forced his mother against her will to
serve him. In fact it is the only currently realized manifestation of his former
god-ideal, or as in this case, his one-time emperor delusion. (Given that
viewpoint we can also understand the epileptic's delusions and those of other
psychotics who yearn to be emperor. It is the stronger abstraction when
measured against the original guiding fiction.) 
The following case illustrates that ungratified ambition can lead to insomnia
because of resulting strained thought processes. The laurels of Alcibades kept
Militades from sleeping. Indeed, insomnia, because of ungratified ambition, is
not rare. The patient is on his guard! I hope that the case I am about to describe
will not diminish in interest when I reveal that it is the result of a physician's
self-analysis. What prompted the analysis is the following occurrence that was
told as follows:
The terrible tragedy of the "Titanic" gave me the opportunity to examine
how it affected me. In my spare time I frequently found myself discussing this
disaster. I constantly kept asking whether some means could not have been
found to save the people who were drowning.
One night I woke up and as appropriate for a professional psychologist I
asked myself: Why did I, a usually sound sleeper, wake up at that particular
moment? I was unable to find a satisfactory answer. A short time later, I was in
deep thought about ways by which the people from the 'Titanic' could have been
saved. After that, it was about three o'clock in the morning. I fell asleep again.
The following night I again awoke and noted that it was two-thirty in the
morning. I fleetingly recalled various theories concerning insomnia among
which was that of an authority who was of the opinion that once a person is
accustomed to waking up at night it was easy always for him to wake up at the
same time. At that moment I knew intuitively how I came to wake up. The
'Titanic' sank at two-thirty in the morning. I had taken that trip in my sleep and
had empathized with that terrible disaster. I had already awakened twice at the
same time the ship was sinking!
During the second night I thought again about ways one could be saved in
such a tragic situation. At the same time I guessed that an attempt was at work
here at prevention and preparation that would similarly serve as precaution as
well as ambition. I also understood clearly that the journey to America, an old
yearning of mine, symbolized in a meaningful way the struggle for my scientific
standing. I acted in my sleep as I would have awake. I was searching for ways
that I could be rescued and had created the most meaningful situation to
mobilize myself for a defense: Identifying with the greatest danger and

contemplating it! Awake to consciousness!
It is easy to understand that this kind of reaction to danger facing me and
those close to me has to reflect my personal attitude. I soon found the
connection.
After all, I am a physician. It, therefore, behooves me to find means to
vanquish death. This already led me to familiar grounds. The struggle against
death is indeed the strongest drive in my profession.3 Like so many physicians, I
also chose this profession to conquer death. Such a leading fiction usually is
prompted by having had to face as a child a life threatening situation,
experiencing an illness, or seeing someone close to you in such situations.
3 See "Kindliche Phantasien über Berufswahl" (Childish Fantasies about Choice
of Occupation), Dr. Kramer in "Heilen und Bilden."
I can recall a number of incidents from my youth in which death appeared
near. Aside from problems I had moving about following a bout with rickets, I
developed a mild form of spasm of the vocal cords, similar to those I later also
diagnosed in children. Crying causes the glottis to close resulting in a shortness
of breath and the loss of voice that interrupts the crying until the spasm subsides
and crying can continue. The shortness of breath is highly unpleasant, as I recall
from my own experience. At that time I could not have been more than three
years old. The exaggerated fear expressed by my parents, and the concern of the
physician, did not escape me and left me, aside from the embarrassment caused
by the shortness of breath, with a feeling that I now see as having been one of
discomfort and insecurity. I further remember that one day, shortly after such a
coughing attack, I was struck by the idea that since there was no way to alleviate
this suffering, I might be able to discover some cure. How I came upon that idea,
whether triggered by something external or on my own is hard to say. However,
I decided to stop the crying. Whenever I felt the first urge to cry I pinched
myself, restrained my crying, and stopped the coughing attack. I had found a
way to cure this suffering, and possibly also alleviate my fear of death.
A short time later, I had turned three, my younger brother died. I believe to
have understood the meaning of death. I had stayed with him almost to the end.
When he was sent to my grandfather, I knew then that I would never see him
again and that he would be buried in the cemetery. After the funeral my mother
took me home. She was very sad, had cried a lot, but smiled a little when my
grandfather, to console her, made a jocular remark that implied she should look
forward to having more children. I could not forgive my mother for a long time
for smiling. From my resentment I can assume that I was well aware of the
tragedy that accompanies death.

When I was four years old I was twice run over by a wagon. I can only
remember that I awoke lying on a couch and that I was in pain. I had no idea
how I got there. Apparently, I had fainted.
When I was five years old I had contracted pneumonia and was given up by
the doctor. Another doctor recommended a new treatment and I was well within
a few days. For a long time there was joy over my recovery and much talk about
my having escaped death. Since that time I remember having contemplated
becoming a physician. This means that I had established a goal from which I
could expect to put an end to my childhood fear of death. Obviously, I had
expected more from my choice of profession than I could produce: I expected to
be able to overcome the fear of death. That is more than I should have expected
from any human; it could only be expected from a god. Reality, however,
required action. Thus I was forced to change the formula of the guiding fiction to
where I consciously altered my goal until it seemed realistic. This led me to
choose the medical profession to overcome death and the fear of death.4
Based on a fantasy of a somewhat retarded boy about his future occupation,
which were founded on experiences similar to mine--the death of his sister, a
sickly childhood, and a familiarity with death--I learned that he had decided to
become a grave digger so that, as he said, he could bury others and avoid being
buried himself. The rigid, contrasting thinking of this boy, who was later to
become a neurotic, never allowed for a middle ground. To him everything is
either above or below, active or passive, a hammer or an anvil, flectere si nequeo
superos, Acheronta movebo! His infantile saving fiction moved in a trivial
situation to the opposite.
When I was five years old and had chosen my profession the following
occurred: The father of a playmate had asked me what I wanted to become. I
replied: a doctor! The man, who probably had bad experiences with physicians,
replied: 'They should hang you from the nearest lamppost.' Obviously, because I
had my mind firmly made up, this expression left me absolutely cold. I believed
that I would become a good doctor and that no one would be hostile toward me.
Besides, I remembered that this man manufactured street lamps.
Shortly thereafter I entered public school. I recalled that on my way to
school I had to cross a cemetery and was afraid every time. I saw with
misgivings that the other children innocently crossed the cemetery, while I
feared every step I took. Aside from being tormented by my fears, I was also
disturbed by the thought that I was less courageous than the others. One day I
decided to put an end to my deathly fear. I again chose toughening up (approach
death!). I lingered behind the other children, placed my school bag on the
cemetery wall, and walked, probably a dozen times, back and forth across the

cemetery until I thought that I had conquered my fear. I believe that from then
on I went that way without being afraid.
Thirty years later I met a former schoolmate with whom I exchanged
childhood memories from our school days. I recalled that the cemetery no longer
existed and asked what had happened to that place that gave me so much trouble.
With some surprise my former comrade, who had lived in that neighborhood
longer than I, said that there never existed a cemetery on the way to school. I
then recognized that my cemetery story was a fictitious cover for my longing to
overcome my fear of death. It was to demonstrate to me that, just like in other
life situations, death and the fear of death can be overcome and that there must
be ways to make that possible. This worked like some powerfully comforting
words which told me that when in difficult situations I would succeed in finding
a way to conquer death. This is how I fought against my childhood fear and how
I became a physician. In the same way I still ponder over problems that have the
same psychological attraction for me. The 'Titanic' catastrophe is an outstanding
example of this.5
4 
On 
the 
meaning 
of 
death 
in 
philosophy 
see 
P. 
Schrecker,
“Persönlichkeitsphilosophie,” (Personality Philosophy), Munich, 1912.
Clearly, my ambition has been so firmly set by this guiding fiction to
overcome death that other goals cannot unseat it. It is more likely that I may
have given the impression that I am not interested in pursuing most
relationships. The explanation for this dichotomy lies in that ambition is only a
means and not an end so that at times it can be used or put aside depending on
whether the impending goal can more easily be attained with one character trait
or another. I have mostly disregarded goals that others may find attractive.
This short analysis shows us the same dynamic that I have found in the
healthy as well as the unhealthy psyche. The awakening at night is a symbol, a
simile of life, reflecting the past (insecurity), the present (danger from
unscrupulous people), the future (the search for a means) and a guiding goal
(overcoming death).
Sleep can be regarded as an abstraction. Its purpose would be to provide
rest for thoughts formed during the waking state, the socially essential, i.e.,
conscious thoughts, as well as rest for the social senses that reach beyond the
physical. In sleep physical and mental activity is subjected to the psyche
operating on experiences and practices stemming from earlier times. It conveys
the psychological activity from the previous day toward an intimated goal. The
dream in remnants of conscious thought processes reflects in hallucinating ways
this psychological progression. The dream, however, which only accompanies

and never generates action--for which it would be unsuitable because it is
abstract and expressed in fragments--is not meant to be comprehensible. It
becomes comprehensible where a dream prepares for action, or seems to do so,
where it spurs on, repulses, or warns. It has then been subjected to an
individually prepared tendency. The same applies where the dream is
remembered or forgotten, and where remembering or forgetting can correspond
to the same tendency.6
Sleep disturbance obeys the same tendency. Insomnia, as shown in our first
case, is promoted as evidence of illness whenever it appears to be the most
useful means to assert one's superiority, one's lifestyle. Patients' complaints,
seemingly in contradiction with our presentation, only serve to give greater
credence to these symptoms. Waking up in those cases is the result of a planned,
even if unconscious, arrangement of fear, of pain, or is based on an unrecognized
act of arbitrariness. Accompanying dreams, in the form of analogies, often
identify the source from which neurotic tendencies draw feelings of concern,
which are either false or intentionally reinforced, for an impending problem. The
fact that dreams in this context can either be irrelevant or non-existing is
demonstrated by the second case described above. Based on the material
presented in that case a temporary sleeplessness could be ascribed to the person
possessing great self-confidence for whom waking thought is self-evident. The
absence of dreams during the first two nights, as reported by the person in that
case, represents nothing unusual. Since he is familiar with dream analysis
dreams have become very rare for him, probably because their value and
meaning suffered from his readiness to act.
5 Wagner described another means for overcoming the fear of death in
"Siegfried": "I grieve not fearing the demise of the gods-since my wish is that
this be." See Furtmüller "Ethik und Psychonalyse," Munich, 1912 on this
psychological mechanism that I have described as characteristic of compulsion
neurosis. 
6 Further findings, that I published later, prove to me first of all that a dream
evidences training toward a lifestyle. Secondly, as a psychological intoxication
against common sense, it awakens feelings and emotions that are appropriate for
the lifestyle, and allow it to assert itself in any given situation.
In the first case cited we can clearly recognize a readiness to follow a
dubious path toward self-inflicted harm (epileptical neurosis) all the way to
death, in order to realize some vague idea. Individual Psychology "proved long
ago" that such "death drives" are a secondary manifestation of depressed
neurotics, and are the results of attempts to express self-importance, to overblow

one's personality, and a way of extorting. The transient insomnia of this patient
appears as a phase in that direction, like the fainting spells that were
accompanied by marked traumatic harm.7 The eventual course of this case is not
clear but should not be dismissed as an indicator of the role of genuine and
emotional epilepsy. In psychotherapeutic treatment the attacks were amenable to
analysis, were predictable, and could be ameliorated or perhaps even moderated.
At first the attacks, which occurred about every 14 days, had ceased while the
patient was under my observation for one month. While I treated him, there was
only an amelioration of the attacks resulting in his being more at ease and
approachable. Shortly before he stubbornly and obstinately terminated treatment,
I was able to show him that he unconsciously worked himself into a digestive
disorder. Several days later he fell ill with jaundice. I have not been able to
establish from personal observation whether he suffered from any additional
illnesses. I learned second hand that as a result of his illness he went into
frequent rages, that he was delirious for short periods of time, playing emperor
(familiar to me from his unconscious fantasies as a way of expressing his
superiority symbolically). He was said to have died from a heart attack six
months after terminating treatment and after a short episode of rage, but not
while seized with epilepsy.
7 The greatest harm was suffered on the day that a psychotherapist in his
ignorance guaranteed that no harm would come to the patient were he to be left
unaccompanied. Chapter XX
The Neurotic1 Character2 3
[1913]
A scientific presentation of psychological manifestations must always take
into account two shortcomings. The constant weaving of the psyche in all
directions can be captured by science only in segments, and then only at rest.
The resulting image must then have enough substance so that from mere
intimations it can stimulate a receptive reader or listener. Not unlike art,
psychology also demands an equally strong intuitive comprehension of the
material, a comprehension and feeling that extends beyond the limits of
induction and deduction. When I mention Nietzsche’s name, a towering pillar in
the arts is evoked. Every artist who imparts his soul as a gift to us, every
philosopher who gives us an understanding of how he masters life through his
intellect, every teacher and parent who lets us feel how the world reflects him or
her, gives direction to our perceptions, sets a goal for our desires, and becomes
our leader in the vast region of our soul.
In the mindset of scientists, and in the fields in which their spirits move,

abides much sacred tradition not revealed in words or in syntax. And yet, it is the
creative, controlled, and artistic instinct that sustains the spirit of his work at
least until an even more urgent need forces him, like a child searching for
something, to smash old idols. His creative genius teaches him to find new ways,
to devise tricks and stratagems so as to embrace the problems presented by his
subject, and with stealth overcome persistent resistance. Regarding the mysteries
of life, and in times of need, everyone is a scientist and a poet. To overcome evil
and repugnance every person finds a way and fashions the direction of his life in
hopes that it will lead to where it ranges high above all suffering, all
deprivations, and above all hardships. The individual's guiding idea, the goal that
was
1 Trans. Note: The literal translation is "nervous." I have used "neurotic" as
well as nervous. 
2 Lecture given at the Sozialwissenschaftliche Bildungsverein, in Prague, 1913.
Originally published in Heilen und Bilden (1914). 
3 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
creatively set and the path he sought to reach it, is reflected in all of his
actions, in the way he perceives life, the present as well as the future, and in how
he embraces the teachings of the past.
If we analyze and dissect the fleeting actions and expressions of an
individual, his behavior, speech, mimicry, and bearing without allowing this to
affect our creative powers and us, do we not then deprive that person of the full
measure of our judgment? A mere objective analysis will never let us understand
an impression or an experience, but, without becoming aware of it, often without
us even being willing to admit it, whatever we hear and judge is given a form
shaped by our personality. The way we process, stress, or minimize impressions
that affect us is predetermined by our subconscious experiences and cannot
easily be changed. We must also be able to discern in others such primed and
anticipated behavior and be able to recognize where it may lead if, we are to
understand what a particular expression means. It may be possible to compare
the same characteristics in a number of people, but they can never be regarded as
being the same. Anger as experienced in one person is basically different from
that in another; ambition in one person entails not only the present, but his whole
background, the future, and a fictitious finale.
The difficulty in representing a psychological manifestation, therefore, is
having to capture as a quiescent substance something that is planned to happen
from an expression, and to render it so that it seems to be happening. Actually,
only an artist is equal to such a task, especially a poet or musician. From this

arises another apparent difficulty. I am thinking of the fleeting appearance of
most emotional expressions. Recurring manifestations, such as physical and
mental behavior, even handwriting, provide valuable material that offers a
tentative guiding impression. An individual cannot possibly judge his own
habitual, always recurring, physical and particular spiritual expressions and
attitudes. These include, first of all, those characteristics from which we deduce
character, and the more unique symptoms of neurosis, which with hardly
supportable analogy, we regard as an illness because, like an illness, they impair
life and the ability to function properly. However, even in the face of such
fleeting, rarely recurring emotional expressions, our approach is successful.
There returns in every expressed emotion the old pattern, the uniform life plan
structured on top of past individual experiences and aimed at a fictitious fifth act.
We must only allow the impression to affect us, then compare it to other
impressions, so as to understand and feel the unity of all expressions. This is no
different from approaching an art form, when we relive the gist of a drama, or
when from single notes of a melody we get a sense of the seamless whole.
The result of applying the method of comparative Individual Psychology in
every case being examined is the recognition of the unity of the personality. This
unity is so consistent that it is reflected in every individual manifestation. The
irrefutable impression of the accuracy of such research only becomes evident
from finding the same lifeline in every layer of the psyche. Important proof is
when this line, sometimes following the most unusual twists and turns, leads
from rising below to above. In persons with straight-line characters and
combative natures, this line will be signified by the way they hold their heads, by
the rise of their voices, by their handwriting, and by the way they move their
arms. It becomes no less apparent as they soar above others when they act,
dream, or fantasize. They dislike being alone because their prescribed journey
leads to people, so as to measure themselves against them and to surpass
everyone else. They always seek to be the first. When they choose a partner, it
suggests already a slight deviation, such as merely wishing to dominate men and
women whom they judge to be weaker. Or, when they first elevate the person
they deemed the weaker for the purpose of domination. The neurotic always
succeeds in reducing his lifeline to a scant formula because, as we shall see,
every character trait is drawn more principled and sharper. The opposite can be
presented as a person whose character is devious and careful. His goal is set at
no lower level, but his path leads to the top in incredible twists and turns. Even
at the level which he yearns to reach, he does not feel secure. His fear of heights
is equal to his fear of falling and his dreams of falling speak volumes.
Everywhere he brings along a security coefficient without which he will forgo

exploring an uncertain future. He is the standard type of nervous person who
sees himself threatened with disaster from all sides. His path is strewn with
security measures and he draws from each experience a warning moral,
principles, and credos that accompany him everywhere. His activities have been
restricted to a minimum by all sorts of sensitivities and by his having limited
physical and mental tolerance, so that he would be upset at the slightest cause.
At times he is cunning and deceitful, or fearful and frightened by his own
courage; he hesitates forever, is always in a retreat that at times he disguises by
vacillating with uncertainty. He has given up behaving like a man, in order to
retain the appearance of an unconquerable machismos.
At this point we shall examine more closely the neurotic's secret goal and
the subconscious life plan which differs from that of the normal person only to
the degree to which it becomes more apparent. This effort brings us to
examining the child's psyche. Beginning with the first day of life, the child's
upbringing directs his attention toward the future and its dangers, although also
toward happiness. Within the family itself there are role models for strength and
power which often enough seem unattainable. Freedom and equality as well as
developing social feeling to act as a calming influence on the child could be
regarded as his due. However, how rarely does a child enjoy this! No wonder
that most children are overcome by a feeling of insecurity that moves them in
two different directions. One emotion makes itself felt as inferiority,
helplessness and weakness indicating a need for support, assistance, and
dependency. Quite often the child finds ways to turn his weakness to an
advantage: he begins to promote his fear and to adopt it as a valuable character
trait since it will give him superiority over his family. He can gain the same
advantage by exaggerating symptoms of illnesses, and by clinging to childhood
impairments. Thus, we find either to a larger or lesser extent next to the straight-
line, upward-rising character traits of ambition, courage, and measuring oneself
against one's surroundings, the character weaknesses that are also retained if they
in some way lead to a goal of superiority: jealousy, avarice, lying, cowardice,
etc.
A seven-year old girl, who had grown up with an indulgent father, a strict
mother, and a sister pampered by the mother, became ill with nightly anxiety
attacks that eventually also occurred during daytime. As was easily
demonstrated, the child was plagued by enormous ambition, did not like her
favored sister, and displayed ugly traits of jealousy and envy, not only with
regard to her sister, but also in school. We can understand the constant pain
suffered by this child who unsuccessfully vied with her sister for favors and in
vain tried to shake the unyielding character of her neurotic mother. Over time

there appeared a tendency to extend the period of being ill and to transform a
bothersome situation into one that was unbearable, since during such times the
child did not suffer from neglect. The father now became attentive and tried to
make up for the mother's favoring the younger daughter by pampering the older
one. The result was bad. The secret goal for superiority had already become so
well established, ambition, jealousy, and dominance had become so advanced
that a daughter turning into a tyrant should have been expected. One day the
mother complained to the father about spending so much money on the girl,
visiting the Semmering, and taking her for rides while she and the younger sister
had to remain at home. The following night the child suffered her first anxiety
attack which, in our view, has to be regarded as a strong revolt. From then on the
father was forced to devote even more love to the now ill child and the mother's
resistance was nullified. The original neglect of the child was now compensated
for; her rejection and the favoritism shown the younger sister were brought to an
end.
If one were to compare the hidden course of these anxiety attacks, their
purpose and their theme, with the child's earlier psychological condition, the
intensive ambition, her sensitivity and jealousy, and if one were to follow these
character traits to where they intersect, then the same guide line appears leading
toward being superior to the mother and sister. It also is in the direction of
placing the father at her service. The fear arising from ordinary circumstances
that this girl had come to know had turned into a form of security and a weapon
to defend herself against personal disparagement. I would be hard put if I had to
name a better means than that discovered by this child, or more correctly, one
into which this child, after making various preliminary efforts and trials, had
grown into. There is nothing wrong with the artful and consequent way the
nervous system reacted; any criticism raised along this line is wrong. What is
wrong does not lie in the nervous system; it is found in the goal the child
instinctively set herself. It is found in her ambition, her vanity, and in her lack of
social feeling.
If we review the results attained thus far, we see a principle concerning the
relationship between childhood inferiority feelings, a reassuring and oriented
goal-setting, and the efforts made and the safeguards created to ensure an
approach to the goal. It can now be easily proven that an intensified feeling of
insecurity in childhood and setting higher and unalterable goals leads to striving
that exceeds human capabilities, but also produces an appropriate effort and
safeguards bringing about a combination that manifests itself into what we call
an emotional disorder. From this arises the neurotic character which entails a
more striking and sharper image either with stirred up activity, or else

materializing as irreparable passivity, hiding at times behind a mask of doubt
and vacillation.
In this psychological scheme there are two almost fixed points: the low self-
esteem of the child who feels inferior, and a goal that is bigger than life and one
that can attain almost a godlike quality. Between these two points lie the
preliminary efforts, the groping dodges and feints, a readiness and a customary
behavior from which the hidden goal can be discerned. Character traits, when
they show traces of past experiences, encouragements, and warnings, are one
form of such customary behavior when they, like blood vessels, search, as if
with feelers, trying to approach the fictitious goal within the turbulence of
reality. The character traits, which impart behavior and form to the personality,
are the real mediators between the past and the future and serve mankind's
guiding ideal as spiritual helpmeet: According to their nature they establish
contact with the outside world, lead the struggle with it, or force a decision on a
hesitating or evasive attitude.
The child suffering from feelings of insecurity requires such guidelines and
preparedness. It becomes more evident and turns into a categorical imperative as
soon as the intensified feeling of inferiority takes effect. Whatever was once
useful to such a child, because of its calming effect, will be perpetuated and
venerated. Only clear setbacks will force a turn-about, but will then only veil but
not change the character. There also comes a need for stronger guide lines but
the individual is nailed to the cross of his guiding idea of power, and now
appears what heretofore had been a disposition toward nervousness, a full blown
neurosis. The further outcome brings us into the field of medicine. I must,
therefore, breakoff here.
If, from the uniformity of its goal direction, I have thus far been unable to
prove the dominating role of the fictitious guiding ideal for all psychological
manifestations, especially for character, I should like to share the following
observation. We are unable to carry out even the slightest physical or mental act
without imagining a goal. This applies to physical movements as well as to
speaking, thinking, and desiring. Only with this fiction of goal-setting do we
give order and direction to our doing and acting; the chaos of the world seems to
have been surmounted and the way has been opened along which life and its
troubles seem manageable. It is simple to observe in the life of a child how in
learning to walk, to see, to hear, and to speak, a tentative goal of
accomplishment has been organically and psychologically prepared. For more
intricate behavior and for psychological activity the child always has a model
that serves as a guiding ideal which he will try to meet or wants to surpass. If
this model puts pressure on the child's feelings, he will assume an aggressive

posture and will often try with defiance, or at times with exaggerated
subjugation and obedience, to attain his goal of superiority. The decisive factor
for a child's psychological achievement, and later that of the adult, is to reach the
highest pinnacle of power which he will demand to attain in the future.
As was previously pointed out, in this struggle for selfassertion the lower
the self-esteem the child is forced to accept the higher that pinnacle. It, therefore,
seems apparent to pay attention to those children who, because of their poor
physical development, such as that caused by innate organ inferiority, have to
struggle harder and wait longer to gain their self-esteem. It is also these children
who, with greater effort and with increased sensitivity in later life, even into old
age, that is to a time when they are no longer aware of their deficiencies, have to
pursue their childhood guiding ideal according to which their longing to conquer
death, to gain masculine power, respect, attractiveness, and riches, in short, to
triumph everywhere, is satisfied. They will always measure themselves against
others and will wish to place everyone at their service. Troubled and with
emotion, they will make known their demands and, if clever, will anxiously look
for devious means to avoid what to them will seem fatal decisions, which means
avoiding almost any decision. Their character traits aim well beyond human
measure, but also are mixed with others that divert so far from the norm that any
observer would recognize that here is a person who does not believe in himself.
In the end, they no longer bestir themselves to seek the will for power, but only
wish to gain the appearance of power. The greater their childhood belief that
they amounted to nothing, that they were like dust, the greater their struggle to
be idolized. They feel themselves godlike, like an artist, whenever they are able
to create something from nothing, which, with their arbitrary value system, they
fantasize into something of enormous value. Self-love and thinking of
themselves assume an increasingly greater role and create a constant
irreconcilability with life.
These factors present new problems for this field of science and reinforce
the power of older, burning questions. The expeditious and prudent treatment of
children with organ inferiorities becomes an urgent requirement in light of the
viewpoints presented here. In the same way the value and significance of
socialized medicine is underscored. The fight against epidemics, syphilis,
tuberculosis, and alcoholism must for this reason also be considered since these
diseases significantly hasten a deterioration of the embryo. The same kind of
harm is caused by poverty and overwork, while a poor economy affects and
deteriorates germ plasma and increases the occurrences of inferior organs.
From the vantage point of this presentation, the frontiers of the social
sciences still harbor many important questions. Social conditions and family

situations must create an environment that will free the child of the burden of
strong feelings of inferiority. Greater knowledge and more extensive study of the
teachings of comparative Individual Psychology will give the caregiver the
opportunity to intercede in time, impede excessiveness, and ameliorate fear of an
uncertain future.
The particular problems of our science, which entails primarily the field of
psychology and psychotherapy, are innumerable. One of the most important of
these in the context of pedagogy is the relationship between the sexes. It
concerns the operating force of the fictitious guiding goal of the neurotic who,
from his neurotic perspective and based on the construction of his character
traits, dissolves all love as well as social relationships with the other sex,
transforming it into a antagonistic attitude. Under these conditions, in what ways
does the guiding goal become effective? When closely examined, it becomes
clear that the neurotic's ideas about godlikeness and an ideal of perfection that he
strives to attain indicate a predominantly strong masculine influence. Thus every
neurotically disposed child, whether boy or girl, can encompass his or her every
striving and goal direction with the phrase: I wish to become a complete man. In
this idea culminates every wish for dominance, power, wealth and victory. This
should not be surprising. From his or her impressions of the outside world, even
at a time when unaware of the inalterability of the sexual character, the
neurotically disposed child gains the feeling that only a man is born to be a ruler.
True, in the early stages, it takes courage to make such an interpretation
from scanty expressions, especially in the case of girls. Only when the uniform
guiding line is successfully discovered does conviction follow. The blurred
manifestation of an impression often hinders our understanding. However, when
a four-year old girl declares that when she grows up she will marry her mother,
and when such a child also demands that she be called Hans, when she later
shows a tendency to wear men's clothing, avoids girls' games, runs around with
boys, and herself expresses the wish to be a boy, then there should no longer
remain any doubt. I had the opportunity to become acquainted with an eight-year
old girl who displayed a number of such traits because, in addition to an
uncontrolled defiance, she also suffered from a childhood disability and had
fainting spells. All this allowed her to be disobedient and to reject every effort to
change her behavior. As I talked with her, she displayed an openly defiant
attitude and suddenly crossed her arms. When I asked the accompanying aunt
who, among those close to the child, crossed arms like that I was told: the father.
As such a child grows up, there is always a form transference of the male fiction,
but the guiding goal does not become any more attainable. The princess ideal, a
frequent form transference, occurs very often and, like other ideals, causes an

immense hypersensitivity. Presenting such a person with reality will always lead
to difficulties and despite all kinds of compromises with life, the dissatisfaction
with the female role always comes to the fore. One such girl, as I was told, who
was twenty years old and about to be married, attempted suicide when she
believed she had discovered in Weininger's "Geschlecht und Charakter" [Sex
and Character] confirmation of her perception of the inferiority of the female.
We can see here how the disparagement of women in our society can drive a
woman out of necessity to a psychological masculinization, to the masculine
protest, just as when pressure is exerted on a child during upbringing, or when
the government withdraws the rights of its citizens, the result is revolt. True,
there is no redemption; those condemned to inferiority become slaves to masters
through subterfuge and machination. 
This masculine lifeline quite clearly can be followed in the case of a fortyyear
old woman who, while in her twenties, began to suffer from a phobia about
being touched as well as from obsessiveness. One of her childhood ideals was an
American Indian (male) for his ability to endure everything and suppress all
desires. Eventually, this ideal was replaced by a seemingly female ideal, the
Maid of Orleans. The meaning of her touch phobia becomes clearer here. When
she was twenty years old, she was in a relationship with a man who suffered
from tuberculosis and was dying. She thought of marrying him, which,
understandably, would not have been consented to by her family. That summer a
number of suitors appeared on the scene. That is when her obsessiveness became
apparent. She was unable to complete any of her tasks, particularly her
needlework, which she constantly had to unravel. This must remind everyone of
Penelope. It means that she was waiting for a husband whom she recognized
herself as unattainable. When I asked whether she was familiar with that story,
she said: "Of course, Sisyphus and Tantalus at the Dardanelles." She then
quickly corrected herself and said "Danae"1. When I urged her to think of
another person since Greek mythology obviously was on the right path, she
could name no one else. And yet, she must have had Penelope on the tip of her
tongue since "nel" in Penelope also is in the word Dardanelles. Her inability to
remember Penelope, however, shows her heavily obscured guiding idea, which
is not unlike other cases where we have to grasp the sense of an expression
without the person revealing its meaning. In this case the patient revealed it to us
through the harmonic connection of two parallel running ideas. For this woman,
however, Penelope is a symbol: the woman who does not accept any suitor; the
woman who does not wish to be a woman.2
We find the same masculine protest when boys mature psychologically.

They act as if the woman were the measure of their powers. One often hears
from little boys, as if making a point about the differences between the sexes,
saying that they will not let a woman boss them. When they grow older and love
dictates, enormous problems arise, just as they will in marriage. Both assume
combative attitudes to prove or make believe over and over again their
superiority. This then is how the neurotic perspective and the guiding ideal of the
masculine protest constantly destroy a natural and comradely relationship and
create an abiding discontent between the sexes.
1 In Greek mythology she is the daughter of Acrisius, King of Argos. 
2 More important than Freud's theory of a promise, which in this case is also
true, is the fact that she mentioned only male characters. Dr. Martin Freiburg
pointed this out to me, which is very much in line with my thinking.
I believe that with this topic, I have touched one of the deepest wounds in
our social life. The danger is greater than is believed. In this respect also,
psychological healing is required from a pedagogy which not only addresses
children, but can awaken in them a sense of the equality between the sexes,
despite a prevailing condition that demonstrates the opposite.
Chapter XXI
Individual-Psychological Remarks on Alfred Berger's Hofrat Eysenhardt1 2
[1913]
Introduction - Dr. Francis von Eysenhardt was born a few years before the
outbreak of the revolution of 1848 in Vienna. His youth coincided with the
reactionary period of the early fifties of the last century and he entered the
criminal division of the royal courts of justice at a time when the old absolutist
Austria was being transformed into a modern state.
Eysenhardt's success was due primarily to his own extraordinary abilities.
He succeeded in uniting within himself the qualities of the old officialdom with
the demands the new spirit made upon the state officials. At an opportune
moment he showed the nature of his own political opinions by insisting that an
unconditioned loyalty to the emperor was essential.
His reputation as a criminal lawyer of ability and his brilliant oratory
combined to make him very popular. He was made attorney general to the
dismay of the criminal world and of advocates. After a number of years he again
became a judge and was made presiding officer of the jury courts. His
intellectual gifts and his prodigious memory astonished everybody. He was
occasionally criticized for showing partiality. Unconsciously he seemed always
to be interested only in obtaining a conviction, and the severity of the
punishments that were meted out when Eysenhardt was the presiding judge

horrified everyone. Yet in his case everyone felt that the impossibility of
influencing him in any way was but the expression of a strict sense of justice
which he would apply to himself as well as to others. It was regarded as a just
reward for his services that he should receive the highest judicial position in the
country. Eysenhardt, it was said, was destined to become the minister of justice.
Both the external and the private life of Eysenhardt had not been of the
usual kind. He had no friends, not even acquaintances. Whole days would elapse
during which he would speak no other words than those demanded by his
official position. His nature was reserved, unfriendly and shy. These traits were
due in great measure to the frightfully strict and even cruel bringing up that he
had received as a child. His father had been accustomed to punish him with a
whip for the slightest error, and in this way the child's feeling for revenge was
definitely fed. The cruel treatment at the father's hands came to an end when
young Eysenhardt, with the little money he had saved bought a revolver and
threatened his father with it. In his youth he exhibited a somewhat abnormal
sexuality; he never associated with respectable girls and was a frequently seen
visitor of disorderly houses. His father, it became known, had on one occasion
whipped him unmercifully when the young boy had bought a pair of lady's
gloves for himself. When alone, Eysenhardt would cover these gloves with
tender kisses.
1 Originally published in Z. med. Psychol. Psychother., vol. 5, pages 77-89
(1913). Republished in Praxis und Theorie der Inividualpsychologie (1920).
Translated into English by P. Radin in The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology, chapter 22 (1925). 
2 Grammatical corrections and sentence structure clarifications have been made
by the editor of this volume.
Thus Eysenhardt spent his life despised, feared, and admired at one and the
same time, in spiritual and intellectual isolation, conscientiously fulfilling his
official duties. Suddenly a remarkable transformation took place within him. His
outward appearance, in all respects old-fashioned and known all over Vienna,
changed. He appeared one day with his beard trimmed in elegant fashion, instead
of the short, rather bristly full-beard, and with new and modern clothes. But it
was not only his external appearance that had changed. His hard somber nature
seemed to have received an illumination from within which was pleasantly
reflected in his outward form and character. This change was interpreted to mean
that Eysenhardt would soon receive a high, if not the highest post in the
judiciary. The assumption was perhaps not quite erroneous, for Eysenharddt
himself expected promotion. He remained in this almost exalted frame of mind

for about three weeks until an important event brought this, possibly the only
happy period of his life, to an abrupt end. A tooth fell out! This sign of oncoming
age found him utterly unprepared, and exerted a frightful influence upon him.
The disturbance in his nervous and psychic life refused to right itself, and he was
constantly troubled by doubts as to whether his intellectual capacities were not
likewise showing signs of waning. His usually unshakable nature was now filled
with vague fears of impending danger.
When the anticipated ministerial crisis did not bring him the post of
minister of justice, this had the effect of an electric shock upon him. He found
himself thinking continually of the reasons for which he had been passed over.
At the same time he began to busy himself intensively with his own ego,
something that was quite new to him. He was no connoisseur of human motives
and feelings. He possessed only the remarkable gift of being able to extract from
the evidence collected, all the criminal processes that led a man step by step to
commit a crime. This process he then knew how to present marvelously and
dramatically. He never recognized in the criminal a fellowman, a person related
to himself. Since he had become psychically ill, however, he began to change.
His conscience began to annoy him; he suffered from hallucinations at night, and
on one occasion there appeared to him in such a hallucination a person whom he
had sentenced very severely for child-rape, a man named Marcus Freund. In all
the hallucinations in which persons appeared to him whom he had prosecuted, he
was the defendant and they were the accusers. From the first time Marcus
Freund appeared to him he was unable to rid himself even in daytime from the
thought of this man, and so he finally decided to go through the whole case again
to convince himself that Marcus Freund had actually been guilty. However, he
delayed and delayed until one day he heard accidentally that which had first
appeared to him. After that his collapse became more pronounced, and he
imagined that the rest of the world was occupying itself with the case of Freund
to the same extent that he was. Hand in hand with this breakdown of his steel-
like personality, the elementary sexual instincts of his nature seemed to become
more manifest. In his own home this inward collapse of the man had hardly been
noticed. The appearance of this new tormenting compulsion-idea had pushed
into the background the feeling that he was losing his intellectual capacities, and
in consequence his mind became freer and capacity for work greater. He
succeeded in pulling himself together once again when he was nominated to
preside over a very important espionage case. The notification of his nomination
was sweetened by the confidential hint that he had been passed over in
connection with the post of minister of justice only because he was to be
reserved for this exceedingly intricate espionage case. Eysenharddt seemed to be

his own self again and forgot all about Marcus Freund.
However, the evening before the last day of the final session of the
espionage case, something happened which drove him to suicide. The cause of
this catastrophe was never entirely cleared up, but it was connected with the
espionage trial in which the wife and daughter of the accused, the latter a girl
under age, played a role. There was also the story of a nocturnal adventure in
which a police agent found Eysenhardt in a place of ill repute, a very unpleasant
situation for him at the time. Eysenhardt left the following note:
"In the name of his majesty the Emperor!" 
“I have committed a terrible crime and I feel myself unfitted either to hold my
post any longer or as a matter of fact to live. I have sentenced myself to the most
severe punishment possible and shall within the next few minutes carry it into
effect myself".
Eysenhardt
We cannot begin our discussion any better than by first paying our respects
to the psychologist and thinker, Berger. 
We long ago answered in the affirmative the question whether the analysis of a
work of art for the purpose of discovering the main-springs of human action is
justifiable. The only important question to be discussed is simply the general
nature of the tact to be employed, and it is of course quite impossible to come to
any complete agreement about it. 
With regard to the life-history of Hofrat Eysenhardt, there is another important
reason for calling this novel to the attention of a psychologist. It is true to life not
merely because it is based upon an historical personage, but also because of the
creative imagination of an artist-psychologist who has more than once given
proof of his intuitive knowledge of the human soul. 
I would not at all be surprised if every psychologist took Berger’s creation to be
either a corroboration or an after-experience of their own beliefs. For everyone
sees only what he can understand and tries to bring his knowledge to bear upon
the investigation of the human soul and of art, just as Steinherr brilliantly points
out in Berger's book. 
We have no desire to tamper with the marvelous outpourings of our poets and
thinkers and shall therefore attempt merely to determine, through their creations,
to what an extend we are on the right path and how much of their work can be
understood by reference to the working method of Individual Psychology. 
Our field of inquiry leads in the same direction as that opened by Berger's art.
We always concern ourselves with striking characters and try to trace back to
childhood and even further, the beginnings of every act. We are interested in the
striking transformation of personality and endeavor to grasp the manifold

thought-connections and forms of expression of man in their entirety. 
The thorough survey of the fantasies of children regarding their future
professions has taught us in the same way as have our experiences with neurotic
people, that the choice of a profession despite many provisos, is likely to show
the inmost essence of the fictive lifeplan, and that this choice of profession is
under the dictatorship of a deified and dogmatic concept of personality. 
We shall direct all our attention to the interrelation of personality and neurosis.
From this connection, if we are interpreting the neurosis correctly, there flow
those fundamental and abstract guiding-lines of the human psyche which enter
into the creation of a character of unusual personality, whether he be a creator
or a destroyer of cultural values, a normal man or an unfortunate carrier of
psychoneuroses and psychoses. 
The scientific judgment and prejudices concerning the psychological structure of
unusual men which have been held so far, will find excellent corroboration in the
description of Eysenhardt. The poet has created his hero so carefully and so
completely that we may cheerfully follow in his steps without even pointing out
warningly that the attraction of a work of art arises from its synthesis and that
the analysis of science profanes and destroys this synthesis. 
Having now drawn general attention to the book, our task is to attempt a
grouping which will give us an understanding of the dynamics of the life
expressed in our hero so that we may, in part, obtain support and some useful
formulas for a knowledge of man and also mold our practical activity with a
view to education, self-control and cure. Let us begin with Eysenhardt's bodily
traits. We are told of his slender shoulders, his bossy forehead, his bushy
eyebrows, of the tardy appearance of his moustache, his jaundiced complexion,
the blueish rings around his eyes, and of his stomachic and biliary disorders.
Clinically, this seems to be the picture of a man who has preserved old traces of
rachitis, inferiority manifestations of the digestive tract and a suggestion of a
degeneration of the secondary sexual characteristics as is so common with
neurotic people. It has frequently enough been pointed out that this group of
body manifestations with its accompanying consequences, pains and
inadequacies, misdirects people into making an infantile self-evaluation whose
final result produces a feeling of inferiority and uncertainty.
The situation of the youthful Eysenhardt, an only child with a tyrannical father,
must have led markedly to the intensification of what Janet calls "sentiments
d'incompletude". 
In order to meet life squarely and to gain security, the psyche of such children
must exaggerate, by way of compensation, the normal contrivances, set its idea
of personality higher, and affirm it more dogmatically. Such children pursue

their path toward a god-head they have themselves created and which then as
god, devil or demon, apparently directs their steps. Their will and desires
become more expressive and aggressive, their actions more secretive and
cunning; lust to dominate, envy, cruelty, avarice, flare up and the preparations
for life are more carefully and precisely made. 
I prefer to follow Berger's description. Eysenhardt is an ambitious, obsequious
man of officious patriotism. Hard and courageous, he plays the role of a savior
of society who possesses great gifts of speech, memory, and intellectual
capacity. His curiosity and desire for information and his acute perceptions
would have made him a detective genius. He is lonely, egotistical, keeps all the
old forms and loves the sharply outlined and clear-cut paths in carriage, attitude,
habits and thought. No one is indifferent to him; he is either hated or loved. 
Gottlob Steinherr, a disappointed climber, but not inferior to Eysenhardt in
originality, knows Eysenhardt's ideal of personality of the older time when the
latter's ambition had expressed itself more directly and more openly. He infers
that Eysenhardt represents a case of the change of criminal and anti-social
instincts into legal ones. He assumes that his guiding-lines are brutal sexual
instinct and unlimited self-complacency; he wishes to dominate men, even to
enslave them, and to possess women.
Let us recall the facts we know: an exceedingly ambitious, fictive, personality-
ideal is in danger of being destroyed by his father. He learns to understand his
environment and the necessity of an apparent submissiveness to power and yet
threatens his father, one day, with a revolver. His personalityconcept had
unquestionably borrowed many traits from his tyrannical father, but had then
developed far beyond it and had learned to avoid a strong opponent and oppress
a weak one. His sexual behavior does not represent the cause of his actions but
merely an analogy. His aggressive attitude becomes hesitant and extends in
regard to women no further than the glove. The strong woman, the domineering
woman, Dion's fury (Plutarch) fill him with terror. He elevates the prostitute to
the role of lady and dreams of the conquest of a child. He might easily have
become a homosexual, but having a contempt for men, he has conquered this
tendency, or he might have developed a desire for the impotent woman or even a
corpse.
His psychical gesture seems to indicate that he is looking for a line of
development for maxims of conduct. He is walking at the very edge of the
pavement and moving along the very limits of bourgeois morality. His pen and
lead pencil are found lying in their proper places after his death. He has found
the proper limits for his hyper-tense aggressiveness and his reputation; the norm
of his sexual habits are enough to prove to himself that he is a man. His

reputation gives him ample opportunity for enjoying the illusion of superiority.
He devaluates man in order to make himself a god.
The higher his position, the weaker his energy becomes. When his lifeline
is tending upward, this consumption of energy, this advocate's love of hunting
decreases. When the hope of a post in the ministry is held out to him, he
becomes human; social feelings suddenly develop and burst asunder the heavy
coat of mail protecting his attitude from his fellowmen. Eysenhardt passes
through a transformation when he feels himself in close proximity to his
godlikeness.
How Eysenhardt Changed
Is such a change in a man, or let us say, in a neurotic, possible? In the
developed neuroses we find as a rule so marked a constancy in the
manifestations that we get the impression of an integrated mechanism. A deeper
knowledge teaches us, however, that not even in this phase does the psyche
always run the same course. A patient may be just pleasantly excited, or he may
be depressed or exuberant, despondent or hopeless or joyful, full of initiative or
fainthearted, in short, all the traits are found in that antithetic order called by
Lombroso bipolar, by me polar and hermaphrodite, ambivalent by Bleuler and
"double vie", split personality etc. by others. In the stage antecedent to the
developed neurosis and which is at times described as neurotic but which is
generally that of health, such antithetic actions can likewise be observed. In the
form of hesitation and doubt, anxiety, shyness, fear of making a decision and in
the trembling experienced when in the presence of anything new, we perceive
active and passive traits and impulses, some of which approximate reality, some
the ego idea. The developed neurosis shows itself as a safeguard of increased
strength and forces to the front the more fundamental characteristics.
"Ambivalence" proves to be the integrated methods of attaining the goal.
Hofrat Eysenhardt was expecting the final consummation of his ambition.
We know, however, that such an occurrence can never take place satisfactorily
because the guiding goal is imaginary and placed too high for fulfillment. We
know that many a neurotic looks forward to happy events with inward trembling
and hesitation although he is, at the same time, perceptibly exalted and
transported to such an extent by his intensified personality consciousness that he
becomes "another man." The author describes this stage humorously and allows
Eysenhardt to change into a modern man whose whole external appearance
seems heightened. A modern, elegantly trimmed beard takes the place of the
short bristly full beard. Here, too, a neurotic trait is mentioned, the fact that he
rather mourns the loss of one of his bodily possessions. We suspect that
Eysenhardt whose "masculinity" has been curtailed, is mourning the loss of his

manhood. He now becomes approachable and kindly disposed, for the automatic
raising of his ego-consciousness permits him to waive part of his "distance". He
freely gives advice and encouraging praise, shows himself more liberal and casts
off some of that intense desire always to prove someone is in the wrong. He is
playing his old role, is still the same angular person Steinherr knew him to be,
but in a more propitious position. The accused also profit by his change, for they
are no longer the necessary sacrifices to his sadistically incited lust. Even his
physiognomy loses its expression of tense desire for domination. His
safeguarding trait of thriftiness is softened and even his emotions, from our
viewpoint apparently primary and unalterable elements, exhibit a change of
emphasis to the degree at least of making the formerly pleasurable exercise of
his profession now appear a terrible burden from which he would like to be
freed. Omnia ex opinione suspensa sunt.
His life and attitude show the neurotic safeguarding preparations for the
anticipated appointment and his memory discloses those reminiscence-residues
favorable to these preparations. In the midst of it all the old fear of uncertainty
reappears, the fear of making decisions, agoraphobia. As Berger says in another
place, Eysenhardt in his sense of incomplete manhood has a presentiment that
just as his father had defeated him, so now he would succumb again.
A lower incisor loosens and breaks off while he is eating. The symbolic
influence of this event interpreted by Eysenhardt as another sign of inadequacy,
the loss of some bodily possession damaging to his masculine power, strikes him
with all the force of a superstitious impulse or, whatever it is that intellectual
people conceal in its place. The approaching end! All is vanity! The truth
overwhelms him almost at the very moment of his ardently-longed-for triumph,
the triumph for which he had worked throughout life, toward which his whole
lifeplan had been directed! The old uncertainty holds him in its vise. What if his
intellectual powers, his main weapons disappear? So again he takes recourse to
his old method, the method to which he was accustomed. He wants some proof
of his powers, some certainty, an examination. By means of the self-criticism to
which he subjects himself, it is within his power either to lower or raise his
prestige. What he is most afraid of is not reality but the semblance of reality, i.e.
whether he is to be deprived of his worldly power. In this condition of
hypochondriac doubt, his construction of fear spurs him on to take even greater
precautions. A sensation of pressure on the heart, slight attacks of anxiety, are
but intensified hallucinatory safeguards and warnings. The magnificently
constructed role of the self-complacent ego has, however, been shaken to its
foundations. When disappointment follows and his triumph, embodied in the
post of minister of justice miscarries, this comes upon a man who is already sick,

a prey to uncertainty and who has been cut loose from his old safeguarding
constructions.
What will happen in all these instances where the path to victory has been
cut off and the harrowing feeling of decreasing manhood seeks some way of
pulling itself together again? Attempts and preparations come to the front to
demonstrate that the personality once possessed has not really suffered and that,
on the contrary, it is now even more firmly fixed. The motor habits of
Eysenhardt take him more frequently to Kaertner-strasse and its side-streets than
before. We may assume that his degenerate sexuality, as in all cases of neurotic
climacterics, has not developed from any biological wave but from the desire to
redeem his fortune; that, in other words, it is a self-deception whose basis is the
intensified will to power, the intensified neurotic guiding-line. Berger seems to
incline towards this view even when he acquits Eysenhardt of the charge of
sensuality, for he makes him feel that his slight lapses are rather to be interpreted
as acts of secret despair, i.e. what we call the masculine protest, when
humiliation, the reappearance of an inferiority feeling and the sinking of the
sense of personality, are involved.
But there is another respect in which Eysenhardt has undergone a
transformation. This transformation shows us to what an extent the development
of a character under the stress and tear of the world is dependent upon the
person's own opinion of himself. It is, in other words, changeable, and can like
every other scheme be exchanged for another, since the character-picture never
represents a purpose in itself, but a psychical attitude by means of which the
personality ideal is either to be attained in the quickest manner possible or its
attainment attempted in some circuitous way, despite the appearance of
insurmountable obstacles. Eysenhardt becomes more human and more humane
to show that if he wills it, he can be these, too. "His ego hermetically sealed
against contact with any other personality moves more freely". His conscience
awakens. We may justifiably assume that this awakening is a contrivance of the
psyche for the purpose of raising the ego-feeling when it appears to be in an
insecure situation. This awakening and the realization of the mistakes one has
committed bring the penitent nearer to God. It presupposes an opponent against
whom the hero's superiority can be proven. But who is Eysenhardt's opponent?
Whom does Eysenhardt desire to put in the wrong this time, Eysenhardt whose
whole lifeplan has been to prosecute others for their mistakes? Whom does
Eysenhardt, who always possessed complete control over all his expressions and
thoughts, now accuse? His thoughts, etc., have now gained ascendancy over him
and he is forced to take his guiding-line literally, to strengthen the fiction of his
godlikeness and adhere to it to the bitter end. His opponent now is the state, the

ruling regime, the patriarchal and paternal power that punishes and rewards.
Eysenhardt's humiliation was a mistake, for the state had possessed no better
servant. This servant had, however, an unquenchable ambition to become the
judicial ruler of the state, and when he found himself cheated of his fiction and
of his assumed right, he put into operation those mechanisms that, to his mind,
were most dangerous for the state. The transformation of his attitude to one of
mildness and softheartedness was the strongest attack and the most powerful
revolt that he could make against the state. "Mildness is anarchy," he had always
preached, and he therefore became mild.
We have here a change in the guiding-fiction. Eysenhardt at first wished to
act as he had done in the case of his father during his early preparations for life,
to rule by subjugating others. When this development was blocked just within
reach of the goal, he created still stronger protections and safeguards, and led a
revolt in the form of judicial clemency.
Hofrat Eysenhardt's Mysterious Experience
The letter in which Eysenhardt described his sufferings was not burnt. The
author states that he forgot to burn it. Berger is too good a psychologist to stop at
this point. Let us, therefore, continue along the above lines. Eysenharddt selected
the arrangement of forgetting in order to incite himself to further revolt and to
show the public where loyalty to the state led.
Remember that Eysenhardt's fiction was to control his masculine protest
from the beginning of his career. This consisted of attaining domination by
subjecting himself to the powers of the state. This fiction of his can be traced
very far back, at least as far back as the time when his direct attack against his
father failed and he was forced to make a detour. Directness did not remain one
of his characteristics. Now we find him defeated again on his main line and at a
time when death had already sent him a messenger. What could possibly be
expected but that he would abandon his detour and proceed to a direct attack
against the state that had so ungratefully repaid his loyal services, that he would
reject those maxims and laws that had hitherto bound him both in his interest and
in that of the state. All these surgings now partially expressed themselves and his
anarchistic mildness became strengthened.
Nerve specialists have all had numerous experiences with the revolt
engineered by aging people, their giving up of positions, deserting their families
and the world in order, on all sorts of pretexts, to bring about a change in the
form of their guiding-line.
Eysenhardt at this stage tried to approach the medical profession which he
had formerly despised as destructive and anarchistic in character. He regarded an
interview with a physician however as a humiliation and therefore wrote down

his hypochondriac and anxiety conditions and attempted to exorcise the sick
person within himself by speaking of himself as though he were a different
person, saving in this way his feeling-personality.
This was at the time when he expected his preferment and when the very
upsetting event of the loss of his tooth occurred. Connected with it were trains of
thought and emotional consequences which made him feel his capacities,
particularly his memory, to be waning.
Here we have the typical " hesitating attitude" of the neurotic whenever he
finds himself in the presence of a new situation, or that a new task is about to
confront him. Eysenhardt with his firm grasp on the normal environment that
had permitted him all his triumphs, had lost all his elasticity and hardly trusted
himself to make the necessary change for his new position.
Here the poet, Berger, comes to our rescue and describes the tentative
preparations he made, the transformation of his outer person, the brightening of
his features, etc. We infer from these fundamental facts and his compulsory
execution of them, the existence of an inward insecurity demanding
compensation. It is the same feeling of insecurity that has driven him out of
society and from associating with respectable women. He feels confident only of
dominating prostitutes and criminals.
The psyche, in particular the neurotic psyche, has a very peculiar method
and contrivance at its disposal for meeting insecure situations. It underestimates
its own powers and insists upon its possession of some inferiority so that it may
gain room for expansion. This is the only position that a neurotic really knows
well and from which he is able to form an estimate of life. Every prick of envy,
of incited craving for domination and aggression will then become more
perceptible; caution will mark every step he takes so that he may gain victory. It
is this "hesitating attitude" of caution that makes neurotics develop misgivings
as to their abilities. It is thus not a mere evasion of Eysenhardt, if he imagines
that his memory has suffered, for it represents, on the contrary, his strongest
means of protection, the best method of warning himself, of redoubling his
attention, mobilizing his forces so that he may attain his guiding-goal and
personality-ideal or, at least, spare his own feelings if he cannot otherwise
succeed by some pretence of illness.
Now what role does the lost tooth play in this connection? It is impossible
to over-estimate Eysenhardt's evaluation of even the smallest parts of his body.
Because of his feeling of inadequacy, the neurotic can stand no loss of any kind.
Nor should we exclude the well-known symbolic significance of the loss of a
tooth. Its loss has at all times been associated with thoughts of death, old age,
and pregnancy. In dreams, fantasies, and poems we find the tooth standing for

something growing, some after-growth, as an expression of masculine power,
and its loss is consequently the symbol of emasculation. The emotional idea that
the novelist wishes to convey is probably identical. Eysenhardt takes the loss of
his tooth as a sign of the decrease of his creative powers. Did he have to interpret
it in this fashion? Remember that Caesar when falling, on his landing in Egypt
exclaimed, "Africa, I seize you by the hand!" Why did Eysenhardt set so high a
value on this event and why did he not interpret it in another way? The answer is
simple enough - because this evaluation was of help to him. He found himself,
according to our view, in a hesitating attitude demanding caution and just before
a decision and change in his situation. This tooth fell out at a most opportune
moment, or to put it in a different way, he utilized this event in order to increase
the strength of his safeguards.
His logical faculties then came under the sway of his end-purpose. Then
came his humiliation. His expectation of obtaining a post in the ministry was not
fulfilled. In consequence of this setback a series of hallucinations appeared every
night, generally in the form of figures of men, occasionally of women, and he
was able to recognize from certain details that they were all people he had
sentenced. These hallucinations interfered with his sleep and filled him with
fear. I cannot here enter into the discussion of these details brilliantly described
by Berger. They seem to have the purpose of demonstrating the need for the
establishment of some illness and the danger to the existence of the state of his
penitence.
My observations of psychotics and neurotics lead me to believe that the latter
resort to hallucinatory images when they are about to develop safeguards of
particular clarity and penetration. As a matter of fact Eysenhardt's hallucinations
always called up his feeling of inferiority. For instance, he allows others to
demonstrate their superiority, to accuse him on account of his severity, to
suggest to him that he also is a criminal just as Marcus Freund had actually
called out to him during the latter's trial. The figure of this man in his series of
hallucinations has the same significance and shows even more definitely the
vulnerable part of Eysenhardt's psyche, that part to which attention has already
been drawn. Like Marcus Freund, Eysenhardt is afraid of women and finds
pleasure only in prostitutes, as Freund had in children. The analysis of
perversions found among neurotics shows the succession of events to be as
follows: fear of women, at best excepting prostitutes, followed by sex
gratification only through children. Such a person may as a matter of fact
proceed along this line as far as necrophilia or homosexuality. The worthless
fickle woman is the ideal of most neurotics and their policy will always be to
depreciate a woman until they have rendered her worthless. 

It is along such a line that Eysenhardt obtained the clearest insight into his own
character, because in his feeling of inadequacy, which events had recently
intensified, we find him craving for increased indulgences so that he may begin
to develop his masculine protest. Has he any presentiment that this path leads to
the craving for the child? He protects himself at any rate by developing warning
hallucinations and terrifying images. He has his hallucinations just as others
have a feeling for society or a religion, in order to protect himself by means of
an aggressiveness which defeat has called forth. 
Two other conditions favoring hallucinations cooperating with each other are
found. His illness and the hallucinations--the accompanying anxiety condition as
well as his doubts as to his abilities, demonstrate him to be ill--destroy a
wonderful instrument forged for the use of the state. In accusing himself he is
accusing the state, the administration of the law, and public safety of which he
had been one of the guardians. By his penitence he is shaking to its very
foundations the concept of justice he had held. He is delivering body blows at
his opponent now, his real opponent, the state, the ruling classes--all of whom
have contributed to his defeat. 
The psychic situation portrayed so concisely by his hallucinations aids us in
what follows. In a moment of deep humiliation he conquers his desires for
revenge by erecting terror-inspiring spectres to show him what would happen if
he proceeded on his normal course. The meaning of his aggressiveness is a
neurotic and hostile preparation directed against his sleeping and unsuspecting
master,whom he is threatening in much the same way in which he once
threatened his father. His neurotic perspective, in its search for security, sought
and found in Marcus Freund a threatening reminiscence. And so Eysenhardt
becomes again the victor. 
When he accepted the presidency of the espionage case upon whose proper
conduct the welfare of the state might depend, he felt that he had returned as
conqueror. He made his preparations as on former occasions. "He did not think
of Marcus Freund any more," because he did not need him any longer. His
protesting sexual tension had become allayed. 
Against "ladies" he was also able to protect himself, for here his old construction
of shyness when in their presence still proved efficacious. But he fell victim to a
child. "Daimonic" femininity conquered him, as from childhood he had had a
foreboding it would. This was however from the very beginning a construction
of his own making. He now had but one alternative left if he wished to evade the
compelling power of the triumphant woman--death. He proceeded along this
path firmly and thus fulfilled two of the above enumerated conditions: he
deprived the state of a loyal servant whom it could ill afford to spare, and left

behind him among the mass of people a shattered faith in the course of justice.
The first of the reasons for his hallucinations, namely that he should shrink back
before the idea of violating a child, had become meaningless. So once again had
he aimed at the head of his father, the father who had punished him for his
craving for love, but this time it was himself he had to strike if he wished to hit
the real enemy.
Chapter XXII
On the Role of the Unconscious in Neurosis1 2
[1913]
Our understanding of individual problems in the psychology of neurosis is
so closely dependent on the vantage point from which they are viewed that it can
be said that: Every working hypothesis, even though it is arrived at from
personal experiences, portrays the extent and limits of the analyst’s knowledge.
This is so evident that it explains the various perceptions, evaluations, or
presumptions, and why one school of psychology emphasizes or minimizes a
particular point of view, and why one analyst can overlook the importance of
one phenomenon while another would attribute to it great significance. Someone
who persists in following one theory can hardly ever be moved from that
position, unless made aware of its internal contradictions.3 Generally, such a
person acts like a nervous patient who would not tolerate changing his life plan
until he has recognized his unconscious exaggerated ideal of greatness and then
rejects it as unrealistic. Compare this to Baco in his Novum Organum in which
he remarks about people who insist that nothing great can be expected from
human endeavors because: “Such people are interested only in their own
unsurpassable perfection. That is why they insist that whatever they have not
discovered or have not yet understood cannot be found or is beyond
understanding.”
Contrary to some other authorities, I should like to encourage the reader to
apply Baco’s observation to the following discussion in order to verify it.
Psychotherapy is an artistic profession. Self-analysis, --which is of value only
for an understanding of one’s own lifeline--is similar to a self-portrait in that it
does not guarantee an “objective” analysis. After all, what results is burdened by
the limited means of one, or two, personalities, and because an individual
perspective does not allow for itself, or others, to be viewed in any other way
than from an individual’s standpoint. Personal views, unlike normal scientific
reasoning, when used to judge psychotherapeutic theories are, therefore, a
burdensome nuisance that can only be explained by the immaturity of our
discipline and should not have a lasting effect.

These personality limitations do not present such an obstruction in the
practice of psychotherapy. If an anxiety-ridden patient has fallen prey to the
pressures of reality, the physician is able to teach him to reconcile himself with
reality and with society. The clash between patient and physician keeps the
neurotic from wandering into a world of fiction. And while the patient is
attempting to struggle for his superiority, the physician can point out to the
patient his bias and rigid attitude.4 The physician’s unshakeable basis is
comprised of the social requirements and benefits that arise from cooperation.
1 First appeared in Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol.3, 1913, Pp. 169-
174. Then published in Praxis und Theorie (1920). Translated into English as
Chapter 19 in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology (1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 See Furtmüller, Psychoanalyse und Ethik, Munich, 1912
The greatest problem in treatment proves to be that the patient, although
believing that he understands the neurotic mechanism, still retains some of his
symptoms. Until he discovers a new, and possibly the most important of the
neurotic dodges, the patient, in spite of what he has learned, will employ the
“unconscious” in order to pursue his goal of superiority, using tried and trusted
means as well as symptoms. He will claim that he is doing the right thing but
really does not understand; he does not understand the connection; and he fights
against a deeper understanding, and also to prove to his physician that he is right.
Having drawn this conclusion we have returned to the line of explanation that I
described as the neurotic life plan in my work Über den nervösen Charakter. In
order for the neurotic psyche to come even close to its overextended goal, it is
forced to resort to dodges and artifices. One of these dodges is to transfer the
goal, or a substitute goal, into the unconscious. If this goal is the “moral” of an
experience or fantasy, then these can also, either partly or totally, succumb to
amnesia to the point where, as a result, the fictitious final goal will be hidden.
The same also applies to the patient, and, by the way, also to a critic, when he
fails to recognize that a retained memory, a symptom, or a fantasy, points
beyond itself to something else, to something that is far more significant than
what it appears to be.
Another way of expressing this, based on these findings, is pointing out that
this same goal, or fragments of experiences and fantasies associated with this
goal, are accessible to the conscious state to an extent and in a form that they
advance, not obstruct, attaining the personality ideal. The biological meaning of
being conscious, as well as what has been described as a part of the unconscious,
is that it must facilitate acting in accordance with a uniformly directed lifeplan.

This view agrees in part with Vaihinger’s and Bergson’s5 profound theories, and
points to an instinct-arisen quality of consciousness appropriate for aggression.
Even the conscious imagination that pursues a hypertensed neurotic ideal is
thus, in terms of its consciousness, a psychological dodge. This can clearly be
established from an analyses of an outsized ego, mania, hallucinations6 and
psychosis in general, admittedly without the operational plan, that is the meaning
of the manifestations in these cases, rising into consciousness or becoming
understandable. Every conscious manifestation of the psyche, accordingly,
directs us, like the unconscious impulse, if it is correctly understood, toward the
unconscious fictitious final goal. The vulgar expression “superficial
consciousness” can mislead only those who are unfamiliar with this connection.
The apparent antithesis between conscious and unconscious impulses is simply a
contrast of means for the ultimate purpose of enhancing the personality. It
becomes irrelevant and is not there for the fictitious goal of godlikeness.
4 See “Beiträge zum Verständniss des Widerstands in der Behandlung.” (On
Understanding Resistance in Treatment), chapter VIII in this volume. 
5 Paul Schrecker, Bergsons Philosophie der Persönlichkeit, Munich, 1912.
Lately, Furtmüller and W. Stern prominently stressed this finding. 
6 See Individual Psychological discussions of “Individual-Psychological
Remarks on Alfred Berger's Hofrat Eysenhardt,” chapter XXI in this volume.
This ultimate purpose, however, and every hypertensed form that purpose
assumes, must remain unintelligible in the unconscious if, because of its marked
contrast with reality, it becomes impossible to act in accordance with the
neurotic guiding line. Where a conscious awareness as a way of life becomes
necessary to protect the unity of the personality ideal, it will appear in an
appropriate form and to the right degree. Even the fictitious goal, the neurotic
life plan, can partly come into consciousness, if that appears appropriate for
enhancing the personality feeling. This is particularly the case with psychoses.
However, as soon as the neurotic goal might nullify itself for having come into
consciousness, which would always be because it had come into serious conflict
with the social feeling, it will form the life plan in the unconscious.
These conclusions, based on psychological phenomena, are confirmed
theoretically in a final summation, even though not spelled out, of Vaihinger’s
fundamental theories on the nature of fiction. In a magnificent synthesis this
brilliant philosopher captured the nature of thought as a way of dealing with life
by employing the artifices of fiction, applying a theoretically useless but
practically necessary idea to attain its purpose. If this profound concept and
clarification of the nature of fiction were necessary to familiarize us with the

nature of artifices employed by our mind,--an insight that will transform our
view of life--then, by virtue of the fact of its “discovery,” the psyche’s guiding
fiction also lies in the unconscious realm, and its emergence into the conscious
state for its ultimate purpose can in part be unnecessary, or even harmful.
Psychotherapy can make use of this finding as a starting point by calling
into consciousness the dominating overrated idea of greatness and can, by
subjecting it to criticism, abrogate its effectiveness for the individual to act. With
this in mind, the following will show that only the unconscious dominant
personality ideal can make the whole neurotic system possible.7
1. The niece of one of my patient’s terminated her employment in my
patient’s business. My patient, who had earlier thought little of her niece’s
performance at work, now claims that she is irreplaceable. She complained that
she could never manage alone and had difficulty making up her mind what kind
of person she wanted to hire. Her husband was totally useless. She regarded her
salesgirl as not having a mind of her own and merely parroting everything she
hears. In talking with this patient one constantly hears her saying “I, I, I,” and
“what if I were not there.”
7 The contrast with Freud and other authorities is clear. Actually, the
compulsion for the unity of the personality, that is the fictitious goal, determines
the extent of the conscious as well as the unconscious states.
The patient suffers from agoraphobia, meaning that she cannot go outside.
How could she ever go outside when she is constantly needed “behind the
counter of her business?” With her agoraphobia she ensures the need for her to
stay at home, and with it she can demonstrate that she is irreplaceable. She also
suffers from pains in her legs and takes four to five grams of aspirin daily. At
night she frequently awakens from pain, and then takes some medication to
relieve her. She has pains so that she can think even at night about her work, and
draw attention to herself. The patient’s highly exaggerated ideal of herself and
seeing herself as a man, a queen, and to be the first in every endeavor, can only
be effective as long as these feelings remain in the unconscious. Her childhood
memories of boys being more fortunate than girls confirm her current view that
women are inferior. She often has dreams of residing in a castle.
2. The following is the dream of a 26 year-old girl who had come to me for
treatment because she was plagued by fits of anger, thoughts of suicide, and
running away:
“It seemed to me that I was married. My husband was a dark complexioned,
medium sized man. I said to him: ‘If you don’t help me to reach my goal, I shall
employ all means to do so, even if it is against your will.’”

The patient’s unconscious goal from her childhood was to transform herself
into a man (see Caeneus, Ovid)8 so that she would always be the dominating
personality.
She was not unaware of this goal in childhood even though it did not then
have the same meaning for her, as we shall see in what follows. As a child she
could not have been aware of the psychological and social significance of her
wish to be a man. It manifested itself, however, in an exaggerated recklessness,
an almost compulsive urge to wear boys’ clothing, to climb trees, to take the part
of boys when playing games, and, in order to cling to the metamorphous
principle, assign female roles to boys.
Our patient was a clever child and soon recognized that her guiding fiction
was untenable. Then two events took place: (a) She experienced a transformation
of the fiction by which she lived which now became: “Above all, I must be
pampered!” When reduced to a power formula it meant:: “I must dominate
everyone and draw all attention to me.” (b) She forgot, “suppressed,” her
original dominant thought so that she might thereby continue to retain it. This
trick of the psyche is extremely important. I need hardly mention that it has
never been a question of repressing sexual impulses or “complexes” into the
unconscious. It had only to do with forcing the striving of power, which stems
from the dominant personality ideal, into the unconscious. It had to do with
fictions that had to be retained for the sake of the personality ideal which can
thereby be prevented from consciously being employed, and consequently tested
or humiliated. A disguising of the striving for power as something sexual is also
for a superficial effect to keep secret the deeper seated striving for power. The
personality ideal protects itself from being dissolved and ensures not losing,
above all else, the unity of the personality by veiling its fictions by withdrawal
from the realm of the conscious! The technique of this type of veiling consists of
not allowing reason to illuminate the prerequisites for acting. The patient’s
neurotic actions must appear invulnerable and must protect a neurotic power
position, whereas the misunderstood prerequisite for acting entails a serious
inferiority feeling.
8 I am grateful to Professor Oppenheim in Vienna for this valuable suggestion.
3. The following is the dream of a male patient who came for treatment
because of an attempted suicide, a feeling of uselessness and clumsiness, sadistic
fantasies, perversions, compulsive masturbation, and a persecution complex:
“I told my aunt that my relationship with Mrs. P. had come to an end. I
knew of all her good and bad characteristics and recited them to her. My aunt
replied: ‘You forgot one trait, that of dominance.’”

The aunt is a quick-witted and a somewhat sarcastic woman. Mrs. P. had
toyed with my patient, which made him wild. She had indicated with her attitude
that she thought little of him. She had repelled him, only to draw him to her
some time later. As far as the patient was concerned, her dominating attitude was
humiliating. As is true for many neurotics, the humiliation and defeats he
suffered were only incentives for becoming more determined in his pursuit of
this affair. He sought to effect a change and to master the situation, or uselessly
attach himself to her for the sole purpose of eliminating other women. An
aroused and heightened inferiority feeling searches for overcompensation. A
typical neurotic trait is that people like our patient seem unable to leave those
who caused them a setback. Understanding this character trait answers the entire
secret of a neurosis which is its “yes--but” characteristic.
The literature on this subject refers to similar traits as masochistic. I
clarified this confusing mistake in my paper on “Die psychologische Behandlung
der Trigerminusneuralgie.” One can only speak of pseudomasochistic traits. Like
sadism they serve the striving for superiority and appear contrary and
ambivalent only as long as one is ignorant of the fact that both character forms
strive toward the same goal. What appears as contrariness is seen only by the
observer and not by those afflicted with this illness, nor do these character traits
seem contrary when examined from the standpoint of a correctly assessed
neurotic life plan.
For a long time, the patient strongly tended toward an analytical view of the
world and of humankind. As is so often the case, this trait stems from a strong
deprecatory tendency. The analytical neurotic literally acts along the maxim:
Divide and conquer! He often can resolve the most attractive interrelationships
only to end up with a mixture of useless patterns. Ecce homo! Is that really the
person? Is this an actual, living psyche? Is this odd antithesis, which is pitting
consciousness against unconsciousness, not a childish way of thinking?
The patient would like to be sarcastic like the aunt. However, he has only a
dull sense of humor and lacks the quick wit to come up with clever answers. He
can thank his life plan for this “hesitating attitude.” It forces him to respond with
answers to questions posed by “opponents”--and everyone is really his
opponent--that will devastate them. Otherwise, he would offer no response or
give an answer that is so deficient that everyone will come away with the
impression that he has to be treated delicately, and that he must be helped in
every way.
On the day before he had his dream the patient was affected by a discussion
with his older brother with whom he never felt as an equal. His brother promised
that he would try once more to help him find work. However, our patient had

made it his specialty to frustrate any such efforts of his older brother.
Undergoing treatment became imperative because he had made a suicide attempt
shortly after having thanked his brother for having obtained a job for him. When
his brother once berated him for his slovenly clothing he dreamed that he wore a
new suit over which he had poured ink. If the psychological position of a patient
is known, it does not take much analysis to understand his dreams. We
recognized ideas and actions aimed at demeaning his brother and secretly
abrogating his influence and achievements. Yet, our patient believes himself to
be an enormously ethical and moral person which should also raise him far
above his brother.
The tendency to demean his brother operates under cover, that is in the
unconscious. Nevertheless, it can achieve more than if it worked at the conscious
level because the influence of a social feeling is made impossible.
From where this tendency to demean had come can easily be found: It is the
product of a hypertensed compensatory idea of greatness. Why does it operate in
the unconscious? In order to be able to operate at all! Otherwise the personality
of our patient would suffer impairment from such a consciously humiliating,
deprecatory desire. He would regard himself as inferior. That explains the detour
taken, the character traits of helplessness and clumsiness which are the tricks and
cunning of a practiced inferiority well tested at work and in one’s personal life!
That also explains the attempted suicide as a last resort, and secretly threatening
to commit suicide in order to increase pressure on the brother so that the brother
would come under greater stress and might forfeit the anticipated fruits of his
efforts.
We can draw from this the following tremendously important statement:
We can regard neurotic acting as if it consciously responds to a goal.9 And, in
conclusion, we can provisionally maintain that being unconscious of a fiction, of
a moralizing experience, or of a memory is the result of psychologically dodging
whenever the personality feeling and the unity of the personality are threatened
by becoming conscious.
9 This observation is based primarily on a recognition that the patient must act
teleologically.
“Do not forget the lust to dominate!” is my warning to the patient. In his
dream I am being placed at the same level as the aunt, just as the brother is at the
same level as Frau P., who was always dominant. This attribution of feminine
characteristics to two men takes place under the same demeaning impulse, which
was discussed earlier. However, the patient in his dreams sends a warning to
himself in the words of the aunt, i.e. by using my words. This was my task. In

fact, this is the most important task of any psychotherapist. The current status of
the neurosis can clearly be discerned: The humiliation from the brother is
answered by demeaning the brother. Then he reminds himself to straighten up,
just as I would normally counsel someone.
The next day he wrote a letter to his sister that he had been hesitant to write.
For the first time he complained openly to her about the arrogance of the brother.
In his conclusion he asked, however, that she keep the letter secret. An open
fight seemed too difficult since it would then disclose his secret lust for
dominance.
Chapter XXIII
Response (to A. Maeder)1 2
[1913]
Following his lecture at the Zurich Kongress des Internationalen Vereins
für Pscychotherapie in September 1912, I publicly informed Dr. Maeder3 in no
uncertain terms of my priorities. Without responding to this challenge, Dr.
Maeder published his work about one half year later, making no attempt at a
clarification. I had only done my duty to prevent the watering down, tearing
apart, and misrepresentation of many aspects of my views on "finality" with
respect to the neurotic, on the meaning of the feeling of inferiority, on
"compensation regarding (the feeling of inferiority) and the preparation that
precedes it," on "the insecurity of gender roles, and on "the preparatory function
of dream thoughts." I satisfied a scientific responsibility when I opposed a
historically necessary and productive but antiquated theory of neurosis, and
galvanized it with my research and the direction I proposed for it to take. In the
same way it was my professional duty to separate the views stemming from my
work from those recognized as having been overtaken, just as it seems that
Maeder needed to regard my research as a "common property," and to demean
the distinction that I drew. Dr. Maeder fell victim to this last tactic, even if he
argued in the service of a scientific duty.
Since Dr. Maeder was silent in light of my explanation in Zurich, the case
was closed as far as I was concerned. Also his work, which it seems remained
unchanged by this incident, does not justify a personal attack. However, because
of his publication, and the incontrovertible impressions you gave Dr. Maeder,
which motivated the above letter [Trans. note: not in this collection], others may
gain the impression that Dr. Maeder found support in my work. However, I do
not have to respond to Dr. Maeder, but to the readership of this journal.
It is clear that the above, aside from the already described substantive
matter, is unsuitable as an explanation. The facts as presented by Dr. Maeder in

no way affect my authority. Dr. Maeder tried with a stifling array of "parallels"
and "proclaimed confirmations" to gain a foothold with a sentence from an
author’s report which refers to my work as "a generally oriented essay on Freud's
psychology." With that statement Dr. Maeder tried to accommodate my theory
on dreams.
1 First published in Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, Vol.3, 1913, Pp. 564-
567. 
2 Translated into English by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Editor’s note: Adler mentions Alphonse Maeder in the new translation of The
Neurotic Character on page 226. An endnote offers the following information:
Physician, psychiatrist, member of the staff at Burghölzli with among others C.
G. Jung, whose student he was from 1928 on. According to Maeder, dreams
have a teleological function, which brings him close to Jung’s and Adler’s
position. Later he developed the method of the ‘short psychotherapy’, which
emphasizes the processes of self-regulation and selfcure. According to Maeder’s
memoirs, he met Adler in March 1910.
In that retrospectively highlighted sentence, however, Dr. Maeder said
nothing that had not been said previously more clearly and better by other
authorities. At that point nothing was said about aggression in dream thinking in
the context of preparing oneself. The following contrasting views provide a
graphic picture (Trans. note: The text has this portion divided into three and then
two columns in which each paragraph, or series of paragraphs, are responsive.):
Maeder:
1910:"The dream ... provides the unconscious with a solution that later is often
accepted and realized."
1913: "Many dreams... search for and provide attempts at solutions"
1913: "Dreams that announce and dreams that lag behind."
Examples of Freud’s responses:
"The dream ... corresponds ... to an intention ... It is repeated every night until
the intention has been realized." (Fragments from a Hy-analysis)
Adler’s responses:
1908: ("Aggression Drive," Progress in Medicine). "In the same vein, an
aggression dream, with or without fear, precedes or follows an attack of pain."
1909 (Yearbook): "From this state of emotions ... there soon transcends
evasion from harming sensibilities, followed by an aggressive precaution or
forecasting."
1910 (Progress in Medicine, "Psychological Hermaphrodite"): ... the
analysis of every dream shows us the tendency to withdraw from the female

toward the male line." Further: "Every anorectic dream expresses the attempt ...
to act like a man." 
1907 (Study of Organ Inferiority): “There are numerous indications of intense
psychic compensation and of the cultivation of the hallucinating character. The
same idea is in almost all subsequent works.”
1910 October (Journal for Psychoanalysis): First and second volumes,
Pages 26 and 27. Interpretation of a dream. At the conclusion: "he safeguards
this feeling of male superiority (in a dream) just as in childish pathogenic
situations -- through pain." The same in numerous other writings.
Volume 4, P. 123 (Criticism of a work by Jung on dream analysis). "He
tried to save himself with all kinds of dodges. ... If it were possible to do away
with the genital ... would it be possible to assume a top position? In short, how
does one make a man out of a girl?" (Dream analyses)
Volume 4, P. 178: “The interpretation (of the dream) resulted in thought
processes about a second child from which she ... fled into a male role. Fear (in
dreams and in neurosis) is identical. -- In 1910 I first described this process as an
"arrangement" in dreaming.”
Volume 5/6, P. 215: "This thinking ahead, premonition with safeguarding
tendencies, is a major function of dreams and also creates the basis for events
that seem telepathic and prophetic ... The poet Simonides once was warned by a
deceased person in a dream against a sea voyage. We might assume that this
famous poet, who had "primed" himself against the journey, probably would
have stayed at home even without the dream and the warning."
Volume 9 (July 1911), P. 406: “Interpreting (the dream) showed it to be an
attempt, while dreaming, of thinking ahead about contracting syphilis..."
Among these solidly established principles, gapless between 1907 and
1911, from which my dream theory flows naturally, and which I can only hint at
here with fragmented sentences and out of context, Maeder inserts one sentence
which I have shown to be meaningless, presenting nothing new, neither now nor
when first composed. Today I am no longer able, as is Dr. Maeder, to draw
"attention," and to create a broader and more extensive treatment since my
primary work "On the Nervous Character" has been in print for over one year. Its
principles were presented sufficiently clearly and emphatically in my "Study on
the Inferiority of Organs" (1907).
Anyone wishing to gauge Dr. Maeder's scientific development of the dream
theory against mine cannot overlook these facts. The fact that Dr. Maeder often
failed to come close to my language, and certainly not to my dream theory,
should be clear from the following contrasting presentation (Trans. note: The
text has the following in two columns with each paragraph matched by one or

more in the contrasting column.):
Maeder, Yearbook, 1913:
P. 696: “Psychoanalysis shows that individual dreams occurring during a
particular time period often are only variations of the same motive containing in
cloaked form a particular egocentric solution of the conflict."
Adler, On the Nervous Character, published in May 1912.
P. 54: "Repeated dreams with similar content show the fictitious guide line
most clearly ... The multiple dreams in one night point to an attempt at various
solutions.”
Maeder, ibid
P. 699: "Dreams that announce an event ... correlate fully with dreams of
healthy individuals which we saw as having a preparatory function, practicing a
decision and action."
Adler, ibid
P. 156: "I want to explain very briefly that the multiplicity of dreams in one
night can be explained by making various attempts at thinking ahead to test
solutions for problems."
Maeder, ibid
P. 700: "Many dreams act like warm-up exercises, preparation for the later
awakened state. They seek and act on attempts at solving actual conflicts. ... We
are quite familiar with a similar biological function, we mean those of games."
Adler, Central Journal for Psychoanalysis, I, 1911.
P. 215, footnote: "This thinking ahead, premonition followed by safeguarding
tendencies, is a prime function of dreams etc.” (see above).
Adler, On the Nervous Character, 1912.
P. 54: "The dream is a sketchy reflection of psychological attitudes and
interprets for the analyst the characteristic manner in which the dreamer will act
in light of an impending problem ... it always presents only attempts at thinking
ahead, testing preparations for an aggressive attitude...”
P. 56: “...many of his preparations for the future are anticipated in a playful
manner ... they are practiced in a waking state or hallucinatory in dreams.”
Maeder, Yearbook published in 1913.
L'Année psychologique Tome XVIII. P. 416: (The next two citations are in
French)
Adler, On the Nervous Character, May 1912
P. 27: "Beginning with the (low) self-esteem of the child ... to the full
development of neuroticism ... phenomena appear which, in terms of Gross,
mean warming-up in our terms, preparation, for the fictitious final goal."
P. 119: "Hallucination as well as dreams are, like other preliminary tests of

the psyche, aimed at finding the path necessary to raise and maintain the sense
(feeling) of personality. They reflect the confidence, the hope, or fears of the
patient."
P. 171: “I must ... note that I ... perceive the dream as a reflection of an
abstract, simplified attempt to find a secure way out of a situation threatening the
loss of the sense of personality by thinking ahead and testing ensuing
difficulties."4
P. 175: "The dream, and this is the gist of my observations, always urges
security and thereby has the function of thinking ahead."
P. 54: “... These facts show us the nature of dreams as a fiction which
elucidates preliminary trials and testing in order to ensure mastering a future
situation ..."
P. 73: "This is how the dream shows the patient a way out so as to protect
himself from healing. ..."
P. 86: "This dream shows us the patient trying to think of further ways at
avoidance ..."
4 More on this subject in a lecture held in 1912: "Dreams and Interpretation"
which is to be printed in the next issue of this journal (Zentralblatt für
Psychoanalyse).
P. 109: "... tentatively arranged dream situations."
P. 120: "... the idea ... is prospectively interpreting toward anticipated danger...."
P. 127: "In a dream, a pre-trial anticipating a prospective danger, this guide line
becomes more accentuated."
P. 130: " In this dream he tests, makes comparisons, whether he should (do this)
..."
P. 142: "This first dream ... begins with considering ways ..."
I see no reason to engage in "tearing a child apart.5"
Dr. Alfred Adler
Vienna, 10 June 1913
5 Editors note: Adler is probably referring to the Maeder quotations in
French, translated below. 
The Annual of Psychology, Volume XVIII. S 416: Dreams inform the analyst on
the attitude of the unconscious with regard to conflicts, on its tendency in the
presence of a problem. The solutions of the dream seem to me to be so much
more useful to the topic that the last better approaches normal... If dreams can
develop a preliminary function, in order to resolve a conflict, a function of
preparatory exercise, how is it made to act unconsciously?... An unconscious
tendency manifests itself in dreams which ends up influencing the self and

imposes on him a determined solution... this conception of the function of the
dream presents a teleological character. S417: I think that one can... say that the
dream and dreaming, the imagination, are for the adult, the continuation and the
compensation of child's games.
Chapter XXIV
Dreams and Dream Interpretation1 2
[1913]
Dream interpretation as practiced by us has the purpose of describing to
the patient how in dreaming he prepares and trains himself, and how it also
often reveals him to be the arranger of his sufferings. It also is meant to
demonstrate how, dependent on similarities and tendentiously selected episodes,
he tries to approach problems he faces from a perspective that would promote
his predetermined, fictitious, goal-oriented striving . In this process we can see a
corruption of logic, of common sense, supported at times by arguments that are
pulled out of thin air.
We are confronting here an age-old problem that can be traced back to the
cradle of civilization. Fools as well as wise men have tried dream interpretation,
kings and beggars endeavored by this means to extend the limits of their
knowledge of the world. How is a dream created? What can it achieve? How can
its hieroglyphics be read? What is its intent? What is its purpose?
Egyptians, Chadians, Jews, Greeks, Romans, and Germans harkened to the
magical tongues of dreams. Their myths and poetry contain buried traces of an
eager search for an understanding of dreams and of their hidden meanings.
Obsessively, it seems to be on everyone’s mind: Dreams can reveal the future!
The famous dream interpretations found in the Bible, the Talmud, in Herodotus,
Artemis, Cicero, and in the Niebelungenlieder express a conviction that dreams
provide a vision of the future! All pondering on this subject is a quest for how
one might begin to interpret a dream correctly so that the future can be
ascertained. To this day the thought of piercing the unknown is associated with
dreams. The fact that our rational age outwardly rejects this striving to uncover
the future, and even laughs at it, is understandable. It also explains the
vulnerability of anyone preoccupied with dream research to the curse of ridicule.
Now, in order to delineate the subject under discussion, it should be
emphasized that this author does not represent the view that dreams are
prophetic inspirations, that they can unlock the future, or reveal the unknown.
Rather, an extensive preoccupation with dreams teaches us only that dreams, as
is the case with every other psychic manifestation, are created with powers
inherent in an individual. This, however, immediately brings up a question that
instructs us that it was not easy to arrive at a belief in a prophetic nature of

dreams, and that such an approach is far more confusing than clarifying. The
question that has raised this issue in all its complexity is as follows: Is it really
not possible for the human mind to look into the future, within certain
constraints, when the individual himself has a hand in shaping that future? Does
conjecturing, which pompously is also called “intuition,” not play a far greater
role in our lives than uninformed critics assume?
1 First appeared in Zentralblatt fuer Psychoanalyse, Vol. 3, 1913, Pp. 547-
583. Translated into English as Chapter 18 in The Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology (1925). 
2 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2002.
An unbiased examination produces some strange lessons. If that question
were asked of someone directly it would normally be answered in the negative.
However, let us disregard for once what can be expressed with words. Were we
to address the other physical forms of expression, were we to examine
movements, postures, and actions we would gain totally different impressions.
Although we reject the idea of being able to look into the future, the fact is that
our whole way of life betrays how we can see and conjecture with confidence
certain future events. Our actions clearly point to our steadfast belief, right or
wrong, that we know what the future brings. Moreover, it is easy to prove that
we would be incapable of acting if the shape of things to come--whether desired
or feared by us--would not provide us with direction and motivation, or would
not urge avoidance or point out obstacles We always act as if we knew the future
with certainty, even though we understand that we cannot know anything.
Let us begin with the little things in life. When I buy something, I have the
feeling beforehand of pleasure. Often it is only this strong anticipation for a
certain situation foreshadowing pleasure or pain that makes me act, or keeps me
from acting. That I might be mistaken cannot deter me. I can also allow myself
to refrain from acting so that once doubt has been raised,3 I can consider two
possible situations without having to make a decision. When I go to bed tonight I
will not know that when I awake it will be daytime, however, I shall be guided
by that it will be.
Do I really not know this? Just as I know that I am standing before you as I
speak? No, it is a completely different knowledge. It will not be found in my
conscious thoughts but in my bodily posture, and traces of that knowledge will
be found in my disposition. The Russian scientist Pavlov was able to show that
animals when they expect to be given certain foods will secrete the essential
digestive juices, as if their stomach anticipated, guessed, what foods it will
receive. That means, however, that our body in the same way must anticipate the

future with a certain foreknowledge if it is to act appropriately, that it makes
preparations as if it knew the future in advance. In the last example, deliberations
regarding the future are made outside a conscious thought. Let us consider for a
moment! Would we ever act if we consciously, with what we know of the
present, could foresee the future? Would not contemplating acting, deliberating
the action, forever weighing the pros and cons of acting become an
insurmountable deterrent for what we must do--act? Consequently, our presumed
knowledge of the future must be kept in the unconscious, removed from
conscious deliberation. There is a pathological condition that is very common
and that can manifest itself to various degrees in an addiction to doubt,
compulsive brooding, folie de doute, etc.. In such cases a person’s suffering
would drive him to always look for the only right way to protect his self esteem,
his personality, in order not to find it. A painful examination of his own destiny
increases such a person’s insecurity, i.e. his prescience becomes so conscious
that a setback follows: The impossibility for the patient to grasp the future
consciously and securely fills him with such a feeling of insecurity and doubt
that every action he wants to undertake is troubled by contrary concerns. Such
contrary concerns are manifested in the onset of delusion, of mania, where a
secret, otherwise unconscious future goal powerfully thrusts out, overwhelms
reality, and maliciously entices conscious thought into making impossible
assumptions in order to protect a suffering selfconsciousness from making
mistakes in social encounters.
3 As I have been able to demonstrate, the function of doubt, in normal life
situations as well as in neurosis, is always to deter aggression, to evade making a
decision, and to hide this from oneself. For the Individual Psychologist, who
looks to deeds not words, doubt, undoubtedly, means “no!”
That conscious thought plays a minor role in dreams needs no proof. This
also applies to the criticizing and restraining functions of sensory organs when a
person is asleep. Is it really inconceivable that expectations, desires, and fears
that range from the kernel of the individual’s personality to a current situation
reveal themselves in dreams?
A patient brought to a hospital was suffering from a critical case of
emaciation. As a result of the disease, his mobility and sensory nerves were
severely affected and he had lost both his vision and hearing. Since it was
impossible to communicate with him, his situation must be regarded as most
unusual. When I saw him, he cried incessantly for beer and made abusive
remarks about someone named Anna. His assaults and his remarks almost never
stopped. If any one of his sensory organs had been functioning, it would have
clearly rectified his behavior. The loss of his sense of touch during sleep had

various effects: It led to another venue, to the limitless regions of fantasy, above
all to the uninhibited emergence of the goal. In the awakened state, that goal by
necessity, tends to reinforce and underscore desires. In effect it is analogous to a
self-deceiving but intensified and exaggerated expression of that goal which,
because of the dreamer’s caution, is attended by restrictions or inhibitions.
Havelock Ellis, (The World of Dreams) mentions this problem using other
explanations. By looking at the above case from other perspectives, or from a
dream analysis, it is clear that only by empathizing with the actual situation,
through a “rationalization” (Nietsche) of the final goal, can a “rational
interpretation” become possible.
Nevertheless, the direction an individual takes in his actions, and with that
the preparatory, anticipatory function of the dream, is clearly recognizable.1 It
foreshadows a readiness for meeting an actual problem consistent with the
dreamer’s lifeline and not with common sense. This stage of readiness never
loses sight of its safeguarding mission. Let us examine this theory with the
following example. A patient with a severe case of agoraphobia, who had fallen
ill with a lung condition, described as follows a dream she had while confined to
her bed and unable to pursue her career as a business woman: “I enter the store
and see the girls playing cards.”
In all my cases of agoraphobia I found that this symptom is used as a
perfectly suitable way to relegate duties to others, to relatives, marriage partners,
employees, and to issue orders to them like an emperor and god. This ploy,
among other effects, can prevent absences from work or refusal to attend events
by certain persons who might find excuses in anxiety attacks, or feeling ill or
nauseous.2 Cases such as these remind me of the captive pope, God’s
representative, who, confined (in the Vatican), heightens with his rejection of
freedom the adoration of believers, and also forces all potentates to come to him
(“The journey to Canossa”), without them being able to count on a return visit
by the pope. My patient’s dream occurred at a time when a power struggle was
quite apparent. Its interpretation is clear. The dreamer transfers herself into a
future situation when she is well again and is able to seek out violators of her
rules. She is totally convinced that without her presence nothing can go right.
She also displays that attitude generally by demeaning everyone and by
pedantically trying to improve on everything. In her constantly growing mistrust
she always tries to find fault in others. She is so full of mistrust that she has
sharpened her senses to where she can foresee where others will go wrong. She
knows exactly what her employees will do when left alone! She also can guess
how men conduct themselves when by themselves since “all men are the same.”

This is the reason that she forces her husband always to stay at home.
Unquestionably, consistent with the form her preparations took, soon after
her recovery from her lung illness she will uncover many omissions in her store,
which adjoins her home. She may even discover that card games were played in
her absence. The day after her dream she ordered her maid, under some pretense,
to bring her the deck of playing cards. She also had her sales women come to her
bedside to give them constantly new instructions and to supervise them. In order
to throw light on an uncertain future she need only apply her sleep-acquired
knowledge and, consistent with her overextended goal for superiority, find
suitable analogies and apply figuratively and literally the fiction of the
recurrence of similarities.3 In order to prove herself to have been right after her
recovery it became necessary to raise the level of her demands. This would
obviously bring mistakes and absences to the fore.
1 First described in “Aggressionstrieb,” 1908 (see Heilen und Bilden). Also
in “Psychische Behandlungen der Trigeminusneuralgie,” in “Beiträge zur Lehre
vom Widerstand,” in “Syphilidophobie” (in this volume) and in Nervoesen
Charakter. 2 See Adler, “Das organische Substrat der Psychoneurosen,” (chapter
15 in this volume) and an excerpt from the medical history of the case cited
above in “Zur Rolle des Unbewussten” (chapter 22 in this volume).
Another example of dream interpretation is found in ancient history and I
cite Simonides’ dream as relayed by Cicero, which I had discussed in an earlier
article (On the Theory of Resistance). One night, shortly before a trip to Asia
Minor, Simonides dreamed that “the ghost of a person whom he had given a
religious burial, warned him from going on that voyage.” Simonides
consequently canceled his travel plans and stayed at home. According to our
experience with dream interpretation, we can assume that Simonides was afraid
of taking that trip. He used this corpse,4 which seemed to be under some
obligation to him, and the repulsiveness of the grave, to scare himself and to
protect himself with the idea of a horrible end resulting from this voyage.
According to the narrator, the ship on which Simonides was to travel sank, a
result that, analogous to other accidents, must have been on the dreamer’s mind
for a long time. By the way, had the ship landed safely, what would have kept
superstitious natures from assuming that it would have sunk had Siminides not
heeded the warning voice and had gone on that voyage? A well-known
graphologist warns his clients of their impending suicide, as I learned from a
number of my patients who consequently had become ill. What a cheap gift for
prophesy! If you commit suicide the graphologist is right; if you stay alive his
warning was useful and he is still right.

We can see that there are two ways for dreams to attempt to foretell or
solve a problem, and to initiate whatever action a dreamer wishes to undertake in
a given situation. The dreamer will seek to accomplish this in ways that are
adapted to his personality and character. The dream can realize an anticipated
future situation as if it were already in effect (the dream of the patient suffering
from agoraphobia). The poet Simonides obviously was influenced by an earlier
experience to avoid having to travel. If you can firmly believe that Simonides
really had this experience, and that he truly believed in the power of the dead,
and also that he was in an actual situation in which he had to make a decision
whether to travel or not, if you can consider all those possibilities, then you must
conclude that Simonides had this dream, and that he chose from among
thousands of images the one that would give him the impulse to firm up his
decision to remain at home. We may assume that our poet even without this
dream would have stayed at home. What about our patient suffering from
agoraphobia? Why did she dream that her employees were careless and
disorderly? Is it not clear then that: “When I am not present everything goes to
pieces, but when I recover and again take charge, I will show them that the
business cannot function without me.” We may, therefore, assume that when this
woman returns to her store, she will uncover evidence of all kinds of neglect and
carelessness, and with her sharp eyes will justify her superiority. She will
probably be proven right and, thereby, will have foreseen the future in her
dream.5 Dreams, therefore, like character, feelings, emotions, and neurotic
symptoms, are arranged in accordance with the ultimate purpose of the
dreamer.
3 I am obligated to my friend and colleague, A. Haeutler, for my deeper
understanding of this “fiction of similarity,” which is one of the most important
preconditions for thinking and the principle of causality. 
4 I shall treat in greater detail the utilization of such ready, emotion-releasing
recollections that are purposefully created to recall emotions in order to
engender greater caution, but also disgust, anxiety, fear of one’s sexual partner,
and fainting. I have described much of this in Nervoesen Charakter as a likeness
(i.e. incest-likeness, criminal-likeness, godlikeness, and as megalomania), and it
can also be described as a juncture. As far as I know, only Hamburger adopted
similar views. See “Individualpsychologische Behandlungung der Neurose” in
this volume.
I must now address an objection that is quite likely to arise in the minds of
many readers. How can I explain that dreams can affect the shape of the future
when most of our dreams seem unintelligible if not silly? The importance of this

objection is so obvious that most authorities look for the essence of a dream in
these bizarre, disoriented, unintelligible manifestations in order to interpret it, or,
seeing the unintelligibility of a dream, deny that it contains anything of
significance. Scherner and Freud, among the more recent authorities, should be
credited for having attempted to solve this riddle of dreams. Freud, in order to
give support to his theory of dreams, according to which a dream in effect
represents reminiscences of childish, unfulfilled sexual desires, and later in death
wishes, saw in the unintelligibility of dreams a tendentious distortion as if the
dreamer, uninhibited by cultural barriers, tried to gratify forbidden desires and
fantasies. This concept today has become just as untenable as the belief in a
sexual basis for neuroses, or as the basis of our civilization as a whole.
The seeming unintelligibility of dreams can be explained first by the
circumstance that the dream is not a means to seize a future situation, but only
an accompanying manifestation, a reflection of powers, a trace and proof that the
body and the mind have made an attempt at foreseeing, and are groping to
vindicate the personality rather than the dreamer’s common sense regarding an
impending problem. It is a thought process empathizing with and in somewhat
the same direction as the individual’s character. Just as is true for understanding
a person’s nature it is expressed in complex language which, when understood,
does not speak clearly, but does point the way. As important an understanding is
of our waking thoughts and speech, since they are preparatory to our actions,
such an understanding becomes superfluous in a dream, which like the smoke of
fire indicates only which way the wind is blowing.
5 It would not be hard to guess that Simonides, who sought immorality as a
poet, had configured his dream in terms of a fear of death. The patient who
suffered from agoraphobia pursued the fictitious goal of domination, the ideal of
a kingdom. Compare this also with the findings in “Individualpsychologische
Ergebnisse bezűglich Schlafstőrungen” (Individual Psychological findings
regarding sleep disorders) which indicate that the fear of death led to the choice
of a medical profession.
However, smoke can reveal to us that somewhere there is a fire.
Furthermore, experience also tells us something about the wood being burned. In
the ashes of dreams are the awakened feelings and emotions that justify the
lifestyle.
If a dream that seems unintelligible is broken down into its constituent
parts, and if the dreamer can tell us what meanings these parts have for him, then
with some effort and perception the impression will be formed that behind that
dream forces are at play aiming in a particular direction. This direction will
generally be adhered to in life and is determined by the individual’s personality,

by the problems that burden him, and by his inadequacies. Such an examination,
which we may well consider an art, reveals a person’s lifeline, or a segment of it,
and we then see his life plan in accordance with which he tries to master life’s
tensions and uncertainties. We can also see the detours he takes for the sake of
security and to avoid defeat. And we can employ that dream, as we can every
other psychic manifestation, just as we can a person’s life itself, to bare his
attitude toward the world and toward his fellow human beings. In dreams there
is a process by which all transit points of foreknowledge are presented in
accordance with a predetermined goal of the lifestyle. The means that are used
in this process are personal experiences seen in the light of deceitful similarities.
This leads us to a further understanding of the initially unintelligible details
in the structure of a dream. A dream on occasion reaches--and this is then also
determined by a particular character trait of the dreamer--for a display of dream
images in which the last events, images of the present, appear. For the solution
of an impending problem there often appear reminiscences of simpler, more
abstract, childish similarities that assume poetic proportions. Thus, a threatening
decision is presented as a school test, a strong opponent as an older brother, the
thought of victory as flying high, danger as an abyss or as falling. Emotions that
enter dreams always stem from preparations made and from anticipations, and
intend to provide protection from a real and impending problem.6 The simplicity
of dream scenes--that is compared to the complexity of real life situations--
reflects the full extent of the dreamer’s efforts to find an escape by shutting out
the confusion of complex forces inherent in a given situation by following a
guideline toward the simplest similarities. This is not unlike a teacher trying to
help a student who is not up to a question about energy propulsion, by asking:
“What happens when someone pushes you?” If a stranger were to walk into the
classroom at that moment, he would be just as perplexed by that question as we
would be when told about a dream.
Finally, the unintelligibility of dreams relates to the problem raised initially
when we saw that an unconscious definite view of the future is needed in order to
protect an impending action. This fundamental principle of human thought and
action is described in my book Über den nervösen Charakter. According to that
principle, an unconscious guideline leads to an unconscious personality ideal.
The structuring of this personality ideal and of the guidelines that lead to it entail
the same thoughts and emotions that are found in the dream and that are present
in the emotional processes that underlie the dream. The force required for a
psychological event to remain in the unconscious presses so strongly on the
thoughts, images, feelings, as well as visual and audio perceptions of the dream
that these, in order not to endanger the unity of the personality, also must remain

in the unconscious, or, better said, remain unintelligible. Remember, for
example, the dream of the patient afflicted with agoraphobia. What drove her,
thanks to her unconscious personality ideal, was dominance over her
environment. Were she to have understood her dreams, then her despotic striving
to dominate and to act would have to give way to the censure of her waking
thoughts. However, since her true striving was for domination, the dream must
remain unintelligible to her. At this point it is possible to understand that
psychological illnesses, all forms of anxiety, become untenable and move toward
healing if the overly stressed goals of the anxiety-afflicted person can be directed
into the conscious state where such goals can be blunted.
6 These emotions, however, tendentiously gain strength from the deceptive
dream image when required for the protection of the lifestyle.
In what follows I shall describe how the interpretation of a dream was
achieved directly through the patient. The patient had come to me for treatment
because of her irritability and thoughts of suicide. I should point out that the
analogous character of the dream-thought always becomes apparent from the
way the dreamer begins to tell the story with an “as-if” clause.7 The problem
situation for the dreamer was that she had fallen in love with her brother-in-law.
The dream was as follows:
A Napoleon dream:8
I dreamed that I was in a dance hall. I wore a pretty blue dress, was nicely made-
up, and danced with Napoleon…
This brings to mind the following:
I elevated my brother-in-law to the level of Napoleon, else it would not
have been worth the effort to entice him away from my sister. (This means that
her neurotic nature was not directed toward the man, but aimed at being superior
to her sister.) In order to cloak the whole affair in a mantle of fairness and,
furthermore, not to awaken suspicion that I was being revengeful for having
missed my opportunity with him, I had to assume the identity of Princess Louise.
This would then make it natural for Napoleon to divorce his first wife Josephine,
in order to marry a woman of equal rank.
7 See Vaihinger, Die Philosphie des Als-Ob (The Philosophy of As-if,
Berlin, 1911) whose epistemological views in other areas are in full agreement
with my neuropsychological concepts. 
8 Napoleon, Jesus, Jeanne d’Arc, the Virgin, but also the emperor, a father, an
uncle, a mother, a brother, etc. often are substitute ideals of a fervent ambition
for superiority, at the same time that they represent direction-determining
emotions in the psychology of the neurotic.

As for the name Louise, I had been using it ever since a classmate, knowing
that I disliked Leopoldine, told a young man asking for my given name that it
was Louise.
That I was a princess had frequently been in my dreams. (Guideline). It was
my colossal ambition that provided me in dreams with a bridge to cross over the
gulf that separated me from the aristocracy. Furthermore, this illusion was so
designed that upon waking, I was to feel more strongly the pain of having grown
up among strangers, alone, and deserted. The feelings that then would come over
me would put me in a harsh and cruel mood toward everyone fortunate enough
to be associated with me.
As for Napoleon, I can only comment that, since I am obviously not a man,
I shall bow only to those who are greater and more powerful than anyone else.
By the way, in the end I would not be deterred from asserting that Napoleon was
a burglar (burglar dreams). Also, I would bow down to him not out of
subjugation, as can be derived from another dream, but to hold him on a string
and then, and only then, would I dance with him. Dancing is a substitute for
many things since music has an enormous influence on my nature.
How often at a concert was I overcome with an intense longing to rush to
my brother-in-law and kiss him half to death. 
In order not to allow this desire to arise with a strange man I must devote myself
passionately to dancing. If I have no partner, I must sit with my lips pressed
together looking gloomily, so as to make it impossible for anyone to be attracted
to me. 
I did not want to be subjected to love and, in my opinion, going to a ball and love
go together. 
I chose blue for my color because it becomes me best and I was filled with a
desire to make a good impression on Napoleon. Now I have a desire to dance,
which I did not have before.
From this point forward the dream interpretation would proceed to show
that in the end this woman’s unconscious plan was solely for domination.
However, that striving has now been changed and diminished to where she no
longer feels personally humbled by dancing.
I have arrived at the conclusion of the case. We have seen that when it
comes to human actions, the dream is not a peripheral psychological
manifestation but, like a reflection, it can disclose events and bodily attitudes
that are directed toward an eventual action. Should it, therefore, be surprising
that people from time immemorial have accepted with the certainty akin to a
universal belief that dreams are capable of showing the future? A great genius,
Goethe, who was capable of focusing all human feelings in himself, presented in

a remarkable ballade this “viewing the future” of dreams, and the power that
dreams have in preparing an individual for an impending event. In it, a count
returning from the Holy Land to his castle finds it devastated and empty. That
night he dreamed about the wedding of dwarfs. The poem concludes as follows:
And if we should proclaim what is to come Then hush the noise and riot. 
Since what he so fondly watched in dwarfs, He learned to enjoy as himself. 
Trumpets and the ringing of resounding sound, Carriages, riders, and the din of
wedding joys. They gather to adore and bow. 
Innumerable, happy people. 
That is how it was, and still is now.
The impression the poet conveys clearly is of the dreamer’s thoughts being
directed toward marriage and children.
Index
A
above · 3, 6, 12, 13, 15, 20, 26, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 45, 47, 49, 51, 54, 57,
62, 
64, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 76, 81, 84, 86, 96, 98, 99, 100, 112, 115, 116, 119, 121, 
122, 124, 125, 127, 143, 146, 148, 149, 151, 166, 169, 174, 175, 177, 180, 185, 
186 
abuse · 136 
accusation 
accuse · 56, 165, 168 
achievement · 115, 154 
activity · 2, 6, 10, 21, 22, 25, 45, 46, 57, 79, 84, 86, 89, 90, 115, 139, 147, 153, 
161 
active · 6, 10, 31, 40, 45, 47, 63, 72, 82, 86, 99, 118, 146, 163 
adapt 
adaptation · 25 
addiction · 53, 185 
adjustment · 10, 60, 62, 94, 111 
adolescence · 95 
affect · 18, 50, 113, 114, 150, 178, 188 
affection · 2, 3, 6, 76, 85, 87, 93, 98, 104 
aggression · 2, 3, 4, 5, 21, 23, 25, 34, 35, 57, 78, 95, 96, 107, 114, 116, 118, 122,
142, 167, 171, 178, 184 
aggressive drive · 34 
agoraphobia · 13, 14, 28, 69, 71, 106, 120, 124, 164, 173, 186, 187, 188, 190
alcohol · 26, 29, 92, 93, 112 
alcoholism · 93, 114, 154 

alibi · 25, 86, 139 
ambition · 4, 10, 13, 20, 21, 27, 35, 51, 52, 62, 85, 98, 102, 115, 137, 139, 143, 
144, 147, 150, 151, 152, 162, 163, 165, 190, 191 
ambitious · 92, 93, 127, 131, 162 
ambivalence · 67 
analogy · 150, 162 
anger · 4, 6, 15, 20, 43, 56, 99, 100, 102, 118, 138, 173 
antithesis · 8, 19, 123, 172, 175 
antithetical · 116 
anxiety · 3, 23, 82, 83, 85, 93, 103, 109, 110, 111, 114, 120, 126, 129, 131, 135, 
152, 163, 164, 166, 168, 170, 186, 187, 190 
anxious · 68, 82, 101 
apperception · 119, 121, 125 
Aristotle · 71 
arrangement · 23, 60, 67, 78, 110, 120, 122, 129, 131, 142, 143, 148, 166, 179
arrogance · 11, 34, 35, 176 
art · 70, 71, 76, 97, 131, 149, 150, 160, 161, 189 
artist · 71, 97, 132, 149, 150, 154, 161 
artists · 13, 71, 119 
as if · 6, 23, 25, 41, 60, 68, 75, 89, 94, 96, 102, 105, 106, 117, 118, 126, 139,
153, 
156, 175, 184, 187, 188 
Asnaourow, Felix · 6 
assertion · 61 
assertiveness · 35 
association · 46, 56, 80, 97, 143 
assumption · 22, 32, 46, 77, 91, 107, 124, 127, 142, 159 
assumptions · 23, 40, 64, 91, 185 
asthma · 19, 25, 76 
attention · 7, 14, 19, 54, 61, 69, 70, 71, 86, 94, 95, 96, 123, 126, 129, 151, 154, 
160, 161, 167, 168, 173, 179 
attitude · 3, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 38,
40, 
48, 50, 52, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 68, 69, 77, 93, 98, 101, 106, 111, 113, 
118, 121, 123, 125, 127, 132, 135, 136, 138, 142, 144, 153, 155, 162, 163, 164, 
165, 171, 174, 181, 182, 186, 189 
avarice · 51, 67, 85, 112, 152, 162 
avoiding · 44, 45, 122, 134, 154 
avoidance · 35, 100, 181, 184 

awareness · 2, 19, 87, 89, 123, 172 
awkward · 2, 10 
awkwardness · 85

B
bashfulness · 11, 95 
Baudelaire, Charles · 71 
beauty · 71, 77, 109, 131, 132, 133 
becoming · 10, 12, 14, 20, 38, 47, 60, 63, 66, 67, 84, 96, 97, 101, 116, 120, 124,
128, 145, 150, 171, 174, 176 
being · 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
30, 31, 35, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 57, 59, 60, 62, 64, 68, 70, 
71, 80, 86, 87, 90, 92, 96, 99, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 107, 113, 116, 117, 119, 
120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 128, 131, 134, 137, 138, 139, 142, 146, 148, 150, 152, 
156, 158, 159, 162, 171, 173, 174, 176, 184, 186, 189, 190, 192 belief · 5, 16,
37, 43, 45, 47, 69, 70, 96, 99, 104, 107, 113, 136, 138, 154, 184, 
188, 191 
belonging · 12, 52 
below · 34, 68, 70, 71, 72, 116, 123, 125, 127, 146, 151, 182 
Berger, Alfred · 56, 158, 160, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 171 Bergson,
Henri · 108, 171 
biting · 30, 51, 80 
Bleuler, Eugen · 44, 58, 67, 163 
blind · 45, 99, 106, 129 
blindness · 18, 21, 91 
blushing · 4, 28, 32 
body · 38, 78, 80, 81, 82, 128, 162, 167, 168, 184, 188 
Breuer, Josef · 21, 83, 84

C
capriciousness · 98 
case · 5, 9, 13, 14, 19, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37, 43, 45, 48, 52, 53, 54,
55, 59, 61, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 76, 84, 86, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 103, 105,
106, 
109, 111, 116, 119, 120, 126, 127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 137, 142, 143, 148, 150, 
155, 156, 158, 160, 162, 166, 169, 172, 174, 177, 183, 185, 186, 191 
cases · 1, 5, 7, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
43, 55, 56, 58, 61, 63, 66, 68, 70, 73, 76, 84, 85, 86, 87, 93, 98, 102, 104, 106,
109, 111, 119, 120, 121, 124, 126, 129, 135, 142, 148, 156, 165, 171, 185, 186 
castration · 24, 44, 55, 69, 88 
causality · 187 
caution · 18, 23, 66, 124, 167, 185, 187 
central nervous system · 42 
change · 13, 19, 35, 50, 51, 70, 80, 84, 98, 111, 128, 129, 141, 146, 153, 155,
159, 
162, 163, 166, 167, 174 
character · 1, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 29, 32, 50, 52, 54, 
56, 62, 67, 76, 84, 85, 86, 99, 102, 110, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 
125, 127, 134, 139, 147, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 159, 161, 165, 166, 168, 
174, 175, 179, 182, 187, 188, 189, 190 
character traits · 1, 3, 9, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 22, 23, 25, 32, 52, 54, 67, 84, 85, 99,
102, 110, 115, 116, 118, 120, 122, 125, 127, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 174, 175 
characteristics · 1, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 21, 25, 31, 35, 53, 67, 87, 93, 98, 102, 107,
108, 111, 113, 132, 150, 161, 163, 166, 174, 176 
Charcot, Jean-Marie · 21, 83 
child · 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30,
40, 43, 44, 45, 48, 50, 51, 55, 60, 62, 63, 68, 85, 86, 87, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 108, 109, 110, 113, 114, 119, 121, 128, 135, 136, 138, 
142, 143, 145, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 159, 162, 168, 169, 173, 181, 182 
children · 2, 3, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 21, 22, 27, 32, 35, 36, 37, 40, 43, 44, 46, 51, 56,
60, 63, 66, 68, 85, 86, 87, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 108, 109,
114, 115, 121, 133, 137, 145, 146, 151, 154, 157, 161, 162, 168 choice · 25, 92,
127, 145, 161, 188 
clean · 86, 128 
cleanliness · 23, 69, 128 

common sense · 60, 119, 121, 135, 147, 183, 186, 188 
community · 24, 86, 90, 93, 97, 129, 134, 136 
communal · 6, 138 
comparison · 34 
compensation · 3, 11, 19, 22, 42, 44, 78, 93, 107, 109, 110, 136, 162, 167, 177, 
179, 182 
compensatory · 19, 22, 24, 69, 104, 115, 117, 119, 175 
competition 
competitiveness · 108 
complex · 57, 58, 83, 101, 112, 161, 174, 188, 189 
compulsion · 4, 17, 21, 51, 58, 69, 83, 84, 86, 116, 118, 120, 122, 128, 130, 131, 
132, 134, 135, 138, 147, 160, 172 
compulsive · 3, 4, 25, 32, 69, 84, 86, 106, 118, 127, 130, 131, 132, 135, 137,
139, 173, 174, 185 
concentrate 
concentration · 90 
concept · 42, 43, 50, 75, 76, 79, 89, 111, 137, 138, 139, 161, 162, 168, 172, 188 
conception · 41, 90, 182 
conflict · 7, 10, 54, 78, 96, 97, 100, 172, 180, 182 
conscience · 100, 159, 165 
conscious · 8, 9, 13, 39, 57, 60, 62, 83, 89, 98, 114, 116, 137, 147, 171, 172, 174,
175, 176, 184, 185, 190 
consciousness · 2, 8, 13, 57, 87, 144, 163, 171, 172, 175, 185 
constitution · 43, 49, 50, 85, 111, 121, 128 
contact · 47, 68, 79, 90, 128, 129, 153, 165 
contempt · 127, 162 
contrariness · 52, 58, 174 
contribution · 24, 54 
cooperate · 33, 58, 60, 63, 64, 134 
cooperation · 60, 63, 93, 130, 135, 136, 171 
coquetry · 25 
counter-compulsion · 134, 135 
courage · 2, 11, 98, 99, 100, 104, 151, 152, 155 
courageous · 26, 142, 146, 162 
coward 
cowardice · 2, 11, 22, 95, 97, 98, 104, 117, 152 
craving · 5, 9, 13, 25, 36, 52, 56, 79, 99, 102, 108, 117, 167, 168, 169 creative ·
90, 149, 150, 161, 167 
creative power · 150, 167 

creativity · 77, 103 
crime · 25, 38, 136, 159, 160 
criminal · 13, 22, 23, 37, 38, 47, 52, 85, 98, 100, 102, 158, 159, 162, 168, 187 
criminality · 17, 37, 92, 103 
critical · 6, 15, 40, 185 
cruel · 14, 159, 191 
cruelty · 53, 87, 92, 104, 117, 128, 162 
cry · 30, 145 
crying · 6, 145 
culture · 12, 19, 28, 50, 51, 133 
cure · 68, 94, 96, 124, 126, 145, 161, 177 
curse · 183 
cyclothymia · 61 
Czerny, Adalbert · 43, 76

D
deaf · 11, 37 
deafness · 21 
death · 11, 20, 30, 48, 51, 69, 72, 91, 108, 114, 120, 130, 139, 142, 143, 144,
145, 146, 147, 148, 154, 163, 166, 167, 169, 188, 191 
defeat · 7, 12, 28, 63, 72, 76, 92, 103, 105, 117, 120, 121, 125, 141, 168, 189 
defense · 23, 144 
defensiveness · 35 
defiance · 6, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 28, 34, 35, 36, 43, 45, 51, 61, 86, 97, 100,
102, 103, 104, 117, 128, 138, 153, 155 
defiant · 6, 11, 13, 14, 16, 22, 35, 38, 43, 52, 55, 97, 100, 102, 121, 155 
deficiency · 81, 139 
delirium · 92 
delusion · 6, 11, 75, 143, 185 
delusions · 6, 11, 143 
dependence · 43, 47 
dependency · 3, 50, 76, 85, 95, 108, 151 
depreciation · 56, 61 
depreciation tendency · 56 
depression · 5, 34, 81, 110, 127, 137 
depressed · 148, 163 
depth · 91 
depth psychology · 91 
derogation · 5, 11, 12, 102 
despair · 165 
Dessoir, Max · 1, 104 
detour · 128, 166, 175 
detours · 114, 117, 189 
development · 2, 3, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20, 22, 23, 35, 40, 42, 50, 52, 54, 66,
84, 85, 86, 88, 92, 93, 96, 97, 98, 102, 108, 113, 114, 119, 136, 154, 163, 165,
166, 179, 181 
dialectic · 11, 19, 86 
difficulty · 150, 172 
difficulties · 13, 77, 124, 141, 142, 155, 181 
discipline · 40, 96, 104, 170 
discontent · 156 

discouraged · 26, 126 
discouragement · 93 
disease · 67, 70, 84, 91, 138, 185 
disorderly · 159, 188 
disparage · 56 
disparagement · 4, 11, 35, 106, 152, 155 
displace 
displacement · 53, 77 
disposition · 11, 55, 64, 76, 116, 153, 184 
distance · 4, 53, 56, 132, 164 
distrust · 64 
dog · 70 
dogs · 44 
dominance · 4, 22, 27, 50, 58, 63, 78, 79, 99, 100, 106, 110, 112, 116, 120, 128,
129, 141, 152, 155, 174, 176, 190 
dominant · 45, 99, 172, 173, 176 
Don Juan · 53, 56, 64, 86 
double vie · 86, 107, 163 
doubt · 2, 5, 6, 9, 11, 23, 24, 34, 83, 84, 86, 87, 93, 109, 111, 131, 138, 139, 153,
155, 163, 164, 184, 185 
dream · 4, 19, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38, 47, 48, 56, 60, 72, 132, 141, 147, 148, 151, 173,
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190,
191 
dream theory · 179 
dreams · 6, 7, 11, 19, 21, 23, 24, 30, 31, 35, 36, 45, 47, 48, 54, 55, 60, 62, 64, 75,
84, 90, 98, 119, 121, 125, 127, 129, 143, 148, 151, 162, 167, 173, 175, 176, 177,
178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 189, 191 
dreams · 6, 7, 11, 19, 21, 23, 24, 30, 31, 35, 36, 45, 47, 48, 54, 55, 60, 62, 64, 75,
84, 90, 98, 119, 121, 125, 127, 129, 143, 148, 151, 162, 167, 173, 175, 176, 177,
178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 189, 191 
drive · 4, 9, 10, 11, 13, 21, 22, 31, 34, 35, 40, 42, 43, 44, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 57,
60, 70, 76, 78, 79, 84, 86, 99, 103, 144, 155, 185 
drives · 4, 5, 9, 10, 22, 23, 42, 43, 49, 50, 61, 64, 76, 87, 89, 114, 122, 139, 148

E
eating · 20, 28, 43, 51, 86, 95, 137, 164 
economy · 154 
education · 9, 12, 40, 96, 161
educator · 85, 87, 96
educators · 95
ego · 22, 50, 90, 159, 163, 164, 165, 171
ego-consciousness · 164
egotism · 52, 53, 85, 101
emotion · 26, 78, 150, 151, 154, 187
emotional · 26, 27, 29, 33, 59, 82, 98, 116, 117, 120, 134, 136, 148, 150, 153,
166, 167, 190 
empathy · 21, 30, 118, 135 
empathize · 3, 48, 106
encourage · 121, 170 
encouragement · 119, 143 
endocrine · 33 
enemy · 23, 61, 65, 94, 169 
energy · 64, 102, 122, 131, 139, 163, 189 
energetic · 55 
enuresis · 2, 6, 18, 35, 36, 51, 69, 109, 110 
environment · 10, 51, 85, 87, 95, 99, 101, 113, 116, 117, 121, 122, 134, 135,
136, 154, 162, 166, 190 
envy · 4, 51, 53, 62, 79, 85, 95, 105, 110, 152, 162, 167 
epileptic · 32, 106, 118, 143 
epilepsy · 32, 121, 142, 148 
equal · 18, 42, 47, 72, 104, 150, 151, 175, 191 
equality · 15, 101, 110, 111, 124, 137, 151, 157 
equilibrium · 8, 32, 85, 111 
error · 59, 108, 110, 112, 159 
escape · 21, 27, 39, 47, 68, 92, 98, 136, 138, 145, 189 
ethics · 130 
evil · 90, 95, 149 
evolution · 42 
examination · 1, 5, 21, 45, 46, 47, 50, 89, 91, 93, 107, 110, 115, 137, 164, 184,
185, 189 

examinations · 96, 136 
excuse · 28, 53, 58, 67, 84, 92, 93, 108, 116, 136, 186 
excuses · 116, 136, 186 
Exner, Sigmund · 82 
expectation · 5, 12, 142, 167 
expecting · 37, 163 
experience · 9, 13, 14, 17, 21, 26, 31, 41, 43, 54, 60, 72, 90, 93, 104, 108, 113,
123, 145, 150, 151, 161, 171, 176, 187, 189

F
failure · 5, 22, 64, 86, 92 
failures · 24, 84, 133 
fainting · 20, 32, 106, 118, 124, 135, 141, 148, 155, 187 
family · 4, 10, 11, 19, 34, 60, 77, 84, 91, 92, 97, 99, 100, 102, 104, 106, 110,
112, 113, 114, 123, 126, 127, 129, 134, 141, 151, 154, 156 
fantasy · 11, 25, 31, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 47, 48, 57, 60, 62, 68, 76, 102, 146, 171,
185 
fate · 10, 14, 15, 47, 98, 133, 138 
father · 2, 7, 11, 12, 13, 20, 27, 28, 30, 36, 38, 40, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 53, 60, 62,
97, 98, 100, 110, 112, 113, 120, 123, 124, 141, 143, 146, 152, 155, 159, 162,
164, 166, 169, 190 
fatigue · 131, 132 
favoritism · 152 
fear · 3, 4, 5, 11, 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28, 31, 34, 36, 37, 40, 41, 44, 46, 47,
48, 52, 55, 56, 59, 61, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 78, 79, 81, 85, 86,
87, 90, 92, 93, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 114, 117, 118,
121, 126, 128, 131, 132, 135, 137, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 151, 152, 154,
163, 164, 168, 178, 187, 188 
fear of being alone · 27, 85 
fear of falling · 151 
fear of society · 28 
feeblemindedness · 18 
feeling · 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 30,
31, 32, 35, 52, 54, 59, 60, 63, 64, 68, 69, 70, 72, 75, 76, 78, 80, 81, 85, 87, 91,
96, 100, 102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,
121, 122, 123, 125, 127, 128, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 142, 145, 149,
151, 152, 153, 155, 159, 160, 162, 165, 166, 167, 168, 172, 174, 175, 176, 177,
179, 181, 184, 185, 186 
feeling of community · 63, 115 
feeling of inferiority · 2, 5, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 35,
52, 54, 68, 69, 78, 85, 104, 107, 108, 109, 116, 117, 118, 121, 122, 125, 128,
134, 136, 153, 162, 168, 177 
feeling of superiority · 127, 134, 136, 142 
female · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14, 24, 28, 32, 35, 37, 38, 39, 41, 44, 45, 48, 52,
55, 56, 61, 62, 64, 87, 102, 104, 106, 110, 128, 130, 131, 132, 139, 155, 156,

173, 178 
feminine · 2, 3, 4, 12, 24, 25, 31, 45, 59, 61, 85, 86, 87, 109, 116, 117, 125, 128,
131, 132, 176 
fetish · 137 
fetishism · 7, 117, 121, 138 
fiction · 23, 37, 60, 75, 112, 120, 132, 145, 146, 153, 155, 165, 166, 171, 172,
173, 176, 181, 186, 187 
fictitious · 77, 89, 108, 112, 116, 118, 123, 125, 136, 143, 146, 150, 153, 155,
171, 172, 180, 181, 183, 188 
fictitious goal · 89, 116, 136, 153, 172, 188 
fictitious superiority · 89, 118 
Fliess, Wilhelm · 1, 2, 61, 70, 87 
forget · 176 
forgetfulness · 52 
forgetting · 147, 166 
form · 1, 2, 4, 7, 10, 15, 22, 23, 24, 25, 34, 36, 37, 48, 50, 51, 62, 64, 68, 69, 78,
79, 80, 84, 89, 93, 94, 104, 106, 108, 115, 116, 124, 128, 130, 134, 145, 148,
150, 152, 153, 155, 159, 163, 166, 167, 171, 172, 180, 186 
free will · 2, 60, 129, 132 
freedom · 2, 4, 53, 109, 125, 138, 186 
Freud · 1, 22, 37, 40, 42, 43, 44, 49, 53, 54, 56, 59, 62, 69, 74, 75, 77, 79, 83, 84,
111, 112, 121, 139, 156, 172, 178, 188 
friendship · 69, 99, 126, 137, 140 
frigidity · 4, 68, 121 
future · 23, 24, 40, 41, 45, 48, 50, 52, 55, 60, 61, 66, 89, 96, 100, 102, 103, 105,
113, 116, 118, 131, 146, 147, 150, 151, 153, 154, 161, 181, 183, 184, 186, 187,
188, 189, 191

G
game · 45, 132 
games · 14, 21, 27, 56, 65, 155, 173, 180, 182, 186 
Ganghofer, Ludwig · 62 
genital · 1, 18, 109, 179 
genitals · 12, 21, 41, 55, 69 
genius · 5, 17, 52, 97, 149, 162, 191 
glands · 2, 18, 33, 42, 85 
goal · 5, 9, 24, 30, 35, 36, 44, 51, 54, 55, 57, 63, 75, 76, 78, 86, 89, 90, 91, 92,
98, 106, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 117, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 127,
134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 143, 145, 147, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 163, 166, 167,
171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 181, 183, 185, 186, 189 
goal of perfection · 127 
God · 48, 55, 142, 165, 186 
Goethe · 76, 77, 138, 191 
greed · 4, 44, 51 
grief · 51, 82, 120 
Gross, Otto · 181 
group · 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 49, 93, 162 
guiding fiction · 143, 146, 147, 172, 173 guiding line · 155, 172 
guiding principle · 20 
guilt · 6, 22, 23, 100, 120 
guilt feelings · 22

H
habit · 64, 127, 129 
Halban, Josef von · 1 
hallucination · 90, 91, 92, 94, 121, 159
hallucinations · 27, 89, 91, 92, 93, 135, 159, 167, 168, 169, 171 Hamburger,
Franz · 187 
handwriting · 150, 151 
happy · 38, 51, 128, 159, 163, 192
happiness · 80, 151 
hate · 11, 13, 20, 120 
hate · 65, 117 
headache
headaches · 6, 13, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, 68, 101, 128, 137 
heart · 14, 78, 80, 81, 106, 121, 126, 148, 164 
heredity · 121 
hermaphrodism · 22, 31, 87 
hero · 11, 22, 27, 45, 69, 86, 138, 161, 165 
hesitiation
hesitating attitude · 63, 93, 107, 129, 166, 167, 175 
Hirschfeld, Magnus · 1 
homosexuality · 1, 3, 68, 111, 112, 117, 139, 168
homosexual · 7, 31, 111, 162 
hostility · 11, 58, 70, 111, 125, 126 
hostile · 25, 70, 78, 93, 129, 136, 138, 146, 169 
human · 19, 23, 51, 66, 70, 75, 76, 78, 84, 90, 91, 95, 99, 111, 117, 118, 121,
135, 
136, 137, 138, 145, 153, 154, 159, 160, 161, 163, 165, 170, 184, 189, 191 human
nature · 90 
humane · 165 
humiliation · 4, 5, 14, 18, 26, 28, 30, 32, 36, 44, 54, 85, 86, 98, 102, 165, 166, 
167, 168, 174, 176 
humility · 58 
hydrocephalus · 18, 109 
hypersensitivity · 5, 20, 35, 70, 79, 85, 87, 102, 103, 109, 134, 155 hypnotic · 21,
83 
hypothesis · 89, 121, 136, 170 

hysteria · 3, 17, 21, 23, 29, 34, 83, 95, 106, 111, 118, 135

I
idea · 4, 13, 16, 27, 34, 35, 36, 38, 72, 103, 111, 132, 136, 138, 139, 141,
143, 
145, 148, 149, 153, 155, 156, 160, 162, 163, 167, 169, 172, 175, 179, 182, 184, 
187 
ideal · 36, 63, 77, 107, 112, 113, 114, 118, 120, 122, 126, 129, 132, 134, 136,
143, 
153, 154, 155, 156, 162, 165, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 188, 190
identification · 50, 71 
illness · 14, 15, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 32, 38, 41, 45, 46, 48, 57, 64, 69, 81, 83, 
84, 86, 93, 96, 101, 104, 107, 108, 111, 112, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 131, 132, 
136, 139, 142, 145, 148, 150, 167, 168, 174, 186 
image · 3, 28, 48, 75, 100, 111, 138, 141, 149, 153, 189 
images · 44, 49, 64, 80, 168, 187, 189, 190 
imagination · 61, 81, 120, 125, 161, 171, 182 
imaginary · 7, 60, 163 
impatience · 10, 124, 143 
impatient · 10 
impotence · 5, 21, 24, 46, 57, 61, 62, 63, 67, 69, 121 
inborn · 2, 10 
incest · 45, 61, 112, 187 
incomplete · 96, 119, 164 
incontinence · 2, 18 
indecision · 34 
independence · 2, 3, 43, 51, 97 
independent · 15, 16, 55, 95, 98, 99, 102 
Individual Psychology · 9, 13, 17, 58, 60, 64, 66, 83, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 115,
130, 
134, 135, 138, 139, 141, 148, 150, 154, 158, 161, 170, 183 
individuality · 122 
indolence · 10, 20 
infantile · 1, 21, 29, 40, 49, 62, 143, 146, 162 
infantilism · 108 
inferiority · 1, 2, 11, 14, 18, 19, 22, 25, 32, 33, 35, 36, 44, 47, 58, 60, 67, 68, 76, 
77, 87, 106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 114, 115, 117, 121, 133, 135, 136, 138, 151, 
152, 154, 155, 161, 165, 167, 174, 175, 177 

inferiority complex · 133 
inferiority feeling · 32, 108, 111, 114, 115, 117, 135, 152, 165, 174 infidelity ·
110 
inhibition · 3, 76, 79 
insatiable · 85, 139 
insecurity · 11, 18, 19, 20, 24, 31, 32, 35, 44, 68, 69, 71, 78, 87, 89, 90, 98, 99, 
103, 106, 107, 108, 113, 114, 128, 139, 145, 147, 151, 152, 153, 167, 177, 185
insight · 25, 49, 64, 84, 96, 124, 127, 136, 139, 168, 172 
insomnia · 54, 142, 143, 144, 148 
instinct · 22, 149, 162, 171 
intelligence · 35, 60 
intelligent · 40, 51 
intention · 38, 178 
intentions · 11, 97, 101, 126 
interest · 27, 28, 30, 60, 66, 76, 87, 96, 112, 139, 144, 166 intolerance · 28, 134,
136, 138 
introspection · 86 
intuition · 49, 76, 83, 184 
irritability · 93, 96, 102, 103, 190 
irritable · 20 
isolation · 31, 58, 87, 90, 93, 97, 114, 134, 135, 159

J
Janet, Pierre · 83, 162
jealousy · 64, 102, 118, 120, 152
jealous · 10, 31, 102
joy · 51, 145 
Jung,Carl Gustav · 40, 41, 43, 44, 121, 177, 179 justice · 119, 158, 159, 164,
168, 169

K
Kant. Emanuel · 35, 138 Klages, Ludwig · 79, 108 Kramer, Josef · 15, 144
Kretschmer · 1, 18, 121

L
language · 75, 77, 78, 80, 116, 117, 135, 179, 188 
laughter · 38 
law · 19, 46, 79, 81, 99, 168, 190, 191
laws · 99, 119, 166 
laziness · 20, 36, 92, 129 
lazy · 23 
leadership 
leader · 149 
learning · 10, 20, 27, 97, 153 
Lenau, Nikolaus · 73 
Leonardo da Vinci · 55 
libido · 40, 43, 45, 46, 47, 56, 57, 64, 75, 77, 79, 106, 110, 121 
life plan · 79, 82, 114, 123, 124, 126, 127, 150, 151, 170, 171, 172, 174, 175,
189 life style (see also style of life) · 117, 118, 119, 121, 125, 129 
logic · 59, 89, 90, 91, 94, 100, 135, 138, 139, 140, 183 
logical consequences · 137 
Lombroso, Cesare · 163 
love · 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 25, 28, 29, 31, 40, 45, 53, 54, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 
64, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 76, 79, 86, 99, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 110, 111, 117, 
120, 121, 125, 128, 129, 132, 135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 152, 154, 155, 156, 163, 
169, 190, 191 
loyalty · 158, 166 
lying · 26, 34, 35, 45, 53, 67, 99, 145, 152, 163

M
Maeder, Alphonse · 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182
male · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 24, 30, 35, 36, 41, 43, 45, 48, 55, 56, 59, 61,
64,
67, 104, 110, 111, 112, 117, 128, 132, 155, 156, 174, 178, 179 
malice · 37, 53, 104 
manic-depressive
mania · 5, 22, 59, 128, 171, 185 
mankind · 99, 153 
marriage · 13, 14, 19, 24, 25, 36, 46, 47, 53, 54, 57, 63, 67, 68, 69, 98, 105, 109,
110, 120, 126, 128, 129, 132, 137, 156, 186, 192 
marry · 29, 37, 46, 53, 57, 128, 155, 191 
masculine protest · 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 15, 16, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 43, 44, 45, 47, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 63, 64, 67, 70, 72, 77, 87,
98, 
103, 104, 110, 111, 122, 131, 155, 156, 165, 166, 168 
masculinity · 12, 13, 15, 27, 31, 69, 105, 117, 119, 138, 164 
masculine · 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14, 15, 16, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 45, 47, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 70,
72, 77, 86, 87, 98, 103, 104, 110, 111, 116, 117, 122, 125, 131, 154, 155, 156,
164, 165, 166, 167, 168 
masochism · 3, 6, 34, 61, 62, 68, 86 
mastery · 86 
masturbation · 7, 23, 24, 25, 44, 45, 46, 47, 52, 67, 117, 121, 127, 128, 130, 137, 
139, 174 
mature · 8, 156 
maturity · 11, 43, 44, 45, 63, 97 
May, Karl · 180, 181 
megalomania · 4, 60, 108, 137, 187 
melancholia · 121 
memory · 55, 69, 84, 89, 90, 91, 107, 139, 158, 162, 164, 166, 167, 171, 176
menopause · 32 
mental disorder · 17 
metaphor · 120 
migraine · 28 
mind · 4, 19, 23, 35, 47, 48, 54, 57, 75, 80, 81, 87, 92, 96, 104, 106, 111, 113, 

120, 122, 126, 132, 142, 146, 159, 160, 165, 172, 183, 184, 187, 188, 190
mistrust · 14, 20, 35, 44, 61, 69, 70, 85, 101, 102, 186 
modesty · 20 
Moebius, Paul Julius · 70, 87 
mood · 41, 80, 116, 191 
morality · 163 
morphine · 26, 29, 30 
mother · 7, 11, 12, 14, 20, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49,
52, 
55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63, 70, 93, 97, 98, 100, 101, 104, 105, 110, 111, 112, 113, 
120, 123, 127, 128, 129, 139, 141, 142, 143, 145, 152, 155, 190 motivation · 184
motives · 46, 53, 104, 159 
movement · 43, 79 
murder · 29, 71 
murderer · 120 
muscles · 76 
music · 78, 191 
musician · 150 
mythology · 156 
myths · 75, 183

N
nagging · 14, 112 
nail biting · 21, 79 
narcissism · 128 
nausea · 28 
necrophilia · 139, 168 
need · 2, 10, 11, 17, 28, 42, 43, 47, 50, 52, 78, 85, 87, 90, 100, 101, 103, 105,
112,
116, 118, 119, 123, 135, 137, 139, 143, 149, 151, 153, 168, 169, 173, 186
negativism · 58, 124 
neglect · 12, 13, 85, 102, 104, 108, 127, 152, 188
neglected child · 102, 103, 104 
neuralgia · 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 106 
neurasthenia · 3, 17, 21, 23, 24, 61, 83 
neurosis · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 11, 17, 18, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 42, 43,
44, 45, 47, 49, 50, 54, 57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 66, 68, 70, 72, 78, 79, 84, 85, 86,
91, 
92, 93, 98, 103, 105, 107, 111, 112, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 125, 
126, 127, 130, 131, 132, 134, 138, 139, 147, 148, 150, 153, 161, 163, 170, 174, 
176, 177, 179, 184 
neuroses · 21, 83, 100, 111, 114, 115, 121, 123, 161, 163, 188 
neurotic · 1, 3, 4, 9, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 38,
40, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68,
70, 71, 72, 75, 83, 84, 86, 87, 89, 93, 106, 107, 108, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132,
134, 135, 136, 137, 139, 143, 146, 148, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 161, 163,
164, 165, 166, 167, 169, 171, 172, 174, 175, 177, 188, 190 Nietzsche, Friedrich ·
49, 149 
nightmare · 57 
nightmares · 7 
normal · 4, 21, 25, 29, 31, 35, 51, 52, 68, 78, 79, 85, 86, 87, 92, 106, 112, 113, 
119, 128, 136, 137, 151, 161, 162, 166, 168, 170, 182, 184 
nymphomania · 25

O
obedience · 2, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20, 23, 58, 85, 95, 104, 111, 117,
118, 153 objective · 2, 89, 90, 96, 113, 150, 170 
obstinacy · 28, 58 
obstipation · 37, 69 
occupation · 11, 55, 57, 146 
Oedipus complex · 53, 57 
old age · 57, 131, 154, 167 
only child · 101, 103, 162 
opinion · 1, 74, 96, 144, 165, 191 
Oppenheim (Hermannn and David) · 15, 173 
opponent · 11, 52, 162, 165, 168, 175, 189 
organ · 3, 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 35, 36, 37, 42, 43, 44, 68, 69, 75, 76, 77,
78, 81, 85, 89, 91, 108, 109, 123, 128, 154 
organ dialect · 75, 76, 77, 78 
organ inferiority · 3, 10, 17, 18, 19, 35, 37, 43, 44, 68, 69, 77, 78, 108, 123,
128, 154 
orientation · 117, 121 
overcoming · 147 
overcompensating · 77 
oversensitivity
overcompensation · 19, 42, 78, 114, 136, 174
Ovid · 173

P
pain · 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 26, 27, 28, 30, 42, 44, 51, 52, 60, 61, 78,
85, 90, 91, 104, 106, 114, 118, 124, 136, 145, 148, 152, 173, 178, 179, 184, 191 
palpitation 
palpitations · 14, 126 
pampering · 103, 108, 123, 152 
pampered · 45, 133, 152, 173 
pantomime · 78, 126 
paralysis · 5, 57, 66, 68, 84, 121 
paranoia · 3, 121 
parent · 97, 100, 101, 104, 149 
parents · 2, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 20, 24, 27, 40, 51, 61, 63, 68, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 145 
passivity · 85, 118, 153 
passive · 11, 12, 31, 47, 84, 86, 99, 117, 146, 163 
patient · 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 13, 14, 17, 20, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 45, 46,
47, 48, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73,
79, 83, 84, 87, 91, 92, 93, 106, 107, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 119,
120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 134, 135, 137,
139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 148, 156, 163, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 181,
183, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190 
pattern · 2, 28, 84, 120, 125, 150 
Pavlov, Iwan · 184 
peace · 10, 23, 126 
pedantry · 35, 131 
penis · 24, 38, 44, 69 
perception · 50, 68, 69, 90, 91, 155, 189 
perfection · 155, 170 
personal superiority · 106 
personality · 2, 9, 10, 58, 68, 75, 76, 78, 86, 90, 91, 106, 107, 112, 114, 116, 118,
119, 120, 122, 135, 139, 142, 143, 148, 150, 153, 160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166,
167, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 181, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190 
perspective · 3, 25, 63, 116, 117, 122, 155, 156, 169, 170, 183 
perverse · 7, 30, 43, 45, 106, 125, 133 
perversion · 68, 112, 121 
pessimism · 103 

philosophy · 55, 70, 76, 106, 146 
phobia · 3, 21, 41, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 156 
phobias · 23, 66, 69 
phobic · 66 
physician · 3, 13, 29, 34, 58, 61, 63, 64, 72, 84, 87, 93, 96, 98, 106, 123, 124,
125, 126, 129, 131, 132, 139, 144, 145, 147, 166, 171 
physics · 49 
physique · 121 
pity · 6, 20 
play · 7, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 28, 36, 45, 47, 51, 56, 65, 68, 85, 86, 96, 97, 101,
128, 167, 184, 189 
pleasure · 9, 10, 14, 42, 43, 44, 49, 51, 52, 63, 90, 168, 184 
poet · 60, 70, 78, 138, 149, 150, 161, 167, 179, 187, 188, 192 
poetry · 70, 183 
possession · 141, 164, 167 
poverty · 2, 28, 154 
power · 2, 5, 7, 9, 23, 25, 31, 50, 62, 63, 64, 70, 71, 75, 78, 81, 86, 90, 99, 102,
111, 112, 120, 125, 127, 131, 132, 135, 136, 138, 139, 151, 153, 154, 155, 162,
164, 165, 167, 169, 173, 186, 187, 192 
practical · 131, 132, 135, 161 
praise · 4, 15, 61, 164 
precocious · 44, 85 
predestination · 5 
pregnancy · 7, 25, 69, 75, 100, 109, 110, 111, 120, 167 
pregnant · 13, 14, 80, 109 
prejudice · 86 
preparation · 4, 48, 144, 169, 177, 180, 181 
prestige · 32, 91, 92, 110, 135, 140, 164 
pride · 57, 71, 104, 105, 108 
primitive · 44, 50, 116, 125 
private logic · 135 
probability · 113 
problem · 1, 15, 26, 31, 34, 37, 45, 47, 49, 69, 70, 71, 73, 77, 87, 91, 92, 98, 100,
111, 117, 118, 119, 127, 133, 134, 139, 148, 171, 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 187,
188, 189, 190 
problem child · 133 
procrastination · 129 
profession · 117, 132, 144, 145, 146, 161, 164, 166, 170, 188 
projection · 49 

proof · 14, 44, 49, 66, 71, 94, 150, 161, 164, 185, 188 
prophesy · 187 
prosperity · 112 
prostitute · 63, 162 
prostitution · 129 
protection · 23, 42, 45, 46, 63, 66, 68, 104, 135, 167, 189 
pseudomasochism · 25, 52, 55 
psyche · 2, 9, 17, 21, 22, 26, 39, 40, 44, 50, 51, 54, 61, 62, 67, 83, 85, 86, 90, 95,
99, 107, 108, 114, 116, 117, 134, 136, 143, 147, 149, 150, 151, 161, 162, 163,
165, 167, 168, 171, 172, 173, 175, 181 
psychic · 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 31, 32, 60, 62, 89, 90, 107, 113, 119, 122, 159,
168, 179, 184, 189 
psychology · 22, 49, 52, 67, 70, 76, 80, 84, 89, 90, 119, 123, 149, 154, 170, 178,
190 
psychological · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 26, 32, 36, 38, 40, 50, 52,
54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 75, 77, 78, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 90, 91,
95, 100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 113, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 132,
133, 143, 147, 149, 150, 152, 153, 155, 157, 161, 171, 172, 173, 175, 180, 190,
191 
psychosis · 17, 58, 91, 92, 114, 135, 171 
psychotic · 17, 32, 48, 75, 114, 121, 135, 137 
psychotherapist · 126, 127, 176 
punishment · 4, 6, 13, 18, 22, 35, 44, 67, 85, 96, 160 
purpose · 14, 17, 20, 21, 24, 33, 37, 38, 50, 59, 60, 61, 75, 86, 91, 116, 118, 131,
147, 151, 152, 160, 165, 167, 168, 172, 174, 183, 188

R
race · 25, 100 
rage · 22, 26, 32, 97, 118, 128, 148 
rational · 136, 183, 185 
readiness · 107, 120, 148, 153, 186 
reality · 11, 31, 53, 60, 79, 86, 91, 106, 107, 113, 118, 119, 123, 134, 136, 153,
155, 163, 164, 171, 172, 185 
reason · 13, 27, 29, 31, 46, 66, 70, 80, 90, 104, 125, 126, 135, 136, 141, 142,
154, 
160, 174, 182, 186 
reasoning · 67, 91, 112, 170 
rebellion · 51, 86 
recollection · 38, 45, 48, 55 
reflex · 21 
reflexes · 89 
regression · 49 
rejection · 67, 128, 152, 186 
religion · 168 
religious · 16, 78, 81, 187 
repression · 1, 49, 50, 54, 84 
repressed · 43, 49, 54, 55 
resentment · 86, 145 
resistance · 10, 21, 53, 56, 59, 64, 79, 99, 117, 123, 149, 152 
responsibility · 17, 100, 124, 130, 134, 177 
responsible · 52 
restlessness · 89 
retirement · 118 
retreat · 4, 78, 85, 86, 105, 134, 151 
retreating · 71, 79, 87 
revenge · 4, 11, 20, 53, 56, 68, 92, 100, 159, 168 
revolution · 158 
ridicule · 6, 28, 183 
rigid · 50, 105, 114, 119, 135, 146, 171 
role · 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 31, 32, 36, 41, 44,
45, 
47, 48, 52, 60, 61, 62, 63, 68, 85, 86, 87, 90, 92, 101, 103, 104, 105, 110, 112, 

117, 118, 120, 124, 128, 130, 131, 132, 137, 148, 151, 153, 154, 155, 160, 162, 
164, 167, 179, 184, 185 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques · 6 
rule · 3, 23, 36, 44, 101, 116, 123, 163, 166 rules · 52, 96, 118, 186

S
sadism · 2, 25, 34, 174 
sadistic · 11, 20, 22, 25, 43, 68, 69, 174 
safeguarding · 20, 60, 63, 66, 67, 69, 71, 129, 164, 179, 180, 186 
safeguarding tendency · 69 
safeguards · 54, 63, 68, 71, 107, 109, 110, 114, 118, 119, 121, 122, 134, 152,
164, 166, 167, 168, 179 
safety · 67, 76, 119, 168 
salvation · 94 
scheme · 117, 125, 153, 165 
Schiller, Friedrich · 3, 60, 67, 76, 77, 87 
schizoid · 1 
school · 15, 19, 20, 35, 45, 46, 48, 49, 52, 55, 79, 95, 97, 100, 103, 138, 146,
152, 170, 189 
Schopenhauer, Arthur · 70, 138 
science · 96, 149, 154, 161 
second child · 101, 111, 179 
security · 18, 23, 24, 27, 28, 32, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 50, 51, 52, 56, 61, 77,
97, 98, 99, 101, 104, 107, 111, 112, 113, 115, 116, 125, 131, 138, 151, 152, 162,
169, 181, 189 
seduction · 19 
self · 6, 9, 11, 13, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23, 25, 44, 52, 57, 68, 69, 70, 80, 86, 98, 102,
107, 113, 118, 122, 128, 131, 136, 140, 144, 148, 153, 154, 160, 161, 162, 164,
165, 170, 177, 181, 182, 185 
selfassertion · 98, 154 
self-confidence · 148 
self-esteem · 18, 44, 57, 153, 154, 181 
self-evaluation · 107, 122, 136, 162 
self-preservation · 22 
semblance · 86, 164 
sensation · 22, 164 
sensitive · 4, 17, 19, 20, 59, 76, 83 
sex · 1, 4, 7, 12, 27, 37, 40, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 52, 63, 64, 70, 104, 105, 117, 155,
168 
sexual · 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 40,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 57, 60, 63, 64, 68, 70, 75, 76, 77,

78, 84, 87, 91, 98, 105, 106, 109, 110, 111, 112, 117, 121, 128, 129, 130, 137,
141, 155, 160, 161, 162, 163, 169, 173, 187, 188 
sexuality · 1, 16, 23, 43, 47, 50, 57, 61, 79, 110, 112, 117, 138, 159, 165 
Shakespeare · 56 
shame · 7, 99 
shock · 83, 159 
shyness · 3, 21, 61, 62, 163, 169 
sickness · 2, 77 
significance · 9, 32, 79, 107, 110, 112, 121, 154, 167, 168, 170, 173, 188 
significant · 17, 19, 25, 28, 29, 35, 47, 50, 54, 64, 67, 70, 79, 84, 90, 98, 100,
109, 115, 118, 121, 135, 171 
simile · 81, 147 
simplicity · 189 
skin · 6, 9, 10, 17, 50, 69, 78, 81, 109 
sleep · 10, 18, 20, 27, 28, 36, 52, 54, 72, 89, 92, 101, 104, 137, 139, 144, 147,
168, 185, 186, 188 
sleep disturbances · 36 
sleep · 20, 72, 95, 143, 144, 169 
sleepsleeplessness · 109, 126, 135, 137, 139, 141, 143, 148 
smell · 10, 19, 56, 60 
social · 6, 8, 10, 14, 17, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 50, 64, 70, 72, 85,
86, 87, 90, 91, 93, 95, 96, 97, 100, 102, 104, 105, 116, 118, 121, 123, 129, 131,
133, 135, 136, 140, 147, 151, 152, 154, 155, 157, 162, 163, 171, 172, 173, 175,
185 
social science · 154 
society · 23, 50, 51, 70, 92, 93, 94, 98, 105, 122, 135, 136, 138, 140, 155, 162,
167, 168, 171 
sorrow · 80 
soul · 91, 100, 149, 161 
spasms · 76 
speech · 19, 46, 75, 76, 78, 85, 95, 150, 162, 188 
stage fright · 93 
stature · 12, 15, 37 
status · 18, 50, 53, 102, 136, 137, 138, 176 
stealing · 38 
Stendhal · 55, 62 
Stern, William · 171 
stomach · 20, 184 
stress · 60, 108, 150, 165, 175 

Strindberg, August · 70 
striving · 2, 3, 4, 19, 23, 29, 48, 50, 57, 62, 63, 79, 86, 87, 91, 99, 102, 106, 107,
108, 112, 116, 117, 118, 126, 127, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 152, 155, 174,
183, 190, 191 
stupid · 137 
stupi · 127 
stuttering · 2, 6, 21, 51, 53, 57, 85 
style of life · 119, 122 
subjective · 2, 12, 18, 113, 125, 143 
sublimation · 5, 49, 111 
submission · 45, 86, 99, 100, 104, 114, 118 
submissiveness · 3, 31, 85, 87, 118, 162 
success · 4, 5, 26, 44, 57, 86, 94, 98, 124, 126, 158 
sucking · 14, 21, 51 
suffering · 6, 7, 14, 19, 25, 26, 28, 30, 45, 53, 61, 67, 93, 98, 106, 111, 113, 114,
116, 120, 122, 136, 137, 145, 149, 153, 185, 187 
suggestibility · 21, 83 
suggestion · 23, 83, 161, 173 
suicide · 17, 20, 53, 92, 103, 106, 136, 155, 160, 173, 174, 175, 187, 190 
superiority · 31, 35, 37, 38, 55, 63, 71, 78, 99, 115, 116, 117, 118, 121, 122, 123,
124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 137, 148, 151, 152, 153, 156,
163, 165, 168, 171, 174, 179, 186, 188, 190 
superior · 29, 31, 38, 55, 116, 120, 124, 131, 139, 140, 152, 190 
superstition · 127 
suspicion · 132, 190 
syle · 119, 122, 129 
symbol · 38, 94, 138, 141, 147, 156, 167 
symbols · 77, 80, 87 
sympathy · 6, 20 
sympathetic · 14, 32 
symptom · 4, 28, 36, 43, 54, 66, 112, 117, 119, 126, 139, 171, 186 
symptoms · 4, 11, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28, 32, 34, 38, 42, 54, 57, 58, 66,
69, 76, 83, 84, 85, 87, 93, 94, 101, 107, 111, 112, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 122,
123, 125, 126, 127, 131, 132, 135, 139, 148, 150, 151, 171, 188
T tardiness · 129
teacher · 2, 11, 13, 15, 46, 47, 97, 98, 102, 124, 138, 149, 189
teachers · 9, 47, 62, 95, 96, 97, 98
teeth · 28, 80
teleology · 122

teleological · 107, 177, 182
tenderness · 20, 61, 117, 118, 129, 137 
tension · 5, 24, 50, 51, 79, 82, 83, 87, 115, 118, 121, 169 
the question · 15, 37, 40, 54, 55, 91, 160 
theoretical · 83 
thinking · 10, 12, 16, 23, 27, 40, 42, 47, 60, 75, 76, 77, 146, 150, 153, 154, 156,
159, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 187 
thirst · 9, 45, 85 
thought · 27, 29, 38, 44, 48, 49, 52, 53, 57, 62, 63, 70, 76, 78, 84, 92, 96, 124,
132, 141, 144, 146, 147, 148, 156, 160, 161, 162, 166, 172, 173, 174, 179,
183, 
185, 188, 189, 190 
thriftiness · 164 
thymus · 18 
thyroid · 18, 109 
time · 2, 4, 7, 15, 16, 21, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 34, 37, 38, 40, 45, 47, 48, 50, 52,
53, 54, 57, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 69, 72, 82, 91, 92, 93, 96, 98, 103, 107, 109, 111, 
117, 118, 119, 120, 123, 125, 126, 129, 134, 137, 139, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
148, 152, 154, 155, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 165, 166, 169, 174, 176, 180, 186, 
187, 190, 191 
timidity · 20, 22, 63, 85, 97, 103 
tooth · 20, 159, 166, 167 
training · 10, 109, 138, 147 
trait · 7, 29, 52, 63, 116, 117, 147, 151, 164, 174, 189 
traits · 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 20, 23, 25, 35, 45, 47, 52, 61, 84, 85, 95, 99,
102, 103, 104, 105, 117, 125, 128, 132, 135, 138, 152, 153, 155, 159, 161, 162,
163, 174 
transference · 59, 64, 84, 123, 141, 155 
traumatic · 148 
treatment · 14, 16, 17, 18, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58,
59, 
62, 64, 66, 67, 71, 72, 83, 84, 94, 98, 102, 111, 112, 115, 117, 123, 124, 126, 
129, 132, 139, 141, 142, 143, 145, 148, 154, 159, 171, 173, 174, 175, 179, 190
trismus · 76 
truth · 132, 137, 164 
truth · 13 
tyrant · 152

U
ugliness · 2, 18, 85, 108, 114 
uncertainty · 3, 7, 12, 13, 27, 48, 63, 71, 100, 116, 128, 143, 151, 162, 164
unconscious · 8, 13, 14, 15, 26, 29, 30, 37, 39, 57, 62, 68, 86, 87, 89, 97, 107,
108,
109, 111, 114, 116, 117, 137, 148, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178, 182,
185, 
189, 191 
understanding · 13, 27, 47, 55, 58, 66, 68, 78, 79, 83, 91, 96, 97, 98, 99, 116,
123, 
126, 127, 136, 149, 155, 161, 170, 171, 183, 187, 188, 189 
unhappy · 51 
unique · 10, 22, 50, 91, 121, 134, 150 
uniqueness · 13, 125, 132, 139 
unity · 150, 172, 174, 176, 190 
unmasking · 125, 136
V vaginism · 24, 68
Vaihinger, Hans · 75, 107, 108, 171, 172, 190 vain · 121, 152 
value · 2, 3, 8, 15, 21, 41, 132, 148, 154, 167, 170
values · 13, 16, 21, 25, 27, 60, 87, 97, 105, 115, 119, 161 vanity · 51, 52,
58, 122, 139, 152, 164 
venereal disease · 70, 91 
virtue · 172 
vomiting · 28, 85

W
Wagner, Richard · 52, 147 
war · 93, 121 
washing compulsion · 67, 69 
wasting time · 126 
weakness · 3, 5, 6, 7, 12, 25, 83, 85, 86, 113, 116, 118, 136, 151 
weapon · 5, 92, 108, 152 
Weininger, Otto · 1, 63, 70, 87, 155 
Wexberg, Erwin · 6 
Wild · 20, 174 
will to power · 78, 165 
willfulness · 58 
wisdom · 13 
wish · 13, 19, 24, 25, 27, 42, 70, 79, 84, 104, 110, 115, 117, 120, 137, 141, 143,
147, 154, 155, 156, 173 
withdrawal · 24, 174 
woman · 4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 36, 37, 38, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 53,
55,
56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 70, 71, 73, 76, 77, 87, 96, 105, 109, 120, 126, 128, 129,
130, 
131, 132, 138, 139, 155, 156, 162, 168, 169, 174, 186, 188, 191 work · 9, 22, 24,
29, 35, 40, 44, 45, 46, 52, 57, 68, 70, 72, 79, 82, 92, 93, 103, 
119, 125, 127, 129, 130, 131, 137, 144, 149, 160, 161, 171, 172, 173, 175, 177, 
178, 179, 186 
world · 2, 8, 10, 11, 14, 21, 22, 25, 38, 50, 55, 60, 67, 76, 81, 83, 89, 90, 91, 97, 
99, 107, 111, 113, 114, 119, 122, 125, 127, 132, 138, 139, 149, 153, 155, 158, 
160, 165, 166, 171, 174, 183, 189
Y younger · 27, 28, 85, 101, 127, 145, 152 youngest · 45, 101
youngest child · 45, 101
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep

insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it
ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the
psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.
1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian
Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be

consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be self-centered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as
impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater
desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace
exaggerated self-protection, self-enhancement, and self-indulgence with
courageous social contribution.

