The Children of the Sky
After nearly twenty years, Vernor Vinge has produced an enthralling
sequel to his memorable bestselling novel A Fire Upon the Deep.
Ten years have passed on Tines World, where Ravna Bergnsdot and a
number of human children ended up after a disaster that nearly
obliterated humankind throughout the galaxy. Ravna and the pack
animals for which the planet is named have survived a war, and Ravna
has saved more than one hundred children who were in cold-sleep
aboard the vessel that brought them.
While there is peace among the Tines, there are those among them—
and among the humans—who seek power…and no matter the cost,
these malcontents are determined to overturn the fledgling civilization
that has taken root since the humans landed.
On a world of fascinating wonders and terrifying dangers, Vernor Vinge
has created a powerful novel of adventure and discovery that will
entrance the many readers of A Fire Upon the Deep. Filled with the
inventiveness, excitement, and human drama that have become
hallmarks of his work, this new novel is sure to become another great
milestone in Vinge’s already stellar career.

THE CHILDREN 
OF THE SKY
A Novel by

Vernor Vinge
Qeng Ho Series: Book 3
Copyright © 2011
by Vernor Vinge
eISBN: 978-1-4299-9336-4

Dedication:
To Carol D. Ward 
and 
Joan D. Vinge

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for the advice and help of: David Brin, John Carroll, Cyndi
Chie, Howard L. Davidson, Robert Fleming, Mike Gannis, Cherie
Kushner, Keith Mayers, Sara Baase Mayers, Tom Munnecke, Diana
Osborn, and Mary Q. Smith.
I am very grateful to my editor, James Frenkel, for all the time he has put
into this book. Jim and Tor Books have been very patient with me in the
long process of creating The Children of the Sky. (I know I said that about
my last novel—but this one was about four times as much work.)


Two years after the 
Battle on Starship Hill

Chapter   00
How do you get the attention of the richest businessperson in the
world?
Vendacious had spent all his well-remembered life sucking up to royalty.
He had never dreamed he would fall so low as to need a common
merchant, but here he was with his only remaining servant, trying to find
a street address in East Home’s factory district.
This latest street was even narrower than the one they had left. Surely
the world’s richest would never come here!
The alley had heavy doors set on either side. At the moment, all were
closed, but the place must be a crowded madness at shift change. There
were posters every few feet, but these were not the advertisements they
had seen elsewhere. These were demands and announcements: WASH
ALL PAWS BEFORE WORK, NO ADVANCE WAGES, EMPLOYMENT APPLICATIONS
AHEAD. This last sign pointed toward a wide pair of doors at the end of the
alley. It was all marvelously pompous and silly. And yet … as he walked
along, Vendacious took a long look at the crenellations above him. Surely
that was plaster over wood. But if it was real stone, then this was a
fortified castle hidden right in the middle of East Home commercialism.
Vendacious held back, waved at his servant to proceed. Chitiratifor
advanced along the alley, singing praise for his dear master. He had not
quite reached the wide doors when they swung open and a hugely
numerous pack emerged. It was nine or ten and it spread across their
way like a sentry line. Vendacious suppressed the urge to look up at the
battlements for signs of archers.
The huge pack looked at them stupidly for a moment, then spoke in loud
and officious chords. “Employment work you want? Can you read?”

Chitiratifor stopped singing introductory flourishes, and replied, “Of
course we can read, but we’re not here for—”
The gatekeeper pack spoke right over Chitiratifor’s words: “No matter. I
have application forms here.” Two of it trotted down the steps with scraps
of paper held in their jaws. “I will explain it all to you and then you sign.
Tycoon pay good. Give good housing. And one day off every tenday.”
Chitiratifor bristled. “See here, my good pack. We are not seeking
employment. My lord”—he gestured respectfully at Vendacious—“has
come to tell the Great Tycoon of new products and opportunities.”
“Paw prints to suffice if you cannot write—” The other interrupted its own
speech as Chitiratifor’s words finally penetrated. “Not wanting to apply for
work?” It looked at them for moment, took in Chitiratifor’s flashy outfit.
“Yes, you are not dressed for this doorway. I should have noticed.” It
thought for a second. “You are in wrong place. Business visitors must
visit to the Business Center. You go back five blocks and then onto the
Concourse of the Great Tycoon. Wait. I get you a map.” The creature
didn’t move, but Vendacious realized the pack was even more numerous
than he had thought, extending back out of sight into the building; these
Easterners tolerated the most grotesque perversions.
Chitiratifor shuffled back in Vendacious’ direction, and the nearest of him
hissed, “That’s a two-mile walk just to get to the other side of this frigging
building!”
Vendacious nodded and walked around his servant, confronting the
gatekeeper directly. “We’ve come all the way from the West Coast to help
Tycoon. We demand a courteous response, not petty delays!”
The nearest members of the gatekeeper stepped back timidly. Up close,
Vendacious could hear that this was no military pack. Except at dinner
parties, it probably never had killed a single living thing. In fact, the
creature was so naive that it didn’t really recognize the deadly anger
confronting it. After a moment, it reformed its line, and said
“Nevertheless, sir, I must follow my orders. Business visitors use the
business entrance.”

Chitiratifor was hissing murder; Vendacious waved him quiet. But
Vendacious really didn’t want to walk around to the official entrance—and
that wasn’t just a matter of convenience. He now realized that finding this
entrance was a lucky accident. Woodcarver’s spies were unlikely this far
from home, but the fewer people who could draw a connection between
Tycoon and Vendacious, the better.
He backed off courteously, out of the gatekeeper’s space. This entrance
would be fine if he could just talk to someone with a mind. “Perhaps your
orders do not apply to me.”
The gatekeeper pondered the possibility for almost five seconds. “But I
think they do apply,” it finally said.
“Well then, while we wait for the map, perhaps you could pass on an
enquiry to someone who deals with difficult problems.” There were
several lures Vendacious could dangle: “Tell your supervisor that his
visitors bear news about the invasion from outer space.”
“The what from where?”
“We have eyewitness information about the humans—” that provoked
more blank looks. “Damn it, fellow, this is about the mantis monsters!”
•  •  •
Mention of the mantis monsters did not produce the gatekeeper’s
supervisor; the fivesome who came out to see them was far higher in the
chain of command than that! “Remasritlfeer” asked a few sharp questions
and then waved for them to follow him. In a matter of minutes, they were
past the gatekeeper and walking down carpeted corridors. Looking
around, Vendacious had to hide his smiles. The interior design was a
perfection of bad taste and mismatched wealth, proof of the foolishness
of the newly rich. Their guide was a very different matter. Remasritlfeer
was mostly slender, but there were scars on his snouts and flanks, and

you could see the lines of hard muscle beneath his fur. His eyes were
mostly pale yellow and not especially friendly.
It was a long walk, but their guide had very little to say. Finally, the
corridor ended at a member-wide door, more like the entrance to an
animal den than the office of the world’s richest commoner.
Remasritlfeer opened the door and stuck a head in. “I have the
outlanders, your eminence,” he said
A voice came from within: “That should be ‘my lord’. Today, I think ‘my
lord’ sounds better.”
“Yes, my lord.” But the four of Remasritlfeer who were still in the corridor
rolled their heads in exasperation.
“Well then, let’s not waste my time. Have them all come in. There’s plenty
of room.”
As Vendacious filed through the narrow doorway, he was looking in all
directions without appearing to be especially interested. Gas mantle
lamps were ranked near the ceiling. Vendacious thought he saw parts of
a bodyguard on perches above that. Yes, the room was large, but it was
crowded with—what? not the bejeweled knickknacks of the hallway. Here
there were gears and gadgets and large tilted easels covered with half-
finished drawings. The walls were bookcases rising so high that perches
on ropes and pulleys were needed to reach the top shelves. One of
Vendacious stood less than a yard from the nearest books. No great
literature here. Most of the books were accounting ledgers. The ones
further up looked like bound volumes of legal statutes.
The unseen speaker continued, “Come forward where I can see you all!
Why in hell couldn’t you use the business visitor entrance? I didn’t build
that throne room for nothing.” This last was querulous muttering.
Vendacious percolated through the jumble. Two of him came out from
under a large drawing easel. The rest reached the central area a second
later. He suffered a moment of confusion as Chitiratifor shuffled himself
out of the way, and then he got his first glimpse of the Great Tycoon:

The pack was an ill-assorted eightsome. Vendacious had to count him
twice, since the smaller members were moving around so much. At the
core were four middle-aged adults. They had no noble or martial aspect
whatsoever. Two of them wore the kind of green-tinted visors affected by
accountants everywhere. The other two had been turning the pages of a
ledger. Pretty clearly he had been counting his money or cutting
expenses, or whatever it was that businesscritters did.
Tycoon cast irritated looks at Vendacious and Chitiratifor. “You claim to
know about the mantis monsters. This better be good. I know lots about
the mantises, so I advise against lies.” He pointed a snout at Vendacious,
waving him closer.
Treat him like royalty. Vendacious belly-crawled two of himself closer to
Tycoon. Now he had the attention of all Tycoon’s members. The four
small ones, puppies under two years old, had stopped their pell-mell
orbiting of the accountancy four. Two hung back with the four, while two
came within a couple feet of Vendacious. These pups were integrated
parts of Tycoon’s personality—just barely, and when they felt like it. Their
mindsounds were unseemly loud. Vendacious had to force himself not to
shrink back.
After a moment or two of impolite poking, Tycoon said, “So, how would
you know about the mantis monsters?”
“I witnessed their starship Oobii descend from the sky.” Vendacious used
the human name of their ship. The sounds were flat and simple, alien. “I
saw its lightning weapon bring down a great empire in a single
afternoon.”
Tycoon was nodding. Most East Coast packs took this version of
Woodcarver’s victory to be a fantasy. Evidently, Tycoon was not one of
those. “You’re saying nothing new here, fellow—though few packs know
the name of the flying ship.”
“I know far more than that, my lord. I speak the mantis language. I know
their secrets and their plans.” And he had one of their datasets in his right
third pannier, though he had no intention of revealing that advantage.

“Oh really?” Tycoon’s smile was sharp and incredulous, even unto his
puppies. “Who then are you?”
An honest answer to that question had to come sooner or later, fatal
though it might be. “My lord, my name is Vendacious. I was—”
Tycoon’s heads jerked up. “Remasritlfeer!”
“My lord!” The deadly little fivesome was clustered around the only exit.
“Cancel my appointments. No more visitors today, of any sort. Have
Saliminophon take care of the shift change.”
“Yes, my lord!”
Tycoon’s older four set their ledger aside and all of him looked at
Vendacious. “Be assured that this claim will be verified, sir. Discreetly but
definitively verified.” But you could see Tycoon’s enthusiasm, the will to
believe; for now, the puppies were in control. “You were Woodcarver’s
spymaster, convicted of treason.”
Vendacious raised his heads. “All true, my lord. And I am proud of my
‘treason.’ Woodcarver has allied with the mantis queen and her
maggots.”
“Maggots?” Tycoon’s eyes were wide.
“Yes, my lord. ‘Mantis’ and ‘maggot’ refer to different aspects of the same
creatures, humans as they call themselves. ‘Mantis’ is the appropriate
term for the adult. After all, it is a two-legged creature, sneaky and
vicious, but also solitary.”
“Real mantises are insects, only about so tall.” One of the puppies
yawned wide, indicating less than two inches.
“The mantises from the sky can be five feet at the shoulder.”
“I knew that,” said Tycoon. “But the maggots? They are the younglings of
the grown monsters?”
“Indeed so.” Vendacious moved his two forward members confidingly
close to the other pack. “And here is something you may not know. It
makes the analogy nigh perfect. The actual invasion from the sky began

almost a year before the Battle on Starship Hill.”
“Before Woodcarver marched north?”
“Yes. A much smaller craft landed secretly, thirty-five tendays earlier. And
do you know what was aboard? My lord, that first lander was filled with
maggot eggsacks!”
“So that will be the real invasion,” said Tycoon. “Just as insect maggots
burst from their eggsacks and overrun the neighborhood, these humans
will overrun the entire world—”
Chitiratifor popped in with, “They will devour us all!”
Vendacious gave his servant a stern look. “Chitiratifor takes the analogy
too far. At present, the maggots are young. There is only one adult, the
mantis queen, Ravna. But consider, in just the two years since Ravna
and Oobii arrived, she has taken control of Woodcarver’s Domain and
expanded it across all the realms of the Northwest.”
Two of Tycoon’s older members tapped idly at an addition device, flicking
small beads back and forth. A bean counter indeed. “And how do the
mantises—this one Ravna mantis—manage such control? Are they loud?
Can they swamp another’s mindsounds with their own?”
This sounded like a testing question. “Not at all, my lord. Just like insects,
the humans make no sounds when they think. None whatsoever. They
might as well be walking corpses.” Vendacious paused. “My lord, I don’t
mean to understate the threat, but if we work together we can prevail
against these creatures. Humans are stupid! It shouldn’t be surprising
since they are singletons. I estimate that the smartest of them aren’t
much more clever than a mismatched foursome.”
“Really! Even the Ravna?”
“Yes! They can’t do the simplest arithmetic, what any street haggler can
do. Their memory for sounds—even the speech sounds they can hear—
is almost nonexistent. Like insect mantises, their way of life is parasitic
and thieving.”
All eight of Tycoon sat very still. Vendacious could hear the edges of his

mind, a mix of calculation, wonder, and uncertainty.
“It doesn’t make sense,” Tycoon finally said. “From my own
investigations, I already know some of what you say. But the mantises
are superlative inventors. I’ve tested their exploding black powder. I’ve
heard of the catapults powered by that powder. And they have other
inventions I can’t yet reproduce. They can fly! Their Oobii may now be
crashed to earth, but they have a smaller flyer, barely the size of a boat.
Last year it was seen by reliable packs just north of town.”
Vendacious and Chitiratifor traded a glance. That was bad news. Aloud,
Vendacious said, “Your point is well taken, my lord, but there is no
paradox. The mantis folk simply stole the things that give them their
advantage. I have … sources … that prove they’ve been doing that for a
very long time. Finally, their victims tired of them and chased them out of
their original place in the sky. Much of what they have, they do not
understand and cannot re-create. Those devices will eventually wear out.
The antigravity flier you mention is an example. Furthermore, the
creatures have stolen—and are continuing to steal—our own inventions.
For instance, that exploding black powder you mentioned? It might well
have been invented by some creative pack, perhaps the same one who
truly invented the cannon catapults.”
Tycoon didn’t reply immediately; he looked stunned. Ever since
Vendacious had heard of Tycoon, he’d suspected that this pack had a
special secret, something that could make him a faithful supporter of
Vendacious’ cause. That was still just a theory, but—
Finally, Tycoon found his voice: “I wondered.… The blasting powder and
the catapults … I remember…” He drifted off for a moment, splitting into
the old and the young. The puppies scrabbled around, whining like some
forlorn fragment. Then Tycoon gathered himself together. “I, I was once
an inventor.”
Vendacious waved at the mechanisms that filled the room. “I can see that
you still are, my lord.”
Tycoon didn’t seem to hear. “But then I split up. My fission sibling

eventually left for the West Coast. He had so many ideas. Do you
suppose—?”
Yes! But aloud, Vendacious was much more cautious: “I still have my
sources, sir. Perhaps I can help with that question, too.”

Chapter   01
So many impossible things. Ravna is dreaming. She knows that, but
there is no waking. She can only watch and absorb and choke on horror.
The Blight’s fleet hangs all around her, ships clustered here and there
like bugs stuck in slime. Originally, the fleet was a hundred fifty starships,
and clouds of drones. The drones have been cannibalized. Many ships
are gone, some cannibalized. Where it serves the Blight, crews have
been cannibalized, too, or simply cast out. Her dreaming eyes can see
hundreds of corpses, humans, dirokimes, even skrodeless riders.
The Blight’s prey is almost thirty lightyears away, an ordinary solar
system … where Ravna and the Children have fled. And that is part of
the reason this vision must be a dream. Thirty lightyears is impossibly far
in this part of the universe, where nothing goes faster than light. There is
no way she can know what is happening in the enemy fleet.
The fleet floats in death, but is not dead itself. Look closer at the
clustered ships. Things move. Construction proceeds. The fleet was once
the hand of a living god; now it exists to resurrect that god. Even trapped
here, in this encystment of pain, it plans and builds, second on second,
year on year, working as hard as its living crews can be driven. If
necessary, it can do this for centuries, breeding more crew to replace
natural losses. This program will eventually produce ramscoop vessels.
They will be the best that can exist Down Here, capable of reaching near-
lightspeed.
Now perhaps none of that effort is necessary, for the Blight can see
Ravna as she sees it, and the encysted god is saying to her: Rules
change. I am coming. I am coming. And much sooner than you think.

•  •  •
Ravna woke with a start, gasping for breath.
She was lying on the floor, her right arm painfully bent. I must have fallen.
What a terrible dream. She struggled back into her chair. She wasn’t in
her cabin aboard the Out of Band II. The automation aboard Oobii would
have turned the floor soft before she ever hit it. She looked around, trying
to orient herself, but all she could remember was the dream.
She ran her hand across the side of her chair. It was wood, local Tinish
manufacture, as was the table. But the walls had a greenish cast, gently
curving into the equally greenish floor. She was inside the Children’s
landing craft, under Woodcarver’s new castle. That took long enough to
recognize! She leaned her head into her hands, and let the cabin spin
around to a stop. When her dizziness had passed, she sat back and tried
to think. Except for the last few minutes, everything seemed reasonable:
She had come down to the catacombs to inspect the Children’s caskets.
This part of the castle spanned a range of technology from the pre-
gunpowder to fallen transcendence, the walls carved with chisels and
mallets, the light provided by lamps from Oobii. Two years ago, the
coldsleep containers had been removed from the Straumer Lander and
laid out with enough space between them to dissipate the waste heat of
the refrigeration.
Half the caskets were empty now, their passengers awakened. That
included almost all the oldest Children. Nowadays, the kids lived in or
near the new castle; some were in school classes here. If she listened
carefully, she could hear occasional shrieks of laughter mixed with the
gobble of Tinish packs.
So why did I enter the Lander? Oh yes. She’d spent a only few minutes
outside, looking through the casket windows at the faces of little ones
who still slept, who waited unknowing for there to be enough grownup
caregivers. Most of those revivals would be routine, but some of the

caskets tested as borderline defective. How could she save the kids in
those withered caskets? That had been the reason for today’s visit, to
review the results on Timor Ristling, her first attempt with the withered
caskets.
The Lander was originally Top-of-the-Beyond technology. Much of that
could not function down here in the Slow Zone; she’d never been able to
transfer the Lander’s maintenance records to the stable technology of her
own ship. She had to come onboard to access those records. Her gaze
slid uneasily around the Lander’s freight cabin. Too much had happened
in this green-walled room. The Lander wasn’t just Top of the Beyond. It
had been at the High Lab, in the Low Transcend, and it had been …
modified. If she looked up she would see some of that, the fungus
hanging from the ceiling. The magical Countermeasure. Nowadays, it
seemed to be as dead as a dusty cobweb, but Countermeasure had
dimmed the sun, and killed her dearest love, and maybe saved the
galaxy. The remains of the fungus bothered even the Straumer Children.
This was not a surprising place to have a really bad dream.
But now she remembered what she had been doing just before the crazy
dream overtook her. The last two days had been a nonstop guilt trip, with
far too little sleep. It was clear that she had screwed up Timor’s chances.
Not deliberately, not through incompetence. But I did pick him for the first
damaged-casket revival. The problem wasn’t the boy’s twisted leg, it
wasn’t the fact that he might not be quite as brilliant as the other children.
The problem was that in the tendays since his revival, Timor had not
grown.
Ravna Bergsndot was thousands of lightyears from reliable advice. Oobii
and this strange Lander were all she had. She remembered pounding on
the data for almost an hour, combining Timor’s casket records with
Oobii’s latest medical tests, and finally understanding what had gone
wrong. No one and no machine Down Here could have known that ahead
of time. In cold, cruel truth, Timor had turned out to be a very valuable …
experiment.
When she’d finally realized that, Ravna had put her head in her arms, too

tired to look for any more technical fixes and raging against the possibility
that she had become a player with other people’s lives.
So then I just fell asleep and had the nightmare? She stared at the
greenish bulkheads. She had been very tired, and totally beaten down.
Ravna sighed. She often had nightmares about the Blighter fleet, though
this was the most bizarre yet. A tip of the hat then to the subconscious
mind; it had dug up something that could distract her from Timor, if only
briefly.
She disconnected her tiara interface from the Lander, and climbed down
from the freight cabin. Three years ago, when Sjana and Arne Olsndot
had brought the Children here, this ground had been open meadow. She
stood for a moment by the spidery pylons, looking round the cool, dry
catacombs. Imagine a spacecraft with a castle built over it. Only in the
Slow Zone.
She would have to come back here again and again until all the Children
were revived—but she was grateful to be done with this place for today.
Up two flights of stairs and she would be in the castle yard, in the
summer sunlight. There would be the Children just leaving class, playing
with each other and with their Tinish friends. If she stayed to chat, she
would likely be in the new castle all afternoon. It might be the sunny
evening before she had to be back in her cabin aboard the Oobii. As she
started up the steps, she could imagine feeling light-hearted. She would
take some time off, just to play with the Children. Somehow she would
make things right for Timor.
She was still in the dark of the stairs when she remembered something
else about the dream. She paused, steadying herself with a hand against
the cool stonework. The mind in the fleet had said, “Rules change.” Yes,
if the Zone shifted and faster-than-light transport became possible again
—well, the Blight could arrive very soon indeed. It was a possibility she
obsessed upon both awake and in her dreams. She had zonographs
aboard the Oobii that monitored the relevant physical laws, had done so
since the Battle on Starship Hill. There had never been an alarm.
Still leaning against the wall, Ravna queried Out of Band II, requesting a

window on the zonograph. The graphic came up, a stupidly self-formatted
plot. Yes, there was the usual noise. Then she noticed the scaling. That
couldn’t be right! She slewed her gaze back five hundred seconds, and
saw that the trace had spiked. For almost ten milliseconds, Zone physics
had shot above the probe’s calibration, so high it might have been
Transcendent. Then she noticed the pulsing red border. It was the Zone
alarm she had so carefully set—the alarm she should have received at
the instant of the spike. Impossible, impossible. This had to be some sort
of screw-up. She rummaged in diagnostics, horror rising. Yes, there had
been a screw-up: she had only enabled the Zone alarm for when she was
local to Oobii. Why hadn’t ship logic caught that stupid error? She knew
the answer to that question. She’d explained it to the Children dozens of
time. The kids could not understand that when you scrape your knee, it
might be your own fault. We’re living in the Slow Zone. We have virtually
no automation, and what we have is painfully simple, devoid of common
sense. Down Here, if you wanted something done right, you had to
provide the good judgment yourself. The kids didn’t like that answer.
Where they came from, it was a far more alien idea than it was even for
Ravna Bergsndot.
She glared at the displays that hung in the dark all around her. This was
clearly a Zone alarm, but it could be a false alarm. It had to be! The spike
had been so brief, less than ten probe samples. An instrumental
transient. Yes. She turned and continued up the stairs, still searching
back and forth along the timeline’s trace, looking for evidence of an
innocuous explanation. There were a number of system diagnostics she
could run.
She thought about this for five more steps, making a turn from one flight
of stairs to the next. Up ahead she could see a square of daylight.
Since the Battle on Starship Hill, the Zone physics had been as solid as a
mountain’s roots … but that was a comparison with fatal consequence.
Earthquakes happen. Foreshocks happened. What she was seeing could
be a tiny, sudden slip in the foundation of the local universe. She looked
at the times on the Zone trace. The spike occurred about when she took

her odd little nap down in the Children’s Lander. So then. For almost one
hundredth of a second, maybe c had not been the ultimate speed, and
the Lander could have known the current state of the Blighter fleet. For
almost one hundredth of a second, Countermeasure could have
functioned.
And her dream was simply news.
Even so, she still didn’t know how much time they had left. It might be
just hours. But if it were years, or decades—then every moment must be
made to count. Somehow.
“Hei, Ravna!” came a childish shout from across the yard, in the direction
of the school. They would be around her in a moment.
I can’t do this. She half turned, retreating toward the stairway.
Nightmares can be the truth. It wasn’t just villains who had to make the
hard decisions.

Chapter   02
There was no school on the last day of every ten. Sometimes that
made the end of the tenday terribly boring to Timor Ristling. Other times,
Belle would show him some dank corner of the New Castle, or Ravna
Bergsndot would take him across the straits to Hidden Island.
Today was turning into the most entertaining kind of day, one where the
other kids let him come along on their projects.
“You’ll be the lookout, Timor,” Gannon had told him. Gannon Jorkenrud
had organized the expedition, and specifically invited Timor, even though
it meant they had to carry him part of the way down from Starship Hill.
Gannon and the others even helped Timor across the boulder field at the
base of the cliffs. Sea birds skirled all about.
The kids were right down on the seashore now, the cliffs towering behind
them. It was strange to be at eye level with the water. The froth of the
waves seemed to merge with the sea haze above, misting over the
buildings of Hidden Island just a couple of kilometers away. Here you
could see what was beneath the cliffs. You could see how “low tide” had
pulled back the water, leaving this field of slick rocks, a jumble of giants.
There wasn’t a single dry place; all this was underwater when the tide
was highest.
Belle pattered along beside and around Timor, grumbling as she often
did. “This dirty water is going to smudge my pelts.” Belle was all white.
This was quite rare among Tines—though one of her, the old male, might
have had black patches when he was younger.
“You didn’t have to come, crapheads,” said Gannon. He and Belle didn’t
get along.
Belle gave a hiss and a laugh at the same time. “Try and keep me away.

I haven’t been to a good shipwreck in years. How did you figure it was
going to come ashore here?”
“We’re humans. We’ve got our ways.”
Some of the other kids laughed. They were strung out, walking down a
narrow path between the rocks. One of them said, “Actually, Nevil saw it
on Oobii’s surveillance monitors when he was studying shipside. Ravna
and the packs know about the wreck, but they haven’t seen the latest
updates.”
“Yeah! Woodcarver’s packs are probably down at Cliffside harbor. We’ll
be first where stuff really happens.”
Walking down here, they still couldn’t see the wreck, just the water
crashing on the rocks. Ahead, a swarm of seabirds towered over one
particular spot. Timor felt an odd twinge of nostalgia. It still happened,
when there was something about this world that reminded him of before.
Those birds were so alien, but at the same time, their clustering was just
like construction swarms back home.
The water surged ankle deep now, soaking through Timor’s leather
shoes, gripping like icy hands. “Wait up, guys!”
“See, I told you walking in this was bad.” That was Belle, dancing around
in discomfort.
Gannon looked back. “What is it now?…” Then he shrugged. “Okay, this
is where we put you up on a rock.”
Gannon and some of the other kids came back and boosted Timor to a
ledge on the nearest monster boulder. Belle climbed two of herself over
the remaining three, and reached the same cleft in the rock.
“You can make it to the top from there, can’t you?” said Gannon.
Timor twisted around, trying to see beyond the slick curve of stone. He
really didn’t like to say he couldn’t do something. “Yeah, I can.”
“Okay. We’re gonna go on ahead. Heh. We’ll make friends with the
shipwrecked doggies. You crawl on up to the top of this rock. If you see
Woodcarver’s packs coming or Ravna Bergsndot, then have your pack

give us a shout. Got it?”
“Yup.”
Gannon and the others continued on their way. Timor watched them for a
moment, but only Øvin Verring turned to give him a little wave. Well,
these kids had gotten older than him; he shouldn’t be surprised they
didn’t include him in much. On the other hand, he was the lookout.
He slid along the ledge toward some obvious handholds. Below him,
Belle was poking around to find a way up for her bottom three. Oops,
there was a pair of sea birds perched above him. He remembered the
lectures about birds and nests. “Nests” were a little like autoform crèches
except without the safety overrides; those birds might come down and
peck at him if they thought he was after their replicates.
Fortunately, the birds contented themselves with loud cackling, then one
after the other they took off for the swarm that hovered over the water’s
edge. He noticed that that was in the same direction the kids had been
walking. Hei! He was almost at the top of the rock! He maneuvered
carefully across the slippery black stone, doing his best to avoid the bird
poop.
One of Belle’s heads poked up from the edge of the rock. “How about a
little help here?”
“Sorry.” He lay flat on the rock and reached down to the first one’s
forelegs. That was her one male, Ihm. By the time Timor had him pulled
up, Belle was able to help him with the rest of herself. She clambered to
the middle of the rock and sat on her feet, complaining all the while about
her frozen paws. He turned awkwardly around and finally got a glimpse of
the wreck. The raft was mostly still in the straits, but sliding meter by
meter toward the rocks.
Three of Belle hunkered down, listening. The others sat tall on either side
of Timor. He guessed those two were watching the wreck. In most ways,
Tinish vision was worse than humans’, but if they chose to spread out,
they had much better depth perception.
Belle said, “Can you hear the timbers breaking on the rocks?” And of

course Tinish hearing was lightyears better than the naked human ear.
“Maybe.” Timor looked at the front of the raft. Okay, rocks would break
wood, right? Especially if the rocks didn’t have avoidance systems. And
nothing had avoidance on this world. He saw how the timbers had split
down the middle. The two halves of the vehicle were sloping separately.
Surely that could not be part of its design.
He squinted, trying to make out the details. The raft was piled high with
barrels. And now he saw that there were lots of Tines, though they wore
brownish rags and were mostly hunkered down between the barrels.
Occasionally four or five of them stood together and tried to do something
with the rigging. Yes, they were trying desperately to keep their craft off
the rocks.
“They’re in trouble,” he said.
Belle made a hooting sound, a Tinish laugh. “Of course they’re in trouble.
Can’t you hear the ones in the water, screaming?”
Now that she mentioned it, he could see heads here and there in the
water. “This is terrible. Shouldn’t someone be trying to help?” Timor was
quite sure that Gannon and the other kids weren’t capable of providing
much help.
He felt Belle shrug. “If they hadn’t been swept so far north, or if they had
come at high tide, there’d be no problem.”
“But shouldn’t we help those packs in the water?”
One of Belle’s heads looked in his direction. “What packs? These are
Tropicals. The individual members are probably as smart as any northern
singleton, but they just don’t make packs except by accident. Look at that
raft! Junk made by mindless Tines. Sometimes the idiots get swept away
from their jungles and the ocean brings them up here. I say the more of
them that die along the way, the better.” She grumbled on the way she
often did, gossiping and complaining at the same time: “Our own war
veterans are bad enough, broken up bits of people. But at least we keep
them decently out of sight. These rabble coming in now have no call on
us. They’ll be idling around town, soiling the alleys, dumbhead singletons

and trios. Mangy, smelly, mindless thieves and beggars…”
The rest made even less sense. Belle was one of those packs who spoke
almost perfect Samnorsk, but sometimes part of her would rattle on even
after her main attention was elsewhere. Timor noticed that the pack was
intensely focused on the wreck, her long necks twitching back and forth.
She had been even more eager than Timor when Gannon Jorkenrud had
invited them to come along. He followed the center of her gaze. There
were barrels bobbing in the foaming surf.
“So if the Tropicals are such problem, why are you interested in the
wreck?”
“That’s the thing, boy. These shipwrecks have been going on since time
out of mind; I remember legends of them. Every few years, a crowd of
Tropical singletons gets washed ashore. They’re always a problem, the
ones who live. But the rafts usually have valuable junk on board, stuff we
normally don’t see, since the Tropics are so filled with disease and choirs
that no pack can survive there.”
She paused. “Hei, some of the barrels are on the rocks. I can hear them
breaking up.” Two of her scrambled to the edge of the rock. Her oldest
hung back, watching to keep them all oriented. “Okay, Timor, you stay
here. I’m going down to have a look.” Her two youngest were already
sliding and scrambling down, risking cuts and sprains in their eagerness.
“But wait!” shouted Timor. “We’re supposed to stand watch.”
“I can do that close up,” she said. “You stay up here.” Her two youngest
were out of sight now, hidden by the edge of the boulder. Two others
were helping old Ihm to negotiate the slippery rocks. She emitted a Tinish
chord that Timor recognized as evasive mumbling. “You be the overall
lookout, okay? Remember, Gannon is depending on you.”
“But—”
All of Belle was out of sight now. Of course, she could still hear him, but
she could be pretty good at ignoring him too.
Timor settled back on the middle of his rock. This was a good lookout

position, though with Belle gone, it would be just his voice to shout
directions. As best he could see in the sea haze, there were no rescue
boats coming across the straits from Hidden Island. Cliffside harbor to the
south was much closer, but the marina was a forest of unmoving spars
and masts. It really was up to Gannon and the other kids to help the
shipwrecked Tines.
He looked back to where the sea met the rocks. Here and there, he could
see Belle’s members. She had worked her way through several narrow
passages and was almost into the foam. She moved carefully, trying to
keep her paws out of the icy water; nevertheless she was within a few
meters of Tropicals who had fallen overboard. Could she help them?
Tines were wonderfully good swimmers; Ravna said that the Tines had
evolved from sea mammals. But watching Belle, Timor guessed that the
arctic waters were too cold for them.
Nevertheless, Belle had two of herself partway into the surf. The others
were tugging at the cloaks of the furthest out, keeping them from being
swept away. Maybe she could rescue a member or two. Then he noticed
that she was desperately reaching for a wooden barrel that was jammed
between half-submerged rocks. Some kind of green fabric peeked out of
breaks in the container.
“Oh, Belle,” Timor said to himself. He moved to the south side of his rock,
trying to get a better view. There! Gannon and the others had finally
reached the water. He could see most of them now. There were also a
couple of packs with them, but Gannon’s pals didn’t have much to do with
Tines. These packs looked pretty uncomfortable, huddling close among
themselves and complaining loudly enough that Timor could hear them
from fifty meters way. The Children didn’t look comfortable either. Their
pants were soaked; Øvin and the others were visibly shivering. Gannon
had climbed onto a little terrace, was waving to the others to follow him.
A big part of the raft was barely ten meters from the kids. It bobbed out
and in, sometimes getting so close to the terrace that Timor feared it
would ram the Children. This piece of raft had remnants of sails flying
from broken-looking masts. Timor hadn’t taken any sailing classes; those

were only for the older kids, the ones who wanted to be explorers and
diplomats. But these masts and sails weren’t the tidy, regular things he
saw in the Hidden Island harbor or at Cliffside. Unless these parts were
regenerating—and the Tines had no such technology—this raft system
was totally out of control. It probably had been ever since it ran into some
storm.
Belle continued to ignore everything except her barrel of treasure, but
Gannon and the other kids were shouting to the mob on the raft. The two
packs on the shore were shouting too. Timor couldn’t understand any of
it, but the noise from the Tropicals was loud. It didn’t sound much like
Interpack. Maybe it was some other Tinish language, or just frightened
screeching.
Timor couldn’t imagine what the kids could do to help. He looked again in
the direction of Cliffside harbor. Hei! Something was moving along the
curve of rocky beach. It looked like four or five packs hauling carts. And
way high above them—the antigravity skiff! It didn’t matter that it wasn’t a
human design and that it constantly teetered like a falling leaf. It was a
little bit of home.
The agrav descended along the cliffs, cautiously tipping around the
updrafts. It was coming down well ahead of the approaching packs, but
still short of Timor’s position. For a moment, Timor wondered why Pilgrim
—the only possible pilot—hadn’t brought it closer. Then the skiff tipped
over, scraping the rocks with its canopy. It flipped again and landed with
a crash. It crashed a lot lately. Fortunately the hull was stronger than
wood and harder than rock. The top hatch popped open and after a
second a human head appeared. No surprise, it was Johanna Olsndot;
she was almost always the passenger.
Timor turned back to give a shout to Gannon and the others. Help had
arrived!
Gannon Jorkenrud was teetering near the edge of his rocky terrace. The
big piece of raft had grounded just out of reach. Øvin Verring and some
of the kids were hanging back, but Gannon and others were throwing
things at the raft. They were shouting, or laughing, and throwing again

and again. They were throwing stones at the Tropicals.
Timor stood up and shouted, “Hei, you guys! Stop that!” No doubt his
words were lost in the wind, but his windmilling arms caught their
attention. Gannon gave him a wave, perhaps thinking Timor was warning
of discovery. The stone throwers backed away from the edge of the
water. Timor slipped on the rock, landing hard in one of the puddles that
pocked the surface.
So he’d probably earned Gannon’s good will. That had been awfully
important to him, but it seemed kind of ugly now.
•  •  •
The Year Two shipwreck was the first since the Children had come to
Tines World. Johanna Olsndot was just sixteen, yet she managed to
establish her Bad Girl reputation in the aftermath of the wreck—a
remarkable achievement considering that other kids misbehaved for
years without getting so labeled.
Pilgrim Wickllrrackscar had heard there was a shipwreck, and the two of
them had flown down to help out. Certainly that was not Bad Girl
behavior. They bounced to ground well ahead of Woodcarver’s shore
patrol. Johanna was out the hatch and running toward the wreckage even
before Pilgrim had the agrav locked down. Behind her, the flyer rose
briefly back into the air, and fell again. She paid that scant attention. The
Tropicals’ raft had already broken on the rocks.
She saw that other rescuers were already here, an unlikely crowd of
Children led by Gannon Jorkenrud. And—well, by damn!—they were
throwing rocks at the drowning Tines! Johanna skirted the boulders,
splashing through the icy water of the Inner Straits, shouting and
swearing at Gannon’s gang.
The group had already retreated from their position on the rocks. They

were busy disappearing in the direction of the cliff path. All of them were
younger than Johanna and none quite as tall. Besides, Johanna was the
one with the reputation for temper and she was the only Child who had
actually fought in the Battle on Starship Hill.
Johanna took one long look around the blocky talus, searching for any
other wrongdoers. There, one more Child, very small. It was Timor
Ristling, awkwardly scrambling down from a rock, helped by Belle
Ornrikakihm. Now there was a sneaky pack of beasties. Then Timor and
Belle were out of sight, too, and the thought flitted from her mind. Pilgrim
had come down from the agrav. All five of him was trying to drag her out
of the ankle-deep water.
“Hei, what’s the problem?” protested Johanna. “The water’s still enough.”
It was bone-chilling cold, but here behind the rocks, the sea was tamed
into a gently swirling pond.
Pilgrim led her along the gravel, a meter or so back from the water. “It’s
not all that shallow. There are holes and dropoffs. You get confident, walk
about, and things can get very bad, very fast.” For a death-defying pilgrim
he could be a wuss. But to be honest … just four or five meters from
where they were standing, there was already white foam spinning up
from the water. Standing at the level of the sea, the surface of the water
was almost indistinct, the churn of sea mist transforming the daylight into
murk.
The shore patrol had arrived. The five packs were already working with
ropes to slide the biggest parts of the raft away from the grinding rocks.
Out on the wreckage, dozens of Tines were perched on piles of junk.
These were the first Tropicals Johanna had ever seen. They were every
bit as strange as the locals claimed. The foreigners didn’t cluster into
packs. They were like a mob of singletons, doing whatever they pleased.
Some of them cooperated to pull on the ropes thrown to them; others
cowered in terror. She looked across the misty water. Here and there,
she saw a head, or a single Tine lying across a bit of broken timber.
Dozens of the creatures had been swept overboard.

Johanna reached out to the nearest of Pilgrim. It was Scarbutt, still the
largest of the pack. “Look there! Those ones in the water are going to
drown! We should go after them first.”
Pilgrim gave a general nod of agreement. “Not sure that can be helped.”
“Hei, it sure as hell can be helped!” Johanna pointed at the coils of
rescue rope that the shore patrol packs had brought. “Grab those ropes!
Get the shore patrol to do the important stuff first!”
Pilgrim was normally a very forward fellow. Now he hung back for a
second, then ran along behind the shore patrol packs, gobbling loudly.
Even after three years of listening to Interpack, Johanna found the
language mostly unintelligible. The words got stacked up in chords, some
them too high pitched to hear. By the time you got the sounds separated
out, you were trying to make sense of the next chord. Just now, Pilgrim
was shouting some kind of demand. The sounds of “Woodcarver” popped
up several times. Okay, so he was invoking higher authority.
Two of the shore patrol packs left their posts and helped Pilgrim drag
unused loops of rope away from the rocks. More packs were running
toward them from Cliffside harbor. These didn’t look like shore patrol.
Most of them avoided Johanna and Pilgrim. Like the rest, they seemed
mostly interested in the raft. Well, there were more lives at stake there,
but the ones who needed immediate help were out in the water. In all,
only three packs—counting Pilgrim—were now working to save them.
Over and over again, the packs would whirl about, tossing floater-tipped
ropes out into the sea. The struggling singletons leaped from the water,
desperately reaching. They looked almost like seamals when they moved
like that. In warmer, quieter water they would have been quite safe. Here,
the rescue ropes were essential; when a singleton managed to snatch a
throw, it was quickly dragged into a stretch of flat pebbly beach. Johanna
and the others managed to save a dozen of the swimmers, but there had
been at least thirty heads out there before. The others must have been
lost to the cold or been swept further north.
Meantime, the rest of the packs had dragged in what remained of the raft.
The Tropicals on board came streaming off as the shore patrol and local

citizens climbed on the junk heaps and began rooting around. Johanna
belatedly realized that the main purpose of the “rescue” was to get at the
wreck’s cargo.
There were no more survivors visible in the straits. Except for Pilgrim, the
packs who had been helping with the rescue tosses had joined the other
salvage maniacs. Along the flat stretch of beach, the surviving Tropicals
were clumped together in shivering groups. The smallest of those was at
least twenty Tines. These weren’t packs; they were just singletons
hunkered together for warmth.
Johanna walked to the edge of the crowd, listening for Interpack speech.
There was nothing that she recognized. After all, there were no real
packs here. She could feel an occasional buzzing sensation, though;
these creatures were not silent in the range that the packs called
mindsound—about forty to two hundred fifty kilohertz.
Pilgrim was pacing her progress, but staying fifteen meters or more away
from the nearest of the Tropicals. “You’re not too popular right now,” he
said.
“Me?” replied Johanna, keeping her eyes on the strange mob. Scarcely
any of them had clothing, but their pelts were just as mangy as the
stories had claimed. Some of the creatures were almost hairless except
down near their paws. “We saved these fellows.”
“Oh, they aren’t the ones you’re unpopular with,” said Pilgrim. Johanna
drifted a little nearer the mob. Now there were dozens of heads following
her, jaws snapping nervously. Pilgrim continued, “Hei, I didn’t say the
Tropicals like you either! I’ll wager that none of them realize you helped
save them.”
Necks lunged in her direction, and one or two of the critters tumbled
down from atop the others. For a moment, she thought this was an
attack, but when the Tines reached the ground, they just looked startled.
Johanna backed away a step or two. “Yes, I see what you mean. These
are like battle fragments. They’re scared and mindless.” And they could
go into attack mode if something spooked them.

“That’s about right,” said Pilgrim. “But keep in mind that these fellows are
not the remains of packs. Most likely they have never been part of a
coherent pack. Their mindsound is just a pointless choir.”
Johanna continued along the edge of the mob. There was a certain
distance the crowd seemed comfortable with. If she got inside that, they
would begin to come at her. Pilgrim was right. These weren’t like war
casualties. Battle fragments she had known longed to be part of coherent
packs. They would react with friendliness toward Pilgrim, trying to entice
him close. If they had known humans before they were damaged, they
would be quite friendly to her. “So what’s going to happen to them?” she
said.
“Ah well, that’s why you’re a bit unpopular with the shore patrol. You
know we get a shipwreck like this every few years. The cargo is mostly
junk, not the sort of things you’d find if serious trade were intended.”
Johanna looked across the misty beach. There really weren’t enough
shore patrol packs to contain the rescuees. The Tropicals wobbled
around weakly and most seemed intimidated by the coherent packs, but
there was a steady trickle of mangy seafarers who took advantage of the
gaps in the shore patrol cordon and ran off along the beach. When a
pack pursued, then there was a concerted rush by five or ten of the other
refugees. Not everyone could be corralled and brought back. She looked
at Pilgrim, “So the patrol would prefer that more of them had drowned?”
Pilgrim cocked a couple of heads at Johanna. “Just so.” He might be
consort to a Queen of the Realm, but he was not the least bit diplomatic.
“Woodcarver has enough trouble with local fragments. These will just be
trouble.”
Inside herself, Johanna felt something colder than the water. The packs’
treatment of fragments was her most unfavorite thing about Tines World.
“So what happens to them, then? If anyone tries to force them back into
the sea—” Her voice rose, along with her temper. Ravna Bergsndot
would not put up with that, Johanna was sure. Not if Johanna got to her
in time. She turned and began walking quickly back to the agrav flier.

All of Pilgrim turned about and trotted along beside her. “No, don’t worry
about that happening. In fact, Woodcarver has a longstanding decree
that any survivors be allowed the run of Cliffside village. These patrol
packs are waiting for reinforcements, to chivvy the mob into town.”
About a third of the seafarers had already disappeared, trotting off as
singletons and duos. They might do better than the fragments Johanna
was used to. Frags of coherent packs were generally anxious mental
cripples; many starved to death even if they were basically healthy.
Elderly singletons, the castoffs, lasted only a short time. Johanna didn’t
slow down. An idea was percolating up.…
“You’re planning something crazy, aren’t you?” said Pilgrim. Sometimes
he claimed he stayed with her because in a year she did as many weird
things as he would see in ten anywhere else. Pilgrim really was a pilgrim,
so that was an extreme claim indeed. His memories went back centuries,
hazing off into unreliable history and myth. Few packs had traveled their
world so much, or seen so much. The price of the adventuring was that
Pilgrim was more a surviving point of view than an enduring mind. It was
Johanna’s great good fortune that that point of view was currently
embodied in someone whose attitudes were so basically decent. Of all
the Tines in the world, Pilgrim and Scriber had been the first she’d
known. That bit of luck had saved her. Ultimately, it had saved all the
remaining Children.
“You’re not going to tell me your plan, eh?” said Pilgrim. “But I bet you
want me to fly you someplace.” That was not a difficult thing to guess,
considering that Johanna was still walking toward the flier, which was
parked—crashed—at the base of a cliff so steep and smooth that no
pack or unaided human could hope to climb it.
Pilgrim ran around in front of her, now leading the way. “Okay, then. But
keep in mind. The Tropicals can’t live here very well. The packs they
make are loose, even when they try to form them.”
“So you’ve lived in the Tropical Choir?” That was something that Pilgrim
had never quite claimed.

Pilgrim hesitated. “Well, for a time I lived on the fringes—you know, in the
Tropical collectives. The true Choir of the deep jungles would be very
quickly fatal for a coherent pack. Can you imagine being surround by
such mobs, no one caring to keep a decent distance? Thought is
impossible … though I suppose if the stories of nonstop orgies are true, it
might be a happy way to dissolve oneself. No, I just meant that these
shipwrecks have happened before. We’ll have a year or two of nuisance,
far more singletons wandering around than normal old age and accidents
would account for—more even than after the war with Steel and Flenser.
But eventually the problem will take care of itself.”
“I’ll bet.” They were walking between house-sized boulders now,
scrambling over lesser rocks that had fallen in between. This was not the
safest place to promenade. All those rocks had come from somewhere
above them. Sometimes after a spring thaw you’d see the rocky
avalanches adding to the talus. At the moment, that was just a passing
thought in the back of Johanna’s mind, another reason to fly away from
here. “So after a year or two, these poor animals are mostly dead and
Woodcarver’s folk have solved the problem?”
“Oh no, nothing like that. Or almost nothing like that. Over the centuries,
Woodcarver and her people learned that if they waited till a good chill
autumn and a surface current that was mainly southerly, you could get rid
of most of the survivors in an almost friendly way: just repair their rafts or
make new ones. After all, it’s not that hard to make junkwork like that out
of the flotsam that is always rolling in.”
“You mean the surviving Tropicals can just be led aboard and put out to
sea?”
“Not quite, though sometimes that’s enough. What the Old Woodcarver
learned was that the Tropicals are like jaybirds. They like shiny things.
They like firemakers—which doesn’t make sense since those go bad so
fast in humid weather. They like all sorts of silly things. And long ago,
folks around here figured what those things were. So pile the trinkets up
on the rafts. Put some food aboard—and if the tide is right you can coax
the remaining Tropicals aboard. Then just push them out into the

southerly stream. Hei, problem solved!”
Johanna reached for the smooth silvery metal of the agrav flier. Her
touch caused the side hatch to flip upwards, and a ramp to slide out. The
craft had been designed for wheeled creatures. Entrance was easy for
the likes of humans or Tines. She climbed aboard and settled into her
usual slot (which was not so well designed for the human form).
Pilgrim came scrambling over the rocks, and one after another padded
up the ramp. “It’s not as if they are whole people, Johanna. You know
that.”
“You of all people don’t really believe that, do you, Pilgrim?”
The fivesome was busy seating himself all around the flight cabin. The
agrav’s user interface might have been flexible in the Beyond, but down
here in the Slow Zone, it defaulted to the form most fit for its original
owners. Those had been Skroderiders. There might not be a single one
alive on the whole planet. Too bad, since that default user interface had
the flight controls scattered around the periphery of the cabin. Maybe a
human crew could have flown the agrav—if that crew had trained their
whole lives for the instabilities of the flight system. A pack, on the other
hand, if it were as practiced and crazy as Pilgrim, could fly the thing, but
just barely.
As the door closed and Pilgrim busied himself resetting the boat’s agrav
fabric, part of him looked around at her, considering her last question. He
made his human voice a little bit sad sounding, “No, they’re more than
animals, Johanna. My love Woodcarver might say that they’re also less,
but you know I don’t believe that. I’ve been in pieces often enough
myself.” He pushed at one of the dozens of control holes set in the
console. The agrav lifted up on the left side, then on the right. They slid
sideways, smacking into the cliff face. He corrected, and the boat sagged
left, coasting away from the cliff but bouncing against the largest of the
rocks below. By then Pilgrim had the rhythm, and the boat fluttered
upward, only occasionally scraping the cliff. Two years ago, after it
became apparent that someone like Pilgrim was needed to fly the boat,
Pilgrim had made a hobby of scaring the pee out of his passengers.

Partly that was pilgrim humor and partly it was to give him an excuse to
fly wherever he pleased. Johanna had been on to his game even if
Ravna was fooled. She had called him out on the issue, and she was
pretty sure that nowadays when the boat behaved insanely it wasn’t
Pilgrim messing around. The problem was that the agrav fabric was
weakening and becoming less rational. More and more, the best
performing parts of the fabric were salvage from Oobii. Pilgrim was
forced to constantly relearn the boat’s flight characteristics. He didn’t
have time for his old hoaxing around.
The skiff slid down five meters, but well away from the cliff. It was twenty
meters above the rocks now, with enough clearance all around so that its
wobbling was not a concern. This was really not a bad takeoff at all.
As they drifted generally upward, most of Pilgrim turned to look at her. “I
forgot to ask. Where is it you want to go?”
“We’re going to get these sailors a decent home,” Johanna replied.
•  •  •
Woodcarver’s Fragmentarium was perched in the lower walls of the
Margrum Valley, not far above Cliffside harbor, where the Tropicals were
being herded. Pilgrim’s flight path was more or less straight toward the
Fragmentarium. That is, it wobbled in all directions, but the average was
straight. At higher altitudes he could have risked supersonic speeds, but
for short little hops like this, a running pack might outpace him.
Though the boat looked like silver metal from the outside, Pilgrim kept the
hull transparent for those within. The view remained surprisingly bad. The
scavenged agrav fabric was stubbornly opaque, a patchwork of russet
scraps. In some places the repair work was so extensive that it looked
like a Tinish muffling quilt sewn together by a crazypack. It was that
pattern of obstacles that determined Johanna’s favorite perch. Her seat

really wasn’t a seat—she had to lean forward to clear the ceiling—and
the safety harness was ad hoc. On the other hand, she had a good view
straight down.
They were just passing over the Children she had seen down by the
shipwreck. Five boys and two girls. From this altitude she could
recognize every one. Yeah, these were the ones. Johanna shook her
head, muttering to herself. “You see that?” she said to Pilgrim.
“Of course I see.” Pilgrim had three snouts pressed close to one clear
spot or another. He had no trouble seeing in multiple directions. “What’s
to see?”
“The Children. They were throwing stones at drowning Tines.” She
checked off the names in her mind, vowing to remember. “Øvin Verring. I
never dreamed he would do something like that.” Øvin had been exactly
her age. They’d been evenly matched at school, and friends in a non-
romantic way.
The skiff performed a tooth-rattling dip and bounce. Johanna had learned
to keep her tongue from between her teeth when she rode this gadget.
Nowadays she barely noticed the acrobatics, except when they were
close to hard objects.
Pilgrim recovered control; he didn’t seem to notice the bouncing either.
“To be honest, Jo, I don’t think Verring was throwing stones. He was
hanging back.”
“So? He should have stopped the others…” They passed over another
Child, this one smaller, falling behind the others. A fivesome was walking
with the boy. It was one of only three packs that seemed mixed up with
these delinquents. “See? Even little Timor Ristling was down there
messing around. He was acting as lookout for the others!” Timor was a
cripple now. He had been healthy enough at the High Lab, but even then
she had pitied him. He’d been about her brother’s age, but he came from
a family of low-level integrators, far beneath the brilliant scientists and
archeologists who were reanimating the old archive. The closest analogy
on Tines World would be to say Timor’s folks were janitors, sweeping up

the glittering trash that more gifted folks left behind. The boy had never
done well in his school classes; he just didn’t have a mind for
technological thinking. You’d think all that bad fortune would make him
more kindly disposed to those poor souls on the shipwreck. Hmm. “I’ll bet
it’s that pack he’s hanging out with.” The pale fivesome was clustered
around him. Belle Ornrikakihm was a grifting wannabe politician out of
Woodcarver’s pre-human empire. It was a shame she’d gotten her claws
into Timor. The boy deserved a better Best Friend, but he was old
enough to refuse mentoring.
Their agrav skiff had pulled ahead of the cluster of humans. She could
see back now, almost into the faces of the kids at the front. Yeah, there
was Gannon Jorkenrud, waving and joking to his pals. Jerkwad. Back at
the High Lab, Gannon had been one year older than Johanna. He’d
skipped grades, had been at the point of graduating from their little
school. Gannon was a flaming genius, even more talented than Jo’s little
brother. At age fourteen, Gannon was as much a master of anguille
borkning as any of the research staff. Everybody agreed that someday he
would be the best borkner in all Straumli Realm. Down Here, Jerkwad’s
talent was good for nothing.
The agrav wobbled higher, flying a little faster. Below them were more
shore patrol packs and ordinary citizens, walking north from Cliffside
village, probably headed for the shipwreck. There were even a few
humans. One of them was running.
“Hei, that’s Nevil down there,” Johanna said.
“He was throwing rocks?” Pilgrim sounded surprised.
“No, no, he’s coming from Cliffside.” Nevil Storherte was the oldest of the
Children. Certainly he was the most sensible. At the High Lab, Johanna
had had such a crush on him, but necessarily from a distance. He
probably didn’t even know she existed back then. She’d been barely a
teenager and he’d been almost ready to graduate. A year or two more
and he might have been one of the Straumer researchers. His parents
had been the Lab’s chief administrators, and Nevil—even when so young
—had had a natural aptitude for diplomacy.

Somehow he had learned that Gannon and the others were coming down
here. He hadn’t been in time to stop them, but she could see that he
wasn’t running to be first to the shipwreck. He had turned inland, heading
for the cluster of Children. As he approached he slowed to a walk, waving
to Gannon and the others, no doubt giving them a proper chewing out.
She leaned down further, trying for a clear view. The sea mists had been
driven inland and the kids were almost out of sight, but she could see that
Nevil had stopped all the miscreants and was even waiting for Timor and
Belle to catch up. He looked up and waved to her. Thanks, Nevil. She
wouldn’t have to feel bad that she hadn’t hung around herself.
Johanna leaned back and looked out the south-facing side of the flier.
Though they were half hidden by sea mists, she could see Cliffside
village and its little harbor, right down at the mouth of the Margrum River.
The agrav climbed into a cloudless day of late summer, and she could
see forever. The “U” of the glacier-carved Margrum Valley stretched
inland, green lowlands rising to stony bluffs and the patches of high snow
that lasted all the way through the summer. Historically, the Margrum had
separated Flenser’s domain from Woodcarver’s. The Battle on Starship
Hill had changed all that.
Woodcarver’s Fragmentarium was ahead, just above the mists. The
Fragmentarium had started out as a temporary war hospital,
Woodcarver’s effort to honor the packs who’d suffered in support of her.
The place had grown into something much more. Pilgrim claimed there
had never been such a thing in this part of the world before. Certainly,
there were plenty of packs who still did not understand its purpose.
The buildings sat on a small tableland in the side of the valley. Fences
followed along the edge of the flat space, taller than any Tinish farmer
would ever build. The buildings within were crammed together, leaving as
much open space as possible for exercise and play. Woodcarver joked
that it was actually to give enough space for Pilgrim to make a safe
landing. Considering how often Johanna and Pilgrim came here, that was
a good thing.
As they came fluttering downwards, she noticed that among the Tines

drifting around the exercise yard there were some who looked
suspiciously mangy. How had they gotten past the fence? She realized
that she might not be the first person bringing word of the shipwreck. She
began revising her sales pitch accordingly.

Three years after the
Battle on Starship Hill

Chapter   03
Usually, Johanna was mobbed by whatever singletons were out in the
exercise area. Today a few of the more articulate called out to her, but
most of the patients seemed more interested in the Tropical visitors.
None of the place’s keepers—the broodkenners—were in evidence.
Johanna and Pilgrim left the exercise field and walked past buildings that
Ravna Bergsndot called the “old folks’ home.” Pack members rarely lived
longer than forty years. These buildings housed Tines that were too aged
to live and work with their packs. The rest of theirselves would visit, in
some cases stay for days at a time, especially if the old ones had been
some special intellectual or emotional part of the pack. For Johanna, it
was the saddest part of the Fragmentarium, since without decent
technology none of these fragments would get any better. The rest of
theirselves would visit more and more rarely, eventually incorporating
younger members, and not coming at all.
Here and there a head raised to watch her. Some of the visiting packs—
the ones who valued their old selves enough to be united—honked
greetings and even whole sentences of Samnorsk. There were grateful
folk here, but all in all it was too much like the dark ages of human
prehistory, like what we Children ourselves must face Down Here.
The broodkenners’ office was at the upslope end of the encampment,
beyond the exercise field and the barracks for able-bodied fragments.
There was one more shortcut they could take, but Johanna and Pilgrim
stayed well away from the war criminals’ compound. That was an
institution that many Tinish kingdoms supported, though usually it was a
public pillory where partially executed enemies of the state could be put
on display. Woodcarver had never been such a sadist. Pilgrim often
assured Jo that the Children were fortunate to have fallen in with the

kindliest despot in the world. Since Flenser was rehabilitated and
Vendacious had escaped, there was only one war criminal left in the
Domain, and that was Flenser’s monster, Lord Steel. The original Steel
had been cut down to three members. His remnant had a prison cell with
its own little exercise yard. She hadn’t seen that fragment in two years.
She knew her brother came here occasionally to talk to the threesome,
but then Jefri and Amdi had personal issues with Steel. She hoped the
visits were not meant to taunt the creature. Steel was thoroughly mad,
surviving in a weird tug of war between Woodcarver’s caution and
Flenser’s demand that the remnant not be destroyed. Today she heard
shrieks of rage coming from the prison compound, demands to be
released. The Remnant Steel knew something was going on, and
apparently there was no keeper to let it out into its exercise yard.
“So where are the broodkenners?” said Johanna. Not even Carenfret was
around, and she was obsessively dutiful.
“Harmony’s here. I can hear him talking.” Pilgrim jabbed a snout toward
the admin office.
“He’s here?” Damn. Harmony was the chief broodkenner, a pack of the
old school and a real jerk. Now she could hear Tinish gobbling ahead. It
was loud enough; she’d mistaken it for the usual random shouting that
came from the patients’ barracks. Yes, the pack was talking on the
telephone. That was probably a good thing, since Harmony’s judgment
could only benefit from outside advice. She lifted the high bar on an inner
gate and let herself and Pilgrim through. The admin building was actually
a dorm for the overnight broodkenners, most often Carenfret. It was big
enough for two or three packs, but right now there seemed to be just the
one voice within. The front door was open. She bent low and awkwardly
waddled indoors, preceded and followed by Pilgrim.
Harmony was way in the back, in his official office. That wasn’t as large
as Harmony would probably like, but it was the room with the telephone,
and the Chief Broodkenner had claimed it his first day on the job.
Johanna was pleased that no one had ever told him how easy it would be
to wire the phone into a different room. She wasn’t the only one who

thought ill of this pack.
Harmony was just racking the phone when Pilgrim and Johanna stuck
heads into his room. “Well, well,” he said, sounding cordial. “Here is the
source of so many of my problems.” He gestured at the floor in front of
his desk. “Do please have a seat, Johanna.”
Jo settled herself on the floor. Now she had to look up to see Harmony’s
heads. Well, it beat standing stooped over to avoid the ceiling beams.
Pilgrim settled himself in the hall, with just one head poked around the
door. He could participate in the discussion without his mindsound
interfering too much.
Johanna had put together a little speech, but this phone call might
change things. “So,” she said, winging it, “you’ve heard about the
shipwreck.”
“Of course. I just finished discussing the matter with the Tinish Queen
Herself.”
“Oh.” So what did Woodcarver say? Harmony looked too self-satisfied for
it to be anything good. “There are almost two hundred surviving
Tropicals, sir. Pilgrim tells me that’s substantially more than in the
average South Sea wreck.”
Harmony gave an irritated little ripple of his heads. “Yes. I understand
you are largely responsible for this problem.”
“Well, I helped too,” Pilgrim put in cheerily.
Harmony waved a dismissive snout at Pilgrim. The Chief Broodkenner
always tried to ignore Pilgrim. The two packs were about as different as
packs could be, one as tightly held as a human’s clenched fist, the other
so loose that sometimes it seemed to dissolve into lesser parts.
Unfortunately for Harmony, Pilgrim was the queen’s consort, had been
for more than two years. Part of the queen herself was now from Pilgrim.
Harmony was far too cautious to say anything reportable against him. All
his heads turned back in Johanna’s direction: “No doubt you’re
wondering where my assistants are this afternoon.” He meant the other
broodkenners, most of whom were very nice people.

“Well, yes.”
“You’re the reason for their absence. That’s what I was just discussing
with the Queen. It’s bad enough that you’ve transformed this shipwreck
from a commonplace opportunity into a serious inconvenience. But it’s
inexcusable that you directed them to come here for refuge.”
“What? I did no such thing.”
Pilgrim said. “Hei, I was there, Broodkenner. Of course, Johanna did no
such thing. I doubt if any of the Tropicals knows a word of Samnorsk.”
Harmony all came to his feet, his various members adjusting the trim red
jackets of his uniform. Two of him came partway over his desk, gesturing
emphatically at Johanna. “Forgive me then. This is simply what I would
expect of you. It’s what my assistants thought too. Every one them is
downhill from the broodkennery right now, holding off the onslaught of
Tropical riffraff. We all speculated just who put the creatures up to this.”
Johanna crossed her arms and leaned forward. She knew that the main
body of the mob was still on the beach being herded toward Cliffside
village by the shore patrol. There couldn’t be more than thirty or forty who
had slipped free—and those would be wandering across the hillsides. As
for the idea that she had suggested the Tropicals come here: well, bunk.
Harmony had done this sort of thing to her in the past, making wild
accusations that turned out to be exactly what she was about to suggest.
This time she refused to be disarmed. “Sir, if your staff thought I directed
the Tropicals here, maybe that’s because it’s a good idea. The Tropicals
are creatures just like your own members, just like the singletons whom
we help here at the Fragmentarium.”
“Here at the broodkennery,” Harmony corrected. Broodkenning was an
essential part of Tinish civilization, a cross between marriage counsellor,
animal breeder, and reconstructive surgeon. Johanna respected most
broodkenners, even hardclawed ones who couldn’t stand the sight of her.
It took real skill to properly recommend which puppies should go with
which packs or whether a whole new pack should be made. It took even
greater talent to create well-functioning packs from adult singletons and

duos. Some of the local broodkenners were geniuses at their craft.
Harmony Redjackets wasn’t one of them. He was an East Coast expert
who had somehow flimflammed Woodcarver when she was in the dumps
for having lost two of her oldest members. The redjackets of the East
took a harsher attitude toward individual members than most packs out
here. In a way, they were like the Old Flenserists—though she would
never suggest that straight out to Woodcarver.
“That’s the fundamental problem with your meddling,” continued
Harmony. “Your notion of fragments as patients. I can understand it. It’s
based on the fundamental human weakness. You simply can’t help it.”
Johanna almost interrupted with a sneering comment. If we Children
weren’t lost in this pre-tech wilderness, we could replace any part of our
bodies, and easier than you, Mr. Harmony, can imagine. Unfortunately,
that might tend to support Harmony’s main point. At a loss for a cutting
response, Johanna let the other’s argument roll on.
“We packs can choose what we are. We can live beyond our members of
the moment and always be the best that can be.”
At least Pilgrim had a reply: “I’ve been around long enough to know that’s
not always true.”
“Loose pack that you are,” said Harmony.
“Ah, true. But a loose pack who has the ear of the Queen. So tell me,
Harmony, you’re just going to turn away the mob that came ashore this
morning?”
“Yes.” The redjackets was smiling.
“There’s more of them than usual,” said Pilgrim. “As a Choir, they’re a
loud nuisance. As singletons and duos they’ll soon be drifting around our
towns, making an even bigger nuisance of themselves. Neither villagers
nor merchants will approve. And I know Woodcarver would not approve
killing them.”
Harmony was still grinning. “That would not be such a problem if you two
had only let nature take its course with the superfluous ones.” He

shrugged. “No one is talking about killing the survivors. I’m quite aware
that eventually the remnants will sail away with what trinket garbage we
provide. Woodcarver has told me that it happens every few decades.” He
gave a pointed and unanimous look in Pilgrim’s direction. “You are not
the only one with the ear of the Queen.” He waved at the telephone.
“Marvelous instrument, this. Certainly the best toy you two-legs have
brought to civilization.”
Damn, fumed Johanna. I could have called both Woodcarver and Ravna
during the flight up here. Instead I just wasted my time fuming.
But Harmony was still talking. “The Queen and I agreed it would be
absurd to cram more bodies into the Royal Broodkennery. Without
extensive enlargement, there is simply not enough room. More important,
housing a Choir of Tropicals is quite the opposite of the purpose of this
institution.” He paused, as if inviting Johanna or Pilgrim to object. “But
you need not worry about them burdening the alleys and markets of
Newcastle town or Hidden Island. I’ve suggested an alternate option to
Her Majesty, and she has enthusiastically blessed it. The Tropicals will
be guided to a new enclave, built specially for them.”
“A second Fragmentarium?” asked Pilgrim.
“Not at all. This will be at the south edge of Starship Hill, far from all the
places where such creatures can make trouble. It will need no staff, since
it’s for containment, not treatment.”
“So, a prison camp?”
“No. An embassy! The Tropicals’ Embassy. Sometimes absurdity is the
best solution.” Honking laughter backed up Harmony’s words. Tines
could do that, provide their own audio accompaniment. Mostly it was
cute, but then there was Harmony Redjackets. “Of course, there will be
some fences needed, and in the early days guarding the exterior will be
good practice for all those soldier packs the Queen keeps on payroll. But
the compound will include a little farmland, enough for hardicore grass
and a yam garden. We all know that Tropicals don’t like meat.”
Johanna glared back at the pack. Tines were omnivores, but they all

loved meat. The only vegetarians among them were the very poor.
Harmony had definitely won the argument if that was all the comeback
she had. She glanced at Pilgrim. “Well, then,” she finally replied, “I
suppose that’s a solution.”
In fact,” said Pilgrim, “it might even be a good solution, depending on the
details. You have to realize, this situation could go on for several years.
I’m not sure that—”
“And that,” interrupted Harmony, “is, thank goodness, not my problem.
You can take your concerns about the future to the Queen, as I’m sure
you will continue to do.”
“Um, yes,” Pilgrim replied.
Behind her, Johanna could feel one of Pilgrim pulling gently at her
waistband, telling her it was time for an orderly retreat. Pilgrim was afraid
she would try to get the last word. He knew her too well. Okay, this time
she would prove Pilgrim wrong. She came to her feet, careful not to crack
her head on the ceiling. “Well then, Sir Harmony. Thank you so much for
solving this problem in such a timely and, um, graceful way.” See, I can
be diplomatic. She bent a little more, but it wasn’t a bow; she was just
trying to back out of the office.
Harmony made a little “don’t go yet” gesture. “You know, I had an
excellent chat with Her Majesty. I think that she and I have come to think
very much alike on issues of probity and public health. After all,
broodkenning is one of the foundations of a happy nation. I think we in
the East understand that much better than most people here. The
reaction against Flenser’s excesses was bad enough. You humans have
added your own confused ethics to the mess.”
“Yes, I’m sure,” said Johanna, waving a gesture she was fairly certain
Harmony would not recognize. She really had to get away from this guy.
Unfortunately, Harmony was the kind who liked to rub it in. Or maybe he
thought that the time to press ahead is when you’ve already scored some
points. “You should understand, Johanna, that your crazy influence on
the Royal Broodkennery is coming to an end. We simply don’t have the

resources for your notion of a Fragmentarium.”
That got her attention. “You’re giving up on the war veterans, the
accident victims?” She took a step back in Harmony’s direction, pulling
against Pilgrim’s jaws.
Harmony seemed oblivious to her tone. “No, not that. The Queen is quite
explicit. Though the odds are against success, and merges of adult
fragments are often ineffectual packs, even so we owe the veterans our
best efforts. It’s the foolishness that has to go. Pack members get old,
they get incurably ill, and they die. I’m sorry, I have to say it. Despite all
your wishful thinking, members die. It’s not our job at the broodkennery to
prolong that process—and we simply do not have the resources to do
so.”
“But the old ones die in any case, Harmony. Why should you care that
their last year or two is pleasant?”
The redjackets shrugged. “That’s why, when I first came to this job, I
thought your foolish ideas were harmless. But have you noticed? Your
unhealthful approach has just encouraged normal packs to linger over
their dying parts. We have more and more of these sick and unproductive
parts here. They aren’t getting any better. We agree, they never will get
better. But they are filling up our floorspace, taking away from the cases
—including those adult singletons you so seem to love—that we could
save. Someone has to make the hard decisions. There needs to be a
thinning.”
Pilgrim stuck a head back into the room. “You may have trouble justifying
your ‘hard decisions’ to soft-hearted western packs who want to carry on
with their oldest members.”
Harmony steepled a couple of his heads judiciously. “It will ultimately be
the choice of the packs involved. We’ll simply tell them our assessment of
their weaknesses and point out that we no longer have the resources to
care for their morbid members. They’ll be free to let us deal with them—
or they can take that responsibility themselves, as decent packs have
always done.” Traditionally, that meant that when a member could no

longer keep up with normal hunting, well, it would fall behind. In fact, “to
fall behind” was the Interpack euphemism for member death.
“And the ones you take care of, how do you kill them, hmm?” Johanna
took another step back into the room, far enough that Harmony finally
understood the threat.
Two of him surged forward, blustering, but the others were staring up at
her a little nervously. “Th-there are traditional ways, not at all painful or
distressing. You poor two-legs, trapped in a single mortal body, I can’t
expect you to understand our point of view.” Now all of him seemed to
have recovered courage. Five pairs of toothy jaws were waggling around
in front of her.
Behind her, all of Pilgrim had grabbed her pants and the bottom of her
jacket. No more subtlety; he was doing his best to drag her from the
room. His voice was diplomatic, belying the effort: “Well, thank you for the
advance notice, dear Harmony.”
The redjackets gave a gracious wave. “My pleasure—though it was the
Queen’s suggestion that I inform you.”
“I’ll thank her myself,” said Pilgrim, “the next time we’re together.”
There were implications in Pilgrim’s words that should give the chief
broodkenner pause. For packs, “being together” could mean literally
“being of one mind.” It was certainly a stronger retort than anything
Johanna could think of. She let her toothy friend lead her away.
Jo didn’t speak until they were out of the building, beyond even Tinish
earshot. “I hope you meant what you said, Pilgrim. About talking to
Woodcarver.”
“Oh yes indeedy. Harmony takes his redjackets much too seriously. His
kind is the worst thing about the East Coast.” But Pilgrim sounded more
amused than enraged.
“He’s a monstrous sonsabitches,” said Johanna.
Pilgrim was looking around at the multistoried barracks that stood on both
sides of the path. From here, you couldn’t even see the exercise field and

the valley beyond. “This place has really gotten overcrowded, you know,”
he said.
•  •  •
The rest of the afternoon was spent in something unusual: a screaming
argument with Pilgrim. Fortunately for her hearing, it was Johanna who
did all the screaming. How could her best friend in the world be so
lukewarm about the murders planned at the Fragmentarium? By
sundown, Johanna was convinced that he was taking her case to
Woodcarver just to keep Jo mellow. Pilgrim was certainly doing his best
to avoid arguing the issues with her. He really didn’t understand why
thinning the old members was murder. And he didn’t want Johanna to
come along to talk to the Queen.
“It’s an intimate thing, Johanna. You know, sex and mindtalk.” He
waggled his heads salaciously.
Normally that excuse worked. She certainly had no place in a Tinish love
affair—but tonight she suspected Pilgrim thought that Jo and her weird
human notions would just cause trouble. “Okay, then,” she said. “You do
your thing with Woodcarver. But make her understand! This redjackets
crap is just as bad as the Old Flenser.”
“Oh, I will, I promise. I’ll do my very best.” The fivesome danced around
nervously, then finally chased himself out the door. Coward.
She should follow him up to the New Castle, maybe talk to Woodcarver
herself. Pilgrim just didn’t have the proper fire.
Fortunately, some shred of common sense remained, and Jo stayed
inside until Pilgrim was well gone. She could give Ravna Bergsndot a
call. Along with Woodcarver, Ravna was Queen of the Realm. Ravna
might not take her title seriously, but she was the most powerful person in
the world. She could tell Woodcarver what to do about this, and by the

Powers Above, her word would rule. Yeah, the trouble was that Ravna
was too much of a compromiser. She would compromise about anything,
as long as it didn’t get in the way of fighting the Blight.
Johanna stepped out into the twilight and took a few deep breaths. The
northwest still held sunset colors, but elsewhere the sky was darkening
blue, with stars already visible in the east. She cursed this world often
enough, but summer was mostly a beautiful time. You could forget how
deadly a natural world could be. You could even sometimes forget what
you had lost. This little cabin that she shared with Pilgrim was an upper-
class residence by the standards of the locals. If Ravna’s plans for
heating water with the starship’s beam gun could be implemented,
houses like this would be more comfortable than any old Tinish castle.
Maybe she should walk up to Newcastle town. That was where most of
the Children lived, and all of the toddlers. Her brother might be up there.
No, Jef and Amdi were in the north woods this tenday, learning to be
scouts. But there were other Children she could talk to. Nevil? He was
probably still down in Cliffside village. He’d be perfect to talk to; he’d
understand. Too bad the phone lines hadn’t been strung that far, or else
she’d call him for sure.
Johanna walked downhill, away from the New Castle and the town that
surrounded it. There really was no one to talk to tonight. Maybe that was
best; she was so bloody angry. Packs could be lovable, nicer than most
humans. But even the nicest of them didn’t really see their members as
persons. She walked a little faster, letting the old frustration grow. Today
had brought a lot of that to a head, and she wasn’t going to let it go. In
the past, she had seen members die; they were people, even if she could
never convince the packs of that.
Well, if talking could not make a difference, maybe there were actions
that would. She let that thought rattle around in her mind for a few
moments, imagining what she could do if she had some of the powers
that every Straumer—even every Straumer child—had had before they
fell Down Here. Ravna’s starship, that was nothing compared to a few
merge toys and braemsjers. She’d raise the fragments to mindfulness,

give them tools that would wipe the smug expression from packs like
Harmony.
It really felt good to imagine such a turn of fortune. And it would have all
been possible, not dreaming at all, before they were cast down from the
Top of the Beyond. Before everything had gone so terribly wrong at the
High Lab.
She looked around, realized she’d walked more than a kilometer. She’d
reached the edge of the Margrum Valley. The moon had risen, showing
the far side of the valley afloat above an evening fog. The path—its
official name was the Queen’s Road—became a bit twisty, zigzagging
back and forth as it descended the north wall of the valley. During the
day, there would be plenty of wagon traffic here, the kherhog handlers
arguing about their right of way.
While she was imagining impossible revenge, her feet had carried her
halfway back to the Fragmentarium. Maybe her feet were smarter than
her head. Harmony complained about not having floorspace, and
Woodcarver agreed. Well, there were ways of making floorspace. There
were ways of making everyone look up and listen! Her pace picked up.
Now both head and feet were cooperating—what a Tinish thing to say—
as she realized how much change she could make all by herself.
Somewhere in the back of her mind a little voice was saying that what
she could do might be worse than not doing anything at all. But for the
moment that voice was easy to ignore.
She came around the last turn before the Fragmentarium. The top of the
cloud layer had just submerged the buildings, so all she could see were a
few dim lights, probably from the old-members barracks. Admin would be
hidden around on the other side of the compound. The Queens’s Road
continued on its winding path down to Cliffside village, but the turnoff to
the Fragmentarium was just another fifty meters or so. She walked
forward, into the fog.
“Hei, Johanna.” The voice came from a little way ahead.
Jo gave a squeak of surprise, her mind cycling through variations on

fight, flight, or make friendly social conversation. She peered into the
mist. Aha. Friendly conversation was in order. It was a pack of four. No,
five if you counted the puppy in a pannier.
“Hello,” Johanna said. “Do I know you?”
The four adult members brought their heads together. Even a meter or
two of fog was enough to soak mindsound into silence; the pack was
trying to think clearly. After a moment the voice replied: “Not understand,
Johanna. Sorry.”
Jo made little sweep of her hand. Most packs seemed to take that motion
to be like the Tinish head gesture for “That’s okay.” Of course, it might be
too dark for the pack to see.
After a moment, they all continued along the path. As usual the fog was
playing little tricks with sound. There was a buzzing sound that might
have been some beat frequency of mindsounds. Or maybe it was just
humming nervously. “I, hmmm,” it said—trying to think of the Samnorsk
words? “I … am,” there was a Tinish chord that might have been familiar,
“I … work … New Castle, um … work stone.”
“You’re a mason at the New Castle?”
“Yes! Right word. Right word.”
Before the humans came, before the Children’s Academy, stonemason
work was a fairly high-standing tech profession; it was still quite
respectable. They walked together in silence, divided by a difficult
language barrier. Now she realized that they were not alone; there was a
pack pacing along behind them, and maybe another behind that.
Certainly Mr. Stonemason had heard them, so it seemed more
mysterious than sinister to Johanna.
“Turn. I turn … here,” said the stonemason. They were at the turnoff to
the Fragmentarium. Johanna followed the pack down the flagstoned
path. They passed a wick lamp and she got a look at the other two packs.
One was just a threesome. The other was four but two of its members
were scarcely more than puppies. So, mystery explained.

As they came near the old-members barracks, the other two packs both
started gobbling. Various voices responded from within, and the packs
were both racing off toward the building. The stonemason stayed with
Johanna. As they came near the entrance, it spoke again: “You don’t
remember me, but except for my puppy, I was with you and Pham Nuwen
when you entered the New Castle. You know, the day Pham made the
sun go dark.”
Johanna turned to the pack, struck by its sudden fluency. An old, balding
member had limped out of the shadows. The stonemason had flowed
around it, and now all heads were pressed close together. The pack must
have been one of Woodcarver’s guards at the Battle on Starship Hill.
Jo smiled. She didn’t remember this particular pack, but—“I do remember
the day. You were outside? You actually saw the sun go out?” Almost
any technology could overawe a pre-tech civilization such as on Tines
World, but what Pham had done, twisting the laws of nature across
hundreds of lightyears … that was something that awed even the
Children. It was no surprise that the act had sucked up all the output of
the sun.
The five—even the little puppy—were nodding agreement. “A thousand
years from now, it may only be a myth in the mind of the pack of me, but
it will be the greatest myth of all. When I looked up at the dark of the sun,
I felt the Pack of Packs.”
The stonemason, now including the halt member who lived in the
Fragmentarium, was silent for a moment. Then it gave a shiver. “It’s too
cold out here for some of me. Why don’t you come inside? There are
several whole packs tonight. They don’t speak Samnorsk, but I can
translate for them.”
Johanna started to follow the other into the hall, but then she realized that
most of the critters within were not reunited. They really were falling
behind. If she stayed more than a minute or two she would start blabbing
about what Harmony had in mind … and too many would understand.
She stopped at the door, and waved the stonemason through. “I’ll come
here another night,” she said.

The pack hesitated a moment. “Okay, then, but you should know. I’m
grateful to you. Part of me is very sick, but with her I am much more
clever. I can plan better. Every night I come here, and I work better the
next day. It’s partly the planning I do when I’m smart. It’s partly what my
new puppy learns from my old part. Rich people do this all the time.” All
the heads looked up at Johanna. “I think that’s part of how they stay rich.
Thank you for suggesting this place to Queen Woodcarver.”
Johanna bobbed her head. “You’re welcome.” Her words came out
strangled. She turned and walked stiffly away, into the dark. Damn,
damn, damn.
She wandered in the mists for some minutes, long enough for the guilt to
boil back into rage. She needed a proper act of creative revenge against
Harmony and all of his traditionalist ilk. Something that would kick even
Woodcarver in the teeth if she couldn’t see sense.
Eventually she ran into the high fence that surrounded the exercise yard
and the able-bodied barracks. She walked along the barrier, trailing her
fingers against the wooden slats. So Harmony figured there wasn’t
enough room. Yeah, it was crowded. Helping one’s old members was
more popular than anyone had predicted. No doubt Harmony was also
complaining about the various resources consumed too. That would
make more of a difference to Woodcarver. But Woodcarver was rich. If
she wasn’t rich enough, Ravna could kick in some of Oobii’s tech rents.
This world was so poor, so stupid. In the High Beyond, caring for
individual sophonts was one of the smallest costs of operations, handled
invisibly for the most part. Wealth went for other things.…
She almost tripped over the creature that was digging under the fence.
The Tine pulled its head and paws out of the dirt. Its jaws snapped shut
just where Jo’s face had been before she startled back—but there was
no further attack. The critter had no backup; it was a singleton. No, wait.
There were a couple others, lurking about in the misty moonlight. They
were all Tropicals. Glares were exchanged, but then the mangy critters
backed down. The three wandered off—and in different directions. You’d
never see a pack casually lose itself like that. How many of these

troublemakers were lurking around the Fragmentarium? The notion of
bundling the Tropicals off to a separate camp wasn’t completely stupid.
Jo continued toward the entrance to the able-bodied barracks. There was
plenty of noise from inside the building. Outside, on her side of the fence,
she saw occasional shadows move, heard an occasional howl. Harmony
must still have his broodkenners playing dogcatcher all over the valley;
she was here all by herself. The thought was not frightening, quite the
opposite. The Tropicals weren’t especially friendly, but they also seemed
to be total scatterbrains. And the fragments in the barracks ahead were
Johanna’s friends—at least to the limits of their intelligence.
In fact … being alone here, she was in a position to get that proper
revenge she’d been thinking of. She walked faster, purpose informing her
direction. The idea was crazy, but it would create plenty of the precious
“room” that Harmony was complaining about. It would show that
sonsabitches and Woodcarver, too, that the fragments weren’t to be
pushed around.
The racket from within the barracks was really loud. Johanna came up
here a lot, and in the wintertime her visits were necessarily after dark—
but she had never heard this much angry gobbling. Of course, these
frags were never as civil as whole packs. They had the moods and
whimsies of hundreds of separate animals. Most in this barracks were big
and healthy, and desperate to be part of whole packs. That was why the
fence and the barred gate were necessary. Most of the time, most of the
frags were a little bit frightened of escape—even at the same time they
yearned to run out into the wide world and find some likely pack. Over the
last two years, Jo had made such matchmaking her business. Carenfret
actually called Johanna the “littlest kenner.” Johanna could walk right into
the barracks and chat with singletons and duos who knew a little
Samnorsk. Even when speech wasn’t possible, the frags enjoyed having
something as smart as a pack that they could come near to, that they
could pretend with. Any number of times, she had started new packs by
pairing duos or getting a singleton together with a duo. At least as often,
she had chatted up damaged packs on Hidden Island, or Newcastle

town, or Cliffside, and persuaded them that she had an ideal completion
for them.
It was that sort of effort, both by her and the decent broodkenners, that
made the escape attempts very half-hearted.
Tonight sounded very different.
The wick lamp mounted over the gate showed dozens of fragments
milling around just inside the entrance. More were coming by the second,
pushing and shoving against the fence.
As she came into view (or hearing, which perhaps was more important
for Tines) there were the usual calls of “Hei, Johanna!” “Hei, Johanna!”
Those shouts were drowned out by angry gobbling, by howling and
yapping that almost sounded like the baying of dogs.
The more articulate actually made sense. The occasional Samnorsk
matched what Interpack she could understand: “Let us out. We want to
be free!”
Now she saw what might be the explanation for all the incautious
wanderlust: the Tropicals that had sneaked inside the fence. She could
spot only a couple, but they were in the loudest clusters. Apparently, their
attitude had tipped the overall consensus.
She’d never seen so many fragments simultaneously eager to break out.
Besides banging the fence, some were digging at the foundations of the
barrier. Right at the entrance, a knot of singletons had piled up, trying to
reach over the top. If they had been a coordinated pack, wearing jackets
with paw straps, they could have boosted some of themselves out. As it
was, the pyramid would reach about two meters fifty and then fall back on
itself.
“Hei, Johanna! Help us.” The voice came from those piling against the
entrance.
“Cheepers!” said Johanna. She recognized the white splash of fur on the
back of its head. This was the most fluent of the Samnorsk speakers;
sometimes he actually made sense. The poor guy would have been a big

plus to almost any pack, but he was from one of Steel’s recycled monster
packs. He had memories that eventually repelled whomever he was
intimate with. Cheepers himself was gentle and friendly, and as smart as
a singleton can be, which made his situation that much sadder to Jo. She
went to one knee so she could look at the singleton eye to eye, through
the tiny gaps in the fence. “What’s up, Cheepers?”
“Get us out, get us out!”
Johanna rocked back. How could she explain? Nuance was rarely a
singleton’s strong point. “I—” she started to make some excuse and then
thought, Well, why not? Slowly, she stood up. Yes, she really could have
revenge. And it would end the crowding, and it would give Cheepers and
his friends what they wanted.
She looked at the gate. It was barred on the outside, but with a simple
timber and clasp. It was almost two meters off the ground. An escaped
singleton couldn’t reach the bar. She was vaguely aware of the three
Tropicals on her side of the fence, watching her. No doubt they were too
scatterbrained to figure out the mechanism, but any coherent pack on
this side of the fence could have opened the gate easily, just by climbing
up on itself. Johanna could open it most easily of all.
Jo stepped forward, already gloating about imagined consequences. She
reached for the gate bar, then hesitated. Consequences, consequences.
There was a reason these poor creatures had been brought here. Where
else could they go? In the towns of the Domain, a very few might find
new minds, but the rest would be cuffed about, some killed, some
enslaved. There was a reason for having the Fragmentarium. She herself
had fought to make Woodcarver’s wartime field hospital into this
institution. Releasing the patients would be vengeance mainly on these
patients themselves. She glanced to her left, at Cheepers bouncing up
and down, urging her on. If they hadn’t been all whipped up tonight, these
frags would mostly shrink from escape.
Johanna stepped back from the gate. No, there were some things too
loony even for her, even in a rage. But I could have, and the look on
Harmony would have been—

Something came streaking in from her left, knocking her off her feet. All
three Tropicals bounded past. They clambered over each other even as
she scrambled to her feet. Maybe they had seen what she was going to
do, maybe they were that smart by themselves. In any case, the top one
eased its snout under the bar and flipped it loose. The pressure from
within swung the gate open, knocking the three’s pyramid in all
directions. The crowd within stampeded through, some of them knocking
Johanna down again, most flowing smoothly around her. Some even said
“Hei” on their way past.
Johanna curled forward, protecting her face behind her knees and arms.
Finally the thundering herd had passed. Their shouts and caroling
echoed back from the hills as they chased themselves both south and
north along the Queen’s Road.
Jo got back on her feet. The damp ground had been trampled into mud.
The open gate hung at an angle. She saw a half dozen figures near the
entrance.
“Guys?” Johanna walked toward the remaining Tines. It wouldn’t be
surprising if the departure had left some injured behind.
Even close up, she didn’t see any blood. None of the Tines were limping,
except the one she called Dirty Henrik, and he’d had a bad forepaw ever
since the rest of his pack got squished in a rock fall. No, these six just
couldn’t decide whether they were staying or going. They milled in and
out of the entrance, making nervous noises as they looked out into the
dark.
Jo stood by the gate for a moment, feeling just as uncertain as the
remaining Tines, and thinking through her reasoning of moments before
—before the Tropicals had put everyone on the other side of the
question. Finally she said, “You gotta make up your minds, guys, cuz I’m
gonna close this gate.”
None of them understood Samnorsk, but when she put her hands on the
gate and began to push it shut, they seemed to get the message. All but
Dirty Henrik quickly slipped inside. Henrik remained half in and half out,

his nose twitching as he smelled the night air. His pack had been a
lumberjack; maybe he could do all right in the outside. Dirty Henrik
wobbled back and forth, then realized the gate was still closing on him.
He gave a little squeak and retreated within.
Jo had to force the gate upwards to overcome the bent hinge, and then it
was shut. She left the lock bar on the ground. Hell, if he wanted to badly
enough, Henrik could probably push his way out.
And now … Johanna stood in silence for a moment, trying to make sense
of what had happened and decide how she should feel about it. Finally
she shook her head and started up the steps that led to the admin
building. She had some phone calls to make.
•  •  •
The other Children called the events of that night “Jo’s great jailbreak.”
Some of them thought it was all very funny. The consequences? Maybe
they were as bad as Johanna had imagined, though not quite so obvious
and visible. For the next year or so, the back alleys and garbage dumps
of villages all around had a surplus of singletons and duos, aimless
beggars who importuned and incompetently burgled and robbed. A few
came back to the Fragmentarium. A very few found refuge in the new
Tropical “embassy,” though the Tropicals seemed much less happy to
have recruits than they were to raise hell with the local singletons.
The majority of the runaways simply disappeared into the awesome
wilderness. Pilgrim thought that more than a few of the disappeared had
survived and made packs of themselves. “I can tell you from personal
experience,” he told Jo some tendays later, when he caught her crying,
“when times get really tough, you’ll patch up with parts you could never
imagine sharing even a single thought with. Hei, look at me.” That turned
her sobs into a hiccupping laugh; she knew what he meant better than
most humans. Nevertheless, she was sure that the wide, deep silence of

the northern forests had swallowed the lives of most of the runaways.
And consequences for Johanna Olsndot herself? Leave aside her most
idiot classmates who thought it was all a joke. Her little brother seemed to
regard the incident with uneasy awe. She was the sister who corrected
his foolishness. In his view, this situation upset the natural order.
Woodcarver actually stopped talking to Jo for a time. Her Majesty knew
the odds against singletons in the wild. She had allowed the
Fragmentarium from the same good will that she extended to her war
veterans—and Harmony’s plans had been an attempt to make room for
those healthy singletons to remain in safety. More, she knew that the
escape was a slap not just at Harmony Redjackets but at Woodcarver
herself.
Maybe it was because of good words from Pilgrim to Woodcarver, but the
Fragmentarium remained open. Indeed, one happy consequence was
exactly as Johanna had imagined: now there was plenty of room in the
institution. Woodcarver did not move to boot the old members out of the
place. Mr. Stonemason and the others had a place for their elderly parts,
even doomed as they were. That crowding problem was postponed for a
while—and Harmony looked like the ineffectual, pompous assholes that
he was!
Any time in the first days after the Breakout, Johanna could easily have
proclaimed her innocence. After all, the evidence against her was
circumstantial, with Harmony the loudest proclaimer of her guilt. The only
eyewitnesses were very confused singletons, and some of them
apparently thought she had been the one to throw the gate open. She
almost told Pilgrim the truth—except that she soon guessed that he
already knew. Johanna came even closer to telling Ravna Bergsndot. It
hurt to think that Ravna saw her as just a stupid little teenager; the poor
lady had to deal with too many of those already. But the days passed,
and Johanna’s reputation grew and solidified. Yeah, she was very glad
she hadn’t done what people thought she had. But hell, it had happened
—and in the future, maybe people like Harmony would think twice before
they crossed the Mad Bad Girl of Starship Hill.


Ten years after the 
Battle on Starship Hill

Chapter   04
Remasritlfeer had been working for the Great Tycoon for more than
two years. This was a constant source of surprise to Remasritlfeer, who
had never taken kindly to fools, even ones as rich as Tycoon. The two
years had been one crackbrained mission after another, some more
dangerous and exciting than the explorer in Remasritlfeer would have
ever dreamed. And maybe that was why he continued to work for the
madpack.
This latest piece of insanity might finally bring an end to their relationship.
Exploring the Tropics! The assignment was more dangerous, more
insane—literally insane—than anything Tycoon had demanded before.
But truthfully, the first few days had been magnificent: Remasritlfeer had
totally survived and in two ways he’d matched or exceeded the triumph of
any explorer in the history of the world.
Unfortunately, that was four tendays ago. Tycoon just didn’t know when
to give up. Glory had degenerated into deadly tedium, tenday after
tenday of failures.
“There has to come an end to it, you know.” The words expressed
Remasritlfeer’s heartfelt opinion, but they were spoken by his passenger
on this flight. This final trip, if there was any mercy in the world.
Chitiratifor was a well-dressed sixsome who barely fit in the balloon’s
passenger platform. The Sea Breeze’s gondola was a cramped place
where every pound had to be accounted for. The insulation round the
passenger platform was so thin that Chitiratifor’s anxiety was painfully
loud. Remasritlfeer could see claws and jaws here and there through the
partition. His passenger was gouging the frame of the gondola with all his
strength. There were retching sounds, some of his members barfing into
the muddy water below.

Remasritlfeer waggled a semaphore at Tycoon’s sailing fleet below. They
paid out the tether a bit faster, let the sea breeze blow the Sea Breeze
steadily toward the swampy inland. This had been the routine twice a
tenday since the beginning of this horrid exercise. All through the
predawn, Tycoon’s support vessels would puff away, mixing iron filings
with various corrosive poisons, filling the gas bag of the Sea Breeze or its
alternate. Then, as the morning wind picked up, Remasritlfeer would lift
off, sailing through the air like no one in history, like no one in the world (if
you didn’t count the Sky Maggots).
“We’ll be over land in a matter of minutes now, sir,” he said cheerfully to
Chitiratifor.
Chitiratifor made some more mouth noise. Then he said, “This has to
look good, you know. My master says that Tycoon is still claiming the
Tropics will make him rich beyond the dreams of all packs past. If we are
not convincing today, he’ll be sailing around down here forever, pissing
away our treasure.”
Our treasure? Chitiratifor and his master Vendacious were a
presumptuous pair. They had some reason. They had provided critical
fixes that made Tycoon’s inventions—including these balloons—
workable. Remasritlfeer could sense their contempt. They figured they
could use Tycoon; it seriously upset them when the Boss could not be
swayed.
It was too bad that in this particular case Chitiratifor and Vendacious
were absolutely right. Remasritlfeer looked inland. The weather had been
perfect so far, but there were high clouds ranked to the north. If those
clouds marched south, this afternoon could get exciting. At the moment,
they simply blocked the far view, the jungle basin that fed the River Fell.
Even on the clearest days, one pack’s eyes could not see the all of that.
The Fell stretched northward to beyond the horizon. Its fringes were a
vast network of great rivers descending from smaller and smaller ones,
ultimately from mountain streams at the edge of arctic cold. Those lands
had their own mysteries and threats. They were the scene of endless
deadly stories and many of Remasritlfeer’s own explorations—but they

could not compare to the Lower Fell, to the mystery and the threat of the
ground below him now. Their balloon wasn’t more than a thousand feet
up. Details were lost in the humid mist—except when he looked almost
straight down. There was the muddy water, the occasional swamp grass.
It was hard to tell just where the outflow of the Fell ended. Normal ships
ran aground on barely submerged mudflats that extended more than a
hundred miles out. The color of the shallows and their smell had given
the Fell its name before any pack set eyes on the river mouth itself. You
needed rafts or special-built ships to get as close as Tycoon’s fleet. And I
am even closer yet! thought Remasritlfeer. It was a rare privilege, one
that he would treasure—after he was far away from here. As for now,
well, he’d seen cesspools in East Home with much the same appearance
as the murk below, and the smell was like nothing he had ever
experienced, a mix of rot and body odor and exotic plants.
The Sea Breeze moved steadily northwards, not much faster than a pack
might walk. The wind and the tether combined to keep them at altitude,
sparing them the awful death that had claimed all previous explorers—
and incidentally keeping them out of the heat and damp of the tropical
jungle. The grass below had taken on its tree form. The trunks might still
be below water, but yard by yard, as the balloon drifted north, those
trunks became thicker, holding more silt from the Fell. “Most of what
we’re seeing now stays above sea level except during storms and the
highest tides,” said Remasritlfeer.
More of Chitiratifor’s snouts were visible now. The pack was peering
down. “How far still to go?” he said.
“We just have to move a little eastwards.” Remasritlfeer had been
watching the ground, and Tycoon’s ships, and the payout of the tether.
You could be sure Tycoon was watching back. If Tycoon had stayed back
in East Home, they all could have abandoned this foolishness by now.
Directly below, he recognized a pattern of trees that he had used on the
last few flights; he signalled for the ship to stop the payout and move
eastward. The Sea Breeze bounced gently against the limit of the tether.
The ground below slid sideways. Remasritlfeer took on the manner of a

tour guide: “And now you’ll see the lost city of legend, the Great Choir of
the Tropics.” Maybe it was a city. There were hundreds of Tines
wherever he looked. As the balloon took them across higher ground, they
could see more. Thousands of Tines. More. Perhaps as many as legend
claimed. And nowhere was there even one coherent pack, just the simple
mindlessness of the vast crowd. The sound … the sound was tolerable.
The Sea Breeze was several hundred feet up, too high for mindsound to
reach. What Tinish sounds did reach the gondola were in the range of
normal Interpack speech. Some of it might be language, but the chords
that sounded from thousands of tympana were smeared of any meaning
they might have had. It was an eerie dirge of ecstasy.
And it squashed Chitiratifor’s arrogance. Remasritlfeer could feel the
gondola shift as the fat sixsome huddled in on himself. There was
fascinated horror in his voice: “So many. So close. It … really is a Choir.”
“Yup,” Remasritlfeer said cheerfully, though he had been similarly
affected the first few times he’d been here.
“But how do they eat? How can they sleep?” In endless debauchery went
unsaid, but Remasritlfeer could almost hear the thought.
“We don’t know the details, but if we go lower—”
“No! Don’t do that!”
Remasritlfeer grinned to himself and continued. “If we go lower you’d see
that these creatures look half starved. And yet there are buildings. See?”
He made a pointing sound. Indeed, there were mud structures visible,
some reduced to worn foundations peeking out from below later
structures, and those submerged beneath still later mounds. No coherent
pack would ever make such random things, barely recognizable as
artificial constructions.
In places, the generations of mud structures were piled five or six deep, a
chaotic mixture of midden and pyramid and multistory hovel. There must
be holes and crannies within; you could see Tines entering and
emerging. Remasritlfeer recognized the neighborhood from previous
flights. There were patterns, as if some fragment of conscious planning

had worked for a few days and then been swept away by noise or some
other plan. In a couple of tendays, all the landmarks would be changed
again.
“Another hundred feet will do it,” he said, and signalled to Tycoon’s ship
to drop anchor. Actually, navigating the tethered balloon was rarely this
precise. Today’s sea breeze was as smooth as fine silk. “Coming up on
the Great Trading Plaza.”
There was some shifting around on the passenger platform above him,
Chitiratifor screwing up his courage to poke additional snouts over the
railing. Then an unbelieving, “You call that a plaza?”
“Well, that’s Tycoon’s term for it.” More objectively, it was an open patch
of mud, fifty feet across; Tycoon had a peddler’s talent for using words to
redefine reality. For several moments, Remasritlfeer was too busy for
chitchat. He reached over the edge of the gondola to cast a mooring line
downward. At the same time he shouted a big halloo to the Tines below.
Of course, there were always watchers down there, though sometimes
they seemed to forget the point of this exercise. Today, the response was
almost immediate. Three Tines ran toward the center of the open space.
They came from widely different points and were clearly singletons. Only
when they got within a few feet of each other was there any sort of
coordinated activity. Then they scrambled around clumsily, snapping at
the rope that Remasritlfeer dangled down to them. Finally, two stood
steady and third scrambled up and got the rope. Then all three got jaws
on it and dragged the cord round and round a mud pillar.
Chitiratifor did not seem encouraged by this show of local cooperation.
“Now we’re trapped, are we? They could just pull us down.”
“Yup, but they don’t try that so much anymore. When they do, we just
drop the rope and fly away home.”
“Oh. Of course.” Chitiratifor said nothing for a moment, but his mindsound
was intense. “Well then, let’s proceed. We have a failure to observe, and
I want some details for my devastating report to our employers.”
“As you say.” Remasritlfeer was at least as anxious as anyone to dump

Tycoon’s Tropical fiasco, but he didn’t feel like agreeing with the likes of
this rag-eared thug. “One moment while I prepare the trade.”
Remasritlfeer ducked down to the bottom of the gondola, opened the
drop door. Their cargo was in a bannerwood kettle hung just below. It
didn’t look like any water had slopped over during the balloon’s ascent.
“Are you guys ready?” Remasritlfeer focused his words into the kettle.
“Yessir!” “Righto.” “Let’s go!” … The words coming back were all piled up,
the response of dozens—perhaps all—of the creatures in the kettle.
Remasritlfeer ladled a dozen of the wriggling cuttlefish into a trade
basket. Their huge eyes looked up at him. Their dozens of tentacles
waved at him. In all the jabbering, he did not hear a particle of fear. He
stuck a snout down to just above the rippling surface of the basket. The
cuttlefish were very crowded in the small space, but that was the least of
the problems they would soon face. “Okay, guys. You know the plan.” He
ignored the tiny cries of enthusiastic agreement. “You talk to the folk
below—”
“Y-ye-yes, yes, y-yes! We ask them for safe landing for you. More trade.
Harbor rights. Yes, yes! Yes!” The chords piled up in a tinkling mass, the
speech of a dozen little creatures, each with voracious memories, each
smarter than any singleton—but so scatterbrained that Remasritlfeer
could not decide how smart they really were.
“Okay then!” Remasritlfeer gave up on his attempt at guidance. “Good
luck!” He latched the trade basket’s rope to the mooring line and paid out
the cord.
“B-b-b-bye, g’bye!” The tinkling of chords came from both the basket and
from the crowd in the bannerwood kettle, comrades calling to one
another. Way beyond the tiny basket, the muddy space below was still
empty of all but a few Tines. That was normally a good sign.
Chitiratifor’s voice came from above: “So why not send down the whole
kettle of fish?”
“Tycoon wants to see how this goes, then maybe send down a few more
with different instructions.”

Chitiratifor was silent for a moment, perhaps watching the trade basket
as it swayed down and down along the mooring line. “Your boss is
freaking insane. You know that, don’t you?”
Remasritlfeer made no reply, and Chitiratifor continued, “See, Tycoon is
a self-made patchwork. Half of him is a skinflint accountant. But the other
half is four mad puppies the accountant picked just for their crazy
imaginations. That might be a good idea, if the miser was the dominant
half. But this miser is driven by the lunatic four. So do you know the
reason he’s mucking around here?”
Remasritlfeer couldn’t resist showing that he understood something of
the matter. “Because he counted the snouts?”
“What?—Yes! The accountant in him estimated the number of Tines in
the Tropics.”
“It could be more than one hundred million.”
“Right. Then his lunatic four realized that dwarfed any other market in the
world!”
“Well,” said Remasritlfeer, “Tycoon is always on the lookout for new
markets, the larger the better.” In fact, new markets were Tycoon’s
greatest obsession, the driver of almost everything he did.
Two of Remasritlfeer continued to watch the descent of the cuttlefish.
Their multiple monologues were still clearly audible. The basket would
touch down in just a couple of minutes.
Angry talk continued to come from the passenger platform: “Tycoon has
lots of stupid ideas, including the notion of getting power by selling things.
But this time … so what if the Tropics has—what crazy number did you
say? The point is, those millions are animals, a mob. Unless we could kill
them all and exploit the land, the Tropics are worthless. I’m telling you, in
confidence of course, my boss is getting tired of this tropical adventure.
It’s bleeding from our essential strengths, the technological advances that
Vendacious is providing, the factory base at East Home. This foolishness
has to stop, now!”

“Hmm, I hope your boss has not been this emphatic with my boss.
Tycoon doesn’t react … favorably … to being ordered around.”
“Oh, don’t worry. Vendacious is much more the diplomat than I am. I’m
just an honest worker, much like yourself, um, sharing my doubts and
irritations about our betters.” Remasritlfeer himself was far from being a
diplomat, but he could tell when someone was feeling him out. He almost
blasted back, telling the six assholes above him where he could stuff
Vendacious and his treacherous plans. No. Be cool.
After another moment of silence, Chitiratifor changed the subject. “The
talking cuttlefish have almost reached the ground.”
“Yup.” In fact, the cuttlefish in the bannerwood kettle were chirping their
interest, too. Apparently they could hear their siblings far below.
“Your boss told my boss that this would be the definitive test. If it fails, we
can all go home. I count that as very good news—and yet, who but a
madpack would bet on speech-mimicking cuttlefish?”
That was a reasonable question, and unfortunately Remasritlfeer didn’t
have any answer that would not make Tycoon look like an idiot. “Well,
they’re not really cuttlefish.”
“They look delightful. I love cuttlefish.”
“If you took a taste of their water, you wouldn’t be interested in eating
these. Their flesh is nearly inedible.” Remasritlfeer had never eaten one
of the strange wrigglers, but the South Seas packs who fished the atolls
in the far west had learned of the creatures’ intelligence and foul taste
almost at the same time. It was Tycoon’s collecting of fantastic rumors
that had sent Remasritlfeer halfway around the world to visit those
islands, talk to the natives, and bring back a colony of the strange
animals. What had seemed as absurd as the present adventure had
ended up being the most exciting time of Remasritlfeer’s life. “And these
little critters really can talk.”
“But it’s nonsense, like the words of a singleton.”
“No, they’re smarter than that.” Maybe. “They’re so intelligent that Tycoon

has conceived the test we do today.”
“Yes, his secret plan. I don’t care what it is, as long as this is the last try.
…” Chitiratifor was silent for a moment, presumably watching the trade
basket descend the last few feet to the muddy ground. Others were
watching. Intently. At the edges of the open space, where the unending
mobs swirled and eddied, there were heads turning, thousands of eyes
watching the Sea Breeze and the little package that was descending from
it. It had taken tendays of dangerous balloon flights—and some truly
expensive jewels—to establish this small open space and the erratically
obeyed rules for these exchanges.
“Okay, tell me!” Chitiratifor’s curiosity had won out. “What in heaven’s
name are you doing with these fish?”
“My boss’s brilliant plan?” Remasritlfeer kept all doubt and sarcasm out of
his voice. “Tell me, Chitiratifor, do you realize where we are?”
Chitiratifor emitted a hiss. “We’re stuck just above the heart of the packs-
be-damned largest Choir in the world!”
“Precisely. No explorer has ever come so close. Tycoon’s fleet is
anchored two thousand feet offshore. That is the closest of all
explorations. Over the ages, who knows how many explorers have
attempted to reach the heart of the Tropics from the North, either on foot
or sailing the River Fell. There’s pestilence and strange beasties on that
approach—but those are survivable. I’ve survived them. And yet the
explorers who go further south all disappear, or return in pieces, near
mindless but for the stories that have made the Tropics legend. And now,
you and I are here, just a thousand feet from the center of it all.”
“Your point being?” Chitiratifor tried to make the question sound lofty and
impatient, but there was a quaver in his words. Maybe the guy had finally
gotten a good view of the creatures below, the unceasing roil of the mob
around the clearing. Given the heat, it was no surprise that the creatures
wore only random trinkets and splotches of paint. But clothing aside,
most of them could never be mistaken for Northern Tines. Tropicals’ pelts
were thin. Many had puffs of fur near their paws but were almost hairless

on their sides and bellies. There were so many Tines that even up here
you could hear some mindsound. That vast chorus was truly the most
unnerving thing about this place, and probably what had put Chitiratifor
into his near-panic.
Now most of Remasritlfeer’s gaze was on the trade basket below. By
protocol, the three Tines should not touch it until the rope went slack, but
he was taking things slow and easy. He interrupted their descent and
took a very careful look with two of his heads gazing down from opposite
sides of the gondola. It looked like the basket was twenty feet up. It was
time for touchdown. And then … Remasritlfeer had no idea what would
happen then.
“My point?… Um, can you imagine what it would be like to be down on
the ground here?”
“Madness,” said Chitiratifor, and it was hard to tell if that was his answer,
or his reaction to the question. Then: “A coherent pack down there,
surrounded by the unending millions of the Choir? The mind would
disintegrate in seconds. It would be like a lump of coal tossed into a vat
of molten iron.”
“Yes, that’s what it would be like if you or I were dropped into the Choir,
but look: The result of our previous trading is that we have a clear space
down below. There are just three Tines in that space, the rope handlers.
The nearest parts of the mob are almost thirty feet away. The situation
would be uncomfortable and you’d have to keep an absolute grip on your
mind, but a pack could survive down there.”
Chitiratifor emitted a dismissive tone that warbled into the sound of fear.
“I can hear the pressure all around. That open space is a tiny bubble of
sanity in the middle of hell. The Choir doesn’t tolerate foreign elements. If
you were on the ground, that precious open space would disappear in an
instant.”
“But no one really knows, right? If Tycoon can get packs safely on the
ground, this tedious trading process might be speeded up.”
“Oh. But that’s a theory you could easily test. Just drop a pack”—

Chitiratifor hesitated, choosing his words with care—“just find a
condemned criminal, give it the offer of freedom if only it will descend to
this clearing and have a chat with the delightful Tines we see below.”
“Unfortunately, we don’t have any condemned prisoners to help us out.
Tycoon thinks that these talking cuttlefish might be the next best thing.…”
The reasoning sounded very thin even to Remasritlfeer. That was Tycoon
for you: he had lots of ideas, but most of them were absurd. The only
people the Tycoon had convinced in this case were the cuttlefish
themselves, who seemed endlessly eager to talk to new strangers. You
had to wonder how creatures like that survived in the world; tasting bad
was surely not a sufficient defense.
Chitiratifor forced a chuckle. “This is the brilliant solution Tycoon has
been hinting at? And you’ll honestly report what happens?”
Remasritlfeer ignored the patronizing tone. “Of course,” he said.
“Well then, let’s land these fish!” Chitiratifor honked laughter.
Okay, little friends. I wish you well. From a thousand feet up, the last few
feet were always tricky, but Remasritlfeer had had plenty of practice. The
little guys would come to no harm from the Choir’s mindsound; the
cuttlefish minds were as silent as the dead. The real question was how
the Choir would react to the presence of non-Choir talkers. The parts of
him that were watching the edge of the open space could see a strange
kind of tension spreading out through the mob. Remasritlfeer had seen
this sort of thing before. The Choir was not a coherent mind, and yet
small parts of it clearly thought to one another, and those mindsounds
percolated for hundreds of feet, creating patterns of attention that were
wider than he had ever seen except in sentry lines.
“The Choir’s mindsound,” came Chitiratifor’s voice, filled with overtones
of awe. “It’s getting louder!” Chitiratifor was shifting around on the
passenger platform, beside himself with fear. He was causing the entire
gondola to bounce and sway.
Remasritlfeer hissed, “Get ahold of yourselves, fellow!” But in fact, the
mindsound of the Choir did seem louder, a mix of lust and rage and

pleasure and intense interest, a rising madness. If all those Tines below
could think together … well then maybe they could focus this high. And
destroy them even aboard the Sea Breeze. Then he realized that
although the mindsounds were louder and more unified, something else
had changed. Almost all low-frequency sounds had ceased. Gone were
the moaning and fragments of Interpack language that had been a
ceaseless churn from the mob. It was so quiet in the low sounds that he
could hear the sigh of the River Fell as it swept past the mudbanks and
grass trees of the delta.
Even the cuttlefish—both here in the kettle and down below in the trade
basket—had ceased their tinkling chatter. It was as if the entire world had
taken a moment to watch and see what would happen.
Remasritlfeer’s wide-spaced eyes told him that the trade basket must be
on the ground. At the same time, the cord he’d been paying out went
slack in his jaws. Yes, touchdown!
Now as clear as tiny bells, he could hear the cuttlefish chattering at the
three Tines who stood by the landing spot. They were saying exactly the
sales pitch that Tycoon had worked out for them, exactly what
Remasritlfeer himself would have said if he had the courage to land in the
middle of this hell (though Remasritlfeer would have spoken with a single
voice rather than the dozen spouting from the little cuttlefish).
The three Tines by the basket didn’t immediately react. The eerie, low-
sound silence continued a moment more. Then there came a spike of
mindsound that near froze Remasritlfeer’s hearts, anger so loud it
seemed to come from his own mind. From all directions, the myriad Tines
broke the fragile protocol Remasritlfeer had worked so long to construct,
rushing inwards upon the trade basket.
The lash of anger numbed Remasritlfeer’s mind, but he saw and
remembered what happened next: The mob surged in like some
monstrous wave, five and ten Tines deep. They came in from all
directions, the open space vanishing in less than two seconds.
Somewhere under the mob was the trade basket. Myriad voices
screamed. The frenzy lasted almost a minute, so that for a time the

attackers were piling up on themselves. Finally the mob retreated,
leaving something like the agreed-upon open space. By some miracle,
the Sea Breeze’s tiedown line remained in place, but the trade basket
was reduced to splinters.
“What happened? Where are they now? What happened?” came the
voices of the rest of the cuttlefish in their bannerwood kettle.
“I … I’m sorry, guys.” The trading space was almost restored, those who
remained in the space were limping back toward their fellows. He could
see no signs of cuttlefish in the churned-up mud.
Chitiratifor gave out a satisfied laugh. “An excellent test. It’s exactly as I
predicted. Okay, fellow. It’s time to drop the tiedown line and get
ourselves back to sanity.”
•  •  •
Four hours later, Remasritlfeer, the surviving cuttlefish, and Chitiratifor
were safely back on Tycoon’s steamship. Three of those hours had been
spent fighting through the worst afternoon storm Remasritlfeer had seen
so far. Even now, the wind was lashing across the deck of the Pack of
Packs, making the balloon recovery job almost impossible. Hell, the
landing crew had better cut it loose before the lightning finally set its
remaining lift gas afire.
Remasritlfeer had his heads down, pushing the bannerwood kettle across
the deck toward shelter. The rain had long ago soaked him; it was
amazing he could think at all.
The cuttlefish were still complaining: “Why-why-why didn’t you let us try
again? again?”
“You shut up!” Remasritlfeer hissed back. Multiple tries had been part of
Tycoon’s orders. Before the storm came up, at least four of Remasritlfeer
would have sacrificed the rest of these suicidal maniacs; the fifth of him

had some weird maternal sympathy for the cuttlefish. Between that and
the storm and Chitiratifor, they had not done quite all Tycoon planned.
Leaving early had probably saved all their lives.
He tied down the kettle and sprinkled the water with fish food. Behind
him, he could see most of Chitiratifor clustered at the railing, barfing into
the sea. Far beyond the railing the swamplands of the coast were a dark
shadow behind the rain. These last few tendays, Remasritlfeer had
accomplished more than any explorer in the history of the Tropics, but
now he knew he would never stand on the ground there. No pack would,
not and live to tell the tale.
Remasritlfeer shook himself. Now to get cleaned up, dried off. There
remained the toughest job of the day—to convince Tycoon that no matter
how big the market, no matter how great the desire, there were some
dreams that were just not going to come true.

Chapter   05
Woodcarver’s Domain stretched along the continent’s northwest coast.
The Domain’s northern part, the lands around Starship Hill, had been
taken in the conquest of Flenser’s empire. That was two hundred
kilometers north of the arctic circle. Tines World was a mellow and
beautiful place, very much what Old Earth had been for humankind’s first
civilization. Of course “mellow and beautiful” were relative terms. The
arctic winters, even on the coast with its warming ocean stream, were
frightful things. The islands were lost in the ice, the snow piled deep, and
night was unending, usually so stormy that you couldn’t even see the
stars.
The summers, however … Ravna Bergsndot had not imagined there
could be such contrast in a natural place. The snow mostly went away, or
hid in the higher hills and the glaciers above them. This year there had
been plenty of spring rain, and bright green spread across the forests and
heather and farmers’ fields, across all the world below the tree line. And
today, today was beautiful beyond that. The rains had ended, and the sky
was clean, with only a few chunky white clouds hanging beyond the
seaward islands. Here, on a clear day in summer, the sun was above the
horizon for the dayaround. At noon, it climbed almost halfway up the sky
and the rest of the day was like an endless afternoon.
It was warm! It was even hot!
More by luck than anything else, Ravna and Johanna chose this day for a
visit to the markets on the South End of Hidden Island. They’d taken the
funicular down from Starship Hill and then the ferry across the fifteen-
hundred-meter inner channel that separated Flenser’s old capital from
the mainland. Now they were walking down wide, cobbled streets, just
enjoying the sun and the light and the warmth.

Most of the town packs had taken off their jackets and leggings. A work
gang of three packs was in a line along one side of the street, digging up
the gutter drainage. On a task as simple as ditch digging, the three packs
could work with a kind of superpack coordination, the dirt being hoisted
from ground to shovel, into buckets and then away, in perfect synchrony.
These weren’t the slaves of the time of Flenser and Steel. When Ravna
and Johanna came strolling along, the superpack seemed to notice and
for a moment resumed its three coherent identities, shouting greetings
with human voices. Ravna recognized the one in the middle as Flenser-
Tyrathect’s city planner.
Johanna chatted with the two who didn’t speak very good Samnorsk.
Ravna had a few words with the city planner, learning what these repairs
were all about, answering the pack’s question about the tools that had
been promised for more than a year. “It’s the power supplies we’re
having trouble with, of course. But you’ll see them in time to help with the
snow.”
And then the two humans continued on, toward Hidden Island’s very own
high street. “Johanna, I think this may be the most beautiful day we’ve
ever had.” Beyond low roof lines, the inland hills stood tall. The New
Castle on Starship Hill might have been something out of a fairy tale, and
downslope from the castle, the hull of Oobii sparkled greenfly bright.
The younger woman was smiling. “It’s a winner, all right.”
Packs walked past them in both directions, avoiding each other as much
as they could. Wagons and kherhog traffic were banned in this part of
town, leaving just enough room for the packs. There were even a few
humans up ahead, the oldest of the refugee children, now adults and
working in local businesses. For a moment, Ravna could almost
imagine … “It’s almost like something back in civilization.”
Johanna was still smiling, but now her look was puzzled. “The High Lab
was nothing like this.” From what Ravna knew, the High Lab had been a
grid of barracks on the airless planet of a red dwarf star. “And before
that,” Johanna continued, “well, we were mostly on Straum. That was

cities and parks. This? I’m more used to it now than anywhere else, but
how does it remind you of civilization?”
Ravna had her own opinion of Straumer civilization; she’d had ten years
of practice in keeping that opinion to herself. So all she said was, “Some
are little things, some are big. There are both humans and aliens here;
outside of civilization, that can rarely happen. The streets are clean and
quaintly wide. I know the packs need the extra space, but … this place
looks almost like some historical city park on a multi-settled world. I can
pretend the technology is just hidden away, perhaps in those little shops
we’re visiting today. This could be at Sjandra Kei, kind of a happy tourist
trap.”
“Well, that’s fine then, because I’ve come to shop for a birthday present!”
Ravna nodded. “Then we have a constructive purpose for this trip.” The
Children took their “birthday” parties seriously. However arguable the
calendar dates, birthdays gave them a bridge to their past. She hesitated.
“So whose birthday are we talking about?”
“Who do you think?” There was something about Jo’s look that made the
answer obvious.
“Nevil?”
“Yup. He’s out of town today, checking out trade prospects on the East
Streamsdell. Nevil has such a wonderful way with humans; I know he’d
like to be just as good with Tines. In any case, we can get him a present
without his ever knowing.”
Ravna laughed. She had been so patient with these two, but Jo was
twenty-four, and Nevil would be twenty-six as of this birthday. They were
the most perfect couple she could imagine among the older Children.
“So, what are you thinking to get him?”
“Something princely and charming, of course.” Actually Johanna had
several ideas. It turned out she had been down here more often than
Ravna, and she’d quizzed both Woodcarver and Pilgrim about the things
that might be available from far parts of the world. Hidden Island was not
the imperial capital the Old Flenser had planned, but it had come to be

the heart of Woodcarver’s Domain—and this side of the Long Lakes, it
was the place to go for exotica.
So the two of them visited one after another of the high street shops, as
well as the summer markets that occupied the cobblestone plazas.
Johanna had a list, not just from Woodcarver and Pilgrim, but also from
her friends Rejna and Giske—themselves already married—and partly
from Nevil himself. Johanna bought some mosaic fabric that showed
landscapes that could be separately viewed by each of the wearer’s
members.
“This is not really very human,” said Ravna.
“Ah, but Nevil might like the pointillist staining. It reminds me of Ur-
digital.”
In another shop, they looked at semiprecious gems set in statuary of gold
and brass. Ravna was technically royalty, but there were no free gifts, nor
even requests to be “officially sponsored” by the co-Queen of the
Domain. For a medieval ruler, Woodcarver was something of an
economic innovator.
“You could have something made special, maybe out of the mosaic
cloth.”
“Yeah!” said Johanna. They turned down Wee Alley. At the back was
Larsndot, Needles & Co. The store was a two-story affair, now extended
out on tent poles into the street. Wenda Larsndot Jr. was on her knees,
pinning velvet around a customer’s new puppies.
“Hei, Johanna! Hei, Ravna!” The seven-year-old was full of cheer, but
she didn’t get up. “Can’t talk now. The slavedrivers are riding me hard.”
Then she chirped something at her customer, some kind of reassurance.
“But you’ll be at school tomorrow, right?” said Ravna.
The little girl—oldest of all the second generation—rolled her eyes. “Yup,
yup. This is my day off. I like tailoring better’n multiplication. Dad’s over
there. Mummy’s in back.” Those would be Ben and Wenda Larsndot,
Junior’s chief “slavedrivers.”

Ben was even busier than Junior. The place was so crowded that—for
packs—it must be mind-numbingly noisy. Was it beautiful days like this
that brought on a buying frenzy?
They gave Ben a wave and walked through the tent toward the back.
Larsndot, Needles & Co. had Tinish employees. In fact, “Needles” was a
mostly young sixsome who had been the original owner. Needles had
done quite well by the partnership, for tailoring was one of the
“problematical professions.” If standing close to another pack is mind-
numbing, then there are only a few things that packs could easily do at
such close quarters—chiefly, make war, make love, or just generally
blank out. Humans were ideal for close-up work. Each human was as
smart as a pack, and each could work mindfully even right next to the
customer. It was the perfect combination—though Ravna was afraid the
Larsndots had gone too far. Fitting in, being needed by the locals, that
was terribly important. At the same time, the humans should be building a
tech civilization, not measuring cloth to fit.
Today there was far more business than the humans could help with. The
company’s three Tinish tailors sat on thickly padded platforms. On the
floor, each of the customers had a single tailor member doing its best
with fitting. To human eyes, the process was comical. The isolated
members were decked out in flamboyant uniforms studded with big-
handled needles, and tailor’s measuring tapes looped from spools on
their collars. They were not quite mindless—the rest of their packs were
up on the pallets, peeking down, trying to maintain contact without
numbing the customers. The groundside members had a lot of practice
and significant guidance from above—but physically they were not much
more adept than dogs. The lips at the tip of their jaws could squeeze like
a pair of weak fingers. Their paws and claws were what you’d expect of
dumb animals, though the creatures often wore tools or metal claws—
hence the human name for the race: Tines.
These tailors had plenty of experience. Their groundside parts could pull
measuring tape from their shoulder spools, could pass it to the customer.
With spoken directions from the tailor above, the customer—if not too

befuddled by having a foreign snout in its midst—could hold tape properly
while the tailor marked the measurement. In other circumstances the
customer held the draped fabric and the tailor’s groundside member
grabbed a pinhandle in its jaws and carefully inserted it.
Ravna and Johanna passed through an older section of the building that
had not been built with humans in mind. They bent low to clear the ceiling
and walked awkwardly down a short hallway toward the sewing room.
Indoors, in a Tinish building, the whiff of packs was overpowering. Ravna
had dealt with many races in the High Beyond—but with good air control.
Here there were no such amenities.
She heard Wenda Sr.’s laughter right ahead. Wenda Sr. handled most of
the business management, except for the accounting. Like most of the
refugees, she was no good at manual arithmetic.
“Hei Johanna! Ravna!” Wenda was standing by one of the sewing tables.
Those were lined up below high windows of smoky glass. Sunlight fell on
the work tables. Larsndot, Needles & Co. had three seamsters; right now
all were busy. Wenda moved back and forth, adjusting the measures,
rolling in additional bolts of cloth, some of it the precious Oobii weave, the
last functional output of the starship’s reality graphics display.
Wenda’s younger child, Sika, was sitting on the table beside her,
evidently “helping to supervise.”
“Hei Wenda! I’m looking for advice.” Johanna laid the mosaic cloth down
on a display table. “I want to get something for Nevil. His birthday, you
know. Would this look too silly on a human?”
“Sika, you stay put, okay?” said Wenda, Sr. For a wonder, the three-year-
old did as requested. Whatever the Tinish seamster was doing fascinated
her.
Wenda came over to their table, turning sideways to fit between the
heavy wooden stools. She nodded respectfully at Ravna, then lifted
Johanna’s fabric sample, turning it in the sunlight. “Ah, this is the real
Down Coast stuff, isn’t it, Johanna?”
The two woman chattered about the fabric. Wenda had been sixteen

when the kids escaped from the High Lab, and one of the first to be
wakened. That made her as old as any of the refugees, as old as Nevil
Storherte. She was twenty-six. Her face and her voice were happy, but
there was gray in her hair, the beginnings of age in her face. Ravna had
read human histories obsessively since their exile began. In a state of
nature, untreated humans began to decline almost immediately upon
reaching adulthood. Wenda had never complained, but more than most—
certainly more than the boys her age—she bore the burden of living
Down Here. And yet she was luckier than some. She was old enough
that, before the escape, she had almost completed the usual prolongevity
treatments. Most of her cohort would last a couple of centuries.
The youngest kids—and certainly the new generation—had not even
begun their medical treatments before the escape. They would age
quickly, probably not live more than a century. They might not even last
long enough for the new technologies to save them. In that case, a return
to coldsleep might be their only hope.
One of the seamsters came around the table. Four of it scrambled up on
the stools, leaned over to look at the fabric from all directions. The pack
was a mostly old fivesome. He understood some Samnorsk, but spoke in
careful Interpack. The chords were largely unintelligible to Ravna, but she
could tell the fellow was pleased to be chatting with Johanna. This guy
was a veteran of Woodcarver’s long march up the coast and the Battle on
Starship Hill. Johanna had more Tinish friends than anyone Ravna knew,
and among many she was a paramount hero. Maybe that was why
Woodcarver had forgiven Jo for running amok back in Year Two.
In the end, Johanna and Wenda and the Tinish seamster came up with a
bizarro cape and pants scheme that Wenda claimed would please both
fashion and Nevil. It was the best evidence Ravna had ever seen for the
absence of a universal esthetic.
“… and I’ll bring you those buckles,” said Johanna.
“Fine, fine,” Wenda was nodding. “Most important, what I need right
away, are Nevil’s fitting measurements.”

“Right, I’ll get them. But remember, this is a surprise. He knows there’ll
be a party, but—”
“Hah. Taking a tape measure to him will likely make him guess.”
“I’ve got my ways!”
And that got both Wenda and Johanna laughing.
•  •  •
Back on the street, Johanna was still laughing. “Honest, Ravna, no
double meaning.” But when she stopped laughing, she was grinning like
a loon.
The afternoon went on forever, the shadows turning and turning without
ever lengthening into sunset. They stopped by a couple of silversmiths,
but what Johanna wanted might have to be done one-off. Now they were
at the north end of the high street. The warren of merchant tents was still
as crowded as packs could tolerate, not more than a few meters
separating one from another.
“Seems like more foreigners than ever,” commented Ravna. It was partly
a question. She could recognize East Home packs by their funny
redjackets. Others were distinguished by their scattered posture or their
scandalous flirtation. Getting all the details explained was just another
reason why she liked to go on these walk-arounds with Johanna Olsndot.
Today Johanna wasn’t quite the perfect tour guide: “I … yeah, I guess
you’re right.” She looked around into the tented chaos. “I wasn’t paying
proper attention.” She saw the smile on Ravna’s face. “What?”
“You know, today you only stopped to chat with every fourth pack that we
came across.”
“Oh, I don’t know everybody—wait, you mean I really haven’t been up to
my usual social standard? Well, huh.” They walked on a few paces, out

of the tented area. When Johanna looked at her again, the girl’s smile
was still there but perhaps it contained a touch of wonder. “You’re right, I
haven’t been feeling the same lately. It’s strange. Our lives I mean.
Things were so tough for so long.”
When Ravna Bergsndot was feeling most sorry for herself, she tried to
imagine what life had been like for Johanna and her little brother. Like all
the Children, these two were orphans, but their parents had made it all
the way to the ground here. Johanna had witnessed their murder, and
then the murder of half her classmates. At just thirteen Johanna had
spent a year in this wilderness, often befriended, sometimes betrayed.
But she and her little brother had still guided the Oobii through the battle
on Starship Hill.
Some of the Children had accepted all this too readily, forgetting
civilization. Some others couldn’t make any accommodation with their fall
from heaven. It was the ones like Jo that gave Ravna faith that—given
time—they might survive the fate coming down upon them all.
They had left the merchants behind, were walking toward the part of town
where in recent years public houses had been established. Johanna
didn’t seem to notice; she was still far away, smiling that small wondering
smile. “Things were tough, and then we unmasked Vendacious and won
against Lord Steel. And since then…” surprise rose in her voice “… why,
now I’m generally having a great time. There’s so much to do, with the
Fragmentarium, with the Children’s Academy, and—”
“You’re wrapped up in making the new world,” said Ravna.
“I know. But now things are even better. Ever since I started dating Nevil,
lots of things are more fun. Human-type people seem much more
interesting than before. Lately, Nevil and I have been even, um, closer. I
want this birthday to be special for him, Ravna.”
Hah! Ravna reached out, touched Johanna’s arm. “So when…”
Johanna laughed. “Ah, Nevil is so traditional. I really think he’s waiting for
me to propose.” She looked at Ravna, and now her smile was both merry
and sneaky. “Don’t you tell, Ravna, but after the birthday party, that’s

exactly what I’m going to do!”
“That’s wonderful! What a wedding that will be!” They stopped and just
grinned at each other. “You can be sure Woodcarver will invent new
ceremonies for this,” said Ravna.
“Yeah, she uses my reputation unmercifully.”
“Good for her. In fact, this means even more to us than to the Tines. You
and Nevil are so popular, he with the Children, you with the Tines. Maybe
—” Maybe this is the time.
“What?”
Ravna drew Jo toward the middle of the street as they continued along
their way—she didn’t want to be snooped upon by passing packs. “Well,
it’s just that I am so tired of being co-Queen.”
“Ravna! It’s worked great for almost ten years now. Woodcarver herself
suggested it. There’s precedent in Tinish history and even in ours.”
“Yes,” said Ravna, “on Nyjora.” In the Age of Princesses, there had been
the Elder Princess and the Younger, the Techie. The Age of Princesses
was the most recent rediscovery of civilization in any known human
history—and that civilization was also the ancestor of Ravna’s Sjandra
Kei and therefore of Johanna’s Straumli Realm.
The Straumers were not much for looking back, but Ravna had told them
about the Age of Princesses. At the Academy, she used that history to
make a bridge between humans and the Domain. Johanna smiled. “You
should be glad to be co-Queen, Ravna. I bet you played at being one
when you were a child.”
Ravna hesitated, embarrassed to admit the truth. “Well maybe; I’ve
discovered that the reality is … distracting. It was necessary to begin
with, but you kids are established now. I need to concentrate on the
external deadline. We only have a few centuries before some really bad
guys blow into town.” Ravna hadn’t told the Children of her crazy dream,
or the zonograph glitch. There had been no repeat, and the data was less
than credible. Instead she worked harder and harder, and did her best

not to seem like a madwoman.
Ravna looked away from Johanna. For a few steps, she just watched her
own feet trudging along the cobblestones. “It could be less than
centuries,” she said. “The Blighters weren’t left with any working
ramscoops, but they could probably boost a few kilograms to near-
lightspeed. Maybe, when they still had their pipeline to god, maybe they
even figured out some way to nail us at lightspeed. I need to spend all my
time making sure we’ll be ready.”
Johanna didn’t reply. Ravna was silent for a few more steps, then
repeated her main point: “I just mean, I should be spending more time
with Oobii. I’m a librarian, after all, and in a situation like this, any other
use of me is a waste. I think it would best if maybe you and Nevil could
lead, with Woodcarver.”
Johanna stared at Ravna in shock. “Are you crazy?”
Ravna smiled. “We’ve both been accused of that at one time or another.”
“Hah!” said Johanna. She put an arm across Ravna’s shoulders. “If we’re
both crazy, it’s in very different ways. Ravna, we need you—”
“Yes, I know. I’m den mother to all that’s left of humanity!”
That old and whimsical complaint should have brought a smile to
Johanna; instead her expression became positively fierce. “Ravna, you’re
the mother of all that’s left here. Ten years ago we were kids and babies,
and to the Tines we were weird animals. Without you to hold us together
—to mother us along—most of us would have died in coldsleep, and the
few who survived would be freaks in Tinish wilderness!”
“… I, um, okay.” Time to regroup: “I guess I did what had to be done. And
now we must prepare for the future. I’m the only one of us trained to
manage Oobii’s planning systems. That’s where I need to spend all my
time now. You and Nevil and Woodcarver should lead. I’m a librarian, not
a leader.”
“You’re both! Librarians and archeologists have always been the ones to
bring civilization back.”

“This is different. We don’t have any ruins to search. We have all the
answers aboard the Oobii.” Ravna raised her chin in the direction of
Starship Hill. “You needed me to begin with, but now Children like you
have grown up. My technical planning is needed more than ever, but …
but I’m tired of being the leader.”
“Your decisions are popular, Ravna.”
“Some of them. Some of them not, or not for a year or five or ten.” Some
might seem obviously wrong for a century—and then suddenly, dreadfully
right.
“I hadn’t realized you felt so … alone. We all have you, so I guess we
thought you see all of us the same.” Johanna looked down at various
bags of fabric samples and birthday trinkets. She gave a little laugh.
“Okay, turn it all around. I’ve been so happy with Nevil. He’s made life a
bright place. I should think what it would be like without that, without
anyone to share it all with. Do you think about Pham very much?”
“Sometimes.” Often. “We had something fine, but there was too much
else going on within him. What owned him was scary.”
“Yeah.” Johanna had met Pham Nuwen, just before the end. She had
seen how scary scary could be. “There are one hundred and fifty of us,
Ravna. We all love you—at least most of the time. Have you ever thought
that there might be enough people now that you could find some one
person you could—you could be with?”
Up the street, Ravna could see some Children. They were Johanna’s age
and older. They were just going into one of the pubs. Ravna gave a nod
in their direction. “Are you serious?”
The girl gave an embarrassed smile. “Look, I found someone. I’m just
saying, you think of us all as children. Think … well, you’ll live longer than
any of us.”
“Don’t say that. You’re ageing now, but that’s only for the present.
Someday we’ll have the resources to go back and rebuild a decent
medical science. This is just temporary.”

“Right. If you guide us there, we’ll eventually have the technology. And
eventually, there’ll be tens of thousands of us. If you can’t find Mister
Right in that mob, there’s something wrong with you!”
“I guess you’re right.”
“Of course I am!” said Johanna. “In the meantime, please remember how
grateful we are, even when we complain. And Nevil and I will work harder
to support you.”
“I want debate.”
“You know what I mean. It’s your voice, up front, that makes the big
difference for people like Wenda and Ben.”
“Okay, I’ll lay off you and Nevil, at least for now.”
“Whew!” Johanna’s look of relief was comic exaggeration, but behind it
Ravna saw the real thing. “Oh, and Ravna? Please don’t mention this to
Nevil. It would just go to his head.”
•  •  •
The tavern district was near the center of Hidden Island, just south of
the Old Castle. In fact, the castle was not really old, though it pre-dated
the Children’s arrival by some decades. Flenser’s castle had been a
fearsome place, a legend across the continent. Flenser—the unreformed
Flenser—had had extraordinary plans for the Tinish race. Before the
humans arrived, this world had not even discovered gunpowder, and the
printing press was the big new thing. From that, Flenser had been busy
building both a totalitarian state and something like the scientific method.
There were rumors that his monster packs still lurked in the Old Castle.
Ravna knew that wasn’t true, though Flenser-Tyrathect still did have his
supporters, spies who shadowed Woodcarver’s own secret agents.
The sun was sliding into the north, the shadows now extending all the

way across the street.
The two women walked past the first of the public houses. “Been there
just yesterday,” Johanna said of it. “These days the customers are mostly
herders from the mainland, celebrating the livestock drive.
Up ahead were the pubs more likely to attract merchants from the Long
Lakes and spies from East Home. Those shops were full of gossip and
questions and strangeness. She noticed the pack across the street; it
looked a lot like the one that had been hanging around behind them in
the market.
Johanna saw her glance. “Don’t worry. That’s Borodani, one of
Woodcarver’s guys. I recognize his low-sound ears.” She gave the pack
a wave, then laughed. “And you say this is really like a city of the Middle
Beyond?”
“A little. I could fool myself for minutes at a time. Sjandra Kei had half a
dozen major races, though nothing like packs. We humans were only the
third most numerous. But we were popular. There were tourist towns that
imitated olden human times—and they attracted at least two of the other
races as much as us humans.”
“So folks would promenade, right? We could almost imagine we’re out
looking for action in some high-priced dive?”
“You had such romances in Straumli Realm?”
“Well, yes. I was a precocious tot, you know. But you actually lived it,
right?”
“Um, yes. A few times,” as a shy college girl, before she graduated and
shipped out to the Vrinimi Organization. At Vrinimi, the socializing had
been exclusively nonhuman—at least till Pham came along.
“So are these taverns much like the bars you remember back in
civilization?”
“Hmpf. Not too much. The ‘bars’ in Sjandra Kei were very crowded—
choir-crowded, by Tinish standards. For the humans and some of the
other races, it was a bit of a courtship thing. Here—”

“Here, every human has known every other since they were little, and
there aren’t enough of us all together to fill these public houses. Still, it’s
fun to imagine. For instance, this place up ahead.”
That would be the Sign of the Mantis. The words were chiseled in Tinish
runes below a one-meter-high carving of an odd insect that walked on
two legs. Ravna had never seen the real thing, but she’d heard that the
critters were a ubiquitous pest in downcoast towns. Of course, the largest
of the real mantises were less than five centimeters tall. Whenever the
story of the human landing was told, there was always the question of
what the strange new aliens looked like. And since there were no videos
to show around, just a pack talking to credulous listeners—also packs—
the humans were often likened to “huge, huge mantises.” The Sign of the
Mantis sign—the wooden sign itself—had actually been imported from a
bar in the Long Lakes. Here it was a great joke, since this particular pub
was indeed a human favorite.
Music came from within.
“See? Just like a nightclub back in civilization?” said Johanna.
It was human music, human voices and the sounds of a dozen
instruments—or one synth. Inside, there would be no synth, no
instruments and maybe not even any singing humans. The words were
some children’s rhyme, and the music … not quite a child’s melody. A
single pack was probably the source of all the sounds. No doubt it was
embellishing on something from Oobii. Human culture was being re-
created from the ground up on the Tines World, from machine memories
and the distortions of a race of medieval pack critters.
A set of neatly painted wooden stairs wrapped back and forth up to the
overhang of the main floor. Johanna bounced up the shallow steps with
Ravna just behind. They were about halfway to the entrance when the
door above opened and a group of teenaged humans came out onto the
top landing.
One of them leaned back into the bar and said something like. “Yeah, just
think about that. It makes more sense than…”

Ravna had scooched out of the way when she saw the crowding above.
These steps were intended to be one-way for a pack; they were just a bit
wider than a single member. The boys hadn’t seen her, but when they
saw Johanna, suddenly their voices cut short. As they came down the
steps, she heard one of them say, “It’s your sister, Jef.”
Johanna’s voice sounded a little sharp. “Hei now, so what are you
doing?”
The lead boy—it sounded like Gannon Jorkenrud—replied, “Just telling
people the truth, little missy.” Yes, that was Gannon. The boy saw Ravna
and the sneer left his face. For a wonder, he actually looked furtive! He
carefully edged past her without quite making eye contact.
The three boys who followed were younger, two seventeen, one
nineteen, all fairly large pains in the neck. And today, all looked similarly
sneaky, passing by her silently, then proceeding a little too quickly down
the steps. Something else about them: they wore those short pants and
silly low-cut shoes that had come into fashion at the beginning of the
summer. Given a cool, rainy day, they’d have freezing shins and soaked
feet.
Further up on the stairs, Johanna was saying, “So Jefri. What’s up?” The
words were lightly spoken, but Ravna saw that the girl had stepped into
the middle of the stairway. And there indeed, at the top of the stairs, were
Jefri and Amdi. Both human and pack were a study in unhappy surprise.
The pack—Amdiranifani—was the more obviously upset; even Ravna
could see it in his aspect. Jefri was a bit smoother. “Hei, Sis. Hei, Ravna.
Been a while.”
Amdi came down the stairs, butted one head softly against Johanna and
two more against Ravna. “It’s good to see you!” said the pack, using its
little-boy voice. Amdiranifani was an eightsome, about as numerous as a
clear-thinking pack could be. When Ravna had first met him, he’d been
entirely puppies. They were so small you could carry half of him in your
arms, while the other half tumbled around your ankles, asking questions
and showing off. He and little Jefri had been so close that some Tines
thought of them as a single pack, and gave them the name Amdijefri. No

packs called them that anymore. Now, each of Amdi’s members had
grown to be large and a little overweight. At first glance, he was
physically intimidating. At second glance and after casual conversation,
you’d realize Amdi was too shy to menace anybody. And at third glance
—if you really got to know him or if he wanted to show off—you’d realize
that Amdi was about the smartest creature you could ever meet Down
Here.
Ravna patted the nearest head, and smiled at the pack and then at Jefri.
“Yes, it is good to see you.”
“And about time,” Johanna inserted, not buying her brother’s casual
manner.
Ravna waved a kind of “it’s okay” at Johanna. Civility had been in very
short supply from Jefri; she had no desire for a return to his rebellious
years.
Johanna didn’t seem to notice. “So, Brother?”
There was a shadow of a glower from the boy. “So. You know. I’ve been
the whole spring downcoast with Meri Lyssndot’s team, surveying the
special metals that Oobii thought—”
“I know that, Jef. And I know you’ve been screwing Meri and every other
girl you can lay your hands on. But you’ve been back how many days
and not a word from you?”
Now the glower was on full. “Lay off, Jo. You don’t own me.”
“I’m your sister! I…” Indignation choked off her words.
Ravna noticed that Amdi had snuck back and seemed to be trying to hide
behind Jefri. She cast about for something that might deflect the
oncoming debacle. Things had been going so well with Jefri this past
year. Ah: “It’s okay, Jefri. I’ve seen the survey report. Good work.” Or
maybe that was laying it on too thick. “I’m more interested in what was
going on with those three…” She waved down the stairs. Should I call
them your friends? I hope they’re not. “What was this ‘truth’ that Gannon
was talking about?”

“Um, nothing.”
“Yup, nothing,” said Amdi, nodding all his heads.
“Well then.” Ravna came up the stairs. Jefri was nineteen, an adult by the
human standards of Sjandra Kei and Straumli Realm. It didn’t matter any
more that Jef had been the nicest child, brave and well-meaning. It
shouldn’t matter that in later years he was often the most rebellious of the
pimply mob. Thank goodness that Johanna had pointed Nevil at him.
Where even Johanna had not managed to talk sense into him, the level-
headed, diplomatic Nevil had succeeded. With any luck, his current
problem was just a temporary backsliding. “We just want to see how
people are doing,” said Ravna. She waved at the entrance just beyond
Jefri and Amdi. “The three of us can talk another time if you want.”
Jefri dithered a second, and then her mild words seemed to bring him
around. “That’s okay. Let’s talk. The whole thing is, um, a bit strange.” He
turned and held the pub’s door open for Ravna and his sister.
•  •  •
Inside the pub it was warm, a reminder that even the summer-day
shadows could be cold. There was the smell of smoke and spice and the
usual pack body odor. Jefri eased past Jo and Ravna, leading them
along a low, narrow corridor, where the smoke was even thicker. Health
and fire-safety regulations were still in this world’s future.
Ravna just followed along silently, bemused by the crazy carvings that
lined the walls—Tines’ ideas about what life in the Beyond had been like
—and wondering at the changes that even ten years had made in her
Children. Funny. She had always thought of Johanna as being tall, even
when she was only thirteen. But that was Johanna’s personality. Even
now, Johanna was only one meter seventy, scarcely taller than Ravna.
And Jefri? He had always seemed so small to her. He had been short,

when Pham had landed and saved him from Lord Steel. She
remembered the little orphan raising his arms to her. But now she noticed
how much he had to scrunch down to clear the ceiling. The guy was
nearly two meters tall when he stood straight.
The music was loudest straight ahead. There was a flickering colored
light that must be one of those crazy mood candelabras. Jefri stepped
through the opening, Ravna and Johanna and Amdi right behind.
The Mantis tavern had a vaulted ceiling, and space for padded alcoves
all around the upper walls. Today, the clientele was mainly human. There
were two or three packs up in the lofts, but the bartender pack was the
only one on the main floor. All the music was—no surprise—coming from
the bartender.
“Back so soon?” someone shouted at Amdi and Jefri. Then they caught
sight of Ravna and Johanna, and there was nervous laughter. “Wow, we
can’t talk treason for more than five minutes and the secret police show
up.”
“I ran into them on the steps,” said Jefri.
“Just shows you should use the exit stairs, like decent folk do.” That was
Heida Øysler. She was still laughing about her secret police crack. Some
of the others seemed a bit pained by it, but then Heida’s sense of humor
was her greatest enemy. At least here there were none of the closed
expressions Ravna had seen on the stairs. Heida pulled over extra chairs
and waved them to sit down.
As they did so, the bartender’s roving member was already bringing out
more beer. Ravna glanced around the table, taking in just who was here.
Ten kids—no. Ten adults. Jefri and Heida might be the youngest here.
None of these were parents yet, though there was one recently married
couple.
Johanna snagged a beer. She raised it to Heida in a mock salute. “So
now that the secret police are here, consider yourselves under
interrogation. What are you miscreants up to?”
“Oh, the usual mayhem.” But then Heida was out of clever responses.

That could be a blessing. When Heida babbled, things could get
marvelously embarrassing. There had been that mock adultery claim
about Tami and Wilm—which then turned out to be essentially true. “We
were just, you know, speculating about the Disaster Study Group.”
“Ah.” Johanna settled her beer back on the table.
“What’s that?” said Ravna. “It sounds terribly official. And I thought I was
into all the terribly official things around here.”
“Well, that’s only because—” began Heida, but one of the other girls,
Elspa Latterby, stepped on her wit:
“It’s just three big words covering up a lot of wishful thinking.” No one
else said anything. After a moment, Elspa shrugged and continued, “You
see, Ma’am—”
“Please, Elspa, call me Ravna.” Oops, I always say that, and some, like
Elspa, always forget.
“Sure, Ravna. Y’see, the thing is, well, you and the Tines have done your
best to stand in for our parents. I know how much Woodcarver and
Flenser-Tyrathect have spent on our academy. And now we’re doing our
best to make something of ourselves—in this world. Some of us, the very
youngest, are quite happy.” A smile flickered on her face. “My little sister
has Beasly and human playmates. She has me—and she doesn’t
remember our folks very well. To Geri, this seems like a wonderful place.”
Ravna nodded. “But for the older ones, life here is just the epilogue to a
holocaust, right?” Certainly, that was often how Ravna saw it.
Elspa nodded, “It’s wrongheaded maybe. But there it is. Not all us feel
this way, but we remember our parents, and civilization. It’s not surprising
that some of us feel just a little bitter to have lost so much. Disasters
have that effect even when no one living is responsible.”
Jefri hadn’t bothered with a human chair. He had set himself on one of
the high perches normally used by the Tines. From there he looked down
gloomily. “So it’s not surprising such people might call themselves the
Disaster Study Group,” he said.

Ravna gave them all a smile. “I guess we’ve all been members of that
club at one time or another—all of us who seriously look at the recent
history.”
Now that the bartender’s member had retreated, Amdi had surfaced all
around the two tables, a head here, a head there, some of him perched
on the high stools. He liked to watch from all directions—and there were
enough of him to do a good job of it. The two on the stools cocked their
heads, but his voice seemed to come from everywhere. “So then it’s a
little bit like me and some of Lord Steel’s other experiments. A lot of
killing went into our making. I came out very well, maybe, but others are
still a mess. Sometimes we get together and just moan and groan about
how we’ve been abused. But it’s not like we can do anything about it.”
Elspa nodded. “You’re right, Amdi, but at least you have a specific
monster to dump the hate on.”
“Well,” said Ravna, “we have the Blight. It was monstrous beyond the
mind of any in the Beyond. We know that in the end, fighting that evil
killed your parents and Straumli Realm, and indirectly killed Sjandra Kei.
Stopping the Blight destroyed civilization in much of the galaxy.”
They were shaking their heads. One of the boys, Øvin Verring, said, “We
can’t know all that.”
“Okay, we can’t be sure of that last; the destruction was so vast that it
destroyed our ability to measure it. But—”
“No, I mean there’s very little we can know of any of it. Look. Our parents
were scientists. They were doing research in the Low Transcend, a
dangerous place. They were playing with the unknown.”
You got it, kiddo, thought Ravna.
“But millions of other races have done that,” Øvin continued. “It’s the
most common way that new Powers are born. My father figured that
Straum itself would eventually colonize some vacated brown dwarf
system in the Low Transcend, that we would transcend. He said we
Straumers have always had an outward reach, we are risk takers.” Øvin
must have noticed the look coming into Ravna’s face. He hurried on:

“And then something went terribly wrong. That has also happened to
thousands of races. Expeditions like our High Lab sometimes get
consumed by what lives Up There, or are simply destroyed. Sometimes,
the originating star system is destroyed, too. But what happened to us—
what has forced us Down Here—that just doesn’t square with what we
personally know about the situation.”
“I—” Ravna began, then hesitated. How can I say this? Your parents
were greedy and careless and exceptionally unlucky. She loved these
kids—well, most of them, and she would do almost anything to protect all
of them—but when she looked at them, sometimes all she could think of
was the destruction their parents’ greed had brought down. She glanced
at Johanna. Help me.
As often happened when the going got tough, Johanna came through: “I
have a little more personal memory than most of us, Øvin. I remember
my parents preparing our escape. The High Lab was no ordinary attempt
at Transcendence. We had an abandoned archive. We were doing
archeology on the Powers themselves.”
“I know that, Johanna,” Øvin said, a little sharply.
“So the archive woke. My parents knew there was the possibility that we
were being led around by the nose. Okay, I guess all the grownups knew
that. But in the end, my folks realized that the risks were much greater
than was obvious. We had dug up something that could be a threat to the
Powers Themselves.”
“They told you that?”
“Not at the time. In fact, I’m not sure quite how Daddy and Mom pulled off
the preparations. There were originally three hundred of us Children.
Somehow, coldsleep units were smuggled out of medical storage, put
aboard the container ship. Somehow we were all checked out of our
classes—you all remember that.”
Heads nodded.
“If a Power were coming awake, surely it would have noticed what your
parents were up to.”

“I—” Johanna hesitated. “You’re right. They should have been caught.
There must have been others working with them to set up our escape.”
“I didn’t notice anything,” said Heida.
“No,” said someone else.
“Me neither,” said Øvin. “Remember how we were living, the temporary
pressurized habs, the lack of privacy? I could tell my folks were getting
edgy—okay, frightened—but there wasn’t room to do things on the sly. It
seems reasonable—and this is one of the Disaster Study Group’s points
—that our escape was just a move in Something’s game.”
Ravna said, “We talked about Countermeasure at the Academy, Øvin.
You children did get special help. Ultimately, Countermeasure—” with
Pham and Old One—“was what stopped the Blight.”
“Yes, Ma’am,” said Øvin. “But all this illustrates how little we know about
the good guys and the bad guys. We’re stuck Down Here. We older kids
feel that we have lost everything. But the official history could just as well
have the good guys and the bad guys switched.”
“Huh? Who is peddling such crap?” Ravna couldn’t help herself; the
words just popped out. So much for gracious leadership.
Øvin seemed to shrink back on himself. “It’s not anybody in particular.”
“Oh? What about those three I passed on the stairs?”
Jefri shifted on his high stool. “You ran into me on the stairs, too, Ravna.
Those three are just gossips. You might as well be blaming all of us.”
“If it’s ‘just everybody’ then where did a name like Disaster Study Group
come from? Somebody must be behind this, and I want to—”
A hand pressed lightly on Ravna’s sleeve. Johanna held the touch for an
instant, long enough to shut down her spew of angry words. Then the girl
said, “Something like this doubting has always been around.”
“You mean doubts about the Blighter threat?”
Johanna nodded. “Yes, in varying degrees. You yourself have doubts on
that, I know. For instance, now that the Blighter fleet has been stopped

by Countermeasure, will it have any further interest in harming Tines
World?”
“We have no choice but to believe that what remains wants to destroy
us.” My dream—
“Okay, but even then there’s the question of just how deadly they can be.
The fleet is thirty lightyears out, probably not capable of travelling more
than a lightyear per century. We have millennia to prepare, even if they
do wish us ill.”
“Parts of the fleet could be faster.”
“So we have ‘only’ a few centuries. Tech civilizations have been built in
less.”
Ravna rolled her eyes. “They’ve been rebuilt in less. And we may not
have that much time. Maybe the fleet can build small ramscoops. Maybe
the Zones will slip again—” She took a breath and proceeded a little more
calmly: “The point is, the point of everything we’re teaching in the
Academy is, we have to get ready as fast as we possibly can. We must
make sacrifices.”
A little boy’s voice spoke from all around them. Amdi. “I think that’s what
the Disaster Study Group disputes. They deny that the Blight was ever a
threat to humans or Tines. And if it is, they say, Countermeasure made it
so.”
Silence. Even the background music from the bartender had faded away.
Apparently Ravna was the last to realize the monstrous issue under
discussion. Finally she said, softly, “You can’t mean that, Amdi.”
An expression rippled across Amdi: embarrassed contrition. Each of his
members was fourteen years old, each an adult animal, but his mind was
younger than any pack she knew. For all his genius, Amdi was a shy and
childlike creature.
Across the table, Jefri patted one of Amdi comfortingly. “Of course he
doesn’t mean he believes it, Ravna. But he’s telling you the truth. The
DSG starts from the position that we can’t know exactly what happened

at the High Lab and how we managed to escape. Reasoning from what
we do know, they argue that we could have the good and the bad
reversed. In which case, Countermeasure’s actions of ten years ago
were a galactic-scale atrocity—and there are no terrible monsters bearing
down on us.”
“Do you believe that?”
Jefri raised his hands in exasperation. “… No. Of course not! I’m just
spelling out what some people are too, ah, diplomatic to say. And before
you ask, I wager none of us here believe it, either. But among the kids as
a whole—”
“Especially some of the older ones,” said Øvin.
“—it’s a very attractive way of looking at things.” Jefri glowered at her for
a moment, challenging. “It’s attractive because it means that what our
parents created was not a monstrous ‘blight.’ Our parents were not silly
fools. And it’s also attractive because it means that the sacrifices we’re
making now are … unnecessary.”
Ravna struggled to keep her voice steady: “What sacrifices in particular?
Learning low-tech programming? Learning manual arithmetic?”
Heida chipped in with, “Oh, part of it is just having other people tell us
what to do!”
These kids probably didn’t even know the names of pre-tech consensus-
building methods. Skipping that stage had just been one of the
simplifications Ravna had chosen. She had hoped that trust and affection
and common goals would suffice until they had more tech and more
people.
“Getting bossed around may be part of it,” said Øvin, “but for some, the
medical situation is a bigger issue.” He looked directly at Ravna. “The
years pass and you rule and you still look young, just as young as
Johanna does now.”
“Øvin! I’m thirty-five years old.” That was human-standard thirty-
megasecond years, the same as Straumers used. “It should be no

surprise I look young. Back in Sjandra Kei, I’d still be a very junior
specialist.”
“Yes, and a thousand years from now, you’ll still look that young. All of us
—even the older children—will be dead in a few hundred years. Some of
us already look decayed—you know, losing our hair like we’ve suffered
rad damage. Getting fat. The youngest of us have scarcely had any
prolongevity treatment. And our children will die like flies, decades before
us.”
Ravna thought of Wenda Larsndot’s graying hair. But that doesn’t mean
I’m wrong! “Look, Øvin. We’ll get the medical research ramped up
eventually. It just doesn’t make sense to put it first. I can show you the
progress charts that Oobii generates. Effective medicine has a million
gotchas. Which cure is going to be hard—and hard for which child—that’s
something we can’t know ahead of time. A crash medical program would
just be a morass of delay. We’ve got at least twenty coldsleep caskets
that are still in working order. I’m sure we can generate the consumables
for them eventually. If necessary, we can freeze anyone who gets
mortally old. No one need die.”
Øvin Verring raised his hand. “I understand, ma’am. I think all of us here
do—even Screwfloss, Benky, and Catchip—who are so quietly listening
in.” There was some embarrassed shifting around in the tavern’s lofts.
From across the room, the bartender said, “Heh, this is all between you
two-legs.”
Heida couldn’t resist: “You packs just don’t die properly!”
Øvin gave a little smile but waved for Heida to pipe down. “Nevertheless,
you see the attraction of the Disaster Study Group. They deny that our
parents messed up. They deny that there’s a need for sacrifice. We
refugees can’t really know what happened or who was to blame in getting
us Down Here. The extremists—and I don’t think any of us have
knowingly talked to such; the extremists are always referred to at third
hand—they say since we know the goodness of our own parents, then
the right bet is that the Blight is no monster at all, and all this preparation
and sacrifice may be in service to … well, maybe to something evil.”

Johanna gave her head a sharp little shake. “Huh? Øvin, that logic is a
jumble.”
“Maybe that’s why we can’t find anyone who says it for themselves, Jo.”
Ravna listened to the back and forth. What can I say to this that I haven’t
said before? But she could not keep silent: “When these deniers say ‘we
can’t really know,’ that is a lie. I know. I was at Relay, working for Vrinimi
Org. The Blight was doing evil almost half a year before Oobii took flight.
It spread out from your High Lab, probably within a few hours of your
escape. It took over the Top of the Beyond. I could read about it in the
news. With Vrinimi’s resources I could follow the destruction in detail, the
Blight killing whomever it pleased. The thing took over Straumli Realm. It
destroyed Relay. It chased Pham and me and the Skroderiders down
here, and the wake of that pursuit killed Sjandra Kei and most of the
humans in the Beyond.” These were things she had told them again and
again and again. “The defense against the Blight wasn’t undertaken until
we arrived here. Yes, what Pham and Countermeasure did was
horrendous—more so than we can measure. Countermeasure did strand
us. But it stopped the Blight and it left us with a chance. Those are facts
that are being denied. They are not something beyond knowing. I was
there.”
And all around the table, these Children now grown up were nodding
respectfully.

Chapter   06
Ravna had plenty of time to think about that terrible surprise at the Sign
of the Mantis. More accurately, she couldn’t think about anything else.
Everything she’d ever said or done looked different now that she
imagined it through the eyes of the Deniers.
In the beginning, the Children had all lived in the New Castle on Starship
Hill, just a hundred meters from the academy. The youngest ones still
lived there with older siblings or Best Friend packs. Most of the others—
grown and with the beginnings of families—lived on Hidden Island or in
the string of houses south of the New Castle.
But Ravna still lived aboard the starship Out of Band II—thirty thousand
tonnes of unflyable junk, but with technology from the stars.
She must seem crazed and remote, hunkered down aboard the supreme
power in this world.
But I have to be here! For the Oobii had a small library, and Ravna was a
librarian. The tiny onboard archive comprised the technological tricks of
myriads Slow Zone races. Humankind on Earth had taken four thousand
years to go from the smelting of iron to interstellar travel. That had been
more or less a random walk. In the wars and catastrophes that followed,
humans were like most races. They had blown themselves back to the
medieval many times, and sometimes to the Neolithic, and, on a few
worlds, even to extinction. But—at least where humankind survived at all
—the way back to technology had been no random walk. Once the
archeologists dug up the libraries, renaissance was a matter of a few
centuries. With Oobii, she could cut that recovery time down to less than
a century. To thirty years, if bad luck will just stay out of my way!
That afternoon, at the Sign of the Mantis, bad luck showed it had been

around all the time. How could this have blindsided me? Ravna asked
herself that question again and again. The Children had always been full
of questions. Many times over the years, she and the Tines had told them
the story of the Battle on Starship Hill, and the history before. They all
had walked around Murder Meadows, seen how the land looked when
Lord Steel had killed half the Children. But they had only Ravna’s words
about other half of the battle, how Pham had stopped the Blighter fleet
and the price that had been paid. The Children had always had lots of
questions about that, and about what had happened to their parents at
the beginning of the disaster. The Children had gone from a world with
families and friends, to waking up surrounded by Tines and a single
human adult. All they had was her word about what had made that
happen. Foolish Ravna, she had thought that that would be enough.
Now the Children had more than doubts. Now they had something called
the Disaster Study Group.
Just hours after the Sign of the Mantis, she and Johanna and Jefri (and
Amdi of course) had another chat. These were the first two kids Ravna
had met Down Here. Ten years ago, they had shared a terrible few
hours. Ever since, Ravna had felt they had a special relationship—even
when Jefri hit his teenage years and seemed lost to all reason.
Now Johanna was livid about the Disaster Study Group—but even more
angry with Jefri, since he hadn’t told her of the group’s latest lies.
Jefri had flared right back at her. “You want to go on a witch hunt, Jo?
You want to flush out everyone who believes some part of the DSG
claims? That would be just about everybody, you know.” He paused, his
glance flickering doubtfully in Ravna’s direction. “I don’t mean the worst
of it, Ravna. We know you and Pham were good guys.”
Ravna had nodded, trying to look calm. “I know. I can see how natural
some of the doubting is.” Yeah she could see, with brilliant hindsight. “I
just wish I had known before.”
Johanna bowed her head. “I’m sorry I never talked to you about this. The
DSG says some despicable things, but both Nevil and I thought it was so

nuts it would just die away. Now, the whole thing seems much more
organized.” She cast a look at Jefri. They were back on the Oobii’s
bridge, a good place for very small, very private meetings. Amdi was out
of sight, hiding around under the furniture. “You and Amdi obviously knew
that the DSG has turned a whole lot more nasty.”
Jefri started to snap back, then gave a reluctant nod. In fact, Ravna
suddenly realized, he looked ashamed. Jefri had the same stubbornness
as his sister; he just frittered it away on aimless frustration. Their parents
were the closest thing to heroes in the sorry High Lab mess. They had
worked miracles to get the kids here. When Jefri finally spoke, his voice
was soft. “Yeah. But like Øvin said, the worst of the claims are just third-
hand … repeated by foolish people like Gannon Jorkenrud.”
Johanna shook her head. “Why do you still hang out with that loser?”
“Hei! Gannon was my friend at the Lab, okay? I could talk to him about
things even the teachers didn’t understand. Maybe now he is a loser,
but…”
Johanna’s angry expression shifted to frank worry. “This is too much, Jef.
Suddenly DSG seems like a real threat.”
Jefri shrugged. “I don’t know, Jo. The latest stuff just sort of popped up,
one or two people on Meri’s expedition, then more when I got back here.
And even if there is a conspiracy, putting pressure on the likes of Gannon
is only going to make the Executive Council look thuggish—and Gannon
might just start accusing people he’s got it in for. He’s got a mean streak.”
Ravna nodded. “How about this, Jefri: Maybe this is complaining based
on legitimate issues—issues I do intend to address, by the way. But
maybe this is the doing of a clique of older Children planning some kind
of mayhem and exaggerating the real issues for their own ends. You are
in a position to find out which is which. Everybody knows, um, that you—”
Jefri’s glance flickered at Johanna, and the boy grinned. He’d always had
a nice smile. “Don’t be shy,” he said. “Everyone knows I’ve been a bloody
asshole. Still am sometimes. Part of my refugee angst, y’know.”
“In any case,” said Ravna, “people seem quite happy to confide in you. If

you act sympathetic toward this evil nonsense, and if there really is a
Denier conspiracy, I’ll bet they will approach you more directly. Is this a
role that, ah, you’d—”
“You mean, will I find out which of my friends might be behind this and rat
them out?” There was no venom in his words, but Jefri didn’t look happy.
Fortunately, Johanna remained quiet, keeping to herself any sisterly
harangues. Finally, he shook his head. “Yeah. I’ll do it. I still don’t think
there is any real conspiracy, but if there is, I’ll find it.”
Ravna realized she had been holding her breath. “Thank you, Jefri.” If the
ones like Jefri Olsndot were on her side, then this was something she
could get through.
Johanna was smiling, looking a bit relieved herself. She started to say
something to her brother, then wisely left well enough alone. Instead she
looked around the table. “Hei, Amdi! You got all this? Any problems?”
Silence, and not a head in sight. That was the trouble with Amdi.
Sometimes he got distracted with the math problems that forever flitted
around in his heads, and was lost to daydreams beyond the imagination
of all but an Archimedes or a Nakamore. Sometimes—especially in
recent years—he simply fell asleep.
“Amdi?”
“Yup, yup.” Amdi’s little boy voice drifted up from carpet level. He
sounded wan, or a little sleepy. “Jefri and I are still a team.”
•  •  •
Ravna’s chat with Jo and Jef and Amdi had been only the first of
several private conversations. Since Pilgrim was out of town, her next
stop was Woodcarver.
Ravna’s co-Queen had ruled much of the Northwest for more than three

centuries. None of her individual members were that old, of course, but
she had been very careful about keeping herself together, and the pack
had clear memories going back to a time when she had been a simple
artist in a cabin by the sea. For Woodcarver, empire had grown out of
that art, the goal to build and mold and carve. Woodcarver was a true
medieval lord. Given that she was also a decent (if occasionally bloody-
minded) sort, her presence and position of authority were miraculous
good fortune for Ravna and the refugees.
Nowadays, the co-Queens shared Starship Hill, Ravna in her starship
Oobii and Woodcarver in the New Castle, the Dome of the Children’s
Lander.
Walking toward the castle gate, Ravna was always struck by the balance
of symbolic powers that she and Woodcarver had achieved. Ravna had
the technology, but she lived lower on the hill. Then a bit higher—
between them—there was the Academy for Humans and Their packs (or
packs and Their Humans), where everyone raced to learn what the future
required of them. And finally, at the top, was Woodcarver in the New
Castle. Deep beneath the dome of the castle were odd scraps of
technology that had come down with the Children. There were the
coldsleep caskets, and the Lander with its remnant automation. There
was the spot in the Lander where Pham Nuwen had died, and a slime of
silicaceous mold that had once been Countermeasure itself.
Today, Ravna pursued the upper corridors, sunlit from dozens of narrow
window slots. But the caskets, the mold, and her terrible dream—they
were still near in her mind.
•  •  •
Ravna talked to Woodcarver in the Thrones Room. In the beginning,
New Castle had been scarcely more than a shell, Lord Steel’s trap for
Pham and Ravna. Woodcarver had filled in the interior spaces,

completing the place. The Thrones Room was the most visible addition, a
huge, tiered hall. On audience days, all the Children could fit in here,
along with a number of packs.
Today it was empty but for one pack and one human. As the guards
closed the doors behind her, Ravna started down the long carpet toward
the thrones and the altar. Out of the shadows on either side of her,
Woodcarver emerged, accompanying her on the walk.
Ravna nodded at the pack; the co-Queens had always observed a
careful informality. “So I imagine your bartender-agent has already told
you about the charming surprise I encountered at the Sign of the Mantis.”
Woodcarver gave a gentle laugh. Over the years she had experimented
with various human voices and mannerisms, watching how humans
reacted. When she spoke, her Samnorsk was completely fluent, and she
seemed perfectly human—even when Ravna was looking right at the
seven strange creatures who together were her co-Queen. “The
bartender?” said Woodcarver. “Screwfloss? He’s a Flenser whackjob. My
guy was one of the customers up in the loft; he told me all about it,
including what Gannon Jorkenrud had to say before you arrived.”
I wouldn’t have guessed about Screwfloss. Weird human words were
unaccountably popular as taken names among the local packs; Flenser’s
minions were fond of the more satanic variations.
Her co-Queen waved for Ravna to take a seat. Between grand
audiences, Woodcarver treated this room like a private den. Up around
the altar, she had fur-trimmed benches and disorganized piles of
blankets. There was a strong Tinish scent from the well-used furniture,
and a litter of drinks and half-gnawed bones. Woodcarver was one of the
few with her own radio link to the oracle that was Oobii; her “altar” had a
very practical significance.
Ravna plunked herself down on the nearest human-style chair. “How
could we miss something this big, Woodcarver? This ‘Disaster Study
Group’ operating right under our noses?”
Woodcarver settled herself around the altar, some of her on perches near

Ravna. She gave a rippling shrug. “It’s purely a human affair.”
“We’ve always known there are reasonable disagreements about what’s
left of the Blighter fleet,” said Ravna, “but I never realized how that was
being tied into our rotten medical situation. And I never guessed that the
Children might doubt the cause of the disaster that had dumped them
here.”
Woodcarver was silent for a moment. There was something embarrassed
in her aspect. Ravna’s look swept across the pack in an encompassing
glare. “What? You knew about this?”
She made a waffling gesture. “Some of it. You know that even Johanna
has been exposed to some of these stories.”
“Yes! And I can’t believe that neither of you have brought this up in
Council!”
“Grm. I just heard rumors rumbling in the background. A good leader
hears more than she acts upon. If you can’t use spies, you should go out
and mingle more with your Children. As long as you’re the remote wizard
on the starship, you’ll have unwelcome surprises.”
Ravna resisted the temptation to put her face in her hands and start
bawling. But I’m not a leader! “Look, Woodcarver. I’m very worried about
this. Leave aside the ‘surprise’ aspect. Leave aside the unpleasant fact
that this must mean a lot of my kids despise me. Don’t you see a threat in
organized disaffection?”
The co-Queen hunched down slightly, the equivalent of a pensive frown.
“Sorry. I thought you had run into this before, Ravna. Yes, I do get
reports from Best Friend packs: What Øvin Verring and company told you
is true. This is all rumors, exaggerated by the telling. I haven’t found any
hard core of believers—though, hmhmm, that may be because the hard
core is among the humans without close Tinish friends.”
“… Yes.” That point raised a world of possibility. “Had you even heard of
a ‘Disaster Study Group’?”
“Not until Gannon started making noises about it.”

“And the really extreme claims, that the Blight is not evil, that Pham was
the bad guy—I’ll wager that is something new, too.”
Woodcarver was silent a moment. “Yes. That’s also new, though there
have been weaker versions.” Then she added, almost defensively, “But
among Tines, rumors can be impossible to track, especially when there is
Interpack sex. Transient personalities pop up with notions that would not
have been imagined otherwise. Afterwards there is no one to point to.”
That bit of Tinish insight forced a chuckle from Ravna. “We humans also
talk about rumors taking on a life of their own, but it sounds like Tines
have the real thing.”
“You think there are conspirators?”
Ravna nodded. “I’m afraid there may be. On this world, you qualify as a
modern ruler, but your notion of ‘spies everywhere,’ well, it’s—”
“Hmpf. I know, by civilized standards, my surveillance is pitifully weak.”
Woodcarver jabbed a nose in the direction of the radio altar, her private
pipeline to Oobii’s archive. In the winter, she used a treadmill to keep it
charged. In the summer, she had the sunlight from this hall’s high
windows. Either way, Woodcarver practically camped around her radio,
studying indiscriminately.
Woodcarver wasn’t the only pack with a spy apparatus. Ravna tried to
put the question diplomatically: “This is a case where any information
would be welcome. Could you perhaps consult with Flenser-Tyrathect—”
“No!” said Woodcarver, making jaw-snapping sounds. She’d never
stopped suspecting that Flenser was plotting a takeover. After a moment
she continued, “What we really need are a couple of dozen wireless
cameras. Cams and networks, that’s the foundation of surveillance
ubiquity.” She sounded like she’d been studying some very old text.
“Since we don’t have proper networks yet, I’ll settle for more spy eyes.”
Ravna shook her head. “We only have a dozen loose cameras, total.” Of
course, much of Oobii could act as cameras and displays. Unfortunately,
when you took a crowbar and pried pieces off those programmable walls
—well, you sacrificed a lot of functionality. The twelve cameras they did

have were low-tech backups. Ravna recognized the irritated expression
spreading across Woodcarver. “Come the day that we can fabricate
digital electronics, all this will change, Woodcarver.”
“Yes. Come the day.” The pack whistled a dirge-like tune. She had three
of the cameras herself, but apparently she wasn’t volunteering them.
Instead: “You know that my illustrious science advisor is squatting on
nine cameras?” Scrupilo was doing his best to create networks even
though he lacked distributed computation. He had the cameras
transmitting from his labs back to the planning logic aboard the Oobii.
That trick had actually speeded up materials evaluation tenfold. Any time
they could use the starship’s power or logic, they had a win. Those labs
were the biggest success story of the last few years.
“Okay,” said Ravna. “I’d be willing to give up part of Scrupilo’s testing
system for a tenday or two. I really want to find out if there is an
organized conspiracy behind these Denier lies.”
“Then let’s see which cameras I can grab.” Three of Woodcarver hopped
onto perches around her radio altar. She warbled something that was
neither pack talk nor Samnorsk. Woodcarver had used Oobii’s
customizer to make sound substitutes for the usual visual interface. For
the pack, the result was almost as convenient as Ravna’s “tiara,” the
fragile head-up display Ravna was normally afraid to wear in the casual
everyday.
Woodcarver listened to the wheeps and beeps coming back from Oobii.
“Ah, that Scrupilo. Oobii says my dear science advisor has been using
the cams for more than your product development. Hmm. You ever hear
of ‘mass-energy conversion drip’?”
“No.… It sounds dangerous.”
“Oh, it is.” Woodcarver warbled some more, probably “looking up”
definitions. “Without adequate process control, the ‘drip’ normally turns
into something called a ‘conversion torrent.’ That’s destroyed more than
one civilization. Fortunately for most histories, it’s very difficult to create
before you know the danger of it.” She queried some more. “Oh good.

That was last tenday. Scrupilo dropped the project, took the path of
sanity for once. What he’s doing now looks like the materials research
he’s supposed to be doing.” There was pause, then a human-sounding
chuckle. “Scrupilo will throw a personal riot when we take those cameras
from him. It will be fun to see.” The science advisor was another of
Woodcarver’s offspring packs. They had turned out to be Woodcarver’s
own dangerous experiments.
Ravna was doing her best to think sneaky: “I bet we can keep the
diversion a secret. Two or three of them could officially ‘break.’” Very few
of the locals understood what was durable and what was not. Over the
years, she had broken all but one of her head-up displays, but the low-
tech cams could probably survive a twenty-meter fall. “Scrupilo won’t
have to disguise his outrage, just the details of the affair.”
“I like that!” Woodcarver gave a rippling grin, and one of her on a high
perch gave Ravna a pat on the head. She spoke some notes to Oobii.
“Okay, let’s take three cameras. We should think on where and how to
best use them.”
“I want this done quickly. The word is out that I’ve been tipped off. If
someone’s behind this, then wouldn’t they move now, to keep us off
balance?”
“Just so.”
Three cameras scarcely made a surveillance system, no matter how
cleverly they were placed. Ravna decided to ask directly about the
others. “What about the three that you’re already using to spy on
Flenser? It’s humans who are the greatest threat just now.”
“No. Those stay in place. If there really is a conspiracy here, then I’d bet
a champion conspirator is behind it, not one of your naive Children.
Flenser is as devious as any creature alive.” And Old Flenser had been
another of Woodcarver’s offspring packs, the deadliest—if not the most
malevolent—of her attempts at creating genius.
“But this is the reformed Flenser. Only two of his pack are still from you.”
Woodcarver sounded a loud sniff. “So? Old Flenser chose the other

three…”
“It’s been ten years.”
“We get along. The three cameras I’ve hidden down in Old Castle, they
give me reason to … well, ‘trust’ is not the right word … to tolerate him.”
Ravna smiled. “You’re always complaining that he knows where you’re
watching him.”
“Um. I suspect he knows. Always suspect him, Ravna. Then you won’t be
disappointed. Maybe … if I can get my people into the castle, we could
move the cameras around. I’ve been wanting to do that anyway. Flenser
must remain at the top of the suspects list. I don’t want those cameras
diverted to anything less likely.”
“Very well.” The Original Flenser had been a scary beast, combining
extremes of human history. Ravna would have been as paranoid about
Flenser as Woodcarver was if she didn’t have her own special source of
information. That source was one the very few secrets that she’d never
told anyone, not even Johanna. She wasn’t going to reveal it now just to
pry three cameras away from her co-Queen.
One of Woodcarver bumped up against Ravna’s chair and set its paw on
her arm. “You’re disappointed?”
“I’m sorry. Yes, a little. We’ve freed up three cameras. Surely there are
more targets.”
“And I’ll look at Flenser still more carefully than before.”
Ravna couldn’t respond to that, not without revealing her own source of
information.
“Look, Ravna. In addition to the cameras, I’ll bring in some of my agents
from the outlands. We’ll get to the bottom of this.”
Woodcarver was really trying to be cooperative. More than any pack
except Scrupilo, she seemed to understand what drove Ravna.
The human reached out to pat the nearest of Woodcarver. This was Sht
—hei, that’s what the name sounded like to human ears. Member names

were normally little more then broodkenner tags, mostly meaningless
even to Tines. Little Sht was just a few tendays old, a necessary addition
in the careful balancing of youth and old age that was a coherent pack.
This baby was so young that it had only basic sensory sharing with the
rest of Woodcarver. Beyond that, all Ravna knew was that the puppy was
not the biological get of any in Woodcarver or Pilgrim. In dealing with
Tines, puppies were often a problem, especially if a pack’s lifegrooming
was careless. Woodcarver had done much better with her own soul than
with her offspring packs; she had maintained a steady purpose for nearly
six hundred years. Ravna shouldn’t have to worry. She petted the small
creature’s fine dense pelt and felt comforted. Hei, if there was a change it
might be like the congenial evolution that Woodcarver had engineered for
herself in the past.

Chapter   07
Scrupilo was beside himself. “This is an outrage!” The six of him
crowded together, two members climbing up on the shoulder straps of
the others to get their muzzles closer to Ravna’s face. “They were stolen.
This is treachery, and I will not stand for it!”
Ravna had arrived at the North End quarries a few minutes earlier.
Looking down from the edge of the carven stone walls, things had
seemed relatively quiet, no blast banners or fire-in-the-hole beeping. This
seemed like a good time for a nice chat with the science advisor.
As she’d started down the open stairs, she had waved to the humans
who were helping with the work. They cheerily waved back, so maybe
Scrupilo wasn’t too angry. She was still halfway up the rock face, when
she heard the science advisor’s outraged shouting. By the time she
arrived at the laboratory entrance, two of his assistants had come racing
out, passing her with scarcely a how-de-do.
Now she faced the madpack in his own office. She hadn’t dreamed that
Scrupilo would be so angered. For that matter, she’d never had any pack
get in her face so abruptly. She backed toward the open doorway, raising
her hands at the snapping jaws.
“It’s just temporary, Scrupilo! You’ll get the cameras back soon enough.”
At least she hoped so. If they had to keep those cams from Scrupilo’s
use for very long, large sections of her own research program would get
jammed.
The good news was that Scrupilo did not bite her face off. The bad news
was that the pack continued to lunge around—and he wasn’t speaking
Samnorsk anymore. The chords she could hear were loud and jagged,
probably cursing. Then abruptly Scrup’s oldest member, the white-

headed one, hesitated. In half a second, the surprised silence spread
across the pack, like some comedian’s exaggerated double take.
“Cameras?” His volume dropped by some decibels. “You mean the three
video cameras that officially failed earlier today when Woodcarver’s
goons came and took them away?”
“Y-yes.” Hopefully the world beyond Scrupilo’s office had not made sense
of this exchange, state secrets being betrayed in a temper tantrum.
Scrupilo climbed down from himself. For a moment he just circled
around, glaring. Scrupilo could be an officious twit. On the other hand, he
was a genius and a true engineer. As long as you could keep him pointed
in the right direction, and keep him from getting too jealous of the perks
of others, he was a treasure.
“Honest, Scrupilo,” Ravna continued in a soft voice. “This is an
emergency. We’ll get those cams back to you as soon as possible. I
know—at least as well as you—how important they are.”
The Science Advisor continued his angry pacing, but now his voice was
level. “I don’t doubt that. It was the only reason I went along with the
confiscation and the cover story I’m supposed to tell everyone.” Jaws
snapped a couple of times, but not in her direction. “But I fear we are
talking at cross-purposes. The video cams were lawfully confiscated by
Your Highnesses and with some explanation. So then, you and
Woodcarver had nothing to do with the disappearance of the radio
cloaks?”
“What? No!” The cloaks would have been practically useless for
surveillance, and wearing them was dangerous to boot. “Scrupilo, that
was never our plan.”
“Then I was right. There is treachery afoot.”
“How could the cloaks disappear? You keep them in your private vaults,
right?”
“I took them out of the vault after the Queen’s agents made off with my
cameras. I had this idea for using the cloaks … a clever idea really, a
way I might wear them without getting killed in the process. Y’see, maybe

if only part of me wore them, and off-the-shoulder, then—” Scrupilo shook
himself free of geekish distraction. “Never mind. The point is, I had the
cloaks laid out in the experiment factory, ready for use. I was still afume
about Woodcarver’s confiscation, and there were way too many other
distractions this morning. Let’s see…” Scrupilo brought all his heads
together for a moment, the very picture of Tinish concentration.
“Yes. You know how the experiment factory is set up.” Long rows of
simple wood benches. Hundreds of experiment trays, each a simple
combination of reagents, all designed by the planning programs on the
Oobii as the ship matched the reality of Tinish resources with the archival
data that it possessed. Some of the rooms would go for hours without
any pack or human presence—and then the starship automation would
issue a flurry of wireless requests to the scheduling receivers in the
dispatch room. Scrupilo’s helpers would sweep through, removing some
experiments entirely, shifting some to new stations, placing some under
cameras for Oobii’s direct observation.
“I was alone with the radio cloaks, quite distracted by my new idea.”
Scrupilo’s heads all look up. “Yes! Those clowns from the Tropical
madhouse showed up.”
“They came in among the experiments?”
“No. That used to happen, but nowadays we keep them in the visitor
area. Heh. I’ve fobbed them off with junk like unconnected landline
telephones.… Anyway, I had to go out and chat with their ‘Ambassador.’”
Scrupilo jostled together. “I’ll bet that’s it! I was out of the room for almost
fifteen minutes. I wish we didn’t have to be nice to that guy. Do we really
need gallite that much? Never mind, I know the answer.
“Anyway, today they were louder and more numerous than usual, the
whole gang painted up like the loose things they are.” Some of Scrupilo
was already edging toward the door, outpacing the conscious stream of
his surmise. “The scum. While they distracted my people, one of them
must have swiped the cloaks!
“Damn! C’mon, milady!” And the rest of him was out the door, White

Head bringing up the rear. The pack clattered down the outside stairs,
shouting chords of alarm in all directions.
Ravna would have had a hard time keeping up with some packs, but
White Head had arthritis, and Scrupilo was not running completely amok.
The pack wouldn’t leave him behind.
Scrupilo was also shouting in Samnorsk, “Stop the Tropicals! Stop the
Tropicals!” The guards at the top of the exit stairs had already lowered
the gates.
As Ravna and Scrupilo ran across the quarry terrace, Scrupilo muttered a
constant stream of Samnorsk. The profanity was a bizarre combination of
translations of pack cursing and Samnorsk naughty words: “Get of
bitches! I should have realized it was the fuckall Tropicals. I was just too
damned pissed about the cameras. I thought you and Woodcarver were
dumping on me again.”
Shouts came from ahead: “We got them!” The packs and humans in the
quarry were not armed, but they had formed a barrier around …
somebody.
Scrupilo wriggled through the crowd of mindsounds, Ravna close behind.
Ambassador Godsgift and its gang were still in the quarry. They had
been inspecting the most spectacular part of the laboratory, where much
of the dull planning and experimentation finally led to miracles.
There was an open space between the crowd and the suspected thieves.
Godsgift and his people were backed up against Scrupilo’s flying
machine, the Eyes Above. This was not an antigravity craft, but
something weirder, at least to Ravna’s mind: a propeller and basket hung
from a pointy balloon.
Scrupilo spent a moment pacing back and forth in front of the crowd,
gobbling in Tinish. Ravna couldn’t really understand, not without Oobii
analysis. He seemed to be asking everybody to cut the high-sound
screaming. In cold dry air—say, like here, today—such sounds could
carry a number of meters, and if every pack went into a tizzy at the same
time, things could get very confusing for them.

Ravna took a few steps in the direction of the Tropicals, then thought
better of it. These Tines looked frightened and edgy, eyes wide. They
stood close among themselves, pressed hard back against the airboat’s
crew basket. The self-styled “Ambassador” was the only clearly-defined
group, but there was sharp steel visible on more than one forepaw.
These fellows might be loosely minded but they had been in the North
long enough to pick up many Northern habits.
Scrupilo shouted in Samnorsk and Tinish. The Samnorsk was: “Anybody
see what these scum were up to?” Part of him was looking at the airboat,
and it suddenly occurred to Ravna that the Tropicals might actually have
been moments from flying away!
A human fifteen-year-old, Del Ronsndot, stepped forward. “I—I was just
showing them around the Eyes Above. I thought they were allowed.”
“It’s okay, Del,” said Ravna. Such tours were standard policy.
“Did they ask to see the airboat?” said Scrupilo.
“Oh, yes, sir. All the visitors like to see it. Once we get some practice,
maybe we could even give them rides.” His eyes slid across to the
Tropicals, and he seemed to realize that perhaps such generosity would
be postponed.
“Did they ask to let any of their packs aboard?”
There was a loud chord or two from the Tropical side of the confrontation,
and then a human voice: “Ah, Master Scrupilo, if you suspect evildoing
you should talk to me directly.” The ambassador stepped forward. It had
taken the name “Godsgift,” and today it was huge. Some of it dated from
the founding of the Embassy, and it was often fluent. Just as often, it
behaved more like a club for singletons who liked to swagger and pose. It
wore mismatched jackets, some quite elegant. It was hard not to smile at
the buffoon. Right now … well, there was something deadly in its gaze.
Think back, Ravna. Remember the butterflies in jackboots? She’d seen
enough aliens to know how misleading physical appearance could be.
Scrupilo was still too angry to be cautious. He sent two of himself
forward, crowding the Ambassador’s personal space. “Fair enough,

Mister Ambassador. What have you done with my radio cloaks?” The two
snapped their jaws in Godsgift’s direction, and though the adversaries
were still three meters apart, the gesture was very much like one human
poking a finger into the chest of another.
Godsgift was not impressed. “Ha. I’ve heard of those cloaks. Surely they
can find themselves?” It pointed a snout in the direction of Starship Hill. “I
haven’t seen your precious cloaks since that amusing demonstration you
gave at Springtime’s Last Sunset.” He spread into an aside. “What
wonderful holidays you Northerners have. For us, the springtime is just
more rain—”
“Be quiet!” Scrupilo turned a head toward his assistants, both human and
Tinish. “Bring me some soldiers with long pikes. We’re putting these
thieves to the question.”
The Tropicals surged toward Scrupilo, steel glittering on their claws. They
would lose any battle, but Scrupilo’s two forward members would likely
get their throats slashed.
Ravna stepped forward and raised her arms in the way that most packs
seemed to find intimidating. “Wait!” she shouted, as loud as she was
able. “No one’s going to be put to the question. We’ll either respect your
embassy or boot you out of the Domain.”
Scrupilo settled back, gobbling to himself.
The Ambassador had edged away from the mob, no doubt to keep a
clear mind. Now he gave a little warble, and the others relaxed a fraction.
Godsgift bobbed heads in Ravna’s direction. “Ah, so blunt and yet—how
do I say?—so full of the common sense. I am grateful, Your Highness. I
came today expecting a happy and friendly tour. At least it will not
become a bloodbath.”
“Don’t count on it,” Scrupilo muttered back.
Ravna lowered her arms and leaned forward so her eyes were more at
the level of Godsgift’s. “Our radio cloaks went missing just in the last
hour, Mr. Ambassador. So, how interested are you in maintaining your
embassy here? Will you and your people submit to a search?” She

waved at Godsgift’s mob and their suspiciously numerous panniers.
The Ambassador’s heads flipped up, probably a dismissive gesture.
“Perhaps the question should be, how much does your Domain value
continued trade with the Tropics?”
In the past, the trade with the Tropics had been an almost unrecognized
silent barter, where bid and response were spread across years of
occasional shipwrecks. The “Tropical Embassy” had begun as a charity
for shipwrecked singletons, a joke of an embassy. Now the joke had a life
of its own and—maybe—some influence in the South.
Ravna crossed her arms and gave the ambassador a look. It was
amazing the effect the soundless stare of a two-legs could have on some
packs.
Whatever the reason, the ambassador gave a shrug. “Oh, very well. We,
of course, have nothing to hide.”
Ravna gave an inward sigh of relief. Now to find who really did the
thieving. She turned to the crowd behind her. A couple of dozen humans
stood nearby, looming tall over the packs. And one at the back—
“Hei, Nevil! How long have you been here?”
Johanna’s fiancé trotted forward, a couple of his friends close behind.
“Just got here. I was at the top of the quarry when I saw everybody go
berserk.” Nevil stopped beside her. He was still breathing heavily. “I
heard the last part though. You want these fellows searched?”
Scrupilo was nodding. “Yes. You humans can get in close without
upsetting our delicate guests.” He jabbed sarcastically in the direction of
the Tropicals, but his gesture lacked spirit. “I was so sure it was them,” he
grumbled to himself.
Nevil squatted down so he could speak more privately. No human could
direct sotto voce mutterings as well as a pack. Ravna leaned closer.
“Godsgift did give in a bit easily,” said Nevil. “Are you sure you have all
his entourage here?”
Scrupilo’s eyes widened. He poked a head up and gave the Tropicals a

long look. “They’re so hard to count.” He did a double take. “God’s Choir,
Nevil, do you think they split off an extra pack?”
Ravna looked at the visitors. The Tropicals always seemed a bit strange,
with their patchy fur, body paint, and mismatched clothing. Now that they
weren’t jammed against the airship, they had separated into something
like packs, mostly foursomes. If they had come in with extra members,
then split to make an additional pack.… It was the sort of playing with
souls that would have left Domain packs dazed and disoriented.
Scrupilo looked back and forth at the Tropicals. “I don’t know how many
came in, but … look at that body paint. Don’t you think there are gaps
within those two fellows at the end? These are Tropicals. There’s no end
to their perversions.”
Godsgift might be hearing every word. In any case, it was becoming
restive: “I say, Your Highness. We’ve agreed to be searched. Be about
the indignity, if you please!”
“Just a moment more, Mr. Ambassador.” Ravna dropped back into her
head-to-heads with Nevil and Scrupilo. “I have no idea, Scrupilo. Those
paint jobs mean less to me than anyone.” I wish Pilgrim were here.
Pilgrim would know just what the Tropicals could do with themselves.
Nevil turned, waved one of his friends forward. Then he continued,
whispering. “Actually, Bili saw something weird when we were up on top
of the quarry.”
Bili Yngva dropped to his knees beside them and nodded. “Yeah. There
was a fivesome skulking around the quarry hoists. Its panniers were
stuffed. When I tried to get a closer look, the critters took off for the boat
landings. And the strangest thing—I think there were blue smudges on its
pelt, like these fellows’ body paint, but rubbed off.”
Scrupilo let out a hoot of triumph. “I knew it!” Then he dithered. In a
second more, orders would be flying in all directions.
Nevil stood up, gave Ravna a look. “Your Highness?”
Yes, Ravna abruptly realized, it’s time to act the co-Queen. She put a

restraining hand on one of Scrupilo’s heads. “Please bear with me, Mr.
Science Advisor.” Then she stood and turned to the crowd, which itself
was milling uncertainly about. “People! People!” Well, that worked in the
classroom. And goodness, it got everyone’s attention here, too! “We’re
going ahead with the property search the Ambassador just agreed to.
Scrupilo will advise, but I want humans to do the close-in.” Who? She
was suddenly even more grateful that Nevil had shown up. He was on
good terms with all the kids, and was a born leader. “Nevil Storherte will
supervise.”
She said, in an aside to Nevil: “Is Johanna close by?”
“Sorry, she’s on the mainland this afternoon.”
“Okay, check out our visitors.”
Nevil nodded, and began to gather a proper crew. Ravna glanced at
Godsgift. “We’ll have you out of here very soon, Mr. Ambassador.”
The Tropical leader smiled broadly. “Excellent.” Quite evidently, it had no
worries about its guilt being proven here.
Scrupilo was dancing with frustration. His gobbling chords broke into a
hissed Samnorsk whisper. “This is all useless! I should phone the boat
moorage, put out an island-wide alarm, and contact Oobii.”
They also needed some aerial surveillance.… She looked up at the
airboat that had been the backdrop for this confrontation. “Is the Eyes
Above flyable?” She pointed at the aircraft. “And does it have a radio on
board?”
“What? No radio, but the motor is charged … hmm, grmm! Yes!” He
started shouting to his ground crews, chords and Samnorsk all mixed
together, in various loudnesses and different directions. What she could
understand was: “Phone Woodcarver!”, “Nevil, move your investigation
away from the Eyes Above! I have use for it.” And a whisper for her ears:
“The craft is fully prepped. I wonder if Mr. Crapheads knew that.” He ran
to the wicker basket as two of his helpers approached from the other
side. They were fiddling with a row of gas valves, arguing with Scrupilo
about details.

Nevil’s people and the Tropicals had moved twenty meters off. The
suspects were grudgingly removing their panniers and jackets. Huh, the
intricate body painting covered much of their bare skin. Some of the
Tropicals were watching the airboat curiously, but they didn’t seem the
least disconcerted by Scrupilo’s activity.
One of Scrup’s assistants came rushing out with the lab’s loose radio.
The nearest of Scrupilo grabbed the box and passed it to himself, up the
gangplank. Then he hesitated, looking around as though he had forgotten
something critical. “Oh, if only Johanna were here. This will go better with
a combo crew.” That is, a pack and a human. “Nevil!” he shouted.
Ravna put a foot on the gangplank. “That’s okay, I can help you as well
was anybody here.” That was probably true; she’d been up with Scrupilo
a number of times. Besides, she didn’t want to stay here and second-
guess Nevil.
Nevil Storherte had started back in their direction. For a second, Ravna
thought he was going to object. The boy—no, the man; he was only eight
years younger than she—was always going on about her indispensable
role in high planning. This time, he seem to realize that he already had a
job and that seconds counted. He hesitated, then gave her a little wave.
“Okay. Good hunting.”
She waved back, then shooed the rest of Scrupilo up the ramp, into the
airboat’s narrow basket.
For once, Scrupilo was not arguing. He scrambled aboard, all the while
shouting to his ground crew. The basket did its usual disconcerting
wobble as Ravna climbed across into the chair at the stern. She wasn’t
quite tied down when the ground crew cut the tethers and the balloon
drew them firmly skywards.
This was almost like agrav—but steadier then Pilgrim’s flier. The ground
simply fell away. Looking over the edge of the basket, she could see all
the Tropicals’ gear laid out. No way that an entire set of radio cloaks
could be hidden in that.
Scrupilo powered up the boat’s propeller and turned the rudder. They

were over the dark ponds that filled the old mining pits and covered the
lab’s tanks of stabilized hydrogen. The placid waters reflected the
towering walls of the quarry. If she leaned further out, she’d be able to
see the reflection of the airboat.
… But not just now. Ravna tied onto a safety harness and began crawling
around the aft end of the basket. There were a number of equipment
cabinets, mostly waterproofed wicker, with latches that could be released
by hands or paws or jaws. She opened one after another, glancing in
each: a heliograph (not enough radios to go around), maps, two
telescopes. It suddenly occurred to her that there was something to
check before anything else. She set the spyglasses down and turned to
the stern cover.
“Highness,” Scrupilo shouted to her. She looked out, saw that they had
cleared the top of the quarry. “Please handle the driving. I’m best with the
telescopes.” Then he noticed that Ravna was trying to pull up the stern
ballast cover. “Highness? The telescopes, please … What are you
doing?”
“It just occurred to me—what if they stuffed the cloaks in the ballast
tanks?”
“Uck.” The pack thought a second, no doubt imagining how this chase
could wreck what they were trying to recover. It was a long shot, but—”I’ll
check the bow and mid tanks.” A pair at a time, Scrupilo’s members
released the various controls they had jaws on and poked around in the
water tanks that were set along the length of the hull. The main rudder
slid free and the propeller slowed till you could see its three blades. The
Eyes Above slowly turned in the nearly still afternoon air, now pointing
toward the outer islands, now at the north channel, now at Starship Hill.
They were high enough that she could see the dome of the New Castle.
“There’s nothing in these tanks but water,” he said returning to his
controls.
“Same back here.”
“Very well then. Time is wasting.” He angled both horizontal and vertical

rudders and spun up the screw. Eyes Above’s stern gently bobbed
upwards, and the airboat angled down, turning toward the island’s North
End boat landings. “Can you circle us around the North End while I take a
look?”
“Yes.” Flying was easy in air this placid. The backseat controls included
two jaw levers by her chair and another pair set far enough forward that
she could use them as foot pedals. Together they provided control of the
rudders and propeller. It wasn’t as simple as a point-and-move interface,
but Ravna had practiced.
Scrupilo hauled the two telescopes forward. The eyepieces were curved
masks that could be rotated to fit either side of a member’s head. Midway
down each barrel was a clasp suitable for the usual shoulder strap on
Tinish jackets. In a matter of seconds, he had the scopes mounted on
two of himself, and two of his other members were looking around for
things to spy on. “Okay. Take us a little north.… Hah. Except for my
construction barge, the moorage is almost deserted.”
The North End moorage had been mostly taken over by Scrupilo’s
serious aircraft project, the creation of a rigid airship. The superstructure
of the Eyes Above 2 was already evident in the spars and ribs rising from
the construction barge. When completed, in another half year or so, the
EA2 would be more than two hundred meters long, capable of
transporting a dozen packs across the continent nonstop.
Most of Scrupilo was maneuvering the two telescopes like binoculars,
sweeping across the piers and boat shelters. The rest of him lay together
in the bottom of the basket, as if asleep. More likely, they were busy with
the others, bringing all that two of them were seeing into a single,
analyzed vision.
Scrupilo was humming to himself; at least the chords meant nothing to
Ravna. “Ha! I see the pitter-patter of wet paws along the quay. See the
gap in the moorage? Some pack was down here recently, departing in
one of the single-hulled day fishers. So we know what to look for!” The
two telescope bearers stood down. The others spread out to the ballast
dumps. “Let’s get upstairs quickly, Your Highness!” He dumped some

water. One way or another, they were going up.
Ravna angled them northwest, across the outer straits. The channel
islands were numerous, forested, and largely uninhabited. If the thief
made it there he could probably get away.
Scrupilo glanced at the gear-driven clock he kept on White Head’s jacket.
“Take us to Ridgeline, that’s the only place the thief could have reached
in this direction.” He was on his telescopes again, scanning the open
water, all the way to where sea mist hung round the furthest islands.
“Hmm, a couple of twinhulls, nothing like our fellow.”
They drove along for a few seconds, the propeller pushing them along at
about five meters per second. The wicker basket was a cold, shadowed
place, but at least the air stream was diverted by the basket’s bow
cowling.
Ravna locked down the rudders and rummaged around for the radio that
Scrupilo had brought aboard. These radios were one of the stranger of
Oobii’s reinventions. Of course, the device had no onboard processors; it
was totally analog, indiscriminately spewing across the entire radio
spectrum. No matter. The starship monitored all aspects of the space
around it.
“Ship. Can you see where I am?” Ravna asked into the microphone.
“Ravna. Yes,” acknowledged a pleasant male voice, something like
Pham’s voice perhaps. But there wasn’t a bit of mind behind this voice.
Oobii’s automation was simply the best computation that could run in the
Slow Zone. By now she was almost used to the interface, and it was the
best she could do when she wasn’t wearing the data tiara.
She described the problem situation in terms the starship could work
with. “And watch for radio lights near my location.”
“Watching,” Oobii replied.
“What transmissions do you see, out to, ah, four thousand meters?”
“I see a number of—”
“Ignore the North End lab.”

“—I see one, your current transmission.”
“Do you see any radio light from Ridgeline Island?”
“The radio frequency energy from Ridgeline Island appears to be normal
scattering.”
“Okay,” said Ravna. “Ongoing: report on artificial radio light seen within,
um”—Here she really needed a better interface. She settled for
something short and crude.—“everything within ten thousand meters of
the north end of Hidden Island.”
“Done and ongoing. Do you want the reports streamed now?”
Ravna thought a second. “No. Report anomalies and forwarded
transmissions.” There were several radios that might legitimately be in
use at this end of the Domain. They were part of the clunky forwarding
operation that Oobii managed.
“Very good,” replied Oobii. “I see nothing unusual at this time.”
“You know, Your Highness, praps you should let me manage the radio
interface.” Scrup was almost as clever with voice comms as Woodcarver.
“No, keep your attention on the ground.”
Scrupilo grumped around the basket. Their path had taken them in a low
sweep of Ridgeline’s shore, giving his telescopes a view beneath the tall
evergreens. “There’s nothing down there, no marks in the sand, and this
is about the only place they could have reached land by now. The thief is
either holed up on Hidden Island or he’s on the inland channel, heading
for the mainland. And now we’ll never catch up! We are useless.”
Scrupilo was like that, getting all frustrated and then giving up for a while.
But Ravna was just getting interested in the problem. Given both the
Eyes Above and the Oobii, there were some possibilities. She chatted
with Oobii. It reported a mainland-trending windstream about five
hundred meters up and a few hundred meters south. They dumped a
little ballast. She brought the rudders around and drove the propeller as
fast as its little electric motor could go. The airboat angled upwards,
Ravna steering according to directions from the starship. It was fun as

long as she didn’t dwell on the fact that she was reduced to being a mere
servomechanism for her starship’s very dumb automation.
They climbed their invisible staircase, turning through 180 degrees as
they went. Scrupilo looked out in all directions, then concentrated his
attention on the Inner Channel, between the mainland and Hidden Island.
Every few seconds he’d comment on the new areas he could see. “Still
no sign of … But wow, the ground speed! Milady, your maneuver is
worthy of Johanna herself!” The starship reported that the Eyes Above
was driving along at almost twenty meters per second. “And I can see the
whole of the mainland shore. Mark my words, we’ll catch this thief!”
They drilled along, airspeed no greater than before, but the North End lab
passed below them and they were already cruising southward along the
Inner Channel. Oobii reported no new radio emissions. Of course, it had
been a long shot that the thief would try to wear the radio cloaks. To the
Tines, the devices were almost religious icons. Wear them, and you’d
most likely fry your mind—but if that didn’t happen then you were
transformed into a godlike pack who could stride the world with
kilometers between one’s pack members! Somebody like Godsgift might
be arrogant enough to wear the cloaks in the middle of trying to steal
them, but that was probably not true of his minions.
She looked out at the cliffs of the mainland, the shoulders that Starship
Hill rested upon. If somehow the thief got ashore, it would be hiding in the
evergreens that grew in the steepness. Oobii said there would be a
summer rain shower in another few hours. Under cover of that, the thief
might make it to whatever rendezvous the Tropicals had planned. She
looked at the froth of dying spring leaves that floated in the evergreens’
crowns. In most places, the ground was hidden. Oobii had no line of sight
on these cliffs. Even so … she gave the starship another call.
Scrupilo’s attention was on his telescopes; apparently he didn’t notice
what Ravna was saying to the Starship. He pointed a snout downwards.
“There are Woodcarver’s troops coming down to the mainland shore! We
should tell them that I’ve covered the shore north of us. Forward a call to
them, Your Highness.”

Then her science advisor noticed that she wasn’t making the call. “Your
Highness!”
“Just a moment, Scrupilo. We may be able to detect the cloaks, even if
they’re not turned on.”
“But we need to make that call to Woodcarver!” Even his telescope
members were looking around at her. Then he gave a start and began to
sniff at his fur. “Wow! Did you feel that, Your Highness? Like a tiny
electric shock, but through all my members, all at once.”
Ravna hadn’t felt a thing; maybe that was because she didn’t have six
fur-covered bodies. However, she had an explanation. “Oobii just hit us
with a very bright pulse. Even if the cloaks are turned off and around a
corner, they might give back an echo.”
“Ah!” One good thing about Scrupilo, he really admired clever surprises.
“Well, in that case, I’m pleased to be your personal radio pulse sensor.”
Ravna grinned back and put through a call to her starship.
Oobii replied, “Except for known radios, no device echoes detected.”
Scrupilo stuck out his snouts from both sides of the basket and took a
naked eye look at the passing scene. “I say we radio pulse every so
often. No way this Tropical would guess your clever trick, Highness.
Sooner or later he’ll move where Oobii can detect him.”
Ravna set up a surveillance plan with Oobii, got some more winds-aloft
advice, and also forwarded Scrupilo’s observations through Oobii to
Woodcarver. They continued southwards, climbing another hundred
meters. They were almost even with the long row of telephone poles that
marched off to the south along the Queen’s Road.
The Eyes Above wasn’t making good time anymore, but it was well
ahead of Woodcarver’s search parties. Just a few hundred meters to her
left, paralleling the telephone poles, were the “town houses” of older
Children and wealthy packs. They might be her most visible achievement
of the last ten years. Ravna didn’t know whether to laugh or cry about
that. The half-timbered houses were large, each big enough for a married

couple, a young child or children on the way, and one or two pack
friends. Oobii was able to keep the buildings warm by shining a very low-
power beam gun on the hot water towers that stood next to each house.
So the town houses were comfortably warm all year round, with hot and
cold running water and indoor plumbing. A large part of Oobii’s tech rent
had gone into paying for the Children’s town houses. The second-
generation kids thought they were heavenly. Their parents regarded the
houses as a small step up from purgatory.
“Ha. I felt another pulse,” said Scrupilo. Ravna called the ship. Still no joy.
“We’re almost to Cliffside harbor, Scrupilo. I think that’s beyond where
the thief could have come.” In any case, the straits between Hidden
Island and the mainland was far busier than the polluted water at North
End. There seemed little hope of spotting a suspicious boat here.
“… Yes. I suppose we should turn around and”—Scrupilo had raised his
telescopes, pointing them at the highlands ahead.—“but not just yet! The
Tropicals may have outsmarted themselves. Something strange is going
on near their madhouse. Can you fly there, quietly?”
The embassy compound was just south of the town houses, a fenced-in
collection of ramshackle sheds perched on the edge of the Margrum
Valley. “I’ll check.” She gave Oobii a quick call, then turned back to
Scrupilo. “In that direction, we have a southbound breeze all the way to
the ground.” She ran the propeller for another thirty seconds, long
enough to put them on a path that would take them past the compound.
They were just a few dozen meters above the heather now. She cut the
motor, and they coasting along with the breeze, surrounded by eerie
silence. “How’s that?”
None of Scrupilo looked up from his intent surveillance. “Excellent. The
bastards are up to something. They’re in a crowd off to the northwest of
the compound.”
“What, they’re playing with their snow sleighs again?” There’d been
heavy snowfall last winter, and the Tropicals had become enamored of
large sleighs. Typical of the mob’s long-term planning, they had begged

and worked to buy a number of sleighs—getting possession just in time
for the spring mud.
“No!” said Scrupilo. “These fellows are by the fence, near the telephone
trunk line. I wonder how close we can get before they see us.”
Ravna glanced behind her. The northering sun was peeking under the
curve of the balloon. “We’re coming at them from out of the sun.” Ahead,
she couldn’t actually see their shadow on the ground, but there was a
bright spot, a glory shine, in the heather beyond the compound, marking
just where their shadow must be. The roundish light had almost reached
the edge of the valley. She vented a little hydrogen. As the Eyes Above
sank, the bright spot moved into the compound.
“Brilliant, Milady! Can you keep us in the sun all the way down?”
“I think so.” When the spot of backscatter brightness drifted beyond the
compound, Ravna vented a little more hydrogen. Goodness, this was like
having a guide program! She felt a small thrill at finding something so
convenient built into the raw nature of the world.
They were about 500 meters from the compound, and losing attitude.
Ravna had to push up from her seat to see over the basket’s bow. The
Eyes Above’s shadow was clearly visible now, surrounded by just a halo
of backshine. She vented a bit more gas, brought the shadow to just
beyond the Tropicals.
There were a bunch of them down there, standing at the edge of the
Queen’s Road, right where it passed closest to the embassy. This crowd
plus the ones at the lab would add up to most of the embassy’s total
population, though the count was always vague. A number of Tropicals
returned south when their wrecks finally slid back to sea. Others had
probably been involved in Fragmentarium breakouts over the years.
Ravna could see their ragged jackets and leggings, the body paint on
their exposed heads and tympana. There were probably twenty packs’
worth, all tangled together. Yup, an orgy in the making.
Now less than two hundred meters away, none of them looked up to see
the Eyes Above. Ravna vented a little more hydrogen, keeping their

shadow just out of the packs’ eyes.
Scrupilo had no need for his telescopes now. Five of him had heads
stuck over the rim of the basket, staring down. He wriggled his White
Head member back to Ravna. “Sst,” whispered White Head. “I can hear
them!”
A few seconds passed—and now Ravna could hear them too. The
sounds were clear in the wider silence, growing louder as the Eyes
Above swept closer, the gobble and hiss of Tinish excitement. The
chords were otherwise nonsense to her, but then she could understand
very little of the local language, even when the packs were trying their
best to be clear.
Scrupilo was not so limited. His White Head reached its nose close to
Ravna’s face, where its fore-tympanum could whisper even more quietly.
“You hear what they’re saying? The get of bitches already know about
the theft! That’s solid proof they’re behind it. No way any of their party
could be back from the lab this fast!”
Now the Eyes Above was coasting over them. There was no more point
in careful navigation. Ravna left her pilot’s chair and leaned over the
edge of the basket. They would pass dead even with the compound’s
twisted tower. Directly below, not more than forty meters away, was the
mob of Tropicals. These guys did look excited. Then there was a gap in
the crowd and she saw the telephone resting on the ground. A thin wire
hung down from the nearest telephone pole.
“Oh,” said Scrupilo. Well, that explained their excitement, and why they
were standing here by the road. Memo: never give half a solution to
these critters.
Just then, someone finally noticed the Eyes Above. Heads turned up all
across the crowd, and the Tines started running around, making a racket
that seemed impossibly loud coming from dog-sized bodies.
Scrupilo blasted back, and Ravna just hunched down and stuck her
fingers in her ears. The battle of the noisemakers continued for several
seconds, getting louder on both sides. Were the Tropicals running along

beneath them? She was afraid to look and get a direct face full of that
tormenting sound.
The Eyes Above slid out over the Margrum Valley. Behind them, Ravna
could see the Tropicals ranged along the edge of the drop, still hopping
up and down in apparent outrage. It was like human fist-shaking.
Scrupilo huffed indignantly: “Mindless prattlers! All they can talk about is
how we’ve abused their ambassador, and how they have every right to
splice into our phone lines.… Deceit! Deceit! Deceit!” This last, he
chanted in time to the chords he was directing toward the enemy.
Ravna dropped some ballast and kicked on the propeller, bringing the
Eyes Above into a long climbing turn that headed back north over the
inner channel. By the Powers, it was amazing the range at which Scrupilo
and the Tropicals could keep up their long-distance shouting match.

Chapter   08
Days passed. The affair of the stolen radio cloaks was not resolved.
The search of the ambassador’s party at Scrupilo’s lab turned up nothing.
Eventually, the lab and North End and all the accessible anchorages in
the near islands and mainside were searched—without success. Ravna
marvelled at the elegant way Godsgift managed Tropical indignation. The
fellow hadn’t always been so smart. During the last eight years, the thing
they called Ambassador had mixed and matched itself. Now he had
almost-credible excuses for why his people spliced into the land line: they
had expected a phone call from the ambassador to a nearby Domain
house. When that homeowner brought no message to the embassy
compound, the Tropicals became afraid for their ambassador’s safety
and so undertook the splice (rather expertly done, on their very first try)
and began raising hell up and down the phone line. Normally, Oobii’s
routing advice made the system quite usable—but that depended on
users honoring that advice.
At the same time he was complaining and excusing himself, Godsgift
refused to allow any search of the embassy compound. Woodcarver
responded with a siege. This lasted about a tenday—and ended when
Godsgift accepted a year of free telephone access in return for his
granting permission to search the building.
Of course, nothing was found in the Embassy search.
The oscillation between sneaky and clownish was both effective and
suspicious. Scrupilo and Nevil lobbied for booting the Tropicals out of the
Domain, strategic materials be damned. Johanna thought the Tropicals
had never been mentally together enough for serious theft. Woodcarver
figured they were being used by Flenser (natch!) or maybe by the long-
missing Vendacious. Flenser denied everything.

Meantime Ravna concentrated on her main problem. She was doing her
best to remove the dissatisfactions that gave support to the Disaster
Study Group. She had to make changes, reforms. Unfortunately, even
the simplest of the projects could have hidden gotchas. Take the idea of
giving the Children more access to Oobii. Ultimately, that might slow the
research program slightly, but that was a price she’d have to pay. Ravna
had no trouble clearing the ship’s main cargo deck. It opened directly at
ground level now, and what gear remained could be safely stored in the
New Castle. It was even less of a problem—a simple request to the
ship’s automation—to turn the inner walls into displays. Now the vaulting
space of the cargo hold was a warm meeting hall. The Children were
eager to decorate the space.
Soon, the inside of the cargo bay was a crude imitation of various places
they remembered from before their world fell apart. There was actually an
elected committee (democracy rearing its head) for deciding the
ambiance of the tenday. The kids and their Best Friend packs showed up
in crowds. Since they were effectively inside the starship, Oobii could
manipulate the acoustics so packs could sit within a couple of meters
without interfering with one another’s mindsounds. That was something
magical and new for most packs, and it brought the place even greater
popularity.
So the New Meeting Place was an overwhelming success, with
unintended side effects that were themselves a benefit. Right? Not quite.
There was a serious gotcha. It first showed up as Ravna was clearing out
the cargo hold. When the carts carrying the gear from the hold (much of it
Beyonder arcana that might someday be very useful) arrived at the New
Castle, Woodcarver’s guards had blocked the cargo for nearly half a day.
Woodcarver was Downcoast, Ravna was told, without radio relay—and
she hadn’t left clear word about where the cargo should be stored, or if it
should be accepted at all! What admin idiocy! Ravna had thought. This
was the sort of thing that Scrupilo occasionally pulled, but Woodcarver’s
castle chamberlains were normally more sensible. Besides, she had
checked out the undercastle space around the Children’s Lander; there
was plenty of room.

Woodcarver had legal say at the castle, just as Ravna was the boss
aboard the Oobii. It was part of their co-Queendom arrangement, but
Ravna had never before been denied use of the catacombs. And
Woodcarver had known of Ravna’s plans for the cargo hold.
In the end, Ravna got the gear stowed away, but in the days that followed
—and for the first time in the ten years that the two had worked together
—she felt a distance and a frostiness between herself and Woodcarver.
Ravna asked Pilgrim about the problem. As both the Queen’s consort
and a parent of some of her recent members, he should have some
insight!
“Woodcarver was too shy to say anything about it, Ravna.”
“Huh?” Ravna replied, remembering Woodcarver’s directness in the past.
“Why would Woodcarver be shy about complaining to me?”
“Um, I think because she knows she’s wrong to be pissed at you.”
“Y-you two have discussed this?”
“Yup. Basically, she thinks this new meeting place upsets the balance of
reputations between the two of you.” He tapped a couple of noses
together and looked a little embarrassed. “I know, that’s—well, childish is
the word a human might use. I would have warned you, except I was
sure that Woodcarver recognized her foolishness in the matter. She’s not
usually like this, but she doesn’t have that new puppy entirely in step with
the rest of her.” He brightened. “I’ll talk to her. The three of us could get
together and—”
“No. I’ll talk to her myself. I should have taken more time explaining the
idea to her in the beginning. The New Meeting Place doesn’t replace the
Thrones Room. It’s just a informal place where everyone can get closer
to the world we’re trying to build.”
So Ravna made an appointment with her co-Queen, in the Thrones
Room atop Starship Hill. Even that was a change. Up till now, she’d felt
welcome to drop in almost without notice.
She talked to Woodcarver for some time, pointing out what a smash hit

the New Meeting Place had become, how it was bringing both the
Children and their packs to understanding and eager participation in what
Ravna and Woodcarver were trying to accomplish.
“It’s working better than I ever dreamed, Woodcarver. There are packs
unrelated to the Children—some of them traditionalists from Woodcarver
City—who’ve come to the New Meeting Place. Ultimately, it could be a
kind of diplomatic center.”
Most of Woodcarver was curled up around her radio. She nodded
courteously at Ravna’s enthusiastic description. “Rather like a capitol,
then?”
“Yes—I mean, no, not a center of power. Woodcarver, packs and
Children have always had data access at the ship.” Ravna managed a
weak laugh. “That’s why so many Tines are great experts on everything
human and Beyonder! The New Meeting Place just makes that access
easier.”
Woodcarver’s heads gave a gentle shake. “But your starship is the center
of power, no matter what you or I might say. When I look out from New
Castle’s parapets, I see the telephone mainlines all leading to your
starship.”
“But we’re using Oobii for switching and access logic.”
Woodcarver’s voice rolled on: “And, invisibly, your starship manages
radio access and relay—without it, our little radios would be a short-range
muddle.”
“That’s only until we get past torsion antennas.” Actually, Ravna was
hoping Tines World would not have to detour through the era of analog
frequency management. Central management should work fine until the
Tines had digital signal processing.
“And we Tines have developed almost none of the energy schemes we
see described in your archives. Your ship’s beam gun warms our water
and our homes.”
Ravna raised her hands. “Without Oobii’s shortcuts it would be decades

before we had anything like these services.”
Woodcarver said, “I know that. But nowadays, when I look out and see
Oobii with its beam gun so artfully positioned to cover the heartland of the
Domain…”
Ravna sat in shocked silence. After the Battle on Starship Hill,
Woodcarver had chosen Flenser’s Old Castle as her seat of office, and
Ravna had moved Oobii down to Hidden Island. In that first year, the
queen had come to realize that however hastily it was built, the New
Castle up on Starship Hill was the proper center for a great empire. She
had moved herself up here, and asked Ravna to follow, putting Oobii
back on the hill, guardian of all Woodcarver could see. Moving Oobii had
not been easy; Ravna could not imagine that the ship would ever fly
again. And now…?
Woodcarver exchanged looks with herself. Conflicted? “I’m sorry. I know,
I asked for Oobii’s help. I know you have removed the beam gun’s
amplifier stage. I would never regard your stewardship of Oobii as a
threat. It’s just that lately I’m seeing the risks with new insight.
“Our dependence on your ship for all things makes it a single point of
failure—I think that’s your technical term for it—which of course I learned
from texts in Oobii’s archive. Isn’t it unwise to bet everything on the
proper operation of a single part?”
For Ravna, the answer to that question had always been obvious. Ravna
had a deadline. It might be less than a century away. She bowed her
head. “I understand. But haven’t we discussed all this before? I thought
we were agreed. We’re using Oobii to support Scrupilo’s research and
move us as fast as possible.”
Woodcarver sighed. “Yes. In any case, we are too far down this path to
change.”
Thank the Powers! Ravna suddenly realized that a disaster had been
avoided. This was so much worse than what Pilgrim had said. “W-
Woodcarver, if on balance you regard Oobii’s meeting place as a
negative thing, just tell me clearly, and I’ll take it down.”

“No, I accept your reasoning, Ravna. I’m content with your new meeting
place.”
“Our New Meeting Place, Woodcarver. Thank you.” Ravna cast around
for some different topic of conversation. “S-so how are the border
inspections going?” Since the cloaks’ disappearance, Woodcarver had
attempted to enforce something like nation-state control on the various
mountain passes leading over the Icefangs.
Woodcarver bobbed her heads in a smile. “All in place, and rather faster
than I had thought possible.” She shrugged. “No matter. In this case, the
real threat is not foreigners. I’m confident the cloaks never left the
Domain.”
“Oh, right. Flenser.”
“You mean the reformed Flenser,” Woodcarver said archly. “Reformed or
not, I know Flenser has always coveted the radio cloaks. They feed his
messianic urges.”
“You could kick him off the Council.”
“I’ve thought of taking action against him. I don’t think you realize how
clever he is. For a fact, I think he’s as clever as before his four were
assassinated. Tyrathect, ‘the humble school teacher,’ was well chosen.
And he still has plenty of political connections on Hidden Island and to
the north. He’s too subtle to catch, and too powerful to ease aside.”
“But there’s no evidence he had anything to do with the theft.”
“There is a certain amount of indirect evidence. Pilgrim has noticed.
Scrupilo would have noticed, if he weren’t so focused on the Tropicals.…
Not many thieves could have escaped your pursuit, Ravna. You showed
again the remarkable usefulness of Oobii.”
“Oh?”
“I got the details from Scrupilo, more than he said to the Council. You
used all sorts of tricks that the Tropicals could never have guessed. No
one who wasn’t deeply involved with Oobii technology could have slipped
past your search. Scrupilo might have managed it. Maybe I could have—

after a lot of research. And then there’s Flenser, who over the years has
wangled who knows what out of Oobii—and who I still suspect stole
Oliphaunt.”
Ravna opened her mouth to protest, then decided that she had already
challenged Woodcarver’s paranoia too much today. In fact, whoever had
stolen the Oliphaunt dataset had an oracle that in some ways was as
significant as Oobii. Possession would make almost any sneaky plan
feasible. And Woodcarver had absolute faith in her smartest offspring’s
continuing villainy. I should be grateful, thought Ravna. Better that
Woodcarver obsess about Flenser than about the New Meeting Place.
•  •  •
When Ravna came back down the hill from the New Castle, it was an
hour or two before midnight. The heather was in twilight. An occasional
star was visible in the southern sky; there was the orbiting hulk of the
freight device that had carried the Children’s Lander here.
The darkness and the clear sky together brought a deep chill that mostly
hid during the summer. By the time Ravna reached Oobii, the breeze had
picked up, driving like icy needles through her locally made sweater. The
Children called such clothing “unspeakably dumb”; in any case, the fabric
had no ability to average temperatures.
The lights from Oobii’s cargo bay—the New Meeting Place—splashed
warm and welcoming out upon the hillside. Ravna stood in the outer
fringes of the light and looked in. Even now, there were packs and
Children within. They were probably just playing games, but even so, the
sight comforted her. Woodcarver would eventually love this place.
But just now Ravna didn’t want to talk to anyone. She passed the light,
continued on around the ship. Since the theft of the cloaks, local security
had been a big topic at council meetings. Nevil, with Scrupilo in loud

support, and Johanna soberly nodding, thought that any number of other
terrible things might happen now, including smash-and-grab attacks. That
sounded foolish to Ravna, but in fact, they didn’t know who they were up
against. Maybe the added surveillance cams would help. Maybe they
needed more guards. We’ll get all the evils of a nation state before we
get the tech we need.
In any case, nothing could go wrong so close to her ship’s watchful eyes.
She stepped near the hull, and Oobii quietly opened a hatch for her. She
walked inside and let the ship take her up to her rooms by the bridge.
She changed out of the heavy sweater and pants, into her shipboard
clothes. Just doing that reminded her again of her special perks. Very
soon she must move out of these digs. That had become a personal
imperative, even though she hadn’t yet spoken of it to anyone. Living
outside of Oobii would slow her work, but now she realized that staying
aboard might be even more destructive.
Meantime, tonight, she had more than enough work to do, and it required
all the tech that her starship bridge could provide:
What was Flenser-Tyrathect up to? Woodcarver had such strong
suspicions about the pack. In fact, Ravna knew that some minor part of
those suspicions was correct. The wily (reformed) monster had indeed
figured out that Woodcarver had bugged his sanctums. But the reason
Ravna knew that was also the reason she knew Flenser wasn’t behind
the current mysteries.
She hunkered down in her favorite-style chair and called up Oobii’s
surveillance suite—the High Beyond system that she had kept hidden
from everyone.
The Out of Band II had been designed for operations at the Bottom of the
Beyond and even in the Slow Zone (where they were now marooned).
But the ship had been built in the Middle Beyond, where technology
tapdanced at the edge of intelligibility. Almost none of the ship’s highest
functions worked Down Here. Certainly, no ship could fly faster than light
Down Here. And the antigravity was slowly dying. The natural-language
translators were laughably incompetent. Even where local physics

allowed a phenomenon, the ship’s software was often incapable of
exploiting it. That was why a lot of Oobii’s design involved Very Dumb
Solutions to classic problems.
Nevertheless, there were surprises. In the days after Pham died, after the
Battle on Starship Hill, Ravna had taken inventory of what remained.
Here and there amidst the wreckage, she found advanced devices that
more or less still functioned. With one exception, she’d revealed these to
Johanna and then to Woodcarver, and—after it was founded—to the
Executive Council. Ravna had kept her mouth shut about the surveillance
suite; she and the Children were trapped on a world of medieval
strangers. The only other galactic on the planet was the Skroderider
Greenstalk, and she was too soon gone. Oh, Greenstalk, how I miss you.
The thought still popped up, for Greenstalk had been with her through all
the most desperate times in space.
So at the beginning Ravna had kept some secrets. It was now years too
late to reveal this one. In the Beyond, “cameras” were more than what
early tech civilizations imagined. Cameras could be a coat of paint, or
critters that looked like insects, or even a bacterial infection. Delivery of
the information to the observer could be even stranger, a diffuse cloud of
perturbations—acoustic, visual, thermal—that took enormous processing
to reconstruct.
One such hardware system had survived Countermeasure’s surge. Even
more miraculous, Oobii could still reconstruct the output. Early on, Ravna
had to decide just who to target with that special surveillance. It had not
been a difficult choice. The Old Flenser had created a strange culture
that was both cruel and fiendishly inventive. Flenser had seemed every
bit as dangerous as Woodcarver claimed.
And so one day during the early years, Ravna had infected Flenser-
Tyrathect’s members with the surveillance system. The infestation was
physically harmless, and the devices could not replicate, but there were
more than enough devices to cover the pack, hopefully for as long as she
needed them.
Over the years, Ravna had often wished—but never with the desperate

frustration of one who has made a profound mistake—that she could
infect somebody else with the surveillance system. But the “reformed”
Flenser had been the greatest unknown, potentially the greatest threat,
and Ravna’s camera had revealed to her that whatever strange thing
Flenser-Tyrathect might be, it was not working against Woodcarver or
Ravna or their plans for the Domain. That certainty had more than once
brought Ravna to the verge of revealing her methods to Woodcarver.
Now, after the misunderstanding about the New Meeting Place, Ravna
wondered if she could ever dare tell her.
Woodcarver’s latest suspicions about Flenser and the radio cloaks made
perfect sense—if one didn’t know about Ravna’s special surveillance.
The ship was constantly monitoring the Flenser data, keeping a record of
the reconstructed images and watching for specified alarm conditions.
Ravna had reviewed that record very carefully in the days immediately
after the theft of the radio cloaks, and the reformed Flenser had seemed
just as darkly innocent as ever. What more could she do?
I wonder what the pack is up to right now, tonight? A frivolous thought
perhaps, since “real time” views from the system were a strange and
scattered thing. Nevertheless, Ravna made the request. Several seconds
passed. Range was the great weakness of this system. Beyond the local
area, reception became extremely ambiguous. Fortunately, Flenser had
been out of the area only a few times in ten years—a very good
consequence of Woodcarver’s strict hold on the fellow. The reports from
the infestation were forwarded in unsynchronized driblets across the
nearly random locations of devices that previously had been shed from
the pack’s members. Sufficient data to build one picture might take a
thousand seconds—and then less than one second for the next image.
Sometimes important adjustments would show up later and Oobii would
revise the image stream in really strange ways.
Tonight, reception was poor, but as Oobii’s signal-processing software
struggled with clues, the pictures gradually became clearer, more
colorful, brighter. There were a few moments of motion and then the
stream froze again. Ravna fiddled with the parameters.

Flenser was somewhere in the sub-basements of the Old Castle. He
went there two or three times a year. Several years ago, Ravna had
concluded that Flenser did indeed know where Woodcarver’s spy
cameras were located. That was a scary conclusion, but then she
realized that most of these trips “downstairs” were just part of Flenser’s
hobby of enraging his pack parent.
There were exceptions; Flenser had some things he really didn’t want
Woodcarver to know about. For instance, Woodcarver had forbidden
Flenser to try to rehabilitate his creation, Steel. In that, Woodcarver had
reneged on her peace treaty with Flenser. It was the only such incident
Ravna knew of. The remains of Lord Steel were allowed to live, but as a
slobbering, slashing threesome. The madpack had been kept in isolation,
at the veterans’ fragmentarium.
For a time, it had looked like Flenser might restart the war over
Woodcarver’s broken promise. Instead, he used the issue to win a
number of concessions—including repossession of the Old Castle. But
Ravna knew that the wily Flenser had not given up on Steel. In the early
years, Flenser had often come down to these sub-basements to meet
with Carenfret, a broodkenner at the Fragmentarium. That pack was
unquestionably loyal to Woodcarver, and probably opposed to every one
of the Old Flenser’s horrific experiments. Flenser and Carenfret had been
conspiring all right, but only to persuade Woodcarver to make Steel
whole. Maybe they would have succeeded eventually. Unfortunately,
Steel’s problem was a torment from within; the poor wretch had fought
itself to death, rendering the conspirators’ plans moot.
Ravna was certain that Woodcarver would not see things so forgivingly.
Meeting down in the Old Castle catacombs was itself the stuff of treason.
The chambers were steeped in horror. Woodcarver had once attempted
an inventory of the place. Her packs had found at least five levels, with
many fallen tunnels still unsurveyed.
In recent years, the catacombs had become much too intriguing to the
Children. When they got to be ten or eleven years old, they just had to
take a crack at exploring “Flenser’s Caves of Death.” If you counted

natural erosion and rock falls, there were plenty of entrances, a new one
discovered every few years. Sooner or later, some kid was going to fall
down a hole and get killed. That and the onshore cliffs had been Ravna’s
biggest day-to-day worries, until this Denier cult thing.
In tonight’s expedition, most of Flenser was carrying solar cell lamps. The
light was scarcely brighter than tar torches, but it didn’t consume oxygen
or make smoke. Ravna recognized the low-ceilinged cavern Flenser was
passing through. Some kids had gotten lost here just last year. It was—
she hoped—the most grisly place they would ever see. She remembered
how it stank, even after all the years. The dark floor was punctuated with
stone plugs that looked like small manhole covers. In the view Oobii
synthesized from Flenser’s various heads, she could see the hexagonal
pattern of dozens—hundreds—of covers stretching off into the darkness.
The picture stream froze. Oobii was waiting for signal or—more likely—
had fallen behind in its analysis. Ravna didn’t rush it. She wanted the
high-resolution video, and if it took a while for the clues to dribble in and
be interpreted, that was fine. In fact, this sequence seemed usable.
Sometimes, no matter how long she waited, all she could get was
ambiguity.
So she stared idly at the still picture. There was a missing “manhole
cover” just to the right of one picture. That was what had scared her
when the kids went exploring. In the dark, you could fall into one of those
open holes and break your neck. She idly merged the views from several
of Flenser’s members. The synthesis gave her a view into the hole. The
bottom was lost in shadow, but she knew each hole was about two
meters deep, ending in a sewage sump. If Oobii was not interpolating
from past experience, this particular hole was not empty.
She could see bones and desiccated flesh. Yech. No doubt about it, Old
Flenser had been a monster. These holes were a combination of
dungeon and rack. Flenser—and later Steel—would split a prisoner into
its component members, sticking each of them into a separate hole.
There, they could be fed and watered, physically tortured or simply left to
go mad in the mindless closeness. Flenser called the process “recycling,”

since once the individual members went mad or catatonic, they could be
reassembled into “custom-designed” packs, the parts mixed and matched
with those of other prisoners. A few of the recycled packs still wandered
about the Domain. Most were sad, lobotomized freaks; a few were
twitchy psychopaths. Recycling was Flenser’s grisliest, stupidest
achievement.
Finally, the video stream came unstuck, and the various viewpoints
moved past the ghastly hole. A tiny window by Ravna’s hand showed a
diagram of how the various members were positioned and which field of
view was being shown in the main display. As usual, Flenser’s crippled
member was rolling along near the front. Its white-tipped ears showed at
one point or another in most of the other views. White-Tips was the
limiting factor in the Flenser-Tyrathect’s mobility. The critter had a
crushed pelvis. It lay, swaddled in blankets, in a wheelbarrow-like
contraption that the others pushed or pulled.
In recent years, White Tips’ eyesight had fogged over. The creature was
getting old, and cataract cures were decades in the future. So the White
Tips’ view showed what was ahead first, but even more hazily than most
of Oobii’s reconstructions. Still, there was something in the way of the
pack. Ravna switched back to a synthesis from all the members. There
was another pack, just at the edge of the lamplight. It was Amdi!
Where was Jefri? Ravna looked carefully in all the windows. Nothing
more could be seen in the shadows. She rolled back a few seconds, and
did some pattern analysis.… No, there was no sign of Jef. She stifled the
impulse to raise the humaniform probability and reanalyze.
Amdi hunkered down as the lamplight spread across him. White Tips’
wheelbarrow was rolled forward amazingly close, and the rest of Flenser-
Tyrathect spread out, forming a semi-circle around Amdiranifani.
The video stream froze again; a diagnostic window showed that this
delay was related to Flenser’s hearing. Till now, the sounds coming
across the link hadn’t received much analysis. Ravna had heard the click
of Flenser’s nails on the stone, the creak of the wheelbarrow, but
Flenser’s mindsounds—ultrasonics from 40 up to 250kHz—were mostly

ignored. Patterns that indicated startlement or anger would be reported,
but constructing a detailed thought stream would have been impossible
for the Oobii even in the Beyond.
Now Oobii heard the chords and gobble-hiss of Interpack speech.
After a moment more, video and synchronized sound continued, with
Oobii’s best guess at translation appearing below the main window.
Flenser-Tyrathect:
You have my [time | curiosity],
[little one | little ones].
Why did you want this meeting?
Amdiranifani:
I [?] very sad. I [?] [?] scared.
What [?] me [?] [?]
Ravna replayed the audio a couple of times. By combining Oobii’s
guesses with her own knowledge, she could often make sense of Tinish.
Amdi’s last statement was pretty clearly: “What will become of me?”
But now Amdi switched to Samnorsk: “Could we please speak in human,
Mr. Tyrathect? It’s the language I like best. My problems are hard to say
right in Tinish.”
“Of course, my dear boy. Samnorsk will be fine.” Flenser’s human voice
had its usual cordial tone, the manner of a clever sadist.
Surely Amdi recognized the mockery in Flenser’s tone? After all, the
eightsome had known Flenser-Tyrathect since the final days of the

Flenserist regime. But now the eight huddled together and edged forward
a few centimeters, almost crawling on their bellies. “I’m so afraid. There
are so many things to be sad about. Maybe if there weren’t so many, I
could cope and not just be a silly self-pitier.”
Flenser-Tyrathect’s chuckle was gentle. “Ah. Poor Amdiranifani. You are
enjoying the gift of genius. When ordinary people are confronted with
multiple tragedies, the pain scarcely increases. They simply can’t feel the
extra burdens. But you have a greater capacity for suffering. Even so—”
The diagnostic window showed serious relay problems. Some of the
forwarding devices were probably riding with the evening glowbugs up on
the surface; maybe those insects were thinning as the night air cooled.
Several seconds passed. Oobii’s guesses were not converging. Finally a
little red flag appeared, indicating that clarity was unattainable with the
data being received. Sigh. Ravna raised the level of acceptable
uncertainty, and waved for the programs to proceed. Sometimes this
surveillance reminded her too much of pre-tech fairy tales: She was a
sorceress hunched over her crystal ball, doing her best to scry truth from
uncertain auguries.
After a moment, Oobii generated its best guess: The displays jigged back
a second or two and restarted. Flenser was saying: “Even so, my boy.
What problems are troubling you?”
Amdi moved a little closer. “You made Steel and Steel made me.”
Gentle laughter. “Of course. I made Steel, and mainly from my own
members. But Steel assembled you from the new-born puppies of
geniuses that he purchased, stole, and murdered for—from all across the
continent. You are among the rarest of packs, born all at once, all of
puppies. Like a two-legs.”
“Yes, like a human.” Oobii’s imagery showed tears in Amdi’s eyes. “And
now dying like a human, even though humans don’t begin to get old while
they’re still children.”
“Ah,” said Flenser. Ravna noticed that the one with the white tipped ears
had tilted its wheelbarrow forward and extended its neck toward Amdi.

Wow. The overlapping mindsounds should be loud enough to be
emotionally confusing to both packs. But Flenser’s voice—as represented
by the surveillance program, always keep that in mind—was as cool as
ever: “Haven’t we discussed this before? Unanimous ageing is a tragedy,
but your members are still only fourteen years old. Your bad times are
easily twenty years in the future, when my grand schemes will finally—”
Amdi’s interruption didn’t quite fit: “I loved Mr. Steel. Of course, I didn’t
know he was a monster.”
Flenser shrugged. “That’s how I made him. My mistake, I’m afraid.”
“I know. But you made up for that!” Amdi hesitated, his voice coming
more quietly. “And now there’s Jefri’s problem. You.…”
Ravna’s head came up. What about Jefri? But Amdi didn’t finish the
sentence.
After a moment, Flenser said, “Yes, I’m doing what I can about that. Now
what new problem has ambushed you?”
Amdi was making human crying sounds, the sounds of a small lost child.
“I’ve learned that two of me are Great Plains short-timers.”
Ravna had to think for a second. Great Plains short-timers? That was a
racial group. They didn’t look different from most other Tines, though they
tended to congenital heart disease. Short-timers rarely lived more than
twenty years.
In the other windows, Ravna could see Flenser’s heads bobbing. “Those
two of you have chest pains?”
“Yes. And eyesight problems.”
“Oh my,” said Flenser. “Short-timers. That is a problem. I’ll check—” The
audio faltered, perhaps Oobii grappling with some exceptionally great
ambiguity. “I’ll check Steel’s records, but I fear you may be right. It’s a
well-known tradeoff among broodkenners: the Great Plains short-timers
often have excellent geometrical imaginations. Still and all, it’s not
unanimous ageing.”
Amdiranifani was shivering. “When those two of me die—I won’t be me

anymore.”
“Every pack faces that, my boy. Unless we get killed all at once, change
is what life is all about.”
“For you, maybe! For ordinary packs. But I came into the world all at
once, with nothing before. Mr. Steel struck a balance when he brought
me together. If I lose two, if I lose even one, I’ll—”
“Woodcarver’s broodkenners can find some kind of match. Or you may
find that six is as large as your mind can comfortably be.” Flenser’s tone
was overtly sympathetic, but—quite consistent with his usual manner—
somehow dismissive at the same time.
“No, please! If I lose any one of my eight, I will fall apart like an arch
without a keystone. I beg you, Mr. Tyrathect. You made Mr. Steel. You
made the Disaster Study Group. You made Jefri betray everyone. In all
that monstering, can’t there be some good miracles?”
Ravna watched, numb, making no move to pause the stream or look at
the log window. Now that the scene had surpassed all bounds of
credibility, it played on with scarcely a hiccup. Amdi wasn’t talking
anymore; there was just the sound of human weeping. That sort of made
sense. The eightsome had crumpled into a posture of abject despair. The
Reformed Flenser wasn’t saying anything either, but what Oobii was
showing in the displays was incredible: All five of Flenser-Tyrathect
edged closer to Amdi. The two that had been the original Flenser pushed
White Tips and its wheelbarrow forward. Some of them were less than a
meter from Amdi’s nearest members. That was almost as unbelievable
as anything else. Flenser-Tyrathect was notorious for his fastidious,
standoffish behavior. Normal packs, friendly ones, would often send one
or two of their number into the space between for a brief exchange of
mindsounds. It was like a human social embrace or a light kiss. Flenser-
Tyrathect was never so familiar. He was always the pack at the far end of
the table, or hunched behind the thickest acoustic quilts.
In this increasingly fantastic video, White Tips had reached forward to
cuddle two of Amdi against its neck. Several of the other were almost as

close. To a naive human it might look like one crowd of animals giving
comfort to another. Between Tinish packs it would be profound intimacy.
And any resemblance to what is really happening is purely coincidental!
Ravna angrily flicked all the views into nothingness.
•  •  •
Ravna sat for a long time, staring into the gentle warm darkness of her
study. She had pushed the analysis much too far. Oobii’s attempt to
make sense out of nearly pure noise was madness. And yet … the
proper nouns could scarcely have been introduced by the software
without some reason. She knew she was damned to return and return to
this scene, to try to tease apart software glitches from signal noise from
underlying revelation. Maybe she could get something out of it by starting
with external truths—for instance, the fact that Jefri was no traitor.
She went back over the data, only now she wasn’t looking at the lying
video. Instead she went down to the surveillance program’s logs. As she
suspected, the transmission conditions tonight had been poor to rotten.
And yet, it had been almost this bad before and she had still received
sensible results. She waved the network logs away and moved up to the
program’s analysis. These were probability trees showing the options
considered and how those options related to one another. The crisp
video Ravna had been watching was simply the most probable
interpretation coming out of that jungle of second-guessing. For instance,
Amdi had almost certainly asserted that some particular person was
behind the Disaster Study Group. She found that node of the analysis,
expanded it; reasons and probabilities appeared. Yeah, and Flenser had
been named as that person simply because of context and something
about Amdi’s posture. Similarly, Amdi had probably said that “someone”
had betrayed “something”—but the software had generated the particular
nouns from a long list of suspects.

It was amazing that Jefri had even made it onto that list, much less
coming out at the top. So what logic had put him there? She drilled down
through the program’s reasoning, into depths she had never visited. As
suspected, the “why I chose ‘this’ over ‘that’” led to a combinatorial
explosion. She could spend centuries studying this—and get nowhere.
Ravna leaned back in her chair, turning her head this way and that, trying
to get the stress out her neck. What am I missing? Of course, the
program could simply be broken. Oobii’s emergency automation was
specially designed to run in the Slow Zone, but the surveillance program
was a bit of purely Beyonder software, not on the ship’s Usables
manifest. It just happened to work Down Here.
Surely, if something serious happened, there would be warnings? Ravna
looked idly through the application’s error logs. The high-priority
messages were just what she expected: “Proceeding with Inadequate
Data, blah blah blah.” She dipped down into low-priority advisory
messages. No surprise. Just for this evening’s session, there were
literally billions of those. She sorted them a couple of different ways and
spent some quality time browsing the results.…
Ravna froze in her chair, staring at the monster she found lurking:
442741542471.74351920 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269471
442741542481.74351935 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269369
442741542491.74354327 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269373
442741542501.75439121 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269313

442741542511.75439144 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269265
442741542521.74351947 Advisory Notice Only:
Flenser sensor count summary: 140269215
… 29980242 lines omitted                           
“Explain!” her voice sound strangled even to her own ears.
A window popped up, defining the relevant fields, pointing to the
provenance of these notices, pointing to analysis of the sensor devices
on each of Flenser-Tyrathect’s members.
The short of it was that these notices said precisely what she thought
they said. In all of the Flenser pack, there remained fewer than one
hundred and fifty million sensors. The original infestation had numbered
in the low trillions and even that had been barely sufficient. If the
infestation had fallen to the low hundred millions then … then her
surveillance was a self-deceiving joke!
How long has this been going on? She waved up a curve fitter and asked
for the best three models of the failure history. It gave back three of
course, but the first was near certain: from day one of her surveillance,
almost ten years ago, her little spies had been steadily failing, a smooth
decay with a half-life of less than a year. In the Beyond the sensor
infestation would have been good for a century. For that matter, the
supporting software would have been smart enough to tell her if she was
using junk. No wonder these gadgets aren’t on the Usables Manifest. Her
desperate cleverness had turned around and bitten her on the nose.
Ravna curled up in her chair, miserable. Tonight was just a microcosm of
her life over the last few tendays. But if I review past surveillance,
knowing how bogus it really is, maybe I can see how far my trust of
Flenser should still extend. She opened her eyes, wiped away her tears,
and looked at the inexorable decay curve glowing in the air before her. It
had been years since the surveillance had had even a trillion sensors.

During all those years the failure notifications had been piling up, but at
invisibly low priority levels. Meantime, the higher layers of the spy
program had continued supplying Ravna with—face it—fantasy. She
might never have noticed, if the real threats had not become so
numerous that the fantasy began to spout flagrant lies.
If I decide the past surveillance was bogus too—I’ll have to tell
Woodcarver about this. Yeah, and destroy whatever trust still remains
between us.
For some moments, her attention was lost in bleak contemplation. Had
she ever messed up this badly before? No. Had things ever looked
darker?… Well, watching the Battle on Starship Hill, that had been
scarier. Losing Pham a few hours later, that had been sadder. But for
despair, there had been nothing worse since the destruction of her home
civilization at Sjandra Kei.
I got through that. Pham had been there for her.
Ravna opened her eyes. It was just past midnight. The outside windows
looked upon a dark landscape; they were that far into the autumn.
There was something she must do, irrational though it might be. She
hadn’t done it in more than a year. Neither the Children nor the Tines
would understand, and she had no desire to encourage superstition. But
if ever there was a time, this was the time to go visit Pham.

Chapter   09
Cemeteries were ghastly places. There had been a few such
memorials at Sjandra Kei. People in the Beyond died, eventually. The
death rate was comparable to the half-lives of the underlying civilizations,
which mostly migrated up and up and—if they were not supremely stupid,
like the greedy fools of Straumli Realm—eventually transformed
themselves into Powers.
Enormous cemeteries existed among sedentary civilizations, where the
weight of the past grew larger than any present time. Ravna remembered
seeing something similar in the terranes of Harmonious Repose: the
cemetery had gradually transformed the terrane into a mausoleum with
incidental living tenants.
The cemetery on Starship Hill had been Ravna’s idea, come to her when
she suddenly realized why cemeteries played such an important part in
the stories of the Age of Princesses. She had picked the spot before the
town grew up around the New Castle. The two hectare plot stretched
across a curving slope of heather, with a view extending from the
northwest islands all the way to Oobii in the south. In another ten years,
the place might be surrounded by Newcastle town. There was no room
allotted for cemetery expansion. And if I have my way, thought Ravna,
this terrible place will never need to become larger.
The Children came up here sometimes, but in the warmth of day. The
youngest didn’t understand about cemeteries. The oldest didn’t want to
understand, but they didn’t want to forget their friends, either.
Ravna mostly came after dark, and when she felt the darkest. By that
measure, tonight was most definitely the time for a visit. She walked
along the main path, her shoes crunching the frost-stiffened moss. Night
in the arctic autumn, even here near the channel currents, ranged from

cold to deathly frigid. Tonight was relatively mellow. The clouds had
come in around sunset, stacking deeper and deeper over the land,
trapping the day’s warmth. The hillside breeze had dropped to nothing
more than a faint, chill breath. Oobii said there would be rain a little later,
but for now the sky was dark and dry and there was clear air down to the
waters of the inner channel. Here and there, she could see lights on the
north end of Hidden Island. Very close by, there were occasional glows of
lavender. Glowbugs. The tiny insects put on a big show only two or three
nights a year, and usually earlier in the autumn than this. As she walked
on, there were more of the lavender glints. The occasional glimmer was
not enough to light her way … but they were welcome.
Rows of graves lay on either side of the cemetery’s main path. Each
place was marked by a headstone carved with a name and a star. The
design was modeled after something she’d found in Oobii’s classical
human archive. The little four-pointed stars were an early religious
symbol, perhaps the most common in human histories, though she was
not clear on the details. There were 151 graves in these four rows,
almost all the inhabitants of the cemetery. One hundred and fifty-one
Children, from less than a year old to sixteen, all murdered on the same
summertime night, burned to death as they lay in coldsleep. The heather
south of town was called Murder Meadows, but the actual killing field lay
beneath the center of the New Castle, the central chamber where the
Children’s Lander still sat upon charred moss.
Ravna had known none of those Children. They had died before she
even knew they existed. Her pace slowed. There could have been more
dead Children here; many of the surviving coldsleep coffins had suffered
fire damage. Reviving Timor had taught her what she could safely do.
Only a few of the original kids still slept in their caskets under the castle,
along with the four miscarriages from the new generation, and two
accidents; someday she would wake them all. Someday she would fix
Timor, too.
Strange as it might seem, there were also a few Tines buried in the
cemetery. Originally, that had been just twelve packs who had fully died

in the Battle on Starship Hill. In recent years, Johanna’s Fragmentarium
for Old Members had begun to change that—much to the chagrin of
redjacket factions.
There was a thirteenth pack, buried just before Pham’s place: six little
markers, each with the glyph of its one member, then a bigger one that
marked the group: Ja-que-ram-a-phan and then the pack’s taken name,
Scriber. Scriber was another whom Ravna had never met, but she knew
his story from both Pilgrim and Johanna: Scriber, the gallant, foolish
inventor who had persuaded Pilgrim to befriend Johanna, the pack that
Johanna had reviled, and who had been murdered for his efforts. Ravna
knew that Jo had her own midnight trips up here, too.
Just ten years, and so many people to remember. Sjana and Arne
Olsndot. Skroderider Blueshell. Amdi was one of the few packs who
came up here regularly—always with Jefri, of course.
Ravna had reached the huge glacial boulder that marked the end of the
path. Pham’s stone made a shoulder in the hill, protecting the children’s
graves from the north winds. But tonight, the air was almost still. The
glowbugs didn’t need to hide in the heather. In fact, they were thickest in
the air around Pham’s grave, so many that their pulsing was in sync.
Every few seconds, there was a silent surge of lavender that washed
around her like a welcoming tide. She had seen them in such numbers
only once before. That had also been around Pham’s grave. It must be
the flowers that she had planted here, now grown high. Ravna and the
Children had put flowers round their classmates’ graves, but they had
never taken quite so well as here. That was strange, considering Pham’s
northern exposure.
Ravna turned off the end of the path, walking around to a special spot at
the side of the rock. Funny thing about religion. At the Top of the Beyond,
religion was the scary, practical matter of creating and dealing with gods.
Down here in the Slow Zone, where humankind had been born … Down
Here, religion was a naturally grown hodgepodge, mostly the slave of
local evolutionary biology.
Still, it’s amusing how quickly our weakness makes us embrace these old

ways.
It was dead dark between the slow pulses of lavender light, but Ravna
knew exactly where she stood. She reached out and set her palm on a
familiar stretch of smooth granite. It was so cold … and then after a long
moment, her body heat warmed it. Pham Nuwen had been a little like
that. Quite possibly, he had never existed but for the year or so that she
knew him. Quite possibly, the Power that created Pham had made him as
a joke, stocked with bogus memories of an heroic past. Whatever the
truth, in the end Pham had made of himself a real hero. Sometimes when
she came up here, it was to pray for Pham. Not tonight. Tonight was one
of the despairing nights. Worse, tonight there was an objective reason for
despair. But Pham had overcome worse.
She silently leaned against the rock for a time.
And then she heard footsteps crunching on the main path. She turned
away from Pham’s stone, suddenly very glad that she hadn’t been
sobbing. She wiped her face and slipped the hood of her jacket a little
forward.
The approaching figure blocked an occasional light from up in New
Castle town. She thought for a moment that this was Jefri Olsndot. Then
the glowbugs pulsed together, a lavender haze that swept out around her
and revealed the other. Not Jefri. Nevil Storherte was not quite Jefri’s
height, and in all frankness, he was not as pretty-boy handsome.
“Nevil!”
“Ravna? I—I didn’t mean to surprise you.”
“That’s okay.” She didn’t know whether to be embarrassed or just
pleased to see a sympathetic face suddenly pop out of the void.
“Whatever are you doing up here?”
Nevil’s hands were fumbling nervously with each other. He glanced over
her head at the huge boulder. Then the light dimmed and there was just
his voice. “I lost my best friends on Murder Meadows. Leda and Josj. I
should care about all my classmates, but they were special.… I come up
sometimes to, you know, to see them.”

Sometimes Ravna had to tell herself that the Children weren’t all children
anymore. Sometimes they told her that themselves.
“I understand, Nevil. When things get bad, I like to come up here, too.”
“Things are going badly? I know there’s lots to worry about, but your idea
with the ship’s cargo bay has been a wonder.”
Of course, he wouldn’t know about Woodcarver’s anger, much less about
the terrible screw-up with her own special surveillance of Flenser.
Nevil’s voice continued, puzzled. “You shouldn’t keep to yourself if there
are problems, Ravna. That’s what we have the Executive Council for.”
“I know. But I’m afraid that on this…” I’ve messed up so badly that certain
Council members are the last people I can talk to. The glowbugs pulsed
again and she saw Nevil’s intelligent, questioning gaze. Since Johanna
and Nevil had been together—which was also since Nevil had been on
the Council—she had rarely chatted with the fellow except when the two
young people were together. Somewhere deep down she’d been afraid
that Johanna might take the interest wrong. Tonight, that thought almost
made her laugh. My problems are so much worse than all I used to worry
about. “There are things that can’t really be brought up in the full
Council.”
She couldn’t see his face now. Would he condemn her for plotting out of
the Council’s sight? But his voice was sympathetic. “I think I understand.
It’s a very hard job you have. I can wait to hear—”
“That’s not what I meant. Do you have a minute, Nevil? I’d like to … I’d
really like to get some advice.”
“Why sure.” A diffident laugh. “Though I’m not sure how much my advice
is really worth.”
Pulse of lights. It was as if they were suddenly standing in a field of
lavender flowers, surely the most beautiful glowbug show she’d ever
seen, so bright it lit the huge boulder almost to the top. Ravna scrambled
up to a perch she had discovered years ago, and waved Nevil to a spot
almost as comfortable. He nodded, clambered up in the dying light. The

boy—the man—was sure-footed. He settled on the rock, half a meter
down from her and almost a meter away. Good. Any crying on his
shoulder would be safely metaphorical.
They sat silently for a moment. Then Nevil said, “It’s about the Disaster
Study Group, isn’t it?”
“It started with the Disaster Study Group. That’s where I first realized how
totally I was messing up.”
“That was my mess-up, and Johanna’s. We should be your objective
pipeline to what our people are—”
“Yeah, yeah, I know Johanna has beaten herself up about that. But the
DSG was only the beginning.” And then Ravna found herself letting go
about the problems that had been weighing her down. It felt so good, and
after a few minutes she realized this wasn’t just because it gave her a
chance to say what she had said to no one previously. In fact, Nevil
actually had intelligent questions, and insights that came close to being
workable advice. He understood instantly why Woodcarver was so upset
about the converting the cargo bay into a meeting place.
“The New Meeting Place is the best thing that has happened in years,
Ravna. But I can see what you’re saying. The effect on Woodcarver is a
negative, but that just makes it that much more important—not to retreat
on the New Meeting Place—but to make it something that Woodcarver
wants to buy into.”
It was the sort of thing that Ravna had thought, but hearing him say the
words was heartwarming. She caught a glimpse of his face as he finished
the sentence. Nevil Storherte had always had a kind of brash diffidence,
and now she realized what that contradiction amounted to. Nevil
Storherte had charisma. Even untrained and unplanned, it fairly oozed
from him.
“Your mother was the chief administrator at the High Lab, wasn’t she?”
“Actually, it was my dad. Mom was the vice chief, or chief of vice when
she was feeling mischievous.”

Ravna had her low opinion of the Straumers’ High Lab. At best it was
good intentions gone cosmically wrong. But the Lab had been the
pinnacle of the Straumer civilization. It had been mind-boggling hubris,
but it had also enlisted the best and the brightest of their entire
civilization. Very likely there had been other heroes besides the parents
of Johanna and Jefri. “Your Dad must have been a management
superstar.” A more talented leader than anyone on this poor world.
Nevil gave an embarrassed laugh. “If you go by the selection process, he
was. I remember how it dragged on through most of my grade school
years, all the hoops my folks had to jump through. But Dad said it didn’t
matter, that there were so many geniuses at the Lab that ‘administration’
was more like herding cats.… You know? You had cats at Sjandra Kei,
didn’t you?”
Ravna smiled in the darkness. “Oh, yes. Cats go back a lot farther than
Sjandra Kei.”
Nevil Storherte might have only childhood recollections to go by, but he’d
grown up among real leaders. And obviously, he had the magic touch
himself. And stupid me, all self-pitying, ignoring resources that were here
all the time. She took a deep breath and launched into something more
than the shallow confidences of a minute before: “You know, Nevil, the
most important thing in the world—maybe in this part of the Galaxy—is
our raising a civilization here in time to face the Blighter fleet.”
“I agree.”
“But the DSG thing has made me realize how much our long-term goal
distracted me from what’s happening in the here and now. I fear I’ve
screwed up so badly that we may lose the main game before it ever
begins.”
Silence, but then in a moment of pale light she saw that it was a
thoughtful, attentive silence, and she continued: “Nevil, I’m trying to
correct my mistakes, but what I’ve tried so far has had unhappy side-
effects.”
“Woodcarver’s reaction to the New Meeting Place?”

“That’s just one.”
“Maybe I can help on that. I don’t have a private channel to Woodcarver,
but Johanna certainly does. And I’ll bet my friends can think of changes
to the New Meeting Place that will convince Woodcarver that it honors
the whole of the Domain.”
“Yes! That would be great.” Thank you. “Let me fly the other changes by
you. Most are a lot scarier to me than the New Meeting Place seemed.”
Maybe you can show me which is dead wrong and which can somehow
be made to work. One by one she described her ideas for reforms, and
for every one Nevil’s reaction was like warm sunlight, sometimes
agreeing, sometimes not, but always illuminating.
About instituting formal democracy: Nevil was in favor. “Yes, that’s
something we must do, and fairly soon now that so many of us are
adults. But I think it’s something that has to grow up naturally, not
imposed from above.”
“But the only traditions the Children—I mean you all—have experienced
are embedded in heavy automation and large marketplaces. How can the
idea come from within?”
Nevil chuckled. “Yeah, lots of nonsense can emerge too. But … I trust my
classmates. They have good hearts. I’ll talk this around. Maybe we can
use the New Meeting Place to model how things were handled in the
most successful of the Slow Zone democracies. And figure out how to do
it without offending Woodcarver!”
About Ravna moving out of Oobii: Surprisingly, Nevil was almost as
uneasy about this suggestion as she was. “We need you aboard Oobii,
Ravna. Anybody who thinks about the question knows that you’re the
only person who knows how to use the planning tools there. If we’re
going to raise civilization before we die of old age, we need you there.”
He was silent for a moment. “On the other hand, you’re right in fearing
that this angers people who don’t think things through—and it’s an irritant
for everyone sitting out in the cold. We Children were born into a
comfortable civilization. Now that’s been lost—except where we see it

sitting, gleaming green on Starship Hill. So maybe it makes sense for you
to move out for a while. But choose the time, some turning point where it
gains the greatest good will. If you stay out, our highest priority will have
to be getting you proper communications back with Oobii.”
“Okay. So we should begin planning for just when to make the move.
Can you—”
“Yes. I’ll check around, but very quietly. I suggest you don’t discuss this
with others. I’ll bet that it’s the sort of thing that once suggested becomes
a popular imperative.”
And then there was the hardest, scariest item: the priority for medical
research. And here, Nevil’s reaction was the most surprising and
comforting of all. “You mean shift resources from the general technology
program, Ravna? In the long run, wouldn’t that slow everything, including
bioscience?”
Ravna nodded. “Y-yes. Basically, we need to build our own computers for
process control and create the networks between them. Then all the rest
of technology will take off; prolongevity will be easy. But in the meantime,
you kids will age. Pre-technological ageing is just dying, withering, year
by year. I can already see it in some of the oldest Children. I look
younger than some of them. It’s a little like the problem of my living the
good life in Oobii—but it looks much uglier.”
“I—” Nevil seemed to be struggling with himself. “Yeah, you’re right. I’ve
been doing okay, but then I probably have a naturally healthy body type. I
think this is a very serious future problem. The good news is that among
the kids I know well—which is most everybody—this is not currently a
major source of complaint.”
“Really? I had been so afraid—” I’ve been seeing monsters everywhere
since the DSG raised its ugly head.
“I suggest you continue with your best long-term research plan. But think
about having a general meeting soon, where you explain the changes
and your development schedule.”
“Okay.” Ravna nodded. “Right. Right.” These were her reforms, but with a

big dose of constructive common sense. “We could do it in the New
Meeting Place after you get it properly rebuilt.”
“Yes. I should have something by early winter. Whenever after that you
feel—”
“Good,” she said. “The sooner the better.” This was progress on almost
all fronts. Somehow that brought her back to the debacle that had made
this night so desolate. She hesitated for just a second. Her special
surveillance of Flenser had always been the secret beyond telling. Now?
Now she finally had someone to share it with.
“There’s one other thing, Nevil.” She explained about Flenser and her spy
infestation.
He gave a low whistle. “I had no idea that Beyonder surveillance tech
could work here.”
“Well, it turns out that in the long run it was a disaster,” she said, and
then described the latest session, under Flenser’s castle. She heard her
voice rising. This part felt as bad as ever. “And confessing to Woodcarver
on top of everything else—I just can’t do it!”
The breeze had risen ever so slightly, and the glowbugs had fallen out of
synch. Now they were only isolated spots of light. There was the
occasional tap of raindrops on her hood, the beginnings of the shower
Oobii had predicted.
Nevil was quiet for a long moment. Finally he said. “Yeah, that’s a
problem. But the surveillance itself—I think that was the right thing.
Johanna has always been very suspicious of that pack. And from what
you said, you got years of valid intel.”
“Some unknown number of years.”
“True. But my Dad used say that there’s no way to be a successful leader
without taking considered risks. And that means occasionally doing
things that fail miserably. The point is to make what you can of the
successes—then revisit the failures. When Woodcarver is happy about
things, then come back to her with this.”

Ravna looked up into darkness, got a couple big raindrops in the face for
her trouble. She licked at the cold water and suddenly was laughing.
“Meantime, the weather is telling us to adjourn this summit meeting.”
She reached out to pat Nevil’s shoulder, and his hand found hers. Surely
both hands were chilled, but his was the warmer. It felt so comforting.
“Thank you, Nevil,” she said softly.
He held her hand for a second more. “It’s just the support you deserve.
We all need you.” Then he withdrew his hand with an embarrassed
laugh. “And you’re right about the weather!” He stood and slid down from
his perch on the rock, then shined a dim light on the rock to help her
down. Thankfully, he did not give her a hand with the descent.
They trudged down the mossy path, keeping a good one meter fifty
between them. The rain had increased to a downpour, and the breeze
had become a driving wind. The glowbugs had surrendered the night,
and she imagined that the path down to Oobii must already be flowing
with mud. It was a dark and stormy night! And yet, and yet … Ravna felt
more comfort and optimism than she had for a very long time.

Chapter   10
Autumn around Starship Hill was beginning to show its teeth. There
was still about half a day of sunlight in every day, but most days were
cloudy, with ocean squalls coming and coming, each a little colder than
the last. The rain was slush, then it was slush and snow. The only uglier
season was the endless mud of late Spring, but that held the promise of
greenery and summer. Autumn’s promise was different: the deadly cold
of Arctic winter. Winter was a good time for one of Ravna’s favorite
projects. In the Northern Icefangs, the tendays of night were dry and
clear and less than 185°K. A space-based civilization would count that as
so near room temperature as to make no difference, but Oobii had
dredged up some metamaterial studies from its archives of bypassed
technologies: Given a hectare at those temperatures, you could carve out
macroscopic logic and then use a laser interference scheme to fabricate
micron-scale semiconductor parts. Their last three attempts had been
tantalizing failures. Maybe this winter would be different.…
Of course, the project had been discussed in the Executive Council.
Scrupilo was obsessed with the experiment, his Cold Valley lab. And
though this third attempt was not a secret, Nevil suggested to Ravna that
it was just as well not to make much of it to the Children at large. The ice
experiments could be a game changer, moving the world to automation
decades ahead of schedule, ending the worst of the kids’ everyday
discomforts. On the other hand, this was the third try and Oobii gave it
only a modest chance of success.
Ravna obsessed right along with Scrupilo; discovering the Disaster Study
Group had made the likelihood of a failure this winter all the more
depressing. But now, since that evening with the glowbugs at Pham’s
grave, she could settle for knowing that things were on the right path.

Every day that passed, Nevil brought some new insight, often things that
could not have been brought up in Council, sometimes things she would
never have thought of by herself. For Nevil was the perfect complement
to Johanna. Before the Oobii landed, Johanna had been alone here,
surrounded by the Tines. She had become their hero. She had close
friends at the highest Tinish levels, and the lowest. The packs loved her
for what she had done in combat and even for the crazy breakout she
had fomented at the old Fragmentarium, which had started the private
hospital movement. Ravna was constantly surprised at how many Tines
claimed to know her personally—even packs that were not veterans.
But though Johanna had plenty of friends among the Children, she—and
Jefri—were still somewhat apart from them; both had spent that terrible
first year here alone. Nevil, on the other hand, was Ravna’s perfect
bridge to the Children. He was a born leader and had known every one of
the kids back at the High Lab. Nevil had their pulse; he seemed to know
every quirky reason for what they might like or resent or desire.
•  •  •
“How do you like the New Meeting Place?” asked Ravna.
“I love it!” Timor Ristling was fourteen years old now, but he still looked to
be only six or seven. He walked with a limp and had a spastic tremor.
Ravna was terribly afraid there were mental deficiencies, too; Timor was
very good at manual arithmetic, but lagged behind in most other topics. It
didn’t help that his Tinish Best Friend was a bad-tempered foursome who
regarded the boy as her sinecure. Belle Ornrikak was tagging along
behind them, a calculating glint in her eyes.
But just now, Timor’s unhappy history was nearly invisible. He held her
hand, all but dragging Ravna along. His tremor could have been taken as
part of his joyful excitement for what Nevil’s design suggestions had
made of the Oobii’s cargo bay.

The space was forty by thirty by twenty meters. Ravna and Pham had
made good use of a tiny part of it in their journey here, smuggling
themselves through customs at Harmonious Repose. Now the space was
almost empty, its inland side resting at ground level. A half-timbered wall
had been built across the cargo hatch, enough to keep out the weather.
Nevil had remodeled the interior, partly with local materials, partly by
revising walls into explicit access points and game stations. He’d
decorated everything in what he confessed was a poor imitation of the
manner of Straum. Timor led Ravna across the gem-tiled floor, showing
her wonder after wonder. “And see above?” The boy was staring up,
wavering a little with his uncertain balance. “It’s the skyline round
Straumli Main. I remember it from just before we left for the High Lab. I
had friends in beginning school there.” She knew he had been about four
years old when he left Straumli Main, but somehow those memories had
survived everything since.
“It’s nice, Timor.”
“No, it’s beautiful! Thank you for building it for us.”
“It wasn’t just me,” said Ravna. In fact, virtually none of the detail design
had been her own. Most was from Nevil and his friends, but Nevil thought
it best if for now she got as much credit as possible.
Belle slipped around Ravna to stand by Timor. The pack was mostly
watching the stations running hunter games, but she sounded bored:
“I’ve heard this is nothing like the real Beyond; the Children will get tired
of the gimmicks soon enough.”
“No, we won’t!” responded Timor, his voice getting a little loud. “I love it
here, and there’s more! I’ll show you.” He turned away, leaving Belle’s
gaze still caught with an addict’s intensity on the game displays. Not until
Ravna had walked past her did she recover and follow along.
Timor took them away from the game and sports floors and up a ramp.
Here, the exciting noises of the gaming area were muted by Oobii’s
active acoustics. Ten or twelve of the oldest Children were sitting around
a projecting display space. Maybe this was a strategy game, or— Then

she noticed Nevil standing a little back from the chairs. It looked as if he
had just arrived, too. She started toward him, but Timor was plucking at
her sleeve. “Do you see what they’re doing?”
There were intricate models floating in the space between the chairs and
the wall. Small windows hung by each of the kids. The models looked like
some kind of network thing, but—she shook her head.
“Øvin can explain!” Timor drew her over to where Øvin Verring and Elspa
Latterby were sitting together.
Øvin looked up at her appearance. There was a flash of surprise in his
face, and perhaps nervousness. “Hello, Ravna!”
“Hei,” said Elspa, and gave a little wave.
Ravna grinned at him. “So what are you all doing?” She looked around at
the entire group. Except for Heida Øysler, these were some of the most
serious of the Children. “Not a game?”
Elspa shook her head. “Ah, no. We’re trying to learn to, um—”
Heida took over: “Ever wonder why we kids haven’t pushed to use
Oobii’s automation?”
“A little.” In fact, most of the Children had resisted learning programming
almost as much as they had more primitive skills.
“Two reasons,” said Heida. “You seemed to want it for your projects—but
just as important, this starship is as dumb as a rock.”
“It’s the best that can exist here, Heida.”
“I like it a lot!” put in Timor.
Heida grinned. “Okay then, so it’s not a dumb rock; it’s more like one of
those whatsits, a flaked stone arrowhead. The point is, it’s worthless for
—”
Øvin shook his head. “What Heida is trying to say in her own gracious
way is…” He thought for a second, perhaps trying to come up with
something less ungracious. “… is that now that we have access beyond
our classes, maybe we should learn to change our ways and make the

best use of Oobii that we can. So far we’re visualizing the problem. That’s
usually the hard part. Let me show you.”
He turned and glanced at the others. Each was suddenly busy with
details on his or her own display. What Ravna could see looked like art
programming, but performed in some incredibly roundabout way. Elspa
Latterby looked up. “Yes, all clear. Go for it, Øvin.”
The structure forming in the space between the kids didn’t look like art.
There were thousands of points of light, variously connected by colored
lines.
Will someone please explain this to me? thought Ravna. It might be a
network simulation, but there was no labelling. Ah, wait, she could almost
guess at the power law on the connections. Maybe this was a—
Øvin was talking again: “This was hell to put together using Oobii’s
interface, but we’ve visualized a whole-body map of the transduction
network in a modern human. Well, it’s what Oobii has on file, a racial
average across Sjandra Kei. We Straumers can’t be much different.
Anyway—” He zoomed in on one cluster in the network. The rest of the
complexity shifted to the sides, not exactly disappearing, but moving into
the far distance. “This,” Øvin continued, “covers part of the motor stability
region.”
Ravna nodded back, and tried to keep a smile pasted on her face. She
was beginning to guess where all this was going. From the corner of her
eye, she saw that Nevil was drifting around the outer edge of the group in
Ravna’s direction. Help!
Her smile must have been encouraging, for Øvin continued with his
explanation: “This is really just a test case for a much larger class of
problems—namely medicine in general. If we can learn enough of Oobii’s
programming interface, we can get the ship to generate pathologies on
the motor stability region and compare them with the symptoms it
perceives in—”
“In me!” said Timor. The boy had settled down on the floor when Øvin
began his demo, but now he struggled up to his knees, making sure that

Ravna would notice. “They’re going to cure what’s wrong in me.”
Øvin glanced down at the boy. “We’re going to try, Timor. Everything’s a
crap shoot Down Here.”
“I know.” Timor sounded irritated by the obvious caveat.
After a second, Øvin looked back at Ravna. “Anyway, if—I mean, as soon
as—we do all that, we’ll have Oobii start generating treatment targets and
running experiments.” Suddenly, Øvin was more hesitant. He was looking
at Ravna for some kind of approval. “We think we have something,
Ravna. What do you think?”
Ravna stared at the network sim for a moment. That was so much easier
than looking into Øvin Verring’s eyes. These kids were very bright, the
children of geniuses. The oldest ones, before their flight from the High
Lab, had had a good Straumer education. Down Here? Down Here, the
kids were relatively uneducated. Down Here, experiments didn’t run
themselves, there were intermediate steps required, infrastructure to
create.
She looked back at Øvin Verring, saw that he saw through her attempt at
mellowness. Her smile cracked apart, and she said, “Øvin. How can I say
this? You—”
And then rescue miraculously arrived. Nevil. He patted Øvin on the
shoulder and smiled comfortingly in Ravna’s direction. “This will be okay,
guys. Let me talk to Ravna.”
The wannabe medical researchers seemed relieved—though not nearly
as relieved as Ravna felt.
Ravna gave them all her best smile. “I’ll get back to you.” She looked
down. “I promise, Timor.”
“I know you will,” said Timor.
Then she let Nevil spirit her away. Thank goodness. He must have some
control on the New Meeting Place environment, since they hadn’t gone
five meters before she felt the sound quality shift and knew that even
standing here in the middle of the floor, it was just the two of them who

could hear each other. “Thanks, Nevil. That was awful. How did the kids
come to try—”
Nevil made an angry gesture. “It was my fault. Damn. The Meeting Place
has plenty of these Slow Zone games, but I figured the best of us would
want to see how what we’ve learned in the Academy could be put to work
here.”
“I think we both wanted that. I do need planning help.”
“Yeah, but I should have guessed that they’d zero in on the impractical.
We both know how crazy it would be to get diverted into heavy
bioscience at this stage.”
Ravna turned so that only Nevil would see her unhappiness. “I’ve tried to
explain this to Øvin before.”
Nevil shook his head. “I know. Øvin … he can be a little unrealistic. He
thinks this is as easy as improving harvest yields. You need to sit
everybody down together and—”
“Right, my speech.” More and more, that looked essential. “And the
sooner the better.” Get everybody together, explain the problem and ask
for their support. “I could ask for formal procedures for handling medical
emergencies, how we might use the remaining sleep caskets till we have
proper medicine.”
“Yes!”
“I should go back, tell Øvin and the others and try to explain.” She looked
over his shoulder at where the amateur Oobii managers were still
clustered around their network simulation. Except for Timor, none of them
were quite looking in her direction.
Nevil seemed to notice the indecision in her face. “If you want, I can
explain to Øvin and the others. I mean, the general idea—and how you’re
still working out the details.”
“Would you?” These all were Nevil’s friends. He understood them in a
way that Ravna never could. “Oh, thank you, Nevil.”
He waved her away. “Don’t worry. I’ll take care of it.”

Ravna stepped out of their bubble of audio privacy. As Nevil turned to go
back to Øvin and the others, she gave them a little wave. Then she was
off to the exit leading up the bridge. There was so much she had to get
right for this speech, for making it something that everyone—including
Woodcarver—could get behind.
•  •  •
A full tenday quickly passed. Outside, the snow now stayed on the
ground, even on the streets of Hidden Island. There was more twilight
and true night. The moon and the aurora were coming to dominate the
sky.
Except for a trip with Scrupilo to Smeltertop and Cold Valley, Ravna
spent most of her time indoors, on Oobii’s command deck. There was so
much to do. Up north, the bottom of Cold Valley had been planed
smooth. Scrupilo’s packs were nearly done with carving a thousand
square meter design; two of Oobii’s micro lasers were already on site.
Come the truly cold weather, they planned on fabbing their first hundred-
micron-scale components … ten thousand adder circuits. Ta-dah! Really!
It was a silly goal, but a major proof of principle. The previous winter they
hadn’t quite reached that point when spring arrived.
Her work on the speech was coming along, hopefully a masterpiece of
realistic optimism. Every day, Nevil came to her with way too many
details of what they were doing with New Meeting Place. The speech and
the New Meeting Place would work together. And she’d set the date for
the speech. She was committed. It felt good!
There was only one full Executive Council meeting in that time;
Woodcarver was in an ugly mood again. Scrupilo, too, was being a pain.
He was the most politically ignorant fellow Ravna had ever met—an
amazing thing considering his parentage. Even though he got most of
Ravna’s attention and most of Oobii’s support, he was still complaining

about her lack of attention for the Cold Valley fab. He was right—if you
ignored the political necessity of assuring support in the future.
Nevertheless, she gave Scrupilo extra time and attention, letting Nevil
handle more of the event details.
There were other reasons for not having more Council meetings. Ravna
had reviewed the early years of her Flenser surveillance; she was still
certain the camera infestation had been accurate for the first few years.
That and the patent absurdities of the most recent session made it very
foolish to get paranoid about Flenser. And yet she was still a bit
uncomfortable about seeing him at a Council meeting.
And finally, Pilgrim and Johanna were out of town, on what Ravna
considered a dangerous and unnecessary adventure. The two had taken
the agrav flier and were snooping around East Home, five thousand
kilometers away. That was beyond direct radio range, but they’d reset
one of Oobii’s few remaining commsets to transmit in the five-to-twenty-
megahertz range. They splattered their radio emissions off the sky and
let the planet’s ionosphere reflect them across the continent. On Starship
Hill, Oobii was clever enough to pick out the signal even when the aurora
hung its brightest curtains above the Domain—and to blast a much
stronger response signal back to Johanna’s commset.
The one full Council meeting had been mainly about that expedition:
“I’m glad we flew out here,” came Pilgrim’s voice. “The stories about
Tycoon haven’t been exaggerated. He really has started his own
industrial revolution.”
Flenser looked up from his accustomed place at the far end of the table.
“Aha! Vendacious shows his claws!”
Woodcarver gave a little hiss, but didn’t otherwise respond. In fact, East
Home was the only place there had been sure sightings of the
misbegotten Vendacious. That had been eight years ago, shortly before a
series of major disappearances from Scrupilo’s labs: printers, a
telephone prototype, even one of the three printer interfaces. At the time,
the thefts had been an even bigger scandal than the recent radio cloak

theft, though two of the burglars had been caught—both former
lieutenants of Vendacious. Since those thefts, Tycoon had been a steady
source of “innovation.”
“We’ve talked about this before,” said Ravna. “Tycoon may regard
himself as our rival, but any diffusion of technology will just speed up our
overall progress. Keep in mind the main threat.” The Blighter fleet coming
down upon us.
Flenser eyed himself slyly—a packish smirk. “The main threat won’t
matter if you get the Domain murdered beforehand.”
“That’s why Jo and I are checking this out,” said Pilgrim. “What we’re
seeing makes us think that over the years, Tycoon may have
accomplished much more than he advertised. Now the true operation is
too big to be disguised. I think Tycoon—or Vendacious—has spies high
in the Domain.”
Woodcarver raised heads at this. Two of her—three if you counted her
puppy, little Sht—were glaring at Flenser.
“These are real technical innovations,” said Johanna. “I think the leaks
have to originate in the North End labs.”
“What!” Scrupilo’s interjection was an indignant squawk.
“Have you met this Tycoon fellow?” said Ravna.
“Not yet,” said Pilgrim. “Even his factory managers rarely see him. He
doesn’t seem very involved in day-to-day operations.”
“We’re being very cautious about this,” said Johanna. “And me, I’m
staying completely out of sight.”
“Good!” that was from both Ravna and Nevil, and very emphatic. There
were things Johanna could do as a two-legs that gave the Pilgrim-
Johanna team great advantages—that was Jo’s argument, anyway.
Ravna was far from convinced that it justified her presence on a spy
mission.
“I wish you were back here,” said Nevil.

“I’m fine, Nevil. Like I said, keeping a low profile.”
A strange sound came over the radio link, probably a chord from Pilgrim.
Ravna smiled, imagining the pack and the girl hunkered down by their
commset. It would be early morning on the east coast now. She
wondered just where they were hiding.
Flenser-Tyrathect was shaking his heads, grinning.
“What?” Ravna said to him.
The pack gave a shrug. “Isn’t it obvious? There is no need for spies high
in Scrupilo’s organization. Who stole the Oliphaunt computer? I know I
could use Oliphaunt to engineer all—”
Woodcarver’s shriek would have been downright painful but for Oobii’s
sound damping. Three of her leaped partway onto the table, their claws
clicking on the surface. “You confess to treason, do you now?” she said.
Flenser showed lots of teeth even as he replied: “Don’t be an idiot. Ah,
but I forgot, you’re already the idiot who didn’t kill Vendacious when you
had the chance. You’re already the idiot who let him escape and who still
blames me for stealing Oliphaunt.”
This brought another of Woodcarver onto the meeting table. There was a
time when Ravna could have been the peacemaker in such
confrontations. Now? Ravna fleetingly wondered if Woodcarver might
take a swipe at her if she tried to intervene.
Nevil was braver, or faster, or perhaps just more foolish. As Woodcarver
scrambled forward, he was already on his feet. “It’s okay, Your Majesty!”
He started to extend a hand toward her, then seemed to realize he was
cajoling someone who was seriously not human. “Um, this is just one of
those burdens of a wise ruler.”
The stilted, medieval approach seemed to work. Woodcarver didn’t
retreat, but her forward surge subsided.
“Flenser has a point,” said Johanna, sounding unperturbed, perhaps
because the sounds of jaws and claws had not survived the low-quality
radio transmission. “Tycoon may really be Vendacious plus Oliphaunt,

but spies in Scrupilo’s labs could also explain his success.”
That satisfied all except Scrupilo: “I do not have spies in any of my labs!”
But not surprisingly, he was perfectly happy to talk about technical fixes
to such nonexistent espionage. Monitoring user access to Oobii was
relatively easy. The problem was to correlate that with exactly what
inventions were appearing elsewhere.
Nevil was looking more and more unhappy. “We have to get this nailed
down. Surely there must be clues at the Tycoon end of this. You’re due to
leave East Home almost immediately, aren’t you, Jo?”
“That was the plan.” There was mumbled conversation between Johanna
and Pilgrim, too scattered for Oobii to clean up. “Our equipment is in
good shape and we have a safe hidey-hole outside of the city. We’re
good to stay a while if it will help, especially if you can feed us some
clues to follow up on.”
Nevil was clearly torn. Ravna could guess how much he’d been looking
forward to Johanna’s return.
“Do we have any clues to feed them?” Ravna asked.
Pilgrim said, “There’s Scrupilo’s lab logs. We could look for coincidences
in detail.”
Woodcarver—now back on her seats—had a different angle. “From what
Johanna and Pilgrim say, Tycoon grows steadily more powerful. If they
come back now, we may have hard time getting this close again.”
“We should have a full-time gang of spies over there,” said Flenser-
Tyrathect.
Woodcarver shrugged agreement. The two were almost talking to each
other.
In the end, that meeting was almost the sort of Exec Council meeting
they should be having these days—except that now Johanna and Pilgrim
would be absent for at least another twenty days.

•  •  •
Twenty days. Johanna and Pilgrim wouldn’t be back till after Ravna’s
big speech. Since that night by Pham’s grave, she had not had much
chance to talk to Johanna. The younger woman had been off spying most
of the time, and when she’d been back she’d been mainly with Nevil.
Now Ravna would have virtually no chance to chat privately with her.
And Woodcarver seemed to be in a bigger snit than ever.
Ravna had written multiple drafts of her upcoming speech. There were so
many issues to bring together. Some were joyously good news—how
New Meeting Place could be used for increased participation, formal
democracy. Some were hard truths—the Blighter threat that loomed in
their future, the need to solve underlying technology problems before
they took on prolongevity research. Some were proposals to make the
hard truths more palatable. Without Woodcarver, now without Johanna
and Pilgrim—it all came down to Ravna’s own best judgment and Nevil’s
advice. Over and over, he showed her nuances that she would have
missed on her own. For instance: “Arrange things so you can end the
speech with the good news that gives realistic reasons to be optimistic
about it all.” And: “We can merge this speech with your idea for a Public
Council, Ravna. My Dad used to say that responsible people can deal
with bad news if they have some control over the hardships.” So they
would announce the meeting as occasion for her speech and as an
opportunity for Children and Tines to feed back into the process. “I’ve
talked to Woodcarver about this, Ravna. She thinks it will work.” And that
was one of the best pieces of news. Woodcarver was still avoiding
Ravna, but she was at least indirectly part of the planning.
Nevil and company had figured how to make the New Meeting Place
seem bigger, and he was showing her dozens of variations on how they
might decorate the place. Finally she just offloaded all that onto him and
concentrated on polishing her speech, doing her best to implement his
final suggestions.

And then it was the day before the “grand meeting.” Ravna was already
thinking of the event in countdown terminology. They were at Meeting
minus fifteen hours. She had a final chat with Nevil, going over what she
would have to know about the physical setup of the New Meeting Place,
rehearsing her presentation still again. “Don’t worry if the speech doesn’t
come out one hundred percent perfect. I’ll be out there. The Public
Council makes it easy for me to stand up, ask a question that gets things
back on track—and just as easy for all your friends to show support.”
“… You’re right,” said Ravna. “I’m just chewing on my own nervousness.”
Ravna glanced at the little clock window she’d been using to time her
speech rehearsals. It also showed the countdown: 14:37:33 till show
time. She and Nevil were up on the bridge, but they’d set the displays to
make it look like her lectern in the New Meeting Place would be in …
well, in 14:36:55. She looked across at Nevil. His face had a certain
earnest nervousness of its own—and she decided he was mainly worried
about her being so obviously worried. Johanna was so lucky to have this
guy.
“Nevil, I want to thank you for everything. Without you, I would still be
flailing.”
He shook his head. “You can’t do it all alone, Ravna. But what you are
working toward is absolutely necessary. It’s what the rest of us, all the
Children, should be helping with. If we pull together, we can’t lose.”
That was something like the language in her speech, and suddenly
Ravna realized that Nevil must really live those words, even as they had
come to seem platitudes in her ears. Too much rehearsing, that’s for
sure.
She stood and walked carefully around the fake lectern, toward where
the bridge entrance was tonight. She waved the door open and turned
back toward him. “So I’ll see you tomorrow then.” She smiled. “In a bit
less than 14:35:21.”
Nevil stood. Maybe there was a little bit of relief in his smile. “That you
will, my lady.”

He stopped within arm’s length from her. “Sleep well and don’t worry,” he
said.
“Thanks, Nevil. G’night.”
He smiled. “G’night.” And then he was gone.
•  •  •
Of course, it was no surprise that sleep didn’t come. In fact, Ravna
didn’t even head for bed immediately. But I deserve a pat on the back for
not doing another rehearsal. She retreated from the platform and lectern
and settled down with her usual analysis tools. Nowadays, Oobii ran
elaborate threat detection software all the time—sometimes so
intensively that it slowed Scrupilo’s research programs. During the last
tenday, Ravna had not kept up with the security monitoring as much as
usual. That fact supported one of her Theories of Worry, namely that
every worrywart has a natural Worry Max. When there are other
concerns—such as preparing for this meeting—normal obsessions
weaken.
Nevertheless, she settled down for a bit of distracting logfile-surfing.
Oobii had a system of prioritized alarms, but—as past debacles had
shown—there was always the possibility it would miscategorize things.
After some tedious time with the logs, she suddenly realized she wasn’t
nearly as obsessed with her speech. Ha! And there really wasn’t all that
much that was troublesome in Oobii’s logs either!… She browsed on,
through lower priority results.
Here was something interesting in the “old threats” department: Oobii
was still watching for any sign of the stolen radio cloaks. Those gadgets
were nothing like the Beyonder commset that Pilgrim and Johanna were
using, or even the voice-band radios Scrupilo built nowadays. The cloaks
made an analog smear of the wearer’s mindsounds across a big swath of

the radio frequency spectrum. The resultant signal was fairly short range
—and essentially impossible for Oobii to translate. Hate, fear, lust—those
might be recognized, but mind reading was very much not possible.
The ship had heard none of that. And yet, Oobii had detected something
very like cloak noise. By correlating with the changing footprint of the
aurora, Oobii guessed the source was high in the Icefangs, about
seventy kilometers to the east. The signal was sporadic and at its loudest
scarcely more than a suspicious correlation. If this was a radio cloak,
there was only one. It was even fainter than a cloak should be at that
distance, and it was being worn for only a few minutes in every day.
Ravna played with the results for some minutes. There really wasn’t
enough signal to do much analysis. If she asked for more, she might get
another taste of Oobii’s wishful thinking. No thank you.… But what
conceivable use was one radio cloak? Without the rest of a Tinish soul
wearing the others, a single cloak was the sound of one hand clapping.
She leaned back, imagining: a party of thieves sneaking out of the
Domain, travelling through a steep-shouldered mountain pass. Those
passes could be deadly, even in high summer. An avalanche could have
killed them all. Or perhaps they’d been ambushed by ordinary bandits.
One way or another, the cloaks were lost, all but one. The theory almost
made sense. But this remnant cloak would need a wearer, and
occasional light for power. So how about this: The cloaks were beautiful
things, the solar cells as dark as velvet but with glints of gold. Maybe
some primitive pack was wearing the remaining cloak as a trophy, totally
ignorant of the magic it was making.
What sad irony. She made a note. She should bring up this with the
Executive Council—better yet, take it to Woodcarver directly. It might get
them talking again. In any case, they should send a search party to the
location before winter came crashing down.
Now her countdown window said 13:25:14. She had frittered away an
hour, not thinking about her speech once. I really should review it some
more, maybe do another rehearsal. She had never been so nervous
about talking to the kids. But in the past, it had always been one on one,

to small groups; now she would be talking to them all. If she properly
made the points that she and Nevil had worked so hard on, so many
problems would be solved. But if I mess up …

Chapter   11
The morning was a dark and blustery thing, perhaps the last rainstorm
of the year and autumn’s chill goodbye. Ravna had the bridge’s windows
looking out on a panorama of the gloom, and she gave it all a kind of
vague attention as she dressed. Down the hill toward the dropoff, there
was a scudding fog, parting now and then for a gray-on-gray glimpse of
the inner channel and Hidden Island. The rain came slanting in from the
north. Ship’s sensors showed it was liquid water, not hail, but it froze as it
splashed across Starship Hill, turning the streets of the New Castle’s
town to ice.
She could see the Children and Tines of the Domain were coming south
from Newcastle town and north along the Queen’s Road. In the westward
view, she could see others emerging from the fog at the top of the
funicular. Ravna paused a second, zoomed in on those muffled figures,
the clumped packs that accompanied them. They must have left Hidden
Island almost an hour earlier—all to make it here on time for the
beginning of Ravna’s speech. In just 00:25:43.
At least they would be warm and comfortable once they got in their New
Meeting Place.
The sight gave her pause. Shouldn’t I be dressed as plainly? Not like this:
She looked at herself front and back. Somehow the outfit had not
seemed so much like a uniform when she and Nevil had decided on the
design. Even though Woodcarver wasn’t talking to her, she had relayed
her desires through Nevil: The Queen intended to wear all her crowns
and regalia and she expected that Ravna would show a formal aspect as
well. Okay. The Children of the Sky could surely see through such
material spin—but if Woodcarver didn’t buy into the New Meeting Place
as a kind of thrones room then her hostility might never melt.

Ravna looked at herself for a moment more. In fact, this style had an
honorable history—even if she was only person in the world who really
understood. Blysse herself had worn something like this when she went
out to win the support of the archeologists and software engineers.
You look good. Hold onto that thought. She grabbed her hud/tiara and left
the bridge.
•  •  •
00:03:51 till show time.
The passage from the command deck currently opened onto a space
above the cargo bay’s inner wall. Today that small place had the
atmosphere of backstage at a classic live theater. For the moment, she
was all alone. Ravna paced the length of the darkened space, not
bothering to change the light level. On one side she had a window on her
speech, especially the opening lines. Don’t botch the opening! On the
other side, she had some windows Nevil had set up looking into the New
Meeting Place itself. These were very temporary views, fisheye
perspectives that were really more limited than was reasonable. Or
maybe that was appropriate. She could peek out like an old-time
performer gauging the crowd.
All the seats that Ravna could see were filled. Nevil would be there,
somewhere in the first rows. It was only Woodcarver and Ravna who
were to come from within the ship. Nevil said that was Woodcarver’s
desire, more royal psychology apparently.
00:00:50. There was the faint metallic clatter of multiple tines on the floor
behind her. Woodcarver. Ravna turned and bowed to her co-Queen.
“Ready for the big day, Your Highness?” There was so much Ravna
wanted to say to Woodcarver. If this day goes right, perhaps you will
listen to me again, and be my friend once more.

Some of Woodcarver’s heads bobbed. That was a smile, though in the
semi-darkness there seemed something strange in it. “Oh yes, though it’s
you who seem to have prepared the most.” She jabbed a snout at the
wall, presumably pointing at the meeting place beyond. “What an …
extraordinary … place you have made for yourself.”
“For us, Woodcarver. For us all.”
00:00:00. Her tiara chimed unnecessarily in her ear. Such precision. A
minute or two more or less should make no difference. But Ravna was
terribly afraid that if she didn’t move forward on a schedule, she might
never get herself on stage. So she didn’t try to say any more, but simply
bowed for Woodcarver to proceed through the doors that were now
opening wide.
Bright sunlight—totally artificial, of course—splashed down upon
Woodcarver as the pack stepped through the doorway. The portal was as
wide as a Tinish pack-level entrance. Woodcarver proceeded through, all
abreast. For that matter, there was room for Ravna, too, but Nevil had
learned that the co-Queen thought it best for her to appear and then
Ravna separately.
So she waited till Woodcarver had cleared the opening and disappeared
toward where her thrones waited on the left. For an instant, Ravna just
hesitated, terrified. This is what happens when you truly realize what a
make-or-break situation you’ve created for yourself. But it was time, and
she had a schedule to keep. She stepped forward. Strangely, the
traditional uniform gave her a kind of strength, and a purposeful stride.
As she stepped into the light, unseen trumpets blasted out a jaunty
flourish. There was nothing Tinish about the music. It was the sort of
honor that went to humans in old historicals. Oh no! That was Glitch
Number 1. If there were to be any flourishes, they should have been for
Woodcarver.
Ravna turned to the right, started toward her own throne. Then she
remembered that she’d intended to turn and bow toward Woodcarver
first. Okay, that was Glitch Number 2, but a small one. She had always

known there would be glitches.
The stage was well above the level of the audience area. As Ravna
walked across it, she looked out at the people and tried to give them a
casual wave. It felt more like shaking a stick, but she heard friendly
applause. Her eyes strayed upwards for a second and—my goodness
what an enormous place this looked to be. She knew the precise
dimensions of the latest build out, but Nevil and his friends had played
clever little tricks with vision and perspective to make it seem even larger.
Gone were the gaming nooks of days past. Today there were slender
arches along the walls. They rose and rose into a ceiling so high that
flying birds would not have been out of place. The fake sunlight spilled
down through a crystal canopy. She recognized the style. This was
rainforest architecture of the Middle Recovery on Nyjora. The Princesses
had used building materials from the fallen ruins—hence the crystal
skylight that would have been impossible for them otherwise. It was a
scene that touched her heart, though it would mean nothing to most
packs—and perhaps not much to Straumli children.
Fortunately, the speaker’s platform and the lectern were just what she
had been rehearsing with up on the bridge. Ravna’s own queenly throne
was just a few paces beyond the lectern, far closer to it than
Woodcarver’s thrones. There were no other seats on the stage. She’d
hoped that the Executive Council would all be part of this, but Johanna
and Pilgrim were still on the East Coast. Apparently Nevil hadn’t been
able to persuade Woodcarver to allow the others up here. Okay, so
Woodcarver wanted governance to be simply the two Queens and the
People.
Ravna hesitated at the steps ascending to her throne. The thing was a
monster, two meters tall, not counting the steps, drenched in fake gems
and precious metals and symbols that didn’t mean much beyond certain
human legends. I really don’t want to go up there. Woodcarver can have
the show, but—
Ravna glanced across the stage. What Woodcarver sat upon necessarily
was different from Ravna’s setup. The pack needed a separate perch for

each member. Woodcarver’s thrones were set at the same height as
Ravna’s, but the total area was no more than Ravna’s single throne, and
the individual perches were laid out in short straight rows, not at all the
way a pack would arrange itself for forceful thought. This was Glitch
Number 3 and far the most serious.
Belatedly, Ravna bowed toward Woodcarver. As she did so, it seemed
like a great shadow moved across the wall behind the platform. It was …
herself … her own image, towering across the ten meter expanse. Just
staring up at it made Ravna a little dizzy. There was no place in the hall
her image would not intimidate. And the camera must be a fixed tracker.
Even when she looked back at Woodcarver, she could tell that the
giantess on the wall was still herself, not her co-Queen.
This was when Nevil was to come on stage, introduce the two Queens
and Ravna’s own very special speech. But Nevil was not to be seen.
Surely Woodcarver will let him give his intros?
She gave Woodcarver a second bow, at the same time searching for a
private voice channel.
Then Woodcarver showed mercy. She shifted a bit awkwardly on her
human-style thrones, bringing her heads closer to one another. When
she spoke, her voice seemed to come from everywhere, conversational
tones that sounded as if she were just a meter or two away. Hopefully,
she sounded like that to everyone here. “Welcome all to the New Meeting
Place. I hope this place will bring openness and power to those who
deserve it.”
Ravna’s face was still the one on the giant display, but Woodcarver was
sitting only a few meters away. Ravna could see that her dress was
Tinish queenly, but not much different from the fur cloaks and half jackets
that she normally wore. As for her expression—a pack’s aspect lay
mainly in the posture of its members: sitting on her thrones, Woodcarver
seemed to have a sardonic expression. “So today, my co-Queen, Ravna,
wishes to tell you what her rule may bring and what it will expect of you.”
Woodcarver extended a snout in Ravna’s direction and waved her
graciously toward the lectern.

For an instant, Ravna froze, thoroughly rattled. There were so many
things, little and maybe not so little, that already had gone wrong. This is
not how it was supposed to be! But she still had her speech and the
ideas she had slaved over. And now she had the undivided attention of
everyone she had hoped to reach. She turned and climbed the steps to
the lectern. A window opened on the familiar, glowing words of her
speech. For one moment, she ignored those words and simply looked out
at her audience: one hundred and fifty humans, perhaps fifty packs. From
her lectern, the main floor was almost three meters down. It spread into a
misty, artificial distance. The seating was far plainer than anything on the
stage, barely more than wooden benches and perches. Everywhere
faces were looking up, and all—even most of the packs—were so familiar
to her.
And there was Nevil, right in the first row! He was dressed in the same
country-spun quilting as all the Children, and right now he looked cold
and soaked and dripping—much like the rest, come in from this
morning’s rain.
But he’d been here after all, just hidden from her view by the lectern.
Sitting right beside him was Timor Ristling, for once without his
possessive Best Friend pack. The boy had an enormous smile on his
face. He seemed totally taken by Ravna’s image on the wall. Then he
saw that she was looking at him and he started waving. Something going
right at last. Ravna twitched her hand up to wave at them both and Nevil
gave her back a wide grin of his own.
Now there was her speech to give. She slid the text window so that
wherever she looked, the words were writ large and translucent across
her view. If she had been Nevil or Woodcarver or Johanna, she could
have ad libbed a new beginning to the talk, something that would mellow
all the screw-ups, that would honor Woodcarver and maybe give
everybody a good laugh. But she was Ravna Bergsndot and she knew
that if she departed from her written speech she would be lost. It was her
life raft.
This was where all the rehearsing would come to her rescue. She could

looked through the misty words, speak them even as her gaze moved
from face to face.
“Thank you, um, Woodcarver.” Hei, an ad lib!
She essayed a sympathetic smile. “Thank you all for coming here this
morning despite the weather.” That wasn’t really an ad lib, since Oobii
had been confident of this morning’s storm front.
“We humans have been here on the Tines World for a little more than ten
years. The packs rescued us and became some of our best friends. But
we must remember, both humans and packs, that our coming was part of
a vast and tragic debacle.” Here she made the proper gesture,
dramatically pointing at the heavens beyond the crystal dome. “The evil
that chased the humans to Tines World, still waits—even though
diminished—in the near interstellar space.” And Ravna went on to
describe Oobii’s best estimate of the status of the Blighter fleet, thirty light
years out. She didn’t bring up the possibility of further Zone shifts; a real
shift would be a game ender, and she had no hint of such beyond the
weird glitch Oobii had reported years before. No, the story she told was
pretty much what she’d been telling the Children from the day they came
out of coldsleep. Nevil had told her that many of the kids had lost sight of
that big picture. Telling them one more time, in this awesome setting,
could make it clear why their present sacrifices were so necessary.
“In just twenty years, the first light from the Blighter fleet will arrive at
Tines World. Will that by itself be a danger? Perhaps, though I have my
doubts. But in the decades after that, it’s possible that very small
payloads, just milligrams, may arrive—all that the Blighters can
accelerate to near-light speeds. With sufficiently high technology, even
such tiny payloads could conceivably harm Tines World.” That was
speculation from the nebulous end of Oobii’s weapons archive,
extrapolating as best it could from their last information on the Blighters
and the most exotic weapon systems that had ever been fielded in the
Slow Zone.
“What’s sure is that if the Blighters still wish us harm, then over the next
century, certainly over the next thousand years, they can kill everyone in

the world, unless—” here she paused dramatically just exactly as in all
her rehearsals, and swept a steely look across her audience “—unless
we, both humans and packs, quickly raise this world to the highest
technology the Slow Zone can sustain. It’s our best hope, perhaps our
only hope. It is worth hard sacrifices.”
As she spoke, she continued to look back and forth across her audience,
occasionally sending a nod in the direction of her co-Queen. Ravna
wasn’t running any analysis tools, but she had the speech so well
rehearsed that there was time to notice the listeners’ reactions. Her eyes
caught on those she most respected. Nevil—not really a good test case,
but a comforting one—was nodding his head at the right times, even
though this all was something he’d heard over and over again during the
last few days. Others: Øvin Verring and Elspa Latterby, they were paying
close attention, but every so often they would look at each other with a
shake of their heads. The tailors, Ben and Wenda Larsndot, they were
sitting far in the back with their kids. They had given up listening early on,
were spending their time keeping their children quiet. They acted as
though they had heard all this before. Which they have, in a dozen dozen
conversations with me over the years. Some, the likes of Gannon
Jorkenrud, were mugging her words.
I have to move on. If only she and Nevil could have foreseen this reaction
when they were planning the speech—or if she were clever enough to
amend it on the fly—she would skip forward with some clever segue and
keep everyone’s attention on the overall message.
The thought made her stumble on the words, almost lose her place. No.
Her only hope was to plow ahead. These words might not sing, but she
knew they made logical sense.
“So what is the greatest sacrifice that we must make for ultimate
survival? It’s a sacrifice I see each of us making every day. It’s a very
hard thing, though I want to convince you that the alternatives aren’t
really workable. That sacrifice is the relatively low priority that we’re
putting on biomedical products.” That seemed to get everyone’s
attention. Even the packs perked up heads here and there.

Start with the bad news, build up to the good—but it was taking so long to
get there! Okay, she was almost to her ideas for repairing more of the
coldsleep caskets and creating an emergency medical committee. “For
now we can treat only minor injuries. We have only basic epigenetic
triggers. Ultimately, all that will change. In the meantime, how are we to
deal with ageing? It’s what our ancestors accepted for thousands of
years…” Ravna never got to the “but.”
“We are not your fucking ancestors!” It was Jefri Olsndot. He was halfway
back in the crowd; she hadn’t seen him before this moment. But now he
was on his feet, enraged.
Jefri? Amdi was clustered all round him, his heads extended in an
expression Ravna could not parse.
Jefri was shouting at the top of his lungs. “How dare you dictate to us,
you so safe and smug? We refuse to die for you, Ravna! We—” he was
still shouting and gesturing, but the sound was gone. Oobii’s acoustics
had damped his voice.
Now Gannon Jorkenrud and another fellow were on their feet. “We will
not die for you, Queenie! We will not die for—” and then their voices
slipped away, too.
Then there were Tami Ansndot and others, all shouting yet silent. Ravna
cast about for sound controls, but they were bundled in the meeting
place’s general automation. I don’t mean to shut people up!
Her eyes focused back on the words of her speech. She had paragraphs
to go! She felt a moment of helpless terror. Then she saw that, down in
the first row, Nevil had come to his feet.
Thank goodness. She and Nevil had planned that he would speak later,
when they went to Question and Answer. If only they could go to that
now, and bail out of the nightmare her speech had become.
She gave him a jerk of her hand, urging him to come up to the lectern.
Nevil climbed the steps to the platform, but did not come around to take
her place. In the audience, Jefri and the others were still standing, but

they weren’t shouting now. Instead there just a fretful murmur that seem
to come from the crowd as a whole.
Nevil turned to them and raised his palms placatingly. After a moment,
the protesters settled back on their benches. “This is our New Meeting
Place, folks. It’s what Ravna has built for us. We should use it to do
what’s right.” The murmuring and angry sounds died away—naturally, as
far as Ravna could see—and everyone was watching Nevil, giving his
sensible words the attention they deserved.
Ravna looked over her shoulder at the monster display that loomed
behind the stage. The camera was still locked on her. Maybe it would
switch to Nevil if she moved away from the lectern. She stepped to one
side, then descended from the platform. But even when she sat in one of
the side seats, there was still her face up there, now frowning down upon
them.
The audience could only see Nevil as a human-sized figure, standing
beside the lectern. At least his voice was not damped:
“That’s probably the most important thing about the New Meeting Place.
It’s where we refugees have our say and our vote.” He looked to his left,
toward Woodcarver.
Woodcarver gave him a civil nod or two, and her voice was downright
conciliatory. “You’re quite right, Nevil. It is more than time that the
humans and the packs of the Domain have their say.”
Nevil looked to his right, at Ravna. “And you, Ravna?”
“Yes, indeed! I—” but he had looked back at the audience, and Ravna let
him run with his presentation. It was going better than her rehearsing.
“So then I suppose the question is, what to vote on?” He grinned, and
there was even laughter from the crowd. “I think there might be a lot of
separate things to vote on. For instance, it’s important that when we are
given the floor to speak, that our voices always be heard.”
Agreement on that was loud and, happily, now unstifled.
“I think the most important issue is medical research. And that’s not just

to keep us looking young and beautiful.” He flashed his smile again, then
became very solemn. “You all know Timor Ristling.” Nevil waved down
toward the front row. Timor still sat there. When Nevil pointed at the child,
the tracking camera finally woke up to its higher logic and suddenly
Timor’s image was towering on the wall behind the stage. This was not
just a head and shoulders shot. The unhappy twistedness of his limbs
was evident, and the faint tremor in his hands. The boy stared up at the
giant image, then clapped in surprised glee.
Nevil smiled back at him, then looked out at the crowd. “How many of you
remember Timor as he was back at the High Lab? I do, even though he
was scarcely four years old. His mother and father maintained our legacy
bootstrap logic—honorable work, and they did it well. They had every
reason to believe their son would be just as steady.” His voice fell. “But
that was not to be. Instead, our situation here has nearly killed him.” He
paused and looked out again at his audience, and spoke with sober
determination. “This is not a burden to be borne, not by Timor, not by
anyone.” The words brought a cheer.
In the tendays that followed, Ravna Bergsndot played this part of the
meeting over and over in her mind, and marveled at the patchwork way
the facts breached her preconceptions, and puzzlement yielded to
understanding. She remembered standing, waving for Nevil’s attention,
trying to guide him back where she thought he’d been going, to talk about
improved coldsleep facilities.
But Nevil had already moved on, riding the approval that seemed to
come from all directions. “So yes, that is something we must surely vote
on. But even that is only a symptom of the systematic problem we must
cure. For whatever reason, there’s been too much secrecy. The
Executive Council should not be meeting in private. Perhaps there should
be no Executive Council at all. I would give up my place on it.”
Several in the audience had stood to speak. Nevil stopped and gestured,
“Jefri?”
Jefri stood arms akimbo. His voice was angry, and he never quite looked
at Ravna. Amdi had hunkered down around him with only a head visible

here and there. “You want the one thing to vote on? It’s not whether we
have an Executive Council or whether you’re on it, Nevil. The real
question is whether we’re going to have a megalomaniac nut case
running us all into the ground!”
For a moment, there was true silence. For a moment, perhaps everyone
was as shocked as Ravna. Then Gannon Jorkenrud was on his feet,
shouting loud support for Jefri. But others were on their feet, too. Wenda
Larsndot and Gannon Jorkenrud were suddenly in an angry shouting
match.
Nevil raised his hands again. After some seconds the tumult died. Wenda
angrily sat down and then so did Jorkenrud and the others. Nevil let the
silence grow for a moment. Then he said, “It’s clear we have much to
discuss, more than we can vote on in this one meeting. We also have the
day-to-day problems of maintaining the Domain. Perhaps there is a safe
compromise. For everyday administration, we have a stable, proven
resource.” He turned and bowed to Woodcarver. “Madame, are you
content to continue without the advice of an Executive Council? To
administer in those noncontroversial issues of Domain affairs?”
Two of Woodcarver cast a look at Ravna. The others, including her
puppy, were looking at Nevil and the audience. The co-Queen’s aspect
was one of sober attention. But Ravna had worked closely with
Woodcarver for ten years. And right now, behind the solemn aspect,
Ravna thought she detected amused satisfaction. None of that showed in
her voice or words: “Quite content, Mister Storherte. Of course, I would
still want everyone’s advice.”
“Of course,” Nevil gave Woodcarver a nod that was almost a bow. And
then he turned to Ravna. But he didn’t have any similar request for her.
Instead, his tone was comforting, conciliatory. “Ravna, we owe you so
much. You supported Woodcarver in her war against Steel and the Old
Flenser. We all remember your love in the early days of our exile, how
you made it possible for Woodcarver and her packs to care for the
youngest of us. Even now, we desperately need your expertise with
Oobii’s archives.” He hesitated, as if uncertain about how to continue.

“But at the same time … we … we think you have become fixated on
potential threats that are very far away. We think you have fallen into a
kind of mental trap, where your losses and loneliness lead you into a”—
he looked up at the magnificent fakery of the Age of Princesses
architecture—“into a kind of personal fantasy.” His gaze came back to
her, compassionate and probing. And now, finally, Ravna fully
understood. She could feel the eyes of all the Children and packs upon
her. Some might hate her, as Jefri seemed to. But most simply saw the
uniform she wore, and this imperial hall—and concluded that her grand
plans were madness. She could almost see that conclusion spread in the
five or ten seconds of Nevil’s silence. Then his voice gently continued:
“So that is why I think that that must be our vote here today: That we ask
you to stand aside from administration for a time, that you continue to
give us the value of your insights and your help with Oobii, but that you
let Woodcarver and the votes of this New Meeting Place do the
governing. Do you understand the vote I’m suggesting, Ravna?”
For the first time in several minutes, Ravna looked Nevil Storherte
straight in the eye. He did not flinch. There was nothing but firm respect
in the gaze he showed to her and the world. Ravna opened her mouth to
shout denunciations back at him,… but she didn’t have the words.
Without a minute or two to think, only enraged babble would emerge. But
I could stop him. Nevil Storherte might have his petty audio and scene
control, everything she had given him to make the New Meeting Place,
but Ravna still had overall master control of the starship Out of Band II.
She could take control of this room, blow out the Age of Princesses lie
and force everyone to listen to … the ravings of one now proven mad.
She noticed that Woodcarver had tensed. She realized that at the level of
raw force, Ravna held the whip hand.
But I’m not a mad woman. And so, when she spoke, Ravna said, “I
understand, Nevil. I understand very well.”
“Thank you, Ravna,” Nevil’s voice was full of compassion and relief.
Now Nevil was looking back at this audience. “And so I think we have
something to vote for. A serious change that gives us all a hand in

making a safe and healthy future. Is there debate before we vote?”
Actually there was, but not very much. Jorkenrud had his say, and then
Jefri. That was more detailed and pointed and cutting than Jefri’s shouted
interruptions had been. Ravna almost started crying in the middle of it. As
far as she could tell, Nevil was not using the Oobii’s acoustics to shut
anyone up, but there were very few who had much to say in opposition,
and they seemed a bit confused. All around them they had the evidence
of Ravna’s megalomania, and when she turned a bit to the side, she
noticed that the camera was tracking her again. Her scowling glare was
monstrous on the wall above.
When it came, the vote was no surprise. The mad woman was safely
elevated to the status of technical advisor.
There were cheers, and then the Children were coming into the aisles
and moving forward. Around Ravna there seemed to be a bubble of
emptiness. Fortunately, the vast display no longer captured her face.
Where Ravna sat, there seemed to be only shadows.
Nevil came down from the speaker’s platform. The babble grew louder as
folks moved in close to shake his hand. Nevil was grinning and waving.
He reached down to lift Timor high into the air. “We’re doing this for him!
We’re doing this for us!”
Then he set the boy down, and both were lost in a swirl of well-wishers.
After a few seconds, Timor came out from the crush, ignored for the
moment. He looked around and then ran awkwardly across the open
floor, toward the shadows that hid Ravna.
Up close, she could see that Timor was crying. He looked lost and
devastated, not suddenly saved as Nevil proclaimed. He looks like I feel.
She went to one knee to greet him. He threw his arms around her neck.
His voice came in her ear, the tone wondering. “Ravna, Ravna. What
happened?”

Chapter   12
For Ravna, the days that followed were strangely placid. She was told
that Johanna and Pilgrim were en route back from the East Coast, but
that no Executive Council meetings were planned. Woodcarver was not
available. For the moment, the new “Technical Advisor to the Domain”
had few responsibilities. She was asked to leave her apartment aboard
the Oobii. That space would be used for the additional medical support
that Nevil had promised. Apparently that involved upgrading the
coldsleep gear, though Ravna wasn’t clear on how that was to be
accomplished.
Ravna was assigned one of the newest town houses on the Queen’s
Road. Bili Yngva showed her around the place and helped her move in.
Bili was apparently Nevil’s chief lieutenant. Bili was smiling and
respectful. “Nevil wanted to show you this place, but I think he’s
discovered just how much work admin can be,” he said, with a disarming
grin. They were on the second floor of her new home. Like all the town
houses, this had steam heating and indoor plumbing. These new ones
had a second flush toilet on the upper floor.
The upper floor had both a front stairs and a back stairs. There was a
living room with wide glass windows. The southwest exposures gave a
grand view across the Inner Channel. “This is the first house with the new
optical-grade glass sheeting. It’s almost like having a real display, except
that the view menu is a bit limited.” He waved at the swirls of frost that
encrusted the margins of the glass. “Don’t worry about the ice, That’ll go
away once we connect the water. Your heater tower is already registered
with Oobii.”
Ravna nodded. Once the ship began heating her water, it wouldn’t matter
how much heat was leaking through those windows, except as it was

used by Oobii’s sensors as thermostat feedback. Ah, the wonders of
central heating and central computing.
After a moment, Bili seemed to realize she wasn’t going to respond
further. “Well, I should go down and help the guys get your baggage
installed.”
Yngva went downstairs, and she heard him shouting out the front door. In
moments there was crashing and banging, the sounds of people doing
battle with large objects. Ravna followed him downstairs, but Bili was firm
in preventing her from helping out. In fact, the boxes were intimidating,
not something that Tines or small humans could do much with. Bili had
four helpers, some of the biggest older boys. They didn’t have much to
say to Ravna, though every once in a while, Gannon Jorkenrud cast a
sneering smile in her direction.
There was so much furniture, crockery, curtains, clothing. None of it was
really hers, not her stuff from Oobii. Aboard ship, she’d had a few
souvenirs and everything else was ship recycles. What Bili’s crew was
bringing in was pack made, though much of it had benefited from Oobii’s
technological contributions to the Domain.
The first floor rapidly filled with physical loot. Bili gave her a big grin,
acknowledging the scale of the job. “Hei, I know it’s crazy, but you need a
lot of stuff to live well in primitive conditions. We’ll get you helpers for the
cooking and laundry.”
Servants.
Ravna retreated to the top floor. She walked around the polished parquet
floor, stopped at the window to examine the fittings. In the early years,
many of the Children had had trouble with raw physicality, with systems
so stupid that you had to understand them. She remembered how often
the little ones were unnecessarily cold. In the early days, she’d had to
remind the kids that they must consciously plan for their comfort. Down
Here there was a harsher truth: even planning was not sufficient to avoid
physical hardship.
Her new situation crippled her abilities with Oobii, yet it was far more

luxurious than what most Children possessed. Nevil’s maneuvering had
not ended with his coup. Surely Bili understood all this, even as he smiled
and indulged her.
There was noise on the stairs. Yngva’s gang of movers had discovered
the second floor. But it wasn’t furniture that came up first. She turned to
see an enormous roll of carpeting snaking up, one push-and-heave at a
time. Yngva and Jorkenrud and the others finally got the thing across the
center of the room. A pack carrying hammers came up the stairs after
them. She recognized Screwfloss, sometime bartender and Flenser
minion. And a carpet installer, too?
“Hei, Ravna, hei, hei,” said Screwfloss, his heads bobbing at all the
humans. He did some ostentatious measuring, then unrolled the carpet,
four of him moving to the corners. One watched from the side. The pack
edged the carpet into position. “Oops, not quite square.” He tried again …
and a third time, finally nailing it down with tacks lipped from one of his
panniers. The margins were still not quite right, but no one said
Screwfloss was an expert carpet installer. On the other hand, the carpet
itself was magnificent. This wasn’t one of those plain, durable items that
came out of the weaving mills. She leaned down and felt the plush. This
was an art weave, some classic Tinish scene. The multiple anamorphic
images were a meaningless jumble to Ravna, but the piece looked
extremely expensive, the work of thousands of hours of traditional Tinish
labor.
Ravna stood and noticed that Bili seemed faintly impatient at all the
adjustments.
“Heh! Looks great, doesn’t it?” said Screwfloss; he was asking her, but
two of him were slanting an impudent look at Bili.
“It’s … beautiful,” said Ravna.
“Good!” said Bili. “We want the Technical Advisor to be happy. Let’s get
the rest of the furniture up here.”
“It looks like you’ve thought of everything, Bili, but—”
“Yes?” his smile became questioning.

“There’s nothing … nothing to think with.” That was how a Straumer
would say it.
Bili nodded. “Oh yes, computation, data access, communication? We’ll
install the house telephone tomorrow, Ravna. But remember, this is all
any of us have away from Oobii.”
Gannon Jorkenrud made a little noise, and Ravna saw the smirk on his
face. Bili’s other guys were blank-faced. Bili Yngva was only one with a
friendly smile pasted on his face. “Don’t worry, Ravna, we’re working on
special access for you down in the New Meeting Place.”
“There are things I really need to keep up with, Bili. If I’m to be Technical
Advisor, I—”
Yngva raised his hands placatingly. “I know, I know! We really need your
help. Working out the priorities of that is just about Nevil’s most important
job these days. He’ll get back to you with the task list in just a few days.
He’s promised me.” He glanced out the windows. It was late afternoon
and the sun had already set. “We should finish up here, or you’re going to
be cold.”
They were already trooping down the stairs. Only Screwfloss seemed to
notice that Ravna was not following. She waved the pack to go ahead,
and then it was gone, too. Down below, they were banging around again,
but this sounded like plumbing. Were Bili and Gannon and the other boys
really this handy? Or was the noise mainly Screwfloss?
She resisted the urge to go downstairs and check on them. Instead she
walked across the room to the broad windows. The glass had seemed
distortion free earlier, but now there were faint ripples … Oh. Warm air
was already rising from the vents.
Ravna gazed out at the neighborhood. There were only a few other town
houses visible in this direction, nothing to block the view. Beyond the
darkening lands and black sea, the sky was now without color. She could
see a handful of the brighter stars. Now that she was stuck on a single
planet, the random position of a few bright stars told her of the seasons
and the hours and … there, at the edge of a pair of stars settling toward

the sea, she was looking at the most important place in all the heavens. It
was a nondescript patch of sky, showing only a few faint stars on even
the darkest, clearest nights.
Just thirty lightyears out were perhaps one hundred starships. It was the
threat that had hung over her for ten years, informing every decision,
forcing her to push and persuade and bully both Children and Tines to
attempt the impossible: to prevail against the Blight.
Now? Those terrible decisions were no longer hers to make, and she felt
the strangest feeling … of peace.
•  •  •
There was no word from Nevil the next day, or the next. A few of the
Children visited her at her new house, but they didn’t stay long. The older
ones looked around at its glory and seemed to sense invisible walls.
The storms of the previous tenday had moved inland, blocking Johanna
and Pilgrim’s return. Their agrav was battened down hundreds kilometers
to the east. Not all misfortune was Nevil’s doing.
Ravna visited the Out of Band II every day. Bili Yngva had given her an
interim access credential for the New Meeting Place. The cargo bay’s
one night of megalomaniac glory was past. Nevil had reverted the place
to something like his original design. As Ravna had expected, the
popularity of the primitive game stations had waned; what Oobii could
create and display was pitifully weak compared to what the older Children
remembered. Nowadays, the gamers were mainly packs and the
youngest Children—and Timor. The boy was practically camped out by
one of the stations, boring even the also-addicted Belle Ornrikak.
Sometimes Timor didn’t even notice Ravna, and when he did he was an
unending firestorm of gaming esoterica. Ravna’s only sympathizer was
now distracted and ecstatically happy.

Other than Timor, the kids seemed reluctant to talk to her. Maybe when
they saw her, they remembered only how she had seemed at that terrible
meeting. So Ravna sat in the public area and puttered around with an
interface, careful not to exceed the powers that came with Nevil’s “interim
access credential.” That meant no sysadmin activity of course. The
compute-and-search allowance was minimal, and some of the archives
were not visible.
On her third visit, Wenda Larsndot came over and asked for help.
“Needles is in love with the idea of mass production. So I’ve been trying
to see what Oobii says. There’s tonnes of stuff about numerical control
tailoring, but I need something easy and low tech.”
So Ravna gave her a tour of the hybrid planning tools that she’d built on
top of the ship’s archives. It was the sort of thing she’d pushed at the
Children for years, even though it was awfully dull—at least by Straumer
standards. There were millions of dead ends in such searches, and Oobii
couldn’t prune them all away. But solving this problem might be easy! In
her mad race to head off the Blight, Ravna had chosen to skip over
mechanical automation.… It turned out that most pretechnical
civilizations invented mechanical readers for pattern-driven looms. So
Wenda’s real problem was simply to find one such that could easily fit the
weaving equipment the Tines already had. Once Ravna had properly set
up the Tinish constraints, it didn’t take long. Oobii dredged up some
insect race whose ancient history included a gadget for driving a near
perfect match for a Tinish loom.
“Wow,” said Wenda as she looked at the first-pass designs. “So now we
can just hire a good artist, and turn out thousand-hour capes in less than
a day!”
Ravna grinned back at her. “It still might not work. There are lots of small
moving parts, and our weaving mills aren’t exactly the same as this. Oobii
is weak on doing final coordination.” She waved at the design uncertainty
flags that floated over the gears and cams. “You might have to ask
Scrupilo to make a special purpose mill.”
“Oh, we’ll make this work.” Wenda was already lost in consideration of

the options and parts lists. Somehow it made her look twenty again.
Ravna glanced up and noticed that Edvi Verring and some still-younger
kids were clustered about. Edvi gave her a nervous smile, “I was
wondering, Ravna, we’ve been having some trouble with a game…”
•  •  •
It had been so long since she’d had time for this. And helping the
Children with games was fun. These games didn’t have the intransigence
of reality. Ravna didn’t need the good luck she’d had with Wenda. When
something didn’t work right, she could often just step back and tweak the
game parameters. Sometimes, librarians—even with just an interim
access credential—could have godlike powers.
“Ravna?” That was an adult voice, bringing her back from the depths of
Edvi Verring’s game craft.
She looked up and saw Bili Yngva standing beside her. How long have I
been playing around? Wenda was still here, working on the weaving mill
gadget.
“Sorry to bother you, Ravna, but—”
Then she noticed various mail flags. “Oops, I didn’t notice.”
“No problem. I just got word from Nevil. He’d like to chat with you, if you
can drag yourself away from the important business here.” He grinned at
Wenda and the gamers.
•  •  •
About half of the New Meeting Place had been converted to offices.

Yngva led her down tiny corridors. The construction was local timber and
the lightweight plastic sheeting that Oobii could still extrude.
Ravna found herself lagging behind Bili. She could feel outrage thrusting
up through her numbness. Sooner or later she and Nevil would have to
talk, but she couldn’t imagine how he could face her, what he could say.
…
Bili looked back at where Ravna had slowed to a halt. “It’s just a little
further, Ravna.”
… so why am I the one who can’t face this meeting?
After a moment, Ravna nodded and followed along. Indeed, Nevil’s office
was just around the corner. It looked no different from the others except
that the display function showed his name in businesslike Samnorsk
script.
Inside, Nevil Storherte looked unchanged, as handsome and calm as
ever. He was seated at a plain workplace, surrounded by plain gray
walls. “Come in, come in,” he said, waving Ravna to one of the chairs
beyond his desk. He glanced at Bili. “This will be about ten minutes. Can
you come back then?”
“Sure thing.” Bili departed.
And for the first time since The Day, Nevil and Ravna were alone, face to
face. Ravna folded her arms and gave Nevil a long stare. Words wouldn’t
quite come.
Nevil stared back mildly, and after a moment raised an eyebrow. “So
you’re looking for an explanation, an apology?”
“The truth, before all else.” But she couldn’t help the strangled way her
words came out.
“Okay, the truth.” Nevil looked away from her for a moment. “The truth is
that you brought this on yourself, Ravna. In the early years, you did
enormous good. You’re still the most important human being in the world.
That’s why everyone let you run loose for so long, that and the fact that
anyone who thinks about it knows how much we owe you. That’s also

what makes your … quirks … so tragic.”
“You really don’t believe in the Blight?”
Nevil shrugged irritably. “I believe that we’re not in a position to know
exactly what happened Up There. Our presence here is good evidence
that a deadly accident happened at the High Lab. Your presence here,
and what’s visible in Oobii’s files—those are good evidence that your
home worlds and probably mine have been destroyed. The silence
across the sky is proof that some terrible catastrophe has been visited
upon the Beyond. But your obsession with the ‘Blight’ goes beyond
reasonable logic.”
“What’s left of their fleet is just thirty lightyears out, Nevil.”
Storherte shook his head. “Thirty lightyears. Yes. Perhaps a hundred
ships, moving at just a few kilometers per second on no coherent bearing
and without ramscoop drives—all this by your own telling! Thousands of
years from now, they may make planetfall, somewhere. When that
eventually happens, whatever the facts behind all this uncertainty will be
ancient history. Meantime—”
“That’s all wishful thinking, Nevil. The—”
“No. I’ve heard all this from you before, Ravna. Over and over. It’s your
mantra, your excuse for hiding aboard this ship. The problem just got
worse in the years since we older kids could take care of younger ones.
You might still be in charge now, if you had not so totally lost touch with
us.”
Ravna stared for a moment, vaguely aware that her mouth was hanging
open. “No one complained—”
“You never would have listened.” He paused. “Understand me: I’m a
moderate. We Children remember our parents, and we know they were
not fools. The High Lab attracted the best minds of Straumli Realm. They
would not have wakened a Great Evil. And yet, when we look at your
ship’s records, we see how you and Pham Nuwen brought disaster
wherever you went. You admit Pham Nuwen was infested by some part
of a Power. You call it Countermeasure and admit it destroyed

civilizations for as far as our eyes can see. Some of us look at these facts
and conclude that everything you say may be true—but with the values of
good and evil reversed.” He waved his hand dismissively. “I regard that
position as extremism, as nutty as yours but not nearly as dangerous.”
“Not … as … dangerous?”
“Ravna, you were running wild, diverting more and more resources into
your obsession. You had to be stopped. So yes. I lied to you. And I told
Woodcarver of your deceit. I set you up for a fall. But however brutal it
seems to you, it was the gentlest way I could find to make the change. It
removed you from authority, but it left you in a position to contribute.” He
was staring into her eyes, perhaps assessing, perhaps waiting for some
response. When none came, he leaned forward and his voice was a little
softer. “Ravna, we need you. You are beloved by all the younger ones.
You were the only adult they had. On a coldly logical level, your
importance is that you’re the only surviving professional, and a librarian
at that. Some of my friends are smart and cocky. All their lives they’ve
lived with decent computation. They’ve solved lots of problems—but at
the Top of the Beyond. Now they are beginning to realize their
cluelessness. You are on a different level from all of them.”
Nevil leaned back, watched her steadily for a moment. “Ravna, I don’t
care that you hate my guts, but I’m desperate for your cooperation. That’s
why I’ve tried to make your new quarters as comfortable as possible.
That’s why I’ve tried to minimize the humiliation you may feel. Even if you
can’t run the show anymore, I’m hoping you’ll help. Our projects are
mundane and practical, but they’re essential for survival on this world.”
Ravna gave a jerky nod. “And you expect this with the game-level access
that Bili gave me today?”
Nevil gave her a smile. It was his first of the conversation, and perhaps
more meaningful than all his friendliness of before the coup. “Sorry. That
was all he has authority to pass out. I’ve discussed this with Woodcarver.
She understands that you are best qualified to exploit what computational
powers Oobii possesses. We’ll get you an office like this so you won’t
have to waste time on frivolous distractions. We ask for two limitations:

Your work should always leave other users with continuity of access. And
second, Woodcarver—well frankly, me too—we don’t want you taking
control.” He hesitated again. “You have some kind of bureaucratic
authority over Oobii, right? Is that called ‘system administration’ on a
machine this small?”
Ravna thought a moment. “Sysadmin is the usual term,” she said. And
you have no idea what that means, do you, Nevil? Once upon a time,
Ravna had been equally ignorant. It was Pham Nuwen and the
Skroderider Blueshell who had shown her what a very special, terrible
thing it was to command a starship.
“Ah. Well, I want to thank you for staying within the access that Bili gave
you this afternoon. It shows that Woodcarver’s worst fears are
groundless.” He looked a little embarrassed, another first for this
conversation. “Nevertheless, we ask that you transfer that authority now.”
“To you.”
“Yes. That would only make the facts fit the result of the general vote.”
When she didn’t reply he said, “It’s for the best, Ravna, and no more than
what you accepted at the time of the meeting.”
She thought back to the last minutes of that meeting, right before the
vote. She remembered her rage, and even now felt it return. She had
turned away from physical force then.
Ravna bowed her head. She would turn away from it now.

Chapter   13
The clear weather moved inland and a new storm front rolled onto the
coast. So while the first big snow fell on Newcastle, Johanna and Pilgrim
had a chance to lift off from their camp to the southeast. Ravna went to
bed late that night, worrying that the two were making a big mistake. The
wind across Starship Hill was rising. What if the two arrived and found a
blizzard in progress? Much safer to wait things out on the ground, even if
far away. Three years earlier, Pilgrim had been stuck in the wilds for five
tendays while storms danced across takeoff and landing points with
perfect synchronization. This time … well, she knew the two travelers had
heard only bits and pieces of what had happened here. She prayed they
wouldn’t let their curiosity trump their good judgment.
The worry and the wind kept her awake for several hours. When she
finally dozed off … she massively overslept. That had happened much
too often since she’d moved to the town house. All her life she’d had
convenient external reminder services. Her body’s natural system
needed discipline that it had not yet learned.
In this case she was wakened by muffled pounding. She lay for a
moment, trying to imagine what that could flag—then suddenly realized
someone was banging on her front door. She skittered across the cold
floor, out of her bedroom. Through the windows she had a glimpse of
darkening overcast, snow piled deep on nearby homes, drowning the
street below. The wind had died sometime during her sleep.
Ravna was halfway down the front stairs when the delicate lockbolt finally
gave up its defense. The door crashed opened. Frigid air swept in around
a figure in a heavy parka. “What damn cheap construction!” That was
Johanna’s voice, and as the figure advanced toward the stairs, it pulled
back its hood. Yes, it was Johanna.

She advanced through the cloak room, pulling off her parka as she came.
A pack of five entered the house behind her. Tines in the arctic winter
had deep pelts, but even they wore heavy jackets in cold like this.
Nevertheless, Ravna recognized Pilgrim. Two of him were inspecting the
shattered lockbolt while two others quietly shut the door. The fifth was
keeping an eye on Johanna.
The young woman threw her parka to the floor. “That fucker! That
motherless, shit-eating traitor! That—”
From there, Johanna’s criticism became more pointed. There were words
Ravna was a little surprised Johanna would know, though maybe in the
Straumer dialect they were more mellow than Ravna thought.
At last there came a pause in the verbal hellstorm. “You’re talking about
Nevil, are you?”
Johanna glared at her for almost five seconds as she seemed to struggle
for speech. Finally, she said, “In case you haven’t guessed, the wedding
is off.”
“Why don’t we go upstairs and talk about it?”
They trekked up the wooden stairs, Ravna in the lead, Johanna thumping
along behind her. Halfway, Ravna heard her muffled voice say something
like, “Sorry about the dirty boots.”
Pilgrim’s voice came from further back: “We’ve talked to Nevil; I’ve had a
hearts to hearts chat with Woodcarver.”
Maybe I won’t have to explain everything. Just the most embarrassing
parts. “How long have you been back?”
“Five hours,” said Pilgrim. “We took a navigational chance, and it paid off.
A mere twelve hours hanging in the air and then the wind died to nothing
and the snow stopped, and here we are!”
As they entered the second level, Ravna turned on the glow panels.
Johanna teetered at the edge of the carpet, then sagged down to sit with
her back against the wall, her butt on the bare wood margin of the room.
Pilgrim helped her take off her boots while he walked around the room,

apparently admiring the carpet.
“We got only the most scattered fragments on our commset,” he said.
“We—”
“You got screwed, Ravna” said Johanna.
Ravna sighed. “I can’t believe I was so naive.”
Johanna shook her head. “You knew I trusted him enough to marry him.”
Pilgrim’s voice was comforting even if his words were not: “Nevil is a big
surprise for all of us, a political genius. He accomplished so much with so
little effort. And I truly think he—”
Jo interrupted him, “You should have been there, Ravna. He was so full
of deeply felt straight talk. He would have lost some teeth if Yngva and
Jerkwad hadn’t been close by.” She looked up at Ravna, and her face
seemed to crumple. “I love, I loved him, Ravna! I can’t believe Nevil is
evil. I think he really b-believes he did the r-right thing.” She leaned
forward, sobbing.
•  •  •
Johanna had moved to the room’s long sofa. Now she simply looked
exhausted. Pilgrim’s big, scarred one was sitting next to her, his head in
her lap. The rest of Pilgrim was lying at the traditional viewing positions
on the carpet. “I’ve got to find Jefri,” Jo said. “Jef was so little when we
left the High Lab. He was almost as talented as Jerkwad, but he didn’t
have any training. I never thought he even liked the place. How could he
betray—”
“He’s not the only Denier, Jo,” said Ravna, remembering the angry voices
denouncing her.
“Yeah. I never paid attention to the whiners. For that matter, since …
since I’ve been on this world, Tines seem much better friends than

humans.” Her look got a little distant. “I thought Nevil was bringing me
back from that.” She glanced at Pilgrim. “You know, there’s a more
surprising idiot than any of us, and that’s Woodcarver. I can see she’d be
pissed when Nevil told her about your secret snooping on Flenser, but
Powers!, why would she let Nevil lead her around like all the rest?”
A soft chuckle rose from Pilgrim. “Ah, dear Woodcarver. She wouldn’t
have been fooled if she weren’t going through a change of life.”
Jo was nodding. “I’ve been worried about her new puppy.”
“Yes. Sht. Keeping Sht was a mistake. Not a big mistake. Woodcarver
and her broodkenners are too experienced for that; normally this would
only be an inconvenience. Now with little Sht onboard, our co-Queen is a
bit more … vindictive than before.” The four of Pilgrim on the carpet had
been staring down into the weave of its design. Now they all looked up at
Ravna. “I understand why you didn’t tell Woodcarver about your spying
on Flenser. But telling Nevil—”
“May be my biggest mistake of all?” said Ravna.
The pack nodded heads. “Nevil’s revelation outraged Woodcarver far
more than it would have pre-Sht. She rationalized this to me in some
detail. She considers that she is using Nevil.”
“I don’t know,” said Johanna. She idly petted the scarred one’s head.
“Back at the High Lab, Nevil was the most popular guy in school. I loved
him even then—well, I had a crush on him. But he comes from a long line
of leaders and politicians. His folks were the lab’s directors, the best in
Straumli Realm. Both naturally and by training, Nevil is a star.”
“Yes, but my Woodcarver has had centuries to observe sneakiness and
breed sneakiness into herself,” said Pilgrim. A smile rippled. “Sharing
puppies with her, I’ve inherited some of that myself.” The four on the
carpet hunkered down. For a moment an old-time human tune filled
around the room, Pilgrim “humming” to himself. “Still, there’s Sht’s
influence. Woodcarver honestly believes that Ravna has drifted into
power madness.”
Johanna straightened abruptly. “What?”

“Woodcarver studied the decorations in the New Meeting Place, and
Ravna’s words and dress.”
“Which were all helpfully put together by Nevil, right?” Jo looked at
Ravna, who nodded.
Pilgrim: “Oh, Woodcarver figured that out—but she says, even so, it was
a valid reflection of Ravna’s inclinations. She is really angry with you,
Ravna. Sorry.”
Ravna bowed her head. “Yeah … I’ve gotten too wrapped up in the Age
of Princesses. Nevil didn’t have to exaggerate much to make me look like
a nutcase.” The Age of Princesses will never seem beautiful to me again.
“Don’t be that way, Ravna.” Johanna eased the scarred one aside and
came around the low table to hold her hand. “Nevil has outsmarted
everybody.” She sat on the carpet beside Ravna’s chair, rested her head
in their clasped hands. “Everybody. That’s the biggest surprise, you
know. So what if we Children have disagreements with you, or complain
that you make mistakes? Most of the kids love you, Ravna.”
“Yes, Nevil said something similar to me. He—”
“Okay then. I’ll bet his biggest problem is keeping the Children from
connecting that affection with their common sense.” She paused for a
long moment, staring at the floor.
“You finally noticed the carpet, eh?” said Pilgrim.
Johanna gave him a weak glare. “Yes.” Her gaze swept along the
windows, the carven knicknacks that Bili had set on the wall shelves.
“This place is beautiful, Ravna. Nevil has set you up with swankier digs
than Woodcarver’s own inner rooms.”
Pilgrim: “And I’ll bet he wants Ravna to work in separate quarters, too.”
Ravna nodded.
Johanna made a grumpy noise. “We already know he’s a great
manipulator.” She came to her feet and walked to the windows. There
was a break in the overcast way out at the horizon. Aurora light spilled
through. After a moment she said. “You know what we need?”

“To finally get some sleep?” said Pilgrim, but Ravna noticed that his eyes
were open and all watching Jo.
“True, but I’m thinking further ahead. If Nevil is a great politician, we just
have to be better. There must be whole sciences of sneaky. Ravna
knows Oobii’s archives. We’re smart; we can learn.” Johanna was
looking at her expectantly, and suddenly Ravna realized that the girl
thought librarians must be experts at everything.
“Johanna, I could set up a sneakiness research program, but—”
“Oh! You think Nevil knows enough about Oobii to track you on this?”
“Ah,” said Ravna. “I didn’t tell you what happened yesterday,” They had
gotten sidetracked by the overwhelming unpleasantness that had come
before. “Nevil explained my new situation.”
“Okay?” Suddenly Johanna looked wary.
Ravna described Nevil’s “moderate” position, his plea for her help. “Then,
well, he said that since I had lost the vote and agreed to step down, it
was only right that I give him system administration authority over Oobii.”
Pilgrim said, “Is that what it sounds like?”
“Ravna, you didn’t!”
“I gave him the sysadmin authority, but—”
Johanna had covered her face with her hands. “So now he can see
everything we do? He can block whatever archive access he wants? He
can redocument records?”
“Not … exactly. I gave him what he literally asked for. I lucked out; if I’d
had to actively lie, I’m sure I would have botched it.”
Johanna peeked from between her fingers. “So … what does sysadmin
mean?”
“Literally, bureaucratic control over the Oobii’s automation. The thing that
Nevil didn’t understand is that Oobii is a ship. It must have a captain, and
the captain’s command must exist independent of administration.”
“Really? I don’t think it was like that on Straumer vessels.”

Ravna remembered back to the near-lethal conflict between Pham
Nuwen and the Skroderider Blueshell. “Maybe not, but it’s the case for
Oobii.” Straumli Realm always cut corners—but she didn’t say that out
loud. “The Out of Band II has a n-partite memory system. Only a minority
is accessible through sysadmin. If that deviates from the rest, then the
person with Command Privilege has a number of options.”
Johanna had lowered her hands. A look of triumph was spreading across
her face. “And … you … have Command Privilege?”
Ravna nodded. “Pham set up a contingent transfer, just before he
dropped onto Starship Hill. It, it was one of the last things he did for me.”
Pilgrim: “So you’re like the Goddess on the Bridge!” The pack looked
back and forth at itself, embarrassed. “Sorry. That’s one of your Sjandra
adventure novels.”
Ravna remembered no such title, but that was no surprise. Most
civilizations had more fiction than they did real history. In any case: “I’m
deleting such references from what Nevil and company can read.”
“Command Privilege can do that?”
“Oh yes. The places he’s likely to see, anyway. Oobii doesn’t have the
compute power to revise its entire archive. The point is, Nevil can go on
about his business, messing and snooping—”
“But it’s all in an invisible box!”
“Right. He shouldn’t notice a thing, unless we have bad luck or we cause
some external effect.”

Chapter   14
A few days later, Ravna had her very own office aboard Oobii … and
the opportunity to begin her research into sneakiness. Oobii’s archives
were mostly about technology. Even so, “sneakiness” was far too broad a
search concept. Normally in the Beyond, where interactions were almost
always positive-sum, “sneakiness” was no more than knowing one’s
customer and driving a shrewd deal. It was exactly the peaceful pursuit of
her old employers at the Vrinimi Organization. The winners got fabulously
wealthy and the losers—well, they only got rich. At the other extreme, in
the unhappiest corners of the Slow Zone, there were sometimes true
negative-sum games. On those worlds, only a saint could believe in
return business, and all advancement depended on diminishing others.
Pham Nuwen’s childhood had been in such a place—or so he had
remembered.
Alas and thank goodness, neither extreme was appropriate here. The
sneakiness Ravna was interested in was nonviolent maneuvering and
politics, what had worked so well for Nevil. Oobii’s little social science
archive covered hundreds of millions of years, in the Slow Zone and the
Beyond, data from a million different races. The ship popped up a query
classification template. She filled it out, leaving aside for now the pack
nature of the Tines—group minds were so rare that it could easily skew
the results. But the rest of the situation, including the presence of exiled
spacer travelers, should get lots of matches. The present situation on
Tines world was a marginally positive-sum game, teetering on the edge
of a takeoff into enlightenment.
She glanced at her command window, which showed all the various
snoopers that Nevil was running. Most of them were targeted on her, and
all were clumsy, wasteful things. In any case, all they would see of Ravna

was the agricultural research she had been assigned.
Then she fed her template into a syllabus generator, setting its priority
very low. That was probably over-cautious, but if she pushed the system
too hard, everything else would drag—one of those “external effects” she
must be careful to avoid. So this dredging operation would take a while.
She sat back for a minute or two, content to watch the process. Okay,
that was not a good use of her time. She should be down in the New
Meeting Place, talking to the Children, fighting fire with fire, innocently
undermining Nevil’s position.
Ravna waved away the displays and left her “private office.” It was even
bigger than Nevil’s, but there was a large Keep Out sign splashed
helpfully across the door. Of course, Nevil didn’t have such a sign. On the
other hand—as Pilgrim had pointed out—his office probably had a back
entrance.
Jo and Pilgrim seemed to be enjoying every hour of this campaign.
Ravna was not so naturally talented, but she was very happy that the two
were now living at her town house. Thanks to Nevil’s “generosity,” there
was more than enough room. Johanna had chortled at that irony.
Ravna walked out of the maze of office corridors and down the ad hoc
wood stairs to the main floor, where Nevil had left the game stations.
Nowadays, this area of the New Meeting Place was almost deserted. The
remaining game addicts consisted of a few packs, and of course Timor
and Belle. Strange. Timor wasn’t at his usual station. She walked around
the floor watching the games. Normally, when Timor wandered, it was to
give long-winded advice to any game-player who did not shoo him away.
She turned, headed for the ramp to midlevel, where most of the
programming stations were located. Those had gained popularity as the
limitations of the games had become apparent. In earlier years, the kids
had turned up their noses at Slow Zone programming. Now their vision of
medical necessity had changed that. It made perfect sense for Children
and Tines to gather and work with Oobii in a nearly civilized venue. Some
of that was gaming, but most was research that forced them to deal with
the available automation. I should have created this place years ago. But

at the time, she had been too concerned with the colony’s self-sufficiency
and establishing the Children’s Academy. She would have seen the New
Meeting Place as frivolous.
There were plenty of human-sounding voices up ahead, including the
polite insistence of Timor Ristling: “But I just want to ask you—”
“Not now, I’m trying to set up the day’s projects.” That sounded like Øvin
Verring.
The top of the ramp was dark, just another place where the makeshift
construction interfered with Nevil’s lighting. Ravna hesitated there,
watching the scene. Øvin was facing five or six of the oldest kids, the
most intense of the medical researcher wannabes, essentially a group
Nevil had whipped up for his coup.
Øvin was talking to the group even as he fiddled with the interface of the
big display, which at the moment was just showing idle status. “What I
wanted to show you all was the tutorial I found yesterday. We not only
have to—”
“Øvin, I just want to ask you if—” interrupted Timor.
Øvin waved the boy away. “Not now, Timor.” He continued to work at the
interface. He was speaking again to the group: “Oobii’s automation is
pitiful, but the tutorial I found claims to show how we can solve simple—”
Timor again said, “Øvin, I was wondering, could I—”
That got Timor a moment of Øvin’s full attention. He glared at the boy
and Ravna prepared to rush in. She didn’t think Øvin Verring had ever
been one of the kids who had been mean to Timor—but she was damned
if he was going to start now.
“Look Timor! Give me a minute, huh? I just want to get this display to
show folks the tutorial. Then you can ask me whatever you want.”
Timor glanced at the display pedestal, as if noticing it for the first time.
“Oh that. You need to—” He reached out, his fingers flicking across the
maintenance interface, below where Øvin had been working. “It’s just
partly broken,” he said, as if that was an explanation.

Øvin Verring stepped back as the expanding display image formed into
what Ravna recognized as a programmer primer environment. Huh, Øvin
had found one she hadn’t seen, “Algorithms for Bottom Feeders.” His
audience was already sucking in notes and playing with the first lesson,
“Constrained Search.”
Øvin stared at it for second. “Oh! Yes, that’s what—” he glanced down at
Timor. “Okay then. What did you want to ask me?”
“Is it okay if I use that workstation? I mean, just for today.” The boy
waved across the room to the station that Belle Ornrikak was already
lolling around, staking out the territory for Timor. It was the only station
without an obvious user in residence.
Verring hesitated. “Um, sure. Go ahead.”
Timor gave a whoop and hustled across the room to Belle.
Ravna let out her breath and strolled in as if she had just come up the
ramp.
“Oh, hei, Ravna.” Øvin came around his audience—which was now
thoroughly distracted by the tutorial—and walked over to her. He made a
small gesture in the direction of Timor and Belle. “Now that I seem to
have lost my workstation … could we talk for a minute?”
“Sure.”
Since Ravna’s fall, Øvin had actually been friendly. Lately, most of the
medical wannabes had seemed friendlier.
“As—as a kind of starter project, we want to refurbish more of the
coldsleep containers. But the in-casket manuals are useless, and so far
we can’t get Oobii to refine us a wish list—even though coldsleep is an
ancient, simple technology.”
Ah. This sounded like something from her speech—the part she hadn’t
gotten to say. So Nevil had put him up to this? She looked over at Øvin’s
team, all working hard to understand the tutorial.
Okay. “You’re right about the manuals, Øvin. Down Here, they can’t do
repairs. On the other hand, Oobii does have an enormous amount of

information about coldsleep implementations. If you could devise a
search list that uses what you see in the casket manuals and properly
feed that to Oobii.…”
“You’d really help? Even after…?”
Ravna nodded. “One important decision you have to make is what level
of medical risk you will tolerate.” Her gaze drifted almost involuntarily to
where Timor sat on the other side of the room.
“Oh.” Then Øvin seemed to follow her gaze. “Oh!… I remember risk was
one of the reasons you wanted to postpone this kind of work.” He
watched Timor Ristling for a few moments. Timor had set his workstation
display to large, perhaps so it would be easier for Belle to follow what he
was doing. That was wasted effort, since the foursome had curled up on
the floor around his chair, all eyes closed. At the moment, Timor was
oblivious to this. He pounded away enthusiastically. This was no ordinary
game. It looked … much simpler. Ravna could see simple dotmarkers
making rows across a plane. Below that was what looked like a synthetic
machine language, three-letter abbreviations and numerical operands.
“It looks like he’s written a binary counter,” Øvin said softly. “That’s so
sad. The human mind should not be wasted on tasks so trivial.” Øvin
glanced back at Ravna and seemed to think better of making a further
comment.
She smiled. “You feel sorry for me, too, hei Øvin?”
“Actually, I was feeling sorry for me and…” he waved at his friends
struggling away at the bottom feeder tutorial. “It’s such a waste.”
•  •  •
Even without the daylight, the northern winter still had its time markers.
There was bright twilight in the hours near noon. On clear nights, away
from the twilight, the aurora swept from horizon to horizon, shifting minute

by minute. The moon bobbed along the horizon in its tenday cycle.
Winter storms came every third or fourth day, some lasting hours, some
continuing on with no letup through to the next storm front. Many
buildings were reduced to bizarre humps beneath the snow, the
smoothness broken only by streets that absolutely must be kept clear.
The lowest parts of Oobii were lapped by the snow. The rest, the arching
drive fronds, the curves of the hull—all that glittered green in whatever
light there was. The area around the main entrance was tramped down
by the constant traffic.
Twice a tenday, Nevil held his public meetings in the New Meeting Place,
and every day the Children of Øvin’s team and others were working in the
ship, honestly trying to master its automation. One group managed to
revive the freight device that had carried the Lander. Nevil had a big party
after that—and Ravna had to admit that the orbiter would improve things.
It was close to being a dead hulk, but still had enough life in it to act as a
remote sensor and radio relay.
The Executive Council no longer met, its members now keeping to their
separate factions. Scrupilo’s Cold Valley lab had not been directly
affected by Nevil’s coup, though that was mainly because the necessary
simulations had already been done and the experimental equipment was
in place. Scrupilo was clearly nervous about the future, but he continued
to play along with Nevil and Woodcarver, and radio relay through the
orbiter had made the Cold Valley setup much more convenient.
And tenday by tenday, Ravna and Johanna and Pilgrim pursued their
little conspiracy from the second floor of their town house.
“It’s just a matter of time,” said Johanna. “Nevil is losing support every
day. That’s what Ravna’s programs say. And that’s what I see when I talk
to Scrupilo and Benky and the Larsndots.” She looked around at Pilgrim,
seemed to detect insufficiently enthusiastic agreement. “So what’s your
problem?”
“Heh, someone has to balance your mood swings.” Pilgrim was perched
at various viewpoints of Ravna’s grand carpet. Pilgrim loved that carpet.

He said it was a Long Lakes masterpiece. Just now, three of his heads
were resting on the plush, staring across its interleaved landscapes. “I
agree with Ravna’s projections, yes. I’m even more pleased that Ravna’s
able to counterspy on Nevil.”
Ravna grinned. “Yes! Abusing Command Privilege is much more fun than
I ever imagined.”
“I’m also pleased with what an excellent politician one of my friends has
turned out to be—not you, Johanna, you’re still the Mad Bad Girl.”
Johanna frowned. “We’re gonna teach that bas—that fellow Nevil a
proper lesson in, um, civic leadership. See? I can be suave.”
Ravna said, “You can’t mean that I’m the excellent politician! I haven’t
been able to do any of the clever maneuvers in Oobii’s guide. I’d trip on
my tongue if I tried, and besides, Øvin Verring and the others are doing
their best. I don’t want to fool them.”
Pilgrim nodded from all around the carpet. “Yes. And they know that.
Since Nevil’s coup, you’ve done your best for them, more than anything
Nevil has done.”
“They know it, too!” said Johanna.
Nevil had assigned some of the oldest kids to help with the research.
These were his special friends, mostly top students at the High Lab. The
effort had lasted scarcely a tenday. Nevil’s friends had no concept of
Oobii’s limitations. Gannon Jorkenrud had spent less than a day trying to
“negotiate” with Oobii—that was the word Gannon himself used. He had
almost punched Timor when the boy tried to give him advice about
access methods. In the end, Gannon had departed in a towering rage.
Pilgrim was grinning. “You haven’t played the little games, but you are
playing the big one. The Children know you’re their friend. More and
more, they realize that your planning methods can work, but the shortcuts
they’ve undertaken will not.”
“Okay, then,” said Johanna. “If you agree everything is going so well,
what does worry you?”

“A couple of things. My dear Woodcarver has rejected me. No more
hanky-panky.” Some of the cheeriness had gone out of his voice.
“I’m sorry, Pilgrim,” said Ravna, though even after ten years she wasn’t
quite clear about Interpack romance—there were so many different
things it could be.
Pilgrim gave a little shrug. “Nothing lasts forever; we made good puppies
for each other. But now—well, that little Sht is something else.
Woodcarver is more suspicious and less forgiving than ever. If you really
love another pack, if you have members from the other, sometimes
secrets can leak across when you get intimate. It’s hardly ever more than
mood and attitude, but for now … well, there is only talk going on
between us.” His heads angled around toward Johanna. “But at least we
are still talking.”
Jo bowed her head, some of her aggressive optimism evaporating.
“Yeah. I still haven’t been able to pin down my little brother.” Jefri and
Amdi were at Smeltertop, about sixty kilometers to the north. That was
the base camp for the Cold Valley lab, and also the lab’s source of glass
templates and high purity carbon. “They have a radio at Smeltertop, but
it’s very public.” She looked at Ravna. “I’ll bet he’ll stay up there the
whole winter; my guess is he’s terribly, terribly ashamed.”
Ravna gave a nod. Her sharpest, most painful memory of Nevil’s coup
was the moment when Jefri stood and denounced her. She looked
around at Pilgrim, searching for something less uncomfortable to discuss:
“What’s the other thing bothering you?”
“Oh yes. That’s the prospect of our inevitable success. You’ve focused
Oobii’s political science research too purely. Politics is good; when it
works properly, disagreements get solved without people beating each
other up. But when a regime knows its days are numbered, there’s
always the chance it may use its position to change the rules and make
the debate it is losing irrelevant.”
Jo’s chin came up with a little start. “You mean violence? Between the
Children? We kids grew up together, Pilgrim. Nevil is a sneaky rat

bastard, but I think he’s doing what he thinks is right. At the bottom of it
all, Nevil is not evil.”
•  •  •
A tenday passed. There was another sea storm, followed by days
when the moon skittered along beneath the aurora.
Ravna spent more than fifteen hours a day in the New Meeting Place and
her little office. The various programming teams were improving, but it
was the younger Children who did best with Oobii. Timor Ristling was the
star. He could reach the depths of Oobii’s automation; he claimed that he
could program without user development tools, though Ravna doubted
that. Again and again it was Timor who patched together little fixes for the
Children, or explained things in ways that made sense to them.
More Children came and talked to Ravna, some to apologize, some to
give a friendly word. Some wanted her okay to demand another election.
Besides working with the kids, she had other … projects. There was her
agriculture assignment; that ran in the space Nevil could see. Oobii’s
genetic modification capability was extremely simple-minded, but it had
been one of the ship’s greatest success stories. The modified fodder
crops brought in more tech rent than the rest of Oobii’s services
combined. Tines of Woodcarver’s Domain had prospered as hundreds of
small farms—scarcely more than private game reserves—had merged
into large ranches. Newcastle town itself could never have grown as it
had without the livestock herds that were now possible.
But Nevil wanted a more direct payoff, some new and tasty food for
humans. That was tricky, since Oobii didn’t have the computational
power to avoid ecological disasters with modified plants that were fully
human-compatible. In the end, Ravna made a minor tweak in natural
hardicore grass—well within natural selection bounds—and then enabled

another of the epigenetic triggers that most humans had carried since
their earliest stargoing civilizations. The Children who used the trigger
would be able to eat and enjoy the new hardicore grass. The combination
mod should be safe for both humans and Tines World, though Ravna
wouldn’t have done it she had still been in charge: every new human
compatibility carried a small risk of making the user more susceptible to
local diseases.
Eventually, her project was complete except for minor window-dressing.
So now, when she was alone in her office, she had plenty of time to
review her spy programs. These were not the high-tech magic she had
used on Flenser—but at least they worked. Pham Nuwen was the
sneakiest good person she had ever known, and a Slow Zone
programmer to boot. During his most paranoid time aboard Oobii, Pham
had set up an elaborate system of booby traps and internal security. That
had contributed to the hellish atmosphere of that terrible time; undoing
the traps had cured some of Oobii’s worst glitches. But now she found
that the security programs gave her a kind of protection that she could
have never managed by herself. Pham’s last gift, unrecognized till now.
So Ravna could check directly on Pilgrim’s fear of Nevilish villainy. Using
Command Privilege and Pham’s programs, she could see inside every
one of Nevil’s Oobii operations, could read every mail and every
conversation. She could even see much of what was happening in the
orbiter.
Yes, Nevil and Bili and their inner circle were getting desperate. They had
stepped up their snooping, and even planted supporters in the groups
who were going to demand new elections. But there was no talk of
violence, just spin and nasty tricks. Both Oobii’s guide and Pilgrim were
recommending that Ravna begin to talk compromise with Nevil’s people,
something mellow enough that no one would regard the outcome of the
elections as unendurable disgrace.
It all kept Ravna shipside more and more, with her catching little naps
and working all the way through till twilight of the next day. Up north,
Scrupilo was ready to fabricate his adders! Unfortunately, that meant he

needed new results from Oobii.
Ravna juggled that problem all through one night, hoping that the kids’
programs would give the system some slack. She could have used her
command privileges to invisibly override the Children’s priority. But that
might be noticed … and in any case, it would’ve felt like a betrayal. In the
end, she let the Children’s priority stand. Finally, she straggled out of the
ship via the private corridors behind the cargo bay, too tired to talk to
anyone in the New Meeting Place.
Outside, the brightest of the midday twilight had faded. To Tinish eyes,
this might qualify as full night. To human vision, the landscape was gray
on gray, lighter sweeps of the recent snowfall piled up around the arching
spines of her starship, falling away to the darker grays of steep, naked
rock, thence to snows that covered the sea ice far below.
Ravna trudged uphill toward Newcastle town. It was just beginning to
snow, per Oobii’s predictions. But this was a soft, windless fall. It would
be a big problem by the time it ended, but for now it just brought a nearly
inaudible sighing to the air. She lit her handlamp and continued on.
Earlier snows had narrowed the way, but there were only a few humans
and fewer packs abroad.
She knew that until humans arrived, the winters in the Domain had
brought life nearly to a halt. Even in recent years, with indoor light and
heat, most businesses slowed in the dark and cold. But up ahead, in the
heart of town, the Academy classes would be in session. Almost all the
youngest Children, both first and second generation, would be there.
They were the least affected by winter depression. The youngest humans
had so much energy that if you gave them light and food and warmth,
they got along fine. Before the New Meeting Place, the Academy had
been the center of social life in winter. There would still be dozens of
packs up there, dazzled by the warmth and the energy. She wondered if
Nevil realized that the Academy still gave Ravna leverage.
Her lamp light reflected off sheets of snowflakes coming down ever more
densely around her. She had reached the outskirts of Newcastle town.
Ten years ago, this had been where she first set foot on Tines World.

There had been no town here, and the castle was still being built. This
ground had been a battlefield. Now it was a medieval city. No, not
medieval. The buildings were stone and wood and wattle, but they had
pipes climbing their walls, and hot water towers sticking high above the
rooftops. No one threw garbage out the windows overlooking this street,
and even at the height of summer, there was no sewage floating down
the gutters. In building Newcastle town, Scrupilo had used Oobii’s design
archives to plan his understreet sewer pipes—and Oobii’s beam gun to
keep water flowing year-round. Such tiny changes had created a place
that might be safer and friendlier than any other in the world.
… And just now, here on the Queen’s Road, she was close to being lost!
She could see only a meter or two, and her stupid handlamp was
perhaps worse than useless. The new snow had already covered all but
the deeper wheel tracks—and even her own footprints. Looking up,
Ravna could see a blurry bluish glow: probably a light in a high window.
Huh. In a rainstorm, even a blinding drencher in the middle of the night,
she could have walked over to the nearest building and proceeded along
with one hand on the wall, recognizing locations as she went. Here, this
afternoon, the snow shoveled up from previous storms blocked her from
touching anything familiar.
She proceeded, assuming that the main axis of the street was simply
where it was easiest to walk. The occasional window lamps were her
stars. There ought to be a fountain square every hundred meters or so.
“Sssssss.” The sound was barely louder than the sound of the falling
snow, and matched its timbre precisely. Either her ears were playing
tricks on her, or a pack was quietly trying to attract her attention. She
drifted away from her guess about the road’s center, toward the sound.
There was a gap in the snow pile, a notch that would mark an alley or
side street. She pointed her lamp onto the space.
The strange hissing stopped. At the center of her lamplight she saw a
pack hunkered down in the snow. The creature gave her a little wave.
“Screwfloss here.” The voice was a whisper, and she suspected it was
focused on her head alone, inaudible anywhere else. “I wonder if we

might have a brief chat?”
Ravna stepped forward and took a good look at the pack. Yes, this was
Screwfloss; she recognized two of him by the white blazes running from
muzzle to crown. “What do you want?” she said.
Screwfloss was backing away from her, angling his heads for her to
follow. “Not so loud,” he said. “One of Bili Yngva’s boys is about, um”—
his heads bobbed a measuring gesture—“about thirty meters behind you.
I’d just as soon he doesn’t know you took a detour.” He was already
sweeping snow over her tracks.
Oh! She hadn’t realized anyone was following her; damn, the new Ravna
should have assumed that was case. She brought her light down to a dim
point, just enough to keep her footing and see the nearest of Screwfloss.
The pack led her down the alley and around two turns. It moved all
together with itself. Ravna knew that the snow damped mindsounds
down to just a couple of meters; the pack would probably lose its mind if
it didn’t bunch up. Looking up, she saw no more bluish lights. This must
be one of the windowless, single-pack-wide streets. They were
ubiquitous down on Hidden Island; the new town had some, too.
“Okay,” said Screwfloss. “This should be private enough. The human will
just follow the main road. He could get to the castle before he ever
figures out he lost you.” The pack gave a crafty chuckle; this critter
watched too much human drama. “It’s just a little further, My boss is
waiting to talk to you.”
Ask him straight out: “Flenser, right?”
“That’s supposed to be a secret.” He sounded insulted.
A proper caution was finally catching up with her—now that she was
deep into the windowless alley. She had decided Oobii’s later
surveillance of Flenser was essentially noise—but this was much more of
a test of her theories than was sensible. She trudged along after
Screwfloss, but now she was watching for turnoffs. The snow was deep-
piled and untrodden. In such fluffiness, maybe she could outrun him.
Finally Screwfloss hesitated. “The Boss is a few meters on, my lady.” In

her dimmed lamp light she had the impression of his heads bowing her
graciously forward.
There was no help for it, so: “Thank you, Screwfloss.” She gave his
nearest head a patronizing pat and strolled forward.
Shadows and flickering sheets of falling snow. So how could Flenser get
to the top of Starship Hill unnoticed? This wasn’t Hidden Island, with its
old maze of secret passages.
She brightened her lamp and swept it quickly around her. She saw snow
up to shoulder height and windowless, half-timbered walls above that.
This was not a cul-de-sac. It was more like a T-intersection—and another
pack sat in a clump beside one of the exits. It was a fivesome. One of the
members was perched in a wheelbarrow.
Ravna walked up to the pack, and gave a shallow bow. “Flenser-
Tyrathect,” she said, using the full name. A feeble attempt to remind you
of your better three-fifths.
As usual, the pack sounded sly and coy: “And greetings to you, Ravna
Bergsndot. I had hoped for a private conversation, and now the elements
have cooperated to make it even more so.”
Ravna tried to sound nonchalant: “You can get the ship’s weather
predictions just like everyone else.”
“Um, yes. Still, I didn’t want to postpone this meeting much longer. Will
you walk with me?” Snouts gestured toward the path behind him. “This
alley intersects the Queen’s Road a bit further on. With any luck, Nevil’s
boy spy will never even guess you strayed.”
“Lead on, then.”
Flenser came to his feet, and struggled to turn the wheelbarrow around.
Ravna reached out to help. “No, no, I’m quite good at this.” Flenser’s
voice might have been frosty; in any case, it lacked some of its slithery
quality. Most of the pack was healthy, but navigating the wheelbarrow
that held his maimed member—that raised in Ravna’s imagination the
vision of an elderly medieval human, hobbling through his last years.

Many broodkenners would have advised the discarding of such a
weakened member.
Then the pack was underway, a lurching progress, but still as fast as a
slowly walking human. Somehow this cripple had popped up all
undetected in the middle of a blizzard in the heart of Woodcarver’s most
secure city. Ravna couldn’t resist: “How did you manage this, Flenser? I
thought you were down on Hidden Island—”
She heard the characteristic sly laugh. “And I was, all tidily bundled up in
the Old Castle, with Woodcarver’s police watching the entrances three
packs deep, and her secret cameras watching my ‘innermost’ haunts.
Yes, I know about those cameras. Ha ha. And I know Woodcarver
knows. But she can’t see me when I’m in other rooms or down in the
catacombs. I have ways out of my castle, and I still have a few truly loyal
retainers. With the Inner Channel frozen, it was easy to sneak me across
to the mainland.”
Ravna knew that Flenser had used that trick in the past, to visit Steel’s
remnant on the mainland. She hadn’t told Woodcarver, partly because
the visits seemed innocent, and partly because it would have revealed
Ravna’s “magical” surveillance system. “So sneaking over the ice got you
to the mainland. That’s still six hundred meters down from where we’re
standing now. How did you get yourself up here all unseen?”
“I would have been noticed on the funicular, that’s for sure.” He gave her
a sly look. “Who knows, Ravna? I’m a master of disguise; perhaps I came
up separately.” He let her chew on that for a moment. “But I’ll let you in
on the secret: call it evidence of my good faith.” Or evidence of the well-
known vanity of all Woodcarver’s creations. “You see, while you and
Woodcarver and Scrupilo were congratulating yourselves about
Newcastle town’s water and sewage system, I was more interested in the
fault map that Oobii devised. Using that map, it was an easy matter—
well, years of labor, actually, since doing it under Woodcarver’s snouts
was a nightmare—to dig a stairway. It’s a narrow thing, almost as narrow
as my member tunnels of old. You remember those?”
“Yes,” Ravna said shortly. Amdi and nine-year-old Jefri had come close

to being burned alive in something similar—though that had been on
Steel’s orders. “You couldn’t get the wheelbarrow through one of those
tunnels.”
“True. On the stairs, I use a special sling for my White Tips”—the maimed
one—“but even so, the climb is excruciating. Isn’t that so, Screwfloss?”
“Yeah, Boss.” The voice came from immediately behind her. She flinched
and turned: Screwfloss was practically treading on her heels—which put
him barely two meters behind Flenser. That was amazingly close for
packs. Okay, the snowfall attenuated mindsounds considerably—but
perhaps Screwfloss was one of the old White Jackets, a Flenser lord.
Those had been trained to give up hunks of identity when their master
demanded it.
Screwfloss continued. “I had to drag White Tips up 151 stairsteps. It will
be worse going back down. We won’t get home till after tomorrow noon
twilight.”
She turned back to Flenser and tried for nonchalance. “Okay, you’ve
shared a real secret with me. What do you want?”
“Simply to help, my lady. It’s as I’ve always told you and your co-Queen,
from the very first day that you and she met the New Me.”
“But you’re not sharing this with Woodcarver?”
“Alas, she is so untrusting!” He paused, struggling to roll the little
wheelbarrow through a shallow snow drift. “And now I fear we are dealing
with a new Woodcarver. No, not something evil, but maybe something
worse. Something foolish.” He layered a regretful chuckle over his words.
“Foolish? I’m sure Woodcarver knows that Nevil is trying to manipulate
her.”
“Of course,” said Flenser. “And she thinks she is in control of the
situation. She’s dead wrong and—well, I’m here to rescue you both. I’m
cleverer than Woodcarver ever was. And you—”
“I’m the utter fool who didn’t see even the most obvious parts of all this
conspiracy.”

Flenser’s wheelbarrow came to a halt. All of his members were staring up
at her, and his voice was suddenly somber and uncoy. “No, Ravna.
You’re not a fool. You’re an innocent, too pure of heart to live on this real
world. Outside of damaged packs and saints, I’ve never seen that among
my people. Tell me. Is this a feature of star-born culture? Are there
places where such minds as yours can survive?”
I’m doing my best to change! Aloud she said, “You packs have your
innocents. What about Tyrathect?”
“Heh. But she didn’t survive as a mind, did she?” Flenser shrugged,
looking back and forth at himself. “Tyrathect graduated to being an
attitude, the bane of my otherwise happy life.” He pointed a snout at his
maimed member. That creature’s rear was hidden in blankets, but its
eyes were large and dark, and right now it was staring at Ravna. “If White
Tips dies before the rest of me, things will suddenly become very
interesting for the Domain.” He gave a theatrical sigh. “In the meantime, I
would find it quite amusing to be your special secret advisor. Please, I’m
at your disposal.”
They walked some paces in silence. Powers! There were consequences,
good and bad, stretching in all directions. What if Woodcarver thought
Ravna and Flenser were conspiring against her? What if Flenser was
using Ravna just as Nevil had? There was that little threat analysis
program she’d found the other day; it could probably list a hundred more
possibilities. I have to talk to Pilgrim and Jo. Meantime, here and now,
what was she going to say?
The wily pack just let her stew.…
“Okay, Flenser. Your advice would be welcome. Not that I feel any
obligation in receiving it.”
“Oh, of course, of course. And this first meeting was mainly to establish
our trusting relationship. I have one major insight and few minor facts for
you. You see, Nevil has made such a mess of you.”
“That’s an insight?”
“Even now you don’t truly know. And Woodcarver, my overconfident

parent, is equally ignorant. She thinks Nevil is just a simple-minded
dilettante.”
“You think he’s more.”
“In himself? Certainly not. But what you’re both missing is that Nevil is the
tool of persons much more clever than he is.”
“Huh? I know the Children, and there’s no one else in Nevil’s league.”
“I agree. Nevil’s senior partners are Tines—and not in the Domain at all.”
Flenser rolled on, leaving Ravna to stand for a moment in the falling
snow. “Impossible!” she said, then trotted to catch up. “Most of the older
Children don’t have close contacts with packs. Nevil Storherte certainly
doesn’t.” Nevil treated packs cordially enough, but she suspected he was
as much a racist as all extreme Straumers, hell-bent on achieving their
special form of Transcendence.
Flenser shrugged. “I didn’t say they were his friends. They use him and
he thinks he uses them. The combination is dangerous, especially if you
and Woodcarver don’t know about it.”
Ravna slowed again, boggled by the possibilities—but there were things
about the claim that didn’t make sense.
Flenser wasn’t slowing. He said something in Interpack. She couldn’t pick
apart the chords, except to understand that it was an interrogative. A
second later there was a reply from ahead of them. “Ah,” said Flenser,
talking to her again. “I fear we’ll have to cut this short. We’re almost to the
exit of this convenient alleyway—and you should be back on the road
ahead of Nevil’s spy. I’ll get all the details to you soon.” One of him came
back to her and grasped her mitten in its jaws, drawing her forward.
“But, but…” All the minutes he had spent on build up and now he had no
time for the details! That was Flenser for you! She dug in her heels.
“Wait!” her whisper was almost a hiss. “This doesn’t make any sense. An
international Tinish conspiracy? Who is involved? And how could you
know the details?”
Flenser didn’t relax his hold on her mitten, but his voice came from all

around her. “How do you think, my dear? The conspirators think I’m on
their side.” Two more of him came back and gently pushed her out onto
the Queen’s Road.
“Now, shoo.” His last words faded into the sound of the falling snow.

Chapter   15
Johanna and Pilgrim both agreed that Flenser’s news should be
passed on to Woodcarver immediately. Pilgrim reported back the next
evening: “I told her the claims Flenser made, leaving out the details of
just where and how the meeting happened.”
“Did she believe you?” asked Ravna.
“What is she going to do to Flenser?” asked Johanna.
Pilgrim gave a little laugh. “I don’t think Flenser has any more to fear than
before. At least, the Woodcarver of the moment is mellow. She told me
she had always figured that Flenser was conspiring with Vendacious
and/or Tycoon, and she’s not surprised that they’re doing their best to
manipulate Nevil. She asked me to congratulate you, Ravna.”
“For what?”
“‘Tell that silly Ravna she’s a step closer to understanding what a
mischievous threat Flenser is.’” Pilgrim was suddenly speaking with
Woodcarver’s voice; it was more a playback than an imitation.
Ravna realized her mouth was hanging open. “So why would Flenser
come to me with this story, now?”
Pilgrim shrugged. “Woodcarver thinks it’s just Old Flenser sadism; after
all, he didn’t provide you with any details. Personally, I don’t think
Flenser-Tyrathect is truly sadistic. He just wishes he was.”
Johanna waved away his point. “But if this is more than Flenser games, if
Vendacious is playing with Nevil…”
The comment seemed to bring Pilgrim up short. He was quiet for a
moment and then his voice was serious. “Okay. You’re right. We need to
squeeze some of those details out of Flenser.”

Johanna’s look was haunted. “We know Nevil is a self-convinced son of a
bitch. But Vendacious is a monster. A soft little politician like Nevil
wouldn’t stand a chance with him. Maybe … maybe we should warn
Nevil. There are games that are too deadly to play.”

Chapter   16
“So what does this word ‘crone’ mean?” Belle pointed a snout at the
page in Timor’s storybook, Fairy Tales of Old Nyjora.
“Um, I don’t know,” Timor replied. His brow furrowed the way it did when
he was puzzled. “We can look it up the next time we’re over at Oobii.”
When she had first known this Child, such a question would have
provoked a panic attack. Timor’s eyes would get wide at the shock of
realizing there was a question for which he didn’t instantly have an
answer. Such was the best evidence Belle had that these human
creatures had once been something like all-knowing.
Nowadays, when confronted with a question, Timor would ask someone
else or go to the public place on Oobii or devise the answer from
materials at hand. Right now, the boy was paging back and forth through
the storybook, his nimble human fingers flipping the pages. “Okay!” he
said. “Here on page thirteen, the wise archeologist is talking about the
lady who was called a ‘crone’ on page forty. He says she’s a ‘beldame.’”
“Belle means beautiful,” said Belle. It was her taken name, one of the
earliest any pack had chosen in the human language. That had been a
bold move, even if it was right after she was kicked out of Woodcarver’s
cabinet, when her former name, “Wise-Royal-Advisor,” became a
mockery.
Timor squinched his mouth in a smile. “I know. Hei, and I remember from
the story of the ‘Princess and the Swamp Lilies’—‘dame’ is just a word for
lady. So ‘beldame’ must mean ‘beautiful lady.’”
“Hmm.” Maybe she could become “Beldame” or “Beldame Crone.” Those
had possibilities for chords and trills. She played with the possibilities
even as Timor returned to reading the story aloud. There was a time

when Belle had really concentrated on learning from books such as
these, the Two Queens’ mass-printing project. Such books would surely
give insights into Ravna Bergsndot’s clever plans. That was before
Ravna had been deposed.
And the stories in this particular book? If you discounted the ugly tropical
background, and the necessary weirdness of humanity, they were very
much like the folktales of Tinish realms. In her speeches, Ravna had
talked about Nyjora again and again, claiming it was a model for what
she was trying to do here. That had snared Belle’s early interest in stories
of Nyjora. But even though Timor liked this latest book, it had turned out
to be frankly fictional. From eavesdropping on the older Children, Belle
had gradually come to realize how stupid Ravna Bergsndot was. The
history of Nyjora meant something deep to her, but to the Children it was
as much a myth as this little book. If anybody had asked Belle (the Crone
Belle Dame, that sounded even better), she could have told them that
Ravna Bergsndot was headed for a fall. Which now had come.
One big difference between Ravna and Belle: Ravna still lived in what
was nearly a palace. Belle had gradually figured out the politics behind
that. There would come a time when Nevil Storherte could not continue to
ignore Belle and her Timor—
“I’m sorry what crone turns out to mean,” said Timor, closing the book
and reaching around to hug her nearest shoulders. “Do you want to read
another story tonight?”
Usually Belle paid more attention to what this Child was saying. But all
any of her remembered was how Timor had looked around at her a few
minutes ago, when she was deep into her little fugue. Timor could rattle
on for hours about this and that even when he wasn’t reading aloud. It
wasn’t natural—or at least it wasn’t Tinish—how many different things he
could talk about, all without making the tiniest mindsound. For a moment,
she considered confessing her inattention. He seemed to guess at it
occasionally. But no, she could sneak back later, when he was asleep,
and find out what “crone” was all about. Maybe she should read the
whole book tonight and be done with it. But then the next few evenings

would be really boring.
Outside something big was banging along the street. It sounded like a
six-kherhog team, pulling multiple wagons. It had to be something big to
be heard through the noise-quilting that was built into the walls. There
were high-pitched screeches and pings, as if the wagon wheels were
throwing up pebbles against the walls of the houses. Their little house
was at the south edge of town, right on Haulage Way. When it had first
been built, Belle had thought Woodcarver had fallen into imperial
madness: the way was so wide and so perfectly graded. Now, after she’d
seen the freight that streamed along it, bound for Cliffside harbor, Belle
acknowledged (to herself) quite a different opinion.
She was half-minded to go outside and scream at the drovers. Instead
she fell back on something more practical. “Timor, don’t you think it’s
unfair that we live in this hovel?” Never mind that it had brightness and
warmth at the click of a claw, even in the northern winter. Never mind that
it was more comfortable than anything that royalty owned before the Sky
Children came. It was the comparison with what some others had that
made it poverty.
Timor stroked her shoulders, trying to comfort her. It was strange that he
had actually been with her long enough that it really did comfort. She did
her best to shrug away the thought. He should despise their situation
even more than she did. It was Belle’s great good fortune that she had
her own personal human; it was her bad fortune that Timor Ristling was
the most accepting and even-tempered and reasonable creature she had
ever met:
“We could live in the general dorms, Belle, with the other kids and their
Tinish friends. Or we could probably room with one of the new families.
You know, like with the Larsndots, down on Hidden Island. I thought you
wanted us to have our own place?”
If Timor had been one of the other counselors back when Belle was still
“Wise-Royal-Advisor,” she would have been sure that this was a
devilishly clever counterattack. Instead, with Timor, she knew it was
absolute innocence. Of course, Belle wanted to have private quarters!

How else could she keep this Child for herself, keep him from falling in
with human friends or even with some other pack? Timor had been her
meal ticket for almost nine years now. If she lost her status as his official
caregiver, she couldn’t even afford to live in this house.
“No,” she said and made the sound of a human sigh. “I just think you
deserve better. You know I only think of what’s best for you.”
“Oh, Belle.” Timor set the book down and wiggled back among the four of
her. “If you really want a better place, I could complain to Ravna. I just
don’t like to do that.”
Who cares about Ravna? thought Belle, but she didn’t say that aloud.
The Bergsndot human was out of power, at best a minor player. On the
other hand, Timor himself was becoming an important one, even if he
didn’t realize the fact. Down in the New Meeting Place, Belle often lay at
his feet pretending to sleep while eavesdropping on the humans.
As far as Belle could tell, Timor’s parents had had roughly the same
social status as did offal collectors in the Domain. Timor had inherited
their talents—and somehow those abilities were rare and precious down
here. Nevil and his friends didn’t like Timor. They didn’t like his innocent
opinions or the effect he had on the other Children. One way or another,
Timor is my lever! The main thing was to pick the right time and issue to
use against Nevil and his pals. She was already planting the seeds for
that: “Maybe we could complain to Nevil, or that nice Bili Yngva.”
The boy yawned. “I guess.” He gave a little shiver. “I’m too tired to read
any more now. I need to go to bed.”
When Timor had been just a puppy of a Child, she had tucked him in
every night. It had become an unnecessary ritual. But the boy was still as
small as he had ever been. He hadn’t grown like the other Children. And
there were other problems. He weakened so easily, and he still needed a
lot more sleep than any human or pack she had ever known. Even if he
stayed loyal to her, she might still lose out.
She led and followed Timor up the stairs to the tiny sleeping loft. At the
top was one of those wonderful little light switches. With a tap of a snout,

there was a bluish glow from a ceramic square mounted on the wall.
“Huh, the light’s kinda dim,” she said.
“It’s okay,” said Timor. “But the room is colder than usual. I’ll bet there’s
some problem with the steam pipes.” That happened often enough. Their
little house had been one of the first with a heating tower, hence it had
one of the crummiest of the devices.
Tonight’s cold was something substantive they could complain about.
She checked the small glass windows. They were all shut tight, no trace
of a breeze. The nearest street lamp was broken, so there wasn’t much
of a view either. They’d have a very nice list when they finally went
complaining.
The rest of her was busy tucking Timor in. “We’ll use extra blankets,” she
said. She topped them with a frayed green quilt, her only prize from the
last real shipwreck. She had almost lost Timor’s loyalty over that. He’d
accused her of robbing from the dying. Hah! But who had been dying?
Not a single pack. And what was left of the Tropical mob was sitting
pretty now, in its semi-mindless way. Besides, no one ever came looking
for goods lost in the sea.
She had used her old bone needles to make a quilt out of the green
fabric, stuffing it with froghen down. It was a crude job, the stitching
irregular; not a single member of herself had direct memory of sewing
skills. After eight years, the stitches were coming loose, and the fabric
was riddled with insect holes. Now it was Timor who insisted they keep
the thing.
“Is that warm enough?” she asked.
“Yes, it’ll be enough.” He patted her nearest head.
“I’ll just listen for a while then.” This was part of the ritual too. One of
Belle scooched down to the end of the bed and sat on the covers.
Another lay on the floor by the bed. The other two sat a few feet away,
listening and watching. She flicked off the light. “G’night, Timor.”
“G’night, Belle.”

Now the room was really dark. On this winter night with the street lamp
gone and the clouds she had noticed earlier, it was probably too dark
even for Timor to see. On the other hand, she could hear everything in
the room, and when she emitted squeaks up in the range of Tinish
thought, she could hear the walls and the floor. With work she could have
even made out the shape of Timor’s face. And Timor’s heart and lungs
made so much noise that even without such effort she could make out his
form under the covers.
Eight years ago, when Timor was just out of coldsleep, he had cried
himself to sleep every night, cried for his lost parents, cried for things he
couldn’t explain. In those first years, Belle would sometimes sit two of
herself on his bed, cuddling him. He hadn’t cried in years now, and he
said he was too old to cuddle, but he still liked her to lie in the dark and
listen for a while.
She didn’t mind. She’d always been a planner and a schemer. She’d
never been fast at thinking on her feet, even when she’d been Belle
Ornrikakihm and not Belle Ornrikak. With Ihm dead, she was down to
four. A pack of four could be a clever person. More often it was dull and
unimaginative. Sometimes, sitting here in the dark, slowly slowly creating
strategy, she wondered if she was only fooling herself to think her plans
were clever.
Timor was still awake and restless, but she could tell he really was tired.
Funny how much she knew his mind even though his thoughts were
silent. Sometimes even silent, he could be almost member useful:
Without climbing, he could reach higher than some of her. His fingers
could solve problems that her Tinish snouts would just fumble over. At
the same time he was as smart as a whole pack, and like all the humans
he had the strangest ideas.
A clever pack could see the power in those ideas.
If only I was a royal advisor once more. That damned Woodcarver had
always favored Scrupilo and Vendacious, her own offspring packs. If I
had guessed that Vendacious was a traitor, I could have unmasked him
and now I would be second in the realm. Sigh. She was edging toward

that waking nightmare, where she came more and more often: she might
never climb back from the trap she had made for herself. She had not the
cleverness, and with Ihm gone she had lost the last of herself who was
fertile.
While Ihm was still alive, she had the possibility of trading puppies with
some other pack. But she had not tried hard enough for a match, or
maybe even when she was five, she still was not attractive. Now she was
four barren old ugly females. Her schemes would never carry her so high
that she would have the pick of a decent litter. In truth her choices were
very few. She could go to the Fragmentarium, adopt some dregs. She
could run away from herself. Or she could simply die off one by one, until
she was nothing, as dead as poor Timor would someday be.
Timor still wasn’t sleeping. This might be one of those rare nights when
he stayed awake longer than Belle. Then she noticed that he was
shivering. The room must be too cold for him, even with all the blankets.
He hadn’t complained, but then he rarely complained. This just proved
that there was something seriously wrong with the house’s features.
Tomorrow she’d advance her schedule and stuff Timor’s torment down
the throat of Nevil Storherte. She and Timor would pry some really nice
digs out of this outrage.…
But what if the cold made Timor really sick? He was so fragile, and he
could die all at once. She’d be left with nothing.
Okay, something had to be done about this tonight. She could call in and
complain—assuming the phones weren’t broken too. She thought for a
moment about how these homes were powered. The teachers at the
Children’s Academy had talked about that in mind-numbing detail, more
than the four-sized Belle could properly remember. Hot water boils into
steam, which can “do work.” So a water pipe had been laid all along the
Queen’s Road, with an outlet at every house on nearby streets. The
skyfolk magic was in the fact that they didn’t need a thousand bonfires to
keep the water from freezing—or to make it steam. The starship Oobii
had limitless fire somewhere inside and it could deliver the heat of that
fire to any point that was visible from its upper hatchway. (Think on that,

enemies of the Domain! Belle had often wondered why Ravna and
Woodcarver didn’t make more of Oobii’s awesome deadly power. Back
when she had still had Ihm, Belle had concluded that the only explanation
for the humans’ meekness must be that there was an upper limit on the
rate that the heat could be pumped out. She no longer understood the
reasoning, but she held the conclusion close in her remaining mind.)
Anyway, all the homes near the Queen’s Road had a view down upon
Oobii. They should never lack for warmth, and the steam also powered
the smaller magics like the lights. And the telephones?
She slipped off the end of Timor’s bed and all of her headed quietly for
the stairs. She was mostly on the steps when Timor’s voice came to her,
soft and half asleep. “You’re a good person, Belle.”
“Um, yes,” she replied. “G’night.” What did he mean by that?
Now back in the downstairs sitting room, she flicked on the light. The
glow lamp came on, but it was so faint she could barely see it. The steam
pressure must be near zero. She walked across the room, easily avoiding
the knickknacks that she and Timor had collected. There were just too
many books, too. She shuffled them out of the way, digging down to the
telephone. It was made for both humans and Tines. A foursome could
easily manage it. She was still smart enough to voice some righteous
indignation on behalf of Timor Ristling. The poor Child could die with
these terrible housing conditions! One way or another they were going to
get the house they deserved. Just don’t waste your rage on the starship’s
call director. The Oobii had a perfect imitation human voice (at least at
low frequencies), but it was almost as dumb as a talky singleton. Once
she had mistaken the telephone call director for a real human. She’d
railed at it for five minutes, uselessly of course. No, she would just say
she was Belle Ornrikak, Best Friend to Timor Ristling, with an emergency
call to, hmm, Nevil? In any case, save the rant for some real person.
She held down the base and raised the receiver to one of her low-sound
ears. There was no wire tone, and none of the little clicks and sputters
she had grown used to. She hissed an ultrasonic obscenity. So steam
pressure really was necessary for telephone service! Belle stomped

around the crowded little room, whacking at whatever was in claw range
—but quietly, so it wouldn’t disturb Timor. It would be hours before she
could unload her wrath on the incompetents who were running things. A
proper politician would use that time to sharpen its rhetoric, but she
wasn’t in the mood. And in fact … Belle opened all her mouths and
waggled her heads. She could feel the bite of frost on her tongues. It
really was getting cold. Without cloaks, even a pack would be
uncomfortable.
She hunkered down and tried to think things out. Why would steam
pressure go away? Well, because the water wasn’t hot anymore! Maybe
Oobii had screwed up; maybe it wasn’t targeting the heaters in this area.
Since she didn’t hear anyone out in the street, complaining, the failure
might be just affecting this one house. She could just go up the street and
ask around. Maybe Timor could stay overnight at one of the houses that
still had heat.
Belle sat in the dark for several minutes, painfully trying to figure the pros
and cons of the scheme. Such an emergency move in the middle of the
night would certainly prove how seriously Timor had been abused. But
she was very afraid that someone like Ravna or Nevil might use it as an
excuse to permanently move Timor in with others.
That thought should have vetoed any plan to get help from the neighbor
Children. But now, where Belle was sitting nearest to the window, she
was chilled. All this strategy is worthless, if Timor dies. The thought was
strangely terrifying, even worse than the silence of mind she’d felt in
Ihm’s last days.
Belle stood up, pulled her cloaks tight around her bodies. As she filed out
the house’s back door, she was already plotting just how she should put
the situation to the neighbors. They were Children, a married couple. She
didn’t remember their names. In fact, she had done her best to keep
them out of Timor’s way. Now she would have to be nicey-nice.
She latched the door behind her—and was immediately struck by the
quality of the air. This cold might be deadly to an unprotected human, but
it wasn’t that bad for a winter night. The clouds blocked out any possibility

of aurora or starlight or moonlight, but she could feel a thick fog all
around her, the humidity bringing a profound silence to all the upper
reaches of sound. There was also a new sound, a hissing, low-pitched
and mechanical. She had a moment of prideful insight. Maybe Oobii was
still sending its ray to the local heater—but there was some leak that was
stealing steam before it could get in the house. I might even be able to fix
this!
She walked around the side of their little house, trying to imagine just
how a fix might be accomplished. Her negativity was complaining like it
always did. She really didn’t know anything about steam technology,
much less leak-fixing. But she could easily sound out the leak. Maybe
she could just push a proper-sized rock into the hole.
So dark, so silent in the higher sounds. Except for the hiss of the leak
there were no sounds but her own breathing and her paws on the ice.
Without echo location she was reduced to feeling her away along like
some dumb deaf human.
She slid down the gully on the north side of the house. The leak was just
a yard or two ahead, almost at ground level. Right here there was faint
illumination from a street lamp way up the street. It glinted off something
stringy, hanging from the wall above her. It was the house telephone line.
Cut.
She took a step or two more before the implications hit her. Then for a
second she froze in terror. Living with all this sky magic made you forget
the life and death things you learned in your earlier life. Fog masks
mindsound. In olden days, fog was weather’s arbitrary contribution to war
and treachery. Now all that ambushers need do was puncture a steam
pipe and they could have all the fog they wanted.
Belle quivered with the effort to see and hear. What could she do? Killers
could be all around. But they hadn’t acted. Maybe if she just ignored the
silence they would let her be. Surely they didn’t care about a worthless
pack of four.
She turned, casually she hope it looked, though two of her started to turn

in the wrong direction, straining to run off to the street below the house.
As she returned to the back door, she played a human humming tune,
sounds pitched low enough to pass through this fog. She strained for the
echoes and at the same time listened way higher up for some telltale of
Tinish thought. Now that she was searching, the clues all came together,
the echoes of flesh and the faint skirling of mind. She could even see
some silhouettes of heads against the dim white fields of the snows
uphill. There was one pack nearby, though it might be as small as four.
Perhaps one or two more packs lurked at the edge of the snow.
And still they didn’t act. If she turned again, she could walk off into the
street. They could get what they wanted.
And what was that? The intruders circled the back of the little house.
Timor? They wanted Timor? Why, why, why? But now they had him
alone, and all she need do was walk away.
Or she could scream so loud that everyone in the neighborhood would
come running. Maybe would come running.
She dithered a second more, slow of thought as always. Then one
overriding thought united her. No one steals my Timor.
She gave out a shriek so loud that it would have pierced the eardrums of
any human standing nearby. “HELP HELP HELP,” were the Samnorsk words.
As the nearest pack charged her, she realized that it was eight. The
noise of her scream echoed back at her revealing the shapes and gaits of
the attacker. It had been ten years, but she recognized the villain!
Chitiratifor. She would have screamed that name aloud, a single Tinish
chord, but something flashed and Orn dissolved in pain. Orn’s head flew
down on the rocks. The rest of her was surrounded, awash in blood and
noise. Maybe she was two. One.
And could only think to scream, “TIMOR!”
•  •  •

That night, Ravna was in her office aboard Oobii until very late. To
Nevil and his snoop programs, she was working hard on her farm
assignment. In fact, she was using Oobii to check everything she could
imagine about Flenser’s accusations. Even if Nevil had scams that didn’t
involve using Oobii, she still knew his comings and goings and could
monitor all the electromagnetic noise in the area. If he was relaying
through the orbiter, there would be correlations. She drummed idly on her
desk, watching the analysis for blockages and search decision requests.
It was annoying to have the power to grab more computing resources—
and not dare to do so. Another hour, though, should be enough. She’d
have results to show Jo and Pilgrim. They should be back from the Cold
Valley lab this evening with the latest from Scrupilo’s icy fab. Those
results rated a big celebration. Instead, the three of them would probably
spend the evening worrying about Flenser and Nevil.
A little flag popped up. “Guidance request: Widen relevance window to
include local anomalies?” One of the older heating towers up on Starship
Hill was failing—at least in Oobii’s infrared view. The first-built towers had
never been very reliable, and she had told the ship to track their decline.
So why was it bothering her now? She brought up an explanation: Okay,
no physical danger, but this was going to leave people in the cold unless
somebody took action. It was the sort of thing Nevil & Co. should be on
top of. Maybe she could handle it, just tell Nevil that the warning
message had somehow been misrouted to her. Another flag appeared,
reporting telephone failures. Strange. Ravna couldn’t imagine a
connection between the two problems—
She heard shouting downstairs; usually the ship suppressed game
station noise better than that. Moments later, someone was pounding on
her office door. Her displays automatically cut over to the agriculture
research she was supposed to be doing.
“Ravna, we need you!” Someone—it sounded like Heida Øysler—was
slamming against the wall so hard that the wood fasteners were cracking.
“Ravna!” That was Heida, and even louder than usual.

It wasn’t till hours later that she remembered the perfection of Tinish
mimicry; this was Heida or some pack. In the here and now, she simply
popped open the door.
It really was Heida. She grabbed Ravna’s arm and dragged her into the
hallway.
“You gotta help us. Right now!”
“What? What?” said Ravna as Heida pulled her toward the stairs.
“Geri Latterby, she’s gone!” said Heida.
Down on the main floor now. The few kids present were clustered around
someone bundled in outdoor clothing, sitting at one of the desks. Øvin
Verring turned, saw Ravna. “You got her!”
Now Ravna recognized the seated figure. It was Elspa Latterby. The kids
parted before Ravna, letting her near. The girl’s head was bent forward.
She had vomited all over the desk.
Ravna touched her shoulder. “Elspa?”
The girl looked up. The left side of her face was scraped and she was
bleeding from near her eye. It looked like she had fallen on her face.
“Geri … we were almost home. Bunch o’ raggedy Tines jumped us. They
took Geri. Beasly ’n’ I chased ’em … I couldn’t keep up.”
Ravna brushed her hand gently across Elspa’s hair. “We’ll get her back,
Elspa.” She looked around at the angry, frightened faces. Run-ins with
fragments were an occasional problem. There had even been a robbery
three years ago. But an abduction? Okay then. “Lisl? You’re our favorite
medic. Please help Elspa.”
The young woman had been hovering in the background, too shy to push
her way forward. But Lisl Armin was one of the few who had really
believed Ravna’s rants about the importance of first aid. With Lisl, and
Oobii’s diagnostics, Elspa should be okay. As for Geri, “Øvin, start
phoning around. There should be an auto list at the top of Emergency
Procedures. We can set up a search—”
“The landlines, they’re down.” Øvin was wall-eyed.

Of course. “You’ve radioed Woodcarver and Nevil?”
“Y-yes,” he said, “Woodcarver is sending out the city troops. Nevil is—”
“Hei! Everybody!” It was Bili Yngva, standing at the outer entrance to the
Meeting Place. He waved a radio at them. “I’m coordinating with Nevil.
He’s spotted the Tropicals; they’re running south!”
The Children swarmed toward the exit.
•  •  •
You can’t be two places at once. Ravna took a chance, and left the
Oobii to accompany the Children.
Queen’s Road ran parallel to the cliffs, gently descending toward the top
of Margrum Climb. There were town houses along the road, their pole
lamps bright circles of light. A trickle of Children joined their group, and
soon they were overtaken by packs of Woodcarver’s city troops.
The Children were full of rumors, stories of attacks all over town.
Bili and his radio had something closer to hard facts—but not very many
of them. “Yes, there’ve been several attacks on Children and city packs,”
he said.
“Who?” that was the shout from several corners of the crowd.
“We don’t know yet! Geri and Elspa, but Elspa is okay. Edvi Verring and
his Best Friend.”
Up ahead, Øvin Verring stumbled. Edvi was his cousin. Øvin twisted
around and pushed his way close to Bili. “Are they okay?”
Bili lowered his voice. “We don’t know, Øvin. Both Edvi and Geri are
missing. Parts of Dumpster and Beasly are dead or missing.”
“Sons of bitches!” said someone. “Best Friend” packs ranged from
opportunists to groupies—to truly best friends, very much like Pilgrim.

Ravna remembered Beasly and Dumpster. They had been ideal
companions for the youngest.
“Look,” Bili shouted. “All the witnesses agree the attackers were Tropical
nutcases. We’re on this. Nevil is almost down to the embassy.” The same
direction the rest of them—and the Tinish troops around them—were
going.
They were leaving the area of newest construction. The last lamppost
marked the south end of Ravna’s own house. There were no lights in the
windows, and the agrav was missing from its customary place behind the
house.
Ravna stepped across the frozen ruts. “Let me borrow the radio for a
moment, Bili.”
Yngva stared down at the gadget clutched in his hand. “I have to keep in
touch with Nevil.”
She held out her hand. “Just for a moment.”
The conversation had not slowed Bili down, but he looked around at the
nearby Children. He was not as smooth as Nevil, but he could recognize
an audience when he saw one. “Okay, but please keep it brief.”
He handed the device to Ravna. It was one of Scrupilo’s analog radios,
not a proper commset. Not that it mattered much now; Ravna only had to
get through to the ship. Fortunately, what had to be done was well within
the authority Nevil had granted her:
She had Oobii ping all the existing radios, repeat back their locations.
Yes, Nevil was already on the grounds of the Tropicals’ Embassy.
Woodcarver was on a wagon, driving down the inner road. She’d reach
the embassy before Ravna. Scrupilo was at North End, trying to get
airborne. Johanna and Pilgrim … their agrav was still aground at the Cold
Valley lab. She punched a message through to it, ending with “… and
we’ll need some active search.” She asked Oobii to relay all priority
items.
“Please, Ravna. Nevil needs this radio for the rescue work and it’s

already low on charge.”
As she handed it back, Oobii’s voice began babbling from the device. Bili
listened for a second, then announced. “Everybody! More casualties.
Belle Ornrikak is dead. The Tropicals grabbed Timor!”
Belle was the least known of the casualties. Half a year ago, Timor might
have counted as the least of the human losses. Tonight … a groan went
around the Children. Some of them started running, trying to keep up with
the soldier packs who were steadily passing by. But the frozen, rutted
ground was not kind to spindly two-legs who wanted to run. These kids
were just causing a traffic jam. Ravna caught up, persuaded them to
keep to a fast walking pace, at the edge of the road. Even Heida slowed
down.
They were beyond most of the town houses now. Only a few of the kids
carried lamps, but Ravna persuaded one squad of packs to stay with
them. Their oil torches lit the way.
Tonight, that light was really needed, even by humans. The sky was
completely dark, without aurora or moon or stars. She hadn’t checked the
weather earlier, but the cloud cover must be thick and complete. They
walked on about a thousand meters. Bili reported—actually Oobii relayed
—that there were no more casualties; all the other Children were
accounted for. Jo and Pilgrim were airborne and coming south.
Now at the southern horizon, there might be a break in the clouds. There
was light, shifting in much the same slow way as the aurora. The kids
were pointing to it now, “Strange color!”
Heida climbed the drifts by the road, stood precariously at the crest for a
moment. “That light. It’s a fire!”
There was only one large structure this side of the Margrum dropoff: the
Tropicals’ embassy.
•  •  •

The fire had not been large. It looked like only one area near the top of
the central tower had burned. In the troops’ torchlight, it was hard to see
much damage. The main gate was open. Two packs in military line
formation guarded the entrance. Four reserve packs were visible in the
shadows. Numerous ordinary packs and some Children were already
here. They milled around, blocked by the troops from going further.
Ravna walked toward the gate, followed by Øvin and Heida and the
others from Oobii.
Bili strode ahead, talking on the radio. “Right. Okay.” He stopped just
short of the guard line and waved everybody back. “I’m sorry guys,
they’re still gathering clues in there.”
Ravna took a step or two more, till she was face to face with Yngva.
“What about Timor and Geri and Edvi? They could be in there.” The
words just popped out; she really wasn’t trying to make trouble.
Bili lowered his voice. “Help keep these people back, Ravna. Please. Be
responsible.”
“Let Ravna through, Mr. Yngva. The Queen asked especially to see her.”
It was a pack in the shadows, behind the guard line. One of
Woodcarver’s chamberlains.
Maybe Bili frowned, but the light was dim and the expression quickly
passed. He waved her through, then turned to shout to the crowd: “Okay,
Ravna is going to help us out here. She’d really appreciate it if you’d all
give us some room to work, folks.”
Ravna didn’t stop to contradict him, but I could learn to dislike Bili Yngva.
The chamberlain and Gannon Jorkenrud guided Ravna back into the
depths of the embassy. Both had lamps, and Jorkenrud was waving his
light all around. His voice seemed both angry and triumphant. “We nailed
the bastards.” He had an axe—a bloody axe?—in his other hand.
This was the first time she’d been in the so-called “embassy.” The
sanctum was less and more than the stories. She saw random pieces of

metal and polished stone, items chipped away from public buildings and
turned into interior decorations. The walls were bare of acoustic quilting,
scarred with holes that might mark recent removals. Trash lay in various
depths. The ceilings were almost high enough for her to walk standing
upright, but the paths through the trash weren’t wide enough for pack
privacy and there were no turnouts for packs to courteously pass. Here
and there, through openings in the walls, she could see Woodcarver’s
troopers searching further corridors.
They passed doors that had been smashed in. Here the air was warm
and humid, smelling of body odor and incense. The chamberlain led them
up a round of stairs that circled the central tower. Gannon came right
behind, still talking angrily about how “we done ’em good tonight.”
The stairs ended at a door with a shattered lock. The chamberlain pulled
the door open a crack, and a breeze swept past them into the room
beyond. There was a gobble of Interpack between the chamberlain and
some pack inside. Ravna thought she heard a chord that meant
contradictorily “too crowded” and “come in.” The chamberlain waved
snouts at Gannon and Ravna. “You two go in, please. I’ll stay out here.”
Some of him streamed down the steps, the members spreading
themselves as far as they could think. The one at the bottom of the stairs
could talk to the troops on main floor.
Ravna and Gannon stepped through. The draft slammed the door shut
behind them.
She looked around, taking in the broken windows and the burned fabric
hangings. Once upon a time—up until a few minutes ago?—the ceiling
had been much lower, with hanging silken canopies. No doubt the place
had been as swampy-warm as the rest of the embassy. Now it was cold
and smelled of smoke. Woodcarver stood around a pile of rubbish that
had tumbled from an armoire. Still-glowing embers smouldered near her
feet, but all of her—even the puppy—was looking in Ravna’s direction:
“We’ll find Geri/Edvi/Timor.” She spoke the three names as a chord. “I
promise, Ravna.”
Nevil nodded. “We know who did this and we have a good idea where

they are now.” He wore the ship’s remaining HUD tiara, but away from
that, his face was sooty. Behind the tiara, his eyes were a little wide, the
first time she had ever seen horror on his face. “The Tropicals must have
been planning this for some tendays. They had perfect knowledge of the
three kids’ habits and their Best Friends.” He kicked savagely at whatever
was behind the papers, then recovered himself, brushing at his face with
a faintly trembling hand. “I’m coordinating with Jo and Pilgrim. They have
the agrav flying, looking for the kidnappers. Scrupilo says he’ll have Eyes
Above in the air in another hour or so.”
Ravna walked across the room, looked down at what Nevil had kicked: a
pack member. Two pack members. One lay in an enormous pool of
blood. The other was stretched out, as though in mid-leap. Now both lay
motionless, beyond any punishment. In life, they had been part of
something that thought well of itself. Few of the Tropicals dressed so
royally. She glanced around at Woodcarver.
“That’s two of Godsgift,” said the Queen.
“These were the only ones left when Gannon got here.”
From behind Ravna, Jorkenrud said, “All the rest must have taken off at
least an hour earlier. They took their sleighs, everything.”
Nevil glanced at Gannon. “Gannon didn’t know that at the time, but—I
take full responsibility. I messed up. There was a chance the kids were
here; we couldn’t wait for Woodcarver—”
Gannon interrupted. “Look. I didn’t do anything wrong. We busted in,
chased what we thought was a whole pack up into the tower here. The
critter said they had the kids, said he’d cut their throats. We could smell
fire in here, so we busted in and he attacked. We just killed two of him—
and then we realized that’s all he was!”
Ravna turned to look at him. “And there were no Children either?” she
said.
Gannon glared at her and visibly bit back some angry retort. “No,
nobody.”

She walked over to where Woodcarver was nosing around the corpses.
Ravna had never liked Godsgift, but—“I really didn’t know packs could do
this sort of thing.”
Woodcarver shrugged, but Ravna guessed she was trying to look
unimpressed: the Puppy from Hell had a kind of dazed expression in its
eyes. “Tropicals are crazy asses,” said Woodcarver. She nosed at the
one lying in a pool of blood. “I think this was the pack’s verbal center; it
was a fixed point in their recent swapping. And these two always paid
more attention than the others to written materials.”
Nevil looked surprised. “I didn’t know that. Downstairs, there were several
smaller fires—blubber oil tossed around and lit, though nothing spread far
enough to bring the whole place down.” He looked around at the charred
papers. “Maybe at the last moment they realized there were secrets left
behind.”
Woodcarver’s heads turned toward him. She said, “Together, these two
might have been bright enough to decide what to burn first.” She shook
herself. “So Godsgift maimed himself to keep a secret.”
•  •  •
A bit of good fortune: the cloud cover broke, and the next real storm
was two days out to sea. Scrupilo’s great airship was still ten days short
of its maiden voyage, but Scrup managed to get his little electric airboat
into the search, circling out to the limits of its motor charge. Air search
beyond that depended on the agrav skiff and the very-low-resolution
pictures from the orbiter. Woodcarver’s Domain covered millions of
hectares of snowfields, naked rock, and channel ice, but clues littered the
bloody snows where Geri and Edvi and Timor had been taken, and not all
the witnesses were dead. The best ground trackers searched all the
nearby forest trails. Video from the orbiter guided them to the most likely
places further out, where mountain farms were scarcely more than

wilderness marked with property boundaries.
Meantime, Johanna and Pilgrim accomplished what no dirigible could:
they shadowed the main party of fleeing Tropicals. They ghosted along
within clouds and behind mountain walls, watching every move the
Tropicals made. The mob had fled before any of the actual kidnappers
could have made it to the embassy—but there might be a rendezvous.…
The main group mushed on along the East Forest Road, not pausing for
any rendezvous. The embassy Tropicals had always looked so stupid,
playing with their huge sleighs in the most inappropriate weather. Now for
once, the weather and the terrain were ideal for a mad sleigh ride. When
they got over High Knob Pass, they all hopped aboard and took a single
long slalom, interrupted only by occasional overturnings and mayhem
collisions. Even so, the next blizzard caught up with them as they came
barrelling down upon the East Gate border garrison, their eight remaining
sleighs crowded with all who had so far survived. They smashed through
the Domain’s border garrison on the East Gate, causing casualties but no
total deaths.
In principle, the Tropicals were now beyond Domain jurisdiction. In fact,
that was where their pursuers finally moved to stop them.
•  •  •
Within hours of the East Gate debacle, Johanna and Pilgrim were back
with Ravna, up on the second floor of the town house. Outside, the
blizzard was a roaring blow, white swirling just beyond the windows.
Inside was snug and warm. On the table by the windows was the cargo
Ravna had been waiting for from the Cold Valley, ten thousand adders
fabricated on a fifty-centimeter disk of pressed carbon. These must still
be delivered to Scrupilo for testing, but Jo and Pilgrim’s mission up north
had delivered the images for the next step: true processors and memory
devices. If these adders tested out, the way was clear for what Ravna

and Scrupilo had worked ten years to create.
The delivery should have been the joyous high point of Ravna’s year.
Instead, when Jo had presented her with the carbon black disk, Ravna
had barely taken the time to tilt it in the light, to admire the nearly
microscopic patterning. She would get the devices to Scrupilo soon
enough; he would do his testing. Meantime, three of the youngest
Children were gone. Three packs were mostly murdered.
Ravna sat with Jo and Pilgrim on that beautiful carpet, and felt as cold
and miserable as if she’d been in the blizzard outside.
Maybe Johanna had been crying, but all that was left was the strain that
showed on her face. “We would have let the Tropicals run right on into
the wilderness, except that the storm had caught up with us.” She had
reported most of this by radio. She’d be saying it again tomorrow morning
when all the Children got together at the New Meeting Place. She
punched angrily at the big pillow she held on her lap. Pilgrim was
stretched out around her, also looking tired and unperky.
“We rescued no one,” Jo said. “We discovered nothing. The only good
thing that came out of this was getting to work with Jefri. He handled the
ground chase, and for the first time in years we really cooperated.”
“Jefri is the best of all the humans at woodcraft,” said Pilgrim. “He and
Amdi came down from Smeltertop, watching all the way for signs of small
escaping parties. They were just ahead of the main group of Tropicals
when the storm hit.”
“So between him and Woodcarver’s troops, the Tropicals were boxed
in?” said Ravna. She had followed the chase with most of the other
Children, just watching the comms from Oobii.
“Yeah, we really had them trapped, and if we didn’t stop them, they could
lose us in the storm.” Jo swatted her pillow again. “We should have
captured a lot more of them, though. Damn that Gannon Jorkenrud. He
just charged on through, whacking Tropicals. I’m gonna complain about
that.”
Ravna nodded. In fact, Johanna had already complained loudly and

publicly, and her complaints had been heard by almost one hundred
Children on Oobii. Jorkenrud’s attack had been ineffectual, except as it
forced a complete loss of coherence among the Tropicals. “Yes,” said
Ravna, “we saw.” Via the camera carried by Woodcarver. “The Tropicals
were hunkered down around their sleighs, almost clumped into rational
groups. Then Gannon and company came in—”
“Yeah! And poof, the Tropicals ran off in all directions, as singletons.”
Johanna glared at nowhere in particular for a moment. “No way could we
catch many of them in the storm.” A shadow passed across her face.
“Tropical singletons in a northern blizzard. I’ll bet they’re dead now.”
“Jefri and Amdi brought nets,” said Pilgrim. “They managed to snag a
few.” He shook a head wonderingly. “What an unlikely team they make.
Jefri is almost as good in the woods as a pack—and Amdiranifani is a
pudgy, overly nice genius who doesn’t even like to eat live food. I’ll bet
the nets were Amdi’s idea. Between them, they caught more Tropicals
than Woodcarver’s troops and Nevil’s idiots.”
“What did you find in the sleighs?”
Johanna shook her head. “We’re gonna have to wait for Nevil’s big
meeting to learn that. We were still in the air, and Amdi and Jefri were
busy with their nets. It was mainly Gannon and company on the wagons.
… I swear, even after ten years Down Here, they still seem to think that
the world is built just for them. If objects don’t have intentional response,
or at least voice command obedience, they figure they’re broken. These
bozos ended up using axes to make kindling of the sleighs and cargo
boxes.”
“I saw some of what they spilled out on the ground. It was a jumble, but
here and there I saw rainbows.”
“Big deal,” said Johanna. “For years, the Tropicals have been stealing
tech items, mostly glittering garbage. I want some real clues. Where are
Geri and Edvi and Timor? How can we get them back…” her voice
became soft and sad, “… or can we ever get them back?” She looked up
at Ravna. “I think Jefri is as upset as I’ve ever seen him, even when he

was little. This takes us back to Murder Meadows.”

Chapter   17
A tenday passed. There had been no sign of Geri or Edvi or Timor, but
something new happened up at the cemetery—hundreds of packs and all
the remaining Children showed up and stood in snowy, windy twilight for
the funeral of Belle and parts of Dumpster and almost all of Beasly. For
better or worse, this looked like a new tradition among the packs. Nevil
said just a few words, thanking the fallen Best Friends, and promising
that the stolen Children would be found. Then various packs and humans
spoke to remember the dead. They even found nice things to say about
the ever-churlish Belle Ornrikak. The last of Beasly stood quietly beside
his pack’s grave, looking sad and puzzled.
The murders and kidnappings brought the Children together as nothing
had before. The growing complaints died, and everyone pulled together.
Though there were no signs of the missing Children, there were clues.
Along with the pilfered trinkets and toys, the Tropicals’ sleighs had
contained food supplies, including syrup-grain bars that only humans
could stomach. Someone had planned to take the stolen Children far
away. Nevil confessed that his leadership had been terribly unprepared
and that their best rescue efforts had been a botch.
So the Domain had an external enemy, someone who evidently was
interested in learning more about two-legs. The names Vendacious and
Tycoon were high on everyone’s suspect list. There was something very
dangerous out beyond the Domain. This time it had used its puppets—
but next time?
Nevil and Woodcarver were forced into closer cooperation. Both Tines
and humans volunteered their time for special watches. The youngest
Children were never without double guards. Jefri and Amdi stayed in
town, working to devise a sustainable town patrol. Nevil appointed

special committees to recommend new policies.
At twice-a-tenday meetings, Nevil summarized the results of the planning
committees. The unsuccessful bioscience projects were swept away by
the necessities of immediate safety.
It was such a perfect fit for Pilgrim’s warning of what a regime might do to
stay in power. But now Pilgrim was less the cynic: “Events have worked
in Nevil’s political favor, but I don’t see how he could have engineered
this.”
“Not by himself,” said Johanna, “but if Nevil has fallen into Vendacious’
schemes, this is exactly the sort of thing that could happen.” She glanced
at Ravna. “You told me Nevil looked overwhelmed in the embassy.”
“Yes.”
Jo nodded. “I think Nevil did a deal with the devil and now he can’t get
out.” She was silent for a moment. “Or maybe he is totally innocent. I
talked to Jefri again today. If he stays in town long enough, I really think I
may learn what’s going on in his head. Jef and Amdi are desperate to
keep this from happening again—but I’ll tell you, they’re whole-heartedly
behind Nevil’s security schemes. Jefri says we really need those
handcannons that Nevil mentioned at yesterday’s meeting. Jefri would
never put up with the kind of dark-hearted alliance Flenser was claiming.
And yet … Jef’s holding something back. Has Flenser had anything more
to say to you?”
Ravna shook her head. “No. You know that.” They had had this
conversation before. Flenser had shown up at the meetings, generally
backing Nevil, and without his usual sly innuendo. The help he had
promised Ravna was not forthcoming.
The Mad Bad Girl crossed her arms truculently. “I say Woodcarver
should grab Flenser and put the bastards to the question.” She glared at
Pilgrim. “How about it? You saw the Queen just this afternoon, right?”
Pilgrim looked around at himself. Embarrassed? “As a matter of fact, our
latest chat was a bit more, um, intimate than any we’ve had in some time.
I got some real insight. I fear she is going to become even more erratic

than before.”
“It’s that puppy, isn’t it?”
“Yes. Sht is older now, but the situation hasn’t stabilized. Woodcarver
knows he’s a problem, but he’s such a part of her now that she can’t deal
with it. She’s bouncing around between some very different states of
mind. I caught her in an affectionate mood.”
“Hmmph. You should tell her to ditch little Sht,” said Johanna, quite out of
keeping with her normal soft-hearted attitude toward individual pack
members.
“Heh, even in the midst of our loving, I suspect that suggestion would
have provoked a very negative reaction. The Old Woodcarver would
have never drifted this far. She knew she was giving up the stability of
centuries when she started fooling around with me—but we never
thought she’d lose it like this. The good news is, she knows she has a
problem and she’s trying to cope with it. I think she’ll eventually be
successful. In the meantime—well, there are several very different places
her opinions dwell: She fully supports Nevil’s plans for tightening up
security. Some of the time she sees Nevil as a proper ally in those plans.
Sometimes she is as suspicious of him as we are, regarding him as a
puppet of Vendacious—or Flenser. Of course, she can’t get her claws on
Vendacious, but she’s toying with exactly your suggestion: putting
Flenser to the question!”
•  •  •
Fifteen days passed. Flenser-Tyrathect was holed up in the Old Castle
down on Hidden Island, under unacknowledged house arrest. Ravna
wondered if—considering all the secret exits—Flenser was really there at
all. One thing was certain: he still wasn’t talking to Ravna!
She continued her covert surveillance of Nevil’s online activity. Nevil and

Bili were as clumsy and cautious as ever. Their attempts to spy on her
would be laughable even if she didn’t have Command Privileges. On the
other hand, Nevil had true control of the orbiter and the commsets he had
appropriated. There were data links she couldn’t snoop on.
Despite the tragedy and paranoia, Ravna found minor good news: the
maiden flight of Eyes Above 2. The behemoth had the size and
appearance of a small interplanetary freighter, and even though it was
limited to the lower atmosphere and could hoist less mass than the agrav
skiff, it was still a safe and relatively fast transport. Nevil was right when
he said that EA2 would revolutionize the Domain’s rescue capability.
Meantime she worked on her Cold Valley project and did the gun
designing that was officially assigned her. Both projects involved working
with Scrupilo. When he demanded she visit him down on the North End,
it was almost like the good old days before the Disaster Study Group and
Nevil and the murders.
Ravna’s town house was less than five thousand meters from the North
End, but to get there, she’d had to walk to the funicular and trundle down
it to the Inner Channel. The channel was still mostly frozen, but rain had
covered it with centimeters of freezing water. Getting across was an ugly
combination of boating and sleigh ride. The rest of the trip hadn’t been
much better, though Flenser’s packs had cut drainage channels in the icy
piles along the streets. So an hour and a half after leaving home, here
she was in Scrupilo’s office at the North End quarry. She was still drying
out from the trip when Scrupilo trooped out from his glassware and
electronics.
“Hei, Scrupilo, so why did you need to see me in person? Is it the guns or
the Cold Valley project?” And I so hope it’s Cold Valley. If not for the
present dangers, that’s where all her attention would be.
“Both and neither,” said the pack grumpily. “Let’s start with the fun things.
Are you quite dried out? I don’t want you dripping on this.”
“I’m dry.”
“Okay, then.” He led her to a test stand at the side of the room. There

were connectors and cables, locally made batteries and voltage
regulators—prehistoric tech that had taken Ravna and Scrupilo years to
make. Almost hidden in the middle of the equipment was a one-
centimeter-wide smudge of carbon on glass. Scrupilo and his helpers had
carefully cut it out of the ten thousand array, then connected power and
data leads appropriately. “We just finished the setup this morning,” said
Scrupilo. “I’ve already done some testing, but I wanted you to see it.” He
clustered around the equipment, tapping switches with his noses, then
correcting his own mistakes. Parts of Scrup were getting very old. His
White Head member was nearly deaf in the lower frequencies, and
Ravna figured from the way it was always closely surrounded by its peers
that it also had problems with the ultrasonic frequencies of mindsounds.
Scrupilo claimed that if he messed around getting younger members,
he’d just lose his dedication. Considering what had happened to
Woodcarver, maybe he was right. “There! I got it right. See? Binary of
twelve coded on the top leads, binary of seventeen on the bottom.” He
waggled a nose at pattern of tiny lights, and then pointed at a third row of
lights below the other two: the outputs. “Twelve plus seventeen is twenty-
nine!”
“You did it, Scrupilo.” Ravna almost whispered the words.
Scrupilo preened, but then some honest core of him replied, “We did it.
Me and you and Oobii’s design programs. We three and the teams up
north and down here.” His heads were bobbing almost maniacally. “I’ve
spent all day playing with this. I had Oobii sending down test settings at
variable speeds, checking the results. Our little adder can reliably do one
hundred thousand operations per second, second after second, for
hours!” He looked up at her. “And the design we’re making at Cold Valley
now,” —the one Johanna and Pilgrim had delivered just before the
kidnappings— “that’s a giant step up from this, but I bet it’ll work too; it’s
the same hundred-micron feature size. Imagine, we’ll have clock, and
memory, and an instruction set all together.”
Now Ravna was nodding back. That next step was the distillation of a
thousand civilizations’ processor designs, optimized for their grotesquely

primitive situation at Cold Valley. “Of course,” she said, “that will be even
more tedious to wire up.”
“Yup, like tying good rug knots. Thousands of hours. But in a year we’ll
have ten or twenty of our own processors. By then we’ll be making vision
chips. There will be even more tedious work for paws and hands—”
“But in ten years, we’ll have local automation.” The machines would be
doing the wire-ups. It was the beginning she’d promised the Children. It
would stink, but it would be enough: “Then we can start shrinking the
feature size.” That was the transition point that had always marked the
beginning of technological civilization.
“Yup, yup,” said Scrupilo; he had long ago brought into the histories he’d
read in Oobii’s archives. For a moment they just stood grinning at each
other like idiots. Very happy idiots. She would so much like to play with
these connectors, set up her own automatic addition. It was the sort of
thing that by itself would not impress any of the Children, except maybe
Timor. He—
Timor would have loved this. The thought brought her back to their
current awful situation. Play with the gear later. She stepped back from
the miracle, her smile leaking away. “You seemed to have other things
you wanted to talk about, Scrupilo?”
The pack’s heads continued to bob for a moment, but Scrupilo eventually
came down to earth too. He wandered to the window, looked down into
the quarry, maybe at the actinic flashes coming from the shed where his
crews were forging ribs and spars. Work had begun on a second huge
airship, apparently to be called Eyes Above 3; Scrupilo had no
imagination when it came to names.
But when Scrup turned back from the window, it wasn’t to talk about EA3.
“You know Nevil’s miniature cannon idea is really stupid.”
That was Nevil’s main technological response to the kidnappings, an
even higher priority than another airship. “Personal protection for all,” was
his slogan for the project. Most of the Children were very much in favor of
the idea. Of course, Ravna had always known that very small cannon

could be made; such were a commonplace in early civilizations. The
trouble was, they were so easy to make and copy, and the Domain
already had military superiority in this part of the world; better not to give
other nations a clue before it was necessary. Besides, Oobii had ideas
for making much more effective personal weapons once the Domain
became a little more technically advanced. “But Scrupilo, you know
Woodcarver favors the notion of personal cannons.” As of the most
recent twice-a-tenday meeting.
The pack made an irritated noise. “You and I have discussed such
weapons before. In principle, they are a moderately foolish idea, perhaps
necessary in the current emergency. What is stupid is the actual design.”
He sent a member across the room to fetch an engineering drawing and
thrust it into Ravna’s hands.
The graphic was done by Ravna, from Nevil’s overall description. She
stared at it for a moment. “Um, I did include a flash and noise
suppressor,” which hadn’t been on Nevil’s wish list. “Did you want a
longer barrel?”
“Well, yes! Would you want this going off in your face?” Scrupilo had
damaged his White Head’s hearing in experiments with the first field
artillery. “But that’s the least of it. Look at the, what do you call it, the
stock.”
That part was also Nevil’s idea, but it had seemed rather clever to Ravna.
“That’s modeled after the handle on a Tinish jaw-axe, Scrupilo.” But
turned sideways, the lower half looked much like the handgrip of Pham’s
long-gone pistol.
“Foolishness!” All but one of Scrupilo came over and grabbed the paper
out of her hands. “For a human with arms and hands, this would be easy
to hold and fire and reload. But for a pack—look, helper members have to
come around on the sides and stick snouts forward of the gunner. The
idea of cartridges and cartridge boxes is nice enough, but I can’t imagine
scrambling around beneath the muzzle to insert a reload.”
Ravna stared at the picture; she really should have fed Nevil’s suggestion

through Oobii’s multi-species designer. This was a weapon for humans.
“Do you have some changes to suggest?”
“I could put my mind to it.” Again, he glanced down through the windows.
“If we have to waste time, at least we can do it right.” He pulled blank
paper from one of his panniers and began sketching. “Hmm, a longer
barrel would improve accuracy and make the gun easier to shoot and
hold and service.…”
Over the next ten minutes the two of them—mainly Scrupilo, since Ravna
was a dunce at design without Oobii—worked out a number of features.
Not surprisingly, what they came up with looked a lot more like a crew-
served weapon than a hand gun. “But I’m sure a single human would be
quite proficient with it. Then—” He looked up, as if listening. All Ravna
heard was the continuing bang of the drop forge—but the one of Scrupilo
still by the window was scrunched against the glass, trying to look
straight down.
Okay, he was waiting for someone. Ravna crossed the room and leaned
close to the glass, blocking the reflected room lighting with her hands.
The flashes from the forge shone through the rain. Freezing water
glittered as it fell from the lab’s eaves. Looking down in the direction of
Scrupilo’s gaze, she could see the flight of rickety wooden stairs that
zigzagged up the quarry wall to Scrupilo’s office. Twilight showed dark
shapes ascending single-file. It looked like three packs. A flash of light
from the forge revealed that the middle pack was a sevensome, all in
heavy raincloaks, including one wee member who rode the shoulders of
the largest. Queen Woodcarver.
Woodcarver’s first bodyguard emerged on the landing just outside
Scrupilo’s door. Ravna didn’t recognize the pack. After a moment it
spread around the outside of the building, watching in all directions.
Then, one at a time, Woodcarver popped up. She stood for a moment
under the portico, removing her raincloaks and shaking off the water that
had made it through to her pelts. She gave Ravna a sharp look, then
came indoors, bringing a frigid bloom of air with her.
“Spring is the worst season,” she said. “It shouldn’t visit us in winter.” Two

of her were looking directly at Ravna. The Puppy from Hell was staring at
Scrupilo’s labware, a destructive gleam in its eye. “But you have much
more extreme environments aspace, don’t you, Ravna?”
“Yes, though they’re so extreme that adequate protection generally
means visitors don’t suffer the way we do here.” We’re actually having a
civil conversation!
Scrupilo had moved to stand at the far end of the lab, behind quilted
screens that were thick enough to allow him to remain in the conversation
without getting in the way of Woodcarver’s thoughts.
Woodcarver nodded in his direction. “Are we in private?”
“Yes, my Queen. And anything that could hear us is temporarily
disabled.”
The puppy hopped onto a lab bench and sniffed around at the connectors
and charge holders. The rest of Woodcarver spread out around Ravna.
“You were so much simpler to deal with than Nevil.”
Ravna nodded.
Woodcarver thought a second. “Sorry, I meant that as a compliment.
Even an apology. I know I have become difficult to deal with. Surely, my
—Pilgrim—has gossiped enough about my state of mind?”
How to respond to that? Ravna tried for something like honesty: “Pilgrim
said that your new addition was … distracting.”
Woodcarver chuckled. “What delightful understatement.” Her six adult
members were all looking at little Sht. The Puppy from Hell looked back
with innocent, what’s-the-fuss body language. Surely that was just
Ravna’s human interpretation. After a moment, Woodcarver continued:
“A century ago, I would not have gone this road. I certainly wouldn’t have
accepted Harmony Redjackets’ crackpot broodkennery. But that was
before dear Pilgrim made me adventurous. Now I’m in a bigger mess
than I have any clear memory of in my entire existence. Sht came close
to undoing me, all before I realized the danger. I’m still searching for
balance. Pilgrim has made suggestions, but in the meantime…”

Woodcarver was mostly looking at Ravna now. “Just so you know, even
when we disagree, I will trust you and Johanna and Pilgrim more than
anyone.”
Ravna nodded. Powers above! “Thank you.”
“Meantime, we have a dangerous situation to deal with.” She stopped,
seemed to be thinking.
From across the room, Scrupilo said, “You mean Nevil and all the
scheming he’s up to.”
Two of Woodcarver looked up. “Yes. I’ve watched Nevil carefully since he
disposed of Ravna. He intends to take over the Domain, but he’s not as
clever as he thinks he is. The question is…” Woodcarver’s voice faded
into thoughtfulness.
Scrupilo helpfully put in, “The question is, is Nevil someone’s puppet,
some pack much cleverer than he is.”
This time all of Woodcarver’s heads came up. “Scrupilo! Will you please
stop interrupting! It’s bad enough having your obsessive mindsound
rattling around the room.”
“Sorry! Sorry.”
Her heads turned back toward Ravna, the puppy’s last of all. “The
murders and the kidnappings have played perfectly into Nevil’s claws.
Was that accidental? If it is, we—you and I together, Ravna—should
have no trouble with Nevil’s grand ambitions. But you know Flenser hints
around that this is Vendacious’ work. If it is that—or worse, if this is
Flenser in some double treason, then we may have been outplayed.” She
thought quietly for a moment. “Nevil would have us believe that the
Tropicals were behind the attack. I’ve watched that embassy mob for
almost ten years. It’s very hard to believe that they could organize this
attack.”
“Godsgift was smart enough,” said Ravna, “in an erratic way. Johanna
thinks that maybe our trade over the last ten years has made some
difference in the Tropics.”

Woodcarver made a little hooting sound. “What difference could it make
to a Choir of a hundred million Tines?”
Ravna smiled. “That’s more or less Pilgrim’s reaction to the idea.”
“I know. I talked to both of them earlier this afternoon. Today is my day to
grovel apologies and attempt reconciliation. But if Nevil is somebody’s
puppet, Godsgift and his mob were key to the operation. For at least five
years, we’ve been sniffing around the East Coast, trying to learn more
about Tycoon or Vendacious or whoever. Have we been looking in the
wrong place? If there is anybody behind Godsgift, that would explain a
lot. I think we should actively test the possibility.”
Scrupilo said, “Send Jo and Pilgrim to the Tropics! Oops, sorry.”
Woodcarver waved a head in Scrupilo’s direction. “Just as he says. It’s
something we should have done long ago. Even now, Jo and Pilgrim are
overflying the mouth of the River Fell.”
Ravna knew how enormous the continental tropics were, even not
counting the Great Sandy. “Negative results wouldn’t really prove
anything,” she said.
Little Sht snapped at the empty air, but the pack’s tone of voice remained
reasonable. “That’s true. But it’s a start. Given what’s happened, we
should be paying as much attention to the Tropics as we do the Long
Lakes and East Home.”
“Yes.”
“And I wanted some reconnaissance undertaken before Nevil and his
friends know that we are about it. Johanna and Pilgrim felt the same way.
Nevil thinks they’re headed to Smeltertop today—instead they’re going
much much farther.”
One trip was about sixty kilometers and the other was several thousand
—but to the agrav, they were about equally difficult. Nevertheless, “I—I
wish all of us had had a chance to talk about this. Woodcarver.”
“Why? Both of them wanted to take a look. This first trip will just be a day
or two, not like some of the East Coast missions. They’ll stay silent until

they’re on the way back.”
“I think there’s a good chance Nevil will know of the mission in any case.”
“So?” said Woodcarver. “That would also argue for us acting quickly. I
was completely outmaneuvered by the murders and the kidnappings.
And since then, Nevil’s been pushing and shoving. I want to know who
we’re up against before they surprise us all again.” She looked around.
“And that’s another reason we had to talk. You really must stop acting
like a fool. Nevil needs your technical advice, but once he realizes we’re
working together, that might not protect you. If he is the tool of
Vendacious, then expect the reaction to be violent. I want you to start
using bodyguards. I’ve got four packs here who will take you home—
that’s in addition to ones you apparently have not even noticed.” She
smiled at the look on Ravna’s face. “And as of tonight, I’m increasing the
coverage.” All her heads were bobbing, including little Sht’s.
•  •  •
Three hours later, Ravna was finally back at her town house on
Starship Hill. More had happened this day than any day since the Battle
on Starship Hill—and not a single person harmed in the process! Her
mind was working overtime, a combination of triumph and planning and
worries: Very shortly, there would be thousands of processor and video
components available from the Cold Valley lab—far more than could be
immediately wired up to the devices that Scrupilo was building. There
would be several years of hard manual labor before the combination of
integrated devices and Oobii’s software designs would make a
difference, but then life for the Children and the Domain would be
transformed. It would be such an enormous win for everyone. So maybe
the question was: Just how evil was Nevil? If he was not a partner in the
murders and the kidnappings, surely some real compromises would be
possible, compromises that would not humiliate him but would still allow

the projects Ravna wanted.
And if Nevil was a puppet of Vendacious or whoever? Maybe he could be
persuaded to renounce the association. If not … perhaps it all came
down to what Jo and Pilgrim discovered once they started looking in the
right places. I wish I could talk to them now. That would have to wait,
probably for a day or two, to keep this mission secret. But what could
they really find in one overflight, even if that was of the heart of the
Choir? Mostly likely, this was the beginning of a number of flights—and
no way could those be kept secret.
Ravna roamed the town house as she cycled through the possibilities.
Outside, she could see the new guards that Woodcarver had assigned.
Nothing covert about these fellows. The Queen’s change of heart—or her
success in controlling her heart—was almost as big a triumph as
anything else that had happened this day. It was also one of the worries
that nibbled around the edges of the day’s optimism. So much depended
on Woodcarver’s favor and her stability. The Queen still had flashes of
anger, failures of attention and memory. The battle to control
Woodcarver’s paranoia wasn’t really over.
Ravna’s own thoughts were skittering off in all directions: new insights,
new worries. If only she had access to Oobii from here. I should have
gone there tonight. There were things that she was missing.
An hour passed. Two. Beyond her second-story windows, she could see
that the drizzle had frozen to glassy ice, a veneer that glittered and
gleamed beneath the occasional streetlight. Get some sleep. Tomorrow
she’d chat with Oobii, maybe find a way to talk with Johanna and Pilgrim.
Ravna finally dragged herself off to bed.
She lay in the darkness, listening to the house settle into the subfreezing
cold of the night. All these houses were so noisy. In Ravna’s childhood,
the indoors and outdoors had been indistinctly separated, and the only
sounds one heard were deliberately engineered into the environment.
Normally those were the sounds of living things, bats and birds and
kittens prowling. Of course, you could make the sounds and the
environment whatever you wanted. Her sister Lynne had been big on

Silence, just another of the endlessly annoying things about Lynne as a
youngster. The two had engaged in sound wars all the time.
Here in the wilderness—Ravna counted all of Tines World as wilderness
—sound was the sometime domain of the Tines with their preternatural
acoustics. Where the Tines were not involved, sound was a feral thing.
Her first few tendays in this town house, before Pilgrim and Johanna
arrived as housemates, Ravna could scarcely sleep. There were these
thumps in the night. There were clicks and groans, and no matter how
she rationalized them they seemed very threatening. Night after night
they repeated. Some of them had come to be almost comforting.
Maybe she slept for a time.…
There was a new creaking. It almost sounded like someone was on the
front stairs.
She quietly moved into the living room. Quietly? If it was a pack coming
up the stairs, she would surely be heard! On the other hand, if she cried
out, the guards on the street would be in here in a moment. She slipped
close to the windows, being careful not to stand in silhouette. Outside
was still and glittering—
—and no sign of even a single guard pack.
No more creaking on the front stairs. She turned her head a fraction; from
here she could see partway down the stairwell. A pack might keep itself
quiet to her ears—but human eyes could make up for human ears:
The walls were not utterly dark, and … she saw shadows that looked
very much like the heads of two Tines. A pack was sneaking up the
stairs.
Surely it can hear that I moved my head, hear the flat of my face. She
turned and dove for the backstairs door.
There was a muted screech and the sound of paws pounding up the front
stairs. Ravna pulled open the door, leaped through, and slammed it shut.
Now the intruder’s hissing was loud. An instant later its bodies slammed
into the door. She leaned against the panel; the door couldn’t be locked

from this side. It was just her weight and strength that was keeping it
shut. Somehow, she had to jam it closed. She flailed around, found the
light switch. The stairs were just shoulder wide, and even though this was
a house-for-humans, the ceiling was only one meter fifty high. The steps
were piled deep with camping equipment and junk that Pilgrim and
Johanna had brought back from their expeditions. They bragged about
how they traveled light, but they always seemed to have souvenirs.
Just beyond her reach was a bundle of staves, each tipped with a short,
wicked blade. She kicked at it, taking some of her weight off the door.
The pack was ramming in unison now. The door sprang ajar and a paw
full of claws extended through the opening. Ravna slammed back at the
door. Something crunched. The member gave a sharp whistle of pain
and the paw was withdrawn. There was an instant of peace, presumably
while the other side had an “ow ow ow” moment. Ravna swiveled the
staves around, jamming their butt ends into the stair railing. She stabbed
two or three of the blades into the door. The rest of the bundle came
loose in her hands. Okay! She sank all but one of the other staves into
various points on the door. Now, when the pounding resumed, the door
was jammed shut more securely than all her pushing had accomplished.
Then she scrambled down over the boxes and bags, sliding the
remaining stave ahead of her. The pole was an awkward thing for a
human to maneuver. The shoulder clasps were useless for a human, and
the shaft had an awkward curve in its lower half. Still, it was long and
there was something sharp at the end.
Her housemates’ junk was deepest at the bottom of the stairs: tents,
equipment, harnesses, boots. Boots. Ravna slipped on Jo’s old boots
and peeked out the tiny window on the outside door. She was looking
into the field behind the house. Far away up the hill, she could see the
scattered lights of Newcastle town. Deep shadows stood nearby, but she
saw no sign of the rest of the gang.
Maybe they were all in the house. There was noise enough at the top of
the stairs. Someone had axes. Woodchips flew from the shuddering
topside door. She saw the glint of a metal blade breaking through.

Ravna turned back to the outside door. It was only one member wide,
secured by a cross-timber. She lifted the bar and pushed. Jammed! She
crouched down and pushed harder. The door creaked open. Ravna
scrambled into the frigid cold. Behind her, the pack had broken through
the upper door. Boxes and bags tumbled down ahead of the intruder, all
but jamming the doorway.
Precious seconds. She stabbed the shoulder stave into the ice, using the
staff to steady herself as she stepped off the stoop. The fresh-frozen ice
felt as smooth as glass under Jo’s boots. She poled herself along, skiing
more than running. Loud gobbling came from within the house.
If she could get to the road before they did, there might be witnesses,
even defenders. Ravna bent her knees and pushed off with her staff. She
coasted almost five meters on each push, keeping her balance by lightly
raking the ice with her blade. She pushed again, sliding onwards. Should
I be screaming for help? She was out of sight of her back door and the
windows above. Maybe they didn’t even know where she was!
The Queen’s Road was directly below, empty beneath the glow of a
street lamp. She pushed off—and discovered that the water hadn’t frozen
into glassy smoothness on the slope. Pain blazed where her hip
smashed into the ice. She slid, spinning, down the washboard surface.
Then she was out in the light, right under the streetlamp. She rolled over,
came to her knees. Somehow, she had managed to hang on to the
bladed staff. Up the road, lights were coming on in the nearest houses.
Coming toward her from the other direction—it was Jefri and Amdi! They
were actually running. Amdi’s claws glittered with ice, and two of him
were steadying Jefri from below. The gang of nine slid to a stop all
around her. Jefri reached down for her hand.
“C’mon,” he said. Around her, she felt Amdi helping her up, bracing
against Jefri. For just an instant she was aware of the warmth of his arms
around her and the penetrating cold everywhere else.
Then she saw at least one pack come tumbling down the front steps of
her town house. Another skittered, sprawling, down the alleyway. Amdi

squeaked something unintelligible to Jef. Suddenly Jefri’s arms tightened
around her, swinging her up and off her feet. “I’ve got her!” he called to
them.
The other packs swirled surrounded them, steel tines and crossbows
everywhere. She had a glimpse of an enclosed fodder wagon sliding into
the lamplight.
“Stop her wiggling!”
Someone grabbed the back of Ravna’s neck and whipped her head
against the side of the wagon.

Chapter   18
Johanna loved to fly in the anti-gravity skiff, but sometimes, such as
right now, it could be a bit too thrilling. She swallowed her heart and
glared across the tiny cabin at Pilgrim. “How much altitude do we have
left?”
“Not to worry,” was his cheery response. “We still have plenty of
clearance.”
Johanna leaned out into the rainy dark. They had flown—or, more
accurately, fluttered and flailed—across hundreds of kilometers of
Tropicals’ territory. Just before this rain, she’d spotted fires below—for
cooking? sacrifices? She hadn’t seen any details, or smelled the fires, so
she guessed the skiff was at least a thousand meters up. Maybe it was
still jungle down there, but Pilgrim claimed he could hear unending Tinish
chatter. If this was a city they were flying over, it must be as big as the
urban terranes of Straumli Realm.
The skiff flipped forward, nearly tumbling over. It was doing that a lot on
this trip. Pilgrim struggled to right the craft. If he failed, they’d be stuck
once again with flying upside down. That got old very fast. This time, he
succeeded in bringing them back to a normal attitude. They coasted
serenely through the dark for several seconds, almost as if this was a
proper aircraft.
“Actually,” Pilgrim said, “We’re at 750 meters.” All his eyes were on the
flickering displays. Just looking at them gave Johanna a headache, and
on this trip they were a constant reminder of larger problems. Over the
years, most of the skiff’s onboard sensors had malfunctioned toward
silence and arbitrary errors. About the only ground imaging left to them
was their own eyeballs looking out open windows and through those
parts of the hull that weren’t blocked by agrav repairs.

They should be less than ten kilometers from a more or less safe landing
area, where the river swampland faded into the ocean. Normally, their
best navigation information came from the orbiter, hanging out at
synchronous altitude—and tonight they weren’t using that.
“Are you making up numbers again?” she asked.
A doggy head turned in her direction and a muzzle patted her on the
hand. “Hei,” he said, “only the less significant digits.” And of course, when
they got really low, Pilgrim could hear the ground. “A little imprecision is
worth it,” he continued. “I’ll bet Nevil and Company haven’t even noticed
we’re not going to Smeltertop tonight.”
“Yeah.” Tomorrow they’d take just a quick look and then skedaddle back
home.
“Not to worry,” said Pilgrim. “We should have done this a long time ago.”
•  •  •
The rain was a steady torrent, but the air was virtually windless, and
the skiff was smoothly sliding along at several meters per second. Pilgrim
claimed that the controls were benefitting from the water pooling at the
bottom of their little cabin.
They were really low. The air stank faintly of sewage and animals. Those
particular smells were not surprising; mariners and Tropical fragments
told of cities larger and more crowded than anything else in this world, a
mindless urbanization that destroyed coherent thought. It wasn’t called
the Choir of Choirs for nothing.
“They’re louder than ever,” said Pilgrim. “A mob all singing together.
Sounds like they’re having a good time, though.… Heh, maybe there
really is nonstop sex.”
They were so low that Johanna could see firelight again, but it was

mostly shielded from sight, glints here and there and an occasional
suffocating wall of hot smoke. She glanced off to her right and up.
“Pilgrim! Is that something flying?”
The skiff fluttered as two of Pilgrim turned to look in the direction she was
pointing. “I don’t see anything. There are some really strange noises
though.”
Since the orbiter had been revived, there had been attempts at
maintaining surveillance over the continent—including the tropical lands,
where no packs had ever explored. The problem was that the orbiter’s
optics were barely more than light sensors, with something like thousand-
meter ground resolution—much worse than Oobii’s on-approach imaging
from ten years ago. Right now, their agrav skiff should be overflying the
mouth of the River Fell. That was the location of the densest settlements
—both in Oobii’s imagery and maritime legend.
The mystery light was gone, but now she realized that, flickering and very
faint, there was a constellation of lights on her left. It was something huge
and motionless, its shape lost in the steady rain.
“We’re at four hundred meters, right on track for our swampy overnight
hideaway. Hei, did I tell you how I—or something almost-I—spent a
tenday there a couple hundred years ago? It’s the closest I ever got to
the Choir.” He was silent again, listening. “The mob noise has faded. I’ll
bet the swamp has spread further inland than we thought. We could
probably land right here.”
“But don’t, okay?” said Johanna.
“Heh, okay. But tomorrow is going to be fun. Even if Tycoon hasn’t been
messing around here, there is so much I’ve been dying to see for years
and years—”
There was a loud noise. The skiff did a somersault and headed
groundward.
“Pilgrim!”
“Not my fault!” the fivesome shouted back, obviously struggling with the

controls. This was worse than anything she remembered, except for
times—like his long-ago “accidental” trip to the moon—when Pilgrim was
creating the problem himself. “Left side lift is—”
The craft flipped over and was swinging back and forth from a single
support point on the right side. That was the good and the bad thing
about agrav. The fabric could be like a lawyer, negotiating with the laws
of physics. It was even possible that now they had more lift than before.
Or maybe not: something snapped and they were falling again. Pilgrim
scrambled around her. Two of him leaned out, jaws snapping, into the
rain. Somehow he didn’t lose anyone. A moment later he was back,
gripping taut fabric. “Here!” he said. “Don’t let go!”
She was holding the edge of the remaining agrav fabric. It wriggled in her
hands, like something alive, trying to pull free. Pilgrim grabbed the rest of
it with all his jaws. He jerked it this way and that, trying to keep them
airborne, but now without any automatic control whatsoever.
“We’re not going to make it!” he shouted. But they weren’t really falling
anymore, just going down much faster than was healthy.
Something whacked them from the right, then the left and the right …
down to a stunning impact from below. Maybe she blacked out. She
remembered Pilgrim’s voice right by her ear: “You sound alive. True?”
Oh, not a memory after all. “Yes,” she finally replied.
“Ha. Another perfect landing.”
“Are you okay, Pilgrim?”
The pack didn’t answer instantly. Members could take more bouncing
around than adult humans, but a whole pack had more opportunity for
individual bad luck. “Mostly,” he finally answered. “I think my Llr banged a
foreleg.” Another hesitation. “Never mind that. We are safely down and
well away from Choir sound.”
“But we didn’t make it to the swamps.”
“True.” He chuckled. “Even you could probably hear the difference.
We’ve come down between rocky obstacles. We gotta get out and look

around.” Some of him was already on the ground outside.
“Yeah.” Something was still holding her down. She thought muzzily for a
second. Oh. She unclipped her restraints and crawled out into the rain.
Pilgrim was right, they’d come down on something hard. Her hands felt
around. There were shallow puddles, no mud. This might have been
glacier-scoured rock or—her fingers found regular cracks—or flagstones.
She stood up, the blood-warm rain soaking her.
She felt the pack clustering close around her shins. Pilgrim’s big one,
Scarbutt, leaned comfortingly against her.
“Let’s see what’s left of the skiff.” A light came on, faintly silhouetting one
of Pilgrim’s heads. The lamp was turned down and he held it in his jaws
so the gleam was in one direction. Pilgrim swept the glow across the skiff
while two of him nosed around in the wreckage, doubtless probing with
sound. “Oh my,” he said, “flying this will be a challenge.”
The skiff had never been a beautiful thing, and over the years, Pilgrim’s
repairs had made it motley. But now, the hull itself was cracked. The
remaining agrav fabric strained upwards in ragged shreds.
Pilgrim abruptly doused his light. “I hear packs talking.” His voice was a
focused whisper in her ear. She felt him press the light into her hand.
“Use it just bright enough for your eyes.”
Johanna nodded. She made the light violet and so dim that she could
barely see the ground below it. It should be invisible to whatever packs
were out there. All of Pilgrim except Scar had crawled back into the skiff
and was bringing out the emergency supply panniers. They had lived off
that gear for tendays in the past.
Pilgrim’s voice again: “I think the packs I hear are searching for us. We
must have made quite a racket coming down.”
Johanna replied with a nearly subvocal whisper. Scar, with his head at
the level of her waist, would pick it up fine. “Are these normal packs?”
“Yes, indeedy. We should be in the middle of mindless Choir chaos, but
what I’m hearing is East Coast Interpack.” So even if they discovered

nothing more, they had answered the big question behind this trip. Now
the problem was how to get the news back to Ravna and Woodcarver. It
might be nice to survive the mission, too.
“You have the commset?” she asked.
“Got it.” Pilgrim was urging her along, away from the crash site. Her pale
violet light hinted that they were walking between high walls of stone.
Walls of brick actually, with nice right angles and waterfalls every few
meters. This was an alley, and somewhere above them were roofs with
rainspouts.
“The end of this path is open—and there are no voices beyond that.
There are some real advantages to this situation, you know.”
Pilgrim was jollying her along. He did that when things were … tense.
Well, he had a couple of centuries of fairly successful survival
experience. She played along: “You mean because we’re still breathing?”
“That, and I’m still thinking. No Choir-driven mental destruction. If we can
find a hiding place, we can operate almost like on our other trips. Except
for the flying, I mean.”
“Yeah, okay. And we can report back.”
“Right. This may be the best possible place to go snooping. We may
actually be able to learn if these guys are manipulating your boyfriend.”
“He’s not my boyfriend!” she almost said that in full voice.
“Whatever,” said Pilgrim. “In any case—” The voice in her ear hesitated.
“Wait up a second.”
Johanna swung her lamp around. Llr had fallen behind. The member had
a clear limp and her pannier had slipped partway off her back. Johanna
reached down and unclipped the pannier.
“Thanks—”
But Jo wasn’t done. She slipped her hands behind Llr’s forelegs and
raised the creature into her own arms.
“Hei wait!” said Pilgrim. “I don’t need that much help.”

Johanna didn’t reply, just proceeded along with the pannier slung over
her shoulder and Llr struggling in her arms like a big, fussy baby. After a
moment, she heard Pilgrim give a resigned sigh. Llr relaxed in her arms,
then reached up and nipped Johanna’s ear—but only with the soft tips of
her mouth.
They followed the alley for another thirty meters, moving at a better pace
than before. That was good, since now even Johanna could hear
Interpack gobbling somewhere behind them. Pilgrim said there was also
a “spiky hissing” noise, probably not part of their speech. Directly ahead
something hulked a little brighter than the violet backglow of the rain. A
stone wall.
“I thought you said this end of the alley was open?” said Johanna.
“There’s a turn,” came Pilgrim’s whisper, “to the right.”
Now Johanna could hear the strange noise Pilgrim had reported.
Something bright lit up behind them. “Come on!” she said to Pilgrim. They
ran for the end of the alley. Just as they made the turn, the noise
sharpened and a brilliant light shone through the veil of rain, lighting up
the walls behind them.
They had escaped the light, but—there was a chord that meant “After
them!” and she heard the clatter of metal tines.
Johanna and Pilgrim kept running, with Llr passing Jo directions about
which way to go.
High ahead of her, she saw occasional flashes of light as the pursuers
swept their hissing spotlight back and forth. It must be some kind of
electric arc. Scrupilo had wanted to make such things, till Ravna found a
low-power design that was actually easier to make. Such arcs were
bright, surely bright enough for Tines—if they pointed them accurately
and didn’t blind themselves.
Pilgrim was leading her in a flat run along a stone way just a little higher
than the puddles. By the light reflected from the enemy’s crazy arc lamp,
she glimpsed brickwork and half-timbered walls—very much like northern
buildings except for the mossy fungus that grew all over them. Maybe the

northern style didn’t last long here. They ducked behind wooden sheds,
out of sight of the probing light.
Jo felt Llr’s claws tighten, cautioning. Slow down. Now that they couldn’t
be spotted, it was best to be as quiet as possible.
“But we need to get further away,” said Johanna.
Pilgrim’s Llr gave her a little pat on the shoulder, agreeing. But now their
progress consisted of the pack moving a meter or two, testing for things
that might cause noise, then signalling Jo how to bring herself and Llr
forward. Behind them, the noise of the chase was slightly diminished. It
sounded like several packs were pacing around, talking quietly to one
another, almost as though they were embarrassed by all the noise they
had made.
Meter by meter, Pilgrim edged away from the Easterners. Then light
flared on a wall ahead of them, right where they would be in another
minute or so. The light swept away, came back briefly a second later,
then was gone again.
Johanna sat on the stone way, putting some of Llr’s weight on her knees.
“Maybe we should just hide here for a while.”
She only mouthed the words, but that was enough sound for Pilgrim. He
shook a head or two, then said: “See how tumbled down everything is in
that direction?” Some of the structures were barely more than mounds of
rotting timber. “I can hear Choir noise ahead. We seem to be moving out
of whatever safety zone is protecting these East Coast bozos. Maybe we
can go far enough to lose them, but not so far that the Choir destroys my
mind.”
“Okay.” What else could she say?
Pilgrim’s Scar had crawled forward, edging his snout out to look at their
pursuers. He froze, and Jo felt Llr tense. “Heh. You gotta see this, Jo.”
She set Llr down and crawled out behind Scar, all but hugging the slimy
stone. She saw four packs about fifty meters away. One of them
managed the electric arc light. It was a miracle that the contraption had

not electrocuted anybody. The pack was swinging the arc around. Jo got
a good view of the others. Two of the packs bristled with strange-looking
pikes, all pointed at the ground. Huh! Those looked like miniature
cannons, though nothing like Nevil’s design. A numerous pack stood in a
commanding posture in the middle of all this. Its speech was almost
inaudible, but clipped and demanding. What was so familiar about that
one? Can it be?… The arc light swept carelessly across the packs. The
leader was wearing lightweight cloaks, barely more than pockets on
harnesses. One member was turned so she could see its complete right
side, the white streak that extended from haunch to snout.
Ten years ago, that one’s teeth had hissed along Jo’s throat, while
another poked a knife into her side, and its pack gloated at the prospect
of torturing her to death.
Pilgrim must have noticed the recognition startle through her. His secret
voice said. “That looks like Vendacious, doesn’t it?”
Johanna nodded. She had absolutely no doubt. So it really was
Vendacious, pulling the strings. Whose strings exactly?
Pilgrim gave her a tap on the shoulder. “They’re dazzled. Let’s sneak
across.” He pointed at the gap in the timbers ahead.
It might not have worked with human pursuers, but the light was turned
away from Jo and Pilgrim, and the Tines probably were bedazzled.
Vendacious seemed to be complaining about something, maybe that very
abuse of the arc light.
Jo slithered across the flagstones. Pilgrim was all around her. He was
probably generating sound-damping noise; Pilgrim was more clever than
most packs at such synthesis. In a matter of seconds they were out of
eyeshot of the searchers. “Quiet and slow,” said Pilgrim. Quietly, slowly,
they crawled forward. Llr had no trouble keeping up. The buildings
around them were still of the northern style, but the wood was rotted and
buckled. In the pale violet light of her handlamp, she could see that some
timbers were almost consumed by mossy fungus. Now the water carried
a miasma of smells: food, sewage, rot, the body odor of myriad Tines.

Was it her imagination or was that chanting ahead?
Pilgrim seemed to sense her unease.
“You can hear something, too,” he said. “They’re making noise all the
way down.”
“How can you stand it?”
“The rain and mist is damping mindsound to almost nothing, but we’re
moving toward something … enormous.” Johanna had seen Pilgrim react
to a starship coming down from the sky. Even that he had taken on with
enthusiastic curiosity, but tonight there might be fear in his words. Then
he urged her forward and seemed to recover some of his usual spirit: “I
can get a lot closer. Closer, I bet, than Vendacious and company can
come.”
In fact, their pursuers seemed to have lost them. Johanna saw an
occasional flash from the arc light but that was way to her left. She also
heard quiet conversations, but those seemed to be on the right. The
searchers were moving forward, but not straight toward her and Pilgrim.
Were they scared of triggering a response from the Choir? Maybe the
biggest mystery was how Vendacious and his pals could survive in this
environment at all. What kept the Choir from sweeping across this area
and destroying all coherent packs?
Jo swept her violet light across the rubble ahead. This wasn’t the decay
of Northern-style buildings. The soaking mess looked like garbage,
organized here and there into structures that might have been nests. She
had seen a weasel nest once, briefly, when its inhabitants were trying to
kill her. “Weasels” were about the size and appearance of gerbils. She
quailed at the thought of what such monsters would be like if they were
as big as Tines.
She angled her light upwards. The violet drowned in the falling rain,
showing nothing but misty backglow beyond a few meters. Right at the
limit of her vision, there was something—it looked almost like a long, low
spider web.
It was a fence! The “spider threads” were cords hung between wooden

posts. Vertical strands dropped from the top cord to tie to each of the
cords below. How could this stop anything? Were the cords poisoned?
As they got closer, Johanna could see how frayed and ripped the network
was, especially near the ground, where it was clear that critters at least
the size of small Tines had broken through.
Pilgrim tugged at her sleeves, drawing her down to the ground. A
moment later, the arc light swept along the fence.
“Sorry,” she said softly. Then, “Are you okay?”
“Yeah. Let’s see if Vendacious and company dare follow us beyond that
fence.”
The ground immediately beyond the fence was flat and open. Even if
Vendacious wouldn’t chase them, he could still see—and shoot—them.
At the limit of her vision she saw piles of … something, maybe the true
form of Tropical buildings. The thrum of Choir voices murmured loudly
and yet she saw no Tines.
She and Pilgrim reached the fence. The cords were just woven plant
fiber. Tearing a hole would be easy. They crawled along the fence line.…
Their pursuers had spread out. They must know that Pilgrim and Jo were
at the fence, even if they didn’t know precisely where.
“They’re going to find us,” she whispered.
“Yeah, yeah,” was all Pilgrim said. He was still searching for the perfect
breakthrough point. At least here, the open area beyond the fence was
not as wide as before. They skulked another three meters. Abruptly,
Pilgrim jabbed a snout upwards, pointing. A sign medallion hung from the
top fence rope. The patterned ceramic disks were a style of
announcement that dated from long before the humans landed. Day or
night, a pack would hear the echoes from it. By the pale light of her
handlamp, Johanna could see the design that was painted on the
surface: the death symbol, a pentagram of skulls. Someone thought it
was a really bad idea to go beyond this fence.

•  •  •
“And I don’t want any shooting.” Vendacious glared around at his
trigger-happy minions. “We’re not in my territory anymore.”
The crowd of packs straightened and looked properly obedient. They
might be trigger happy, but they weren’t crazy enough to cross him.
Normally, these fellows patrolled the west side of the Reservation,
making sure that no one crossed the boundary. Of course, no pack would
voluntarily walk off the Reservation, but there was a constant dribble of
Tropicals coming in. The creatures were dumb singletons. That was the
thing about the Choir: it wasn’t a proper tyranny. Its behavior was
describable only in the mean. There was always a tiny fraction of outliers
who were confused enough or ornery enough do almost anything.
Guards like these working for him tonight were supposed to pick up such
and take them to the convocation bourse. That was a pain. It was much
easier just to shoot disobedient intruders. On the far side of the
Reservation, that was easy to do. It was good sport, Vendacious thought.
On this side, such shooting would be heard by Tycoon people who would
loyally report the behavior, raising all sort of problems for Vendacious.
Tonight of all nights, thought Vendacious, I don’t want Tycoon’s guns out
here, nosing around.
Having made his point, Vendacious eased off on the homicidal glare. He
wanted his people to be at the top of their form this evening. “The two I
want are somewhere between us and the fence. Don’t worry about
exactly where. Push forward along a broad front. Eventually we’ll flush
them out.” Two of the gunpacks broke into uneasy smiles. They had been
on similar outings before. Killing dumb singletons was one thing. Forcing
a thinking pack into Choir territory was a different matter entirely. “Go
quietly. Listen for my signals.” They would have to stay quiet till the next
density of the Choir swept through. When that happened, they could
probably make as much noise as they wanted.
Vendacious watched as the packs spread out in a ragged skirmish line

and started toward the fence. The lamp manager stayed somewhat back,
sweeping its light toward likely shapes and sounds.
Vendacious followed his people forward, unlimbering his own small rifle
as he did so. At the same time, he reached into one of his pockets and
unmuted the commset hidden there, but at such a low volume that even
he could scarcely hear it.
He complained into his pocket: “They didn’t come down where you said.”
And they survived the crash.
There was the half-second delay and then Nevil’s voice came back. As
usual, the human was full of cocky rejoinders: “You’re just lucky I noticed
them sneaking down your way. You’re even more lucky I’d prepped their
aircraft. I crashed them right where you said.”
Vendacious didn’t reply immediately. He found that silence often
provoked Nevil Storherte into informative elaboration. And after a
moment Nevil came up with something interesting: “You know the, um,
targets took a commset with them when they escaped from the skiff.”
What! Can they hear us talking then? Vendacious stifled the question. He
had come to know that the starfolks’ “commsets” were nothing like radio
cloaks. Unless Nevil reprogrammed the devices, each would have a
separate “channel” through his orbital relay. So aloud, he just said,
“That’s interesting. I assume you’re blocking their calls.”
“Of course, though at the moment they’re just carrying the device. The
interesting fact is that I can tell you where they are.”
Vendacious’ current plans depended on two incredibly powerful,
incredibly infuriating tools. One was Nevil Storherte. I’m so glad Nevil is
far away. I don’t think I could keep from killing him otherwise.
Nevertheless, Vendacious was pleased at his own mild response: “And
where is that?”
“Thirty-one meters from you—your commset—on a bearing of forty-seven
degrees.” You could hear the smirk in the two-legs’ techno-speak. Nevil
was supposedly a master of guile, but that was with other humans. His
contempt for Tines was strong and obvious.

Fortunately, Vendacious had spent much of the last ten years learning
everything he could about humans and the Beyond. There was vast
power in their knowledge, even though the religious nuttery sometimes
made it hard to tell what was real. In any case, Vendacious could reason
with numbers better than any unaided “Child of the Sky.” He looked out at
where the Reservation fence stood in his spotlight. Johanna and Pilgrim
would be at the fence now, near the right end of his searchers. He
squeaked pointedly at the various packs, shifting them to converge on
the pile of rubble where his quarry must be hiding.
Tonight should still be a major triumph, but it had turned out riskier than
the original plan. He’d expected to find his two greatest enemies crushed
and dead in their aircraft. Instead he was skulking through the dark after
them, hoping that neither his light nor his noise would attract Tycoon’s
interest. And yet, there was a thoroughly delicious side to this. At this
very moment, Pilgrim and Johanna were squeezed up against the fence.
To cross that fence would mean certain death, torn apart physically or
mentally or both. But if they stayed where they were, Johanna would be
back in his claws. This time she would not be rescued by Pilgrim’s clever,
humiliating lies, for Pilgrim himself would be just as helpless as the
human. Either way, I win.
Vendacious maneuvered himself closer to his searchers. Normally he
loathed every second here in the Tropics, even more when he had to
work in the filthy outdoors. Tonight … tonight he was truly enjoying
himself.
•  •  •
“I think they know where we are,” said Pilgrim.
Johanna nodded. Even though he was looking into the spaces beyond
the fence, she knew he was talking about their pursuers. Looking over
her shoulder, she could see occasional members of the searcher packs.

They seemed closer, and now the search light was spending most of its
time centered almost exactly over her head. The light glittered off the
death-heads medallion. “Most of them are on the side we came from.
Maybe we could sneak back the other way … flank them.” It was a forlorn
suggestion.
“No,” said Pilgrim. “You know, you might not have any trouble with the
Choir, mindless as you are.” That was a bit of Pilgrim humor. Johanna
doubted the serious point behind his statement. There were stories about
what happened to animals in the Tropical cities. Everything here was
consumed, in mind or flesh.
Nevertheless she tried to match him. “You might be okay, too, near
mindless as you are.” He didn’t reply, and after a moment Johanna was
reduced to miserable reality. “I can’t see looking for mercy from
Vendacious.” He will never get his claws on me again.
“Me neither.” Pilgrim’s voice was no longer bantering, but it didn’t have
the miserable tone that Johanna had heard in her own. But then Pilgrim
was a pilgrim and such as he bragged about their fearlessness. “You
know,” the pack continued, “all my life, even back to the myths of earlier
me’s, the stories about the Tropics have been the same, that the place is
deadly to mind, that you only go there if you want to dissolve in joy. But
look at what we’re not seeing.” He pointed a snout into the rain that
glittered in Vendacious’ spotlight. “Scarcely a single Tropical member.
We hear chanting, but this rain and this humidity damps the real sounds
of thought down to nothing. Look at how hunched together each of
Vendacious’ packs are. I’ll bet this rain is having even more effect on the
Choir, and the chanting we hear is the Choir cooped up, out of the wet! I
could probably run right across this street and find us a hidey-hole on the
other side.”
“If you don’t get shot by Vendacious’ goons—”
“Piffle.” Pilgrim waved dismissively. Johanna guessed that Wicky didn’t
believe any of what he was saying, and was dying to get her out of
harm’s way. On the other hand, his voice had that intrigued, calculating
tone he used when he was planning something over-the-top. “Honestly,

Johanna, this doesn’t look as crazy as when Scriber and I rescued you
on Murder Meadows. And … I’ve always wondered what the Choir was
like. Imagine getting in, and returning alive.” His Scarbutt member was
pulling at a tear in the fence, making it large enough so the pack could
sprint through.
“Oh, Pilgrim!” Her whisper was loud enough that even she could hear it.
Not that that really mattered any more. She reached out, trying to hold
him back. This was way too much like being a little orphan girl again.
“Hei, don’t worry. We’ve gotten through worse.” He wriggled loose from
her, but did not immediately rush off. Maybe he was waiting for the arc
light to drift away from their part of the fence. “Use your invisible light. Try
to see where I end up on the other side. I’ll find some place safe, and
wave.”
“Okay.” She gave him a pat. Wicky was right, even if he was blowing
smoke. She pulled the commset and other gear close and then shone her
violet light out into the space beyond the fence.
A moment passed. The glare of the arc light shifted away, leaving
blinding afterimages. That didn’t stop Pilgrim. He sprinted out through the
widened hole in the fence. She squinted into the afterimages and—the
big light came back, shining right on the running foursome. Pilgrim zigged
and zagged. Apparently the gun packs couldn’t get a bead on him, for no
one fired.
The chanting of the Choir was growing. Hopefully, the mind sounds were
still attenuated by the wetness, but what Johanna could hear sounded
like a mob at close quarters. An ambush on top of Vendacious’ ambush?
She swung her pale light to the right. There was a trickle of shapes in the
rainglow. They were moving past her position, in the general direction of
Pilgrim. The trickle became a crowd, a mob, members shoulder to
shoulder as she had never seen before among the Tines.
Pilgrim turned, was running away, but all along the far edge of the open
space, Tropicals were pushing into the open. They weren’t running. The
Tines strolled along almost parallel to the fence. Their numbers grew.

Somehow Pilgrim Wickllrrackscar kept his mind. He was running all
together, but Llr’s limp kept him from full speed. It didn’t matter. The
Tropicals were a mob now, sweeping along the fence like the edge of
some giant scissor blade, the cutting point of contact moving faster than
any pack could run. Rac fell to slashing claws. The last Jo saw of Pilgrim
was little Llr’s body tossed into the air, like a tidbit for some vast
carnivore.
“Pilgrim!” Maybe she screamed the name aloud.
Pilgrim was gone, but the mob did not overrun the fence. As a whole,
they were sweeping parallel to the barrier. Avoidance wasn’t perfect; the
crowd was too jammed together for that. Here and there, Tropical
members were rammed through the barrier. Most of them wriggled back;
some wandered aimlessly further inward.
The Choir racket was a roar, even to her ears. The higher frequencies
would be tearing at Vendacious’ goons, but when she looked behind her:
There was a pack with guns on one side. The arc light lit the rain on the
other.
A human-sounding voice spoke conversationally. “Run, Johanna, run.
Into the Choir. I want to see this.” Vendacious.
It seemed like good advice, even considering the source. Johanna tore
through the fence and ran into the Choir.
•  •  •
Well damn! So much for reverse psychology. The two-legs was
running. Without thinking, Vendacious whipped up his rifle and aimed at
her back. At the same time he was shouting to his troops “Don’t shoot!”
His lips tightened on the trigger just as sense finally percolated all the
way through him. There was a reason why he had threatened the others
with death if they started shooting on this side of the Reservation. The

work of eight years would be in jeopardy … but oh, I could figure out a lie
to cover it; Tycoon believes so many bigger lies. He stifled the thought.
He had taken enough chances tonight. He must be content to enjoy this
from a distance.
It was her good fortune that Johanna Olsndot had sprinted through the
fence just as the passing mob became slightly thinner. She made it
twenty feet into Choir territory, forty feet. Now the mob came thick again,
the mindsounds even louder than when they had destroyed Pilgrim.
Vendacious and his comrades hugged the ground, each pack holding all
its own heads together. If not for the rain, some of them might have been
destroyed, even on this side of the Reservation boundary.
Somehow Vendacious managed to keep some eyes and ears tracking
the fleeing human. The mindsounds wouldn’t stop the mantis, but now
she was battered by dozens of Tines, the brute force of the Choir. She
was knocked to her knees, and now some of the members had wakened
to her otherness and the biting began. Joy spread through every one of
Vendacious’ own members. Oh, how long he had waited for this. And he
knew just what to expect, thanks to his special diligence. He’d always
wondered what the Choir would make of humans, since mental
destruction would be impossible. So when one of the first humans he had
kidnapped ceased to be useful, he’d arranged that it would “escape” from
the Reservation. Just as now, there had been an initial hesitation. And
then just as it did with non-Tinish animals of all sizes, the Choir had torn
the creature apart, playing with the parts much as they seemed to play
with the parts of dismembered packs. But unlike member sacrifices, the
Choir valued animal intruders only for their food value. The hapless two-
legs had served the eaters well—and served Vendacious far better than it
had as a prisoner.
Now he watched as the same pattern played out. Johanna was back on
her feet. The noise was so great he couldn’t hear her breath, the
whimpering, but the arc light showed blood streaming down one side of
her face. She staggered away from the fence, swinging her gear at the
mob and shouting, as if she thought the flow would go around her. She

got another ten feet, almost to the burrows that edged this side of the
Reservation. He knew from observation that there would be no salvation
there. Jaws waited. She fell again, and this time didn’t get up. The mob
piled upon her, a wave on a lump of flesh. He saw bits and pieces
bobbing to the surface, mostly the equipment she’d been carrying.
It took fifteen minutes before the density passed into full rarefaction, an
unusually long time. The feeding clump boiled in the arc light, eventually
rolling what was left into the burrows. As the mob swept out of the area,
there was only the rain and humidity to keep him from hearing the
outcome. And even the rain had diminished. He could hear no one
moving around in the wreckage. Listening very carefully … no, there was
not even the sound of human breathing, just the moaning respiration of a
thousand mindless Tines.
“So what happened?” That was Nevil’s voice, from Vendacious’
commset. There was ill-concealed uneasiness in his voice.
Vendacious didn’t answer immediately. He stared out at the piles of
soaked, stinking garbage. Somewhere under all that, just fifty feet beyond
the fence, lay the corpse of the creature that had ruined his past life and
threatened his future. Fifty feet. So near, and yet he could not safely
cross that distance to crunch the marrow with his own jaws. He looked
slyly at his loyal troops. It would take the threat of painful death to force
them across. After watching the Choir, no normal pack could believe the
stories about the Choir’s endless joy. The chances of coming back from a
fifty-foot sortie—even during a rarefaction—were close to zero. Besides,
Vendacious operated this close to the House of Tycoon only when there
was the deadliest necessity.
Vendacious thought a moment and realized there was something more
he could do. He spoke into his commset, replying to his own pet human:
“Where is Johanna’s commset?” Is it still functioning at all?
“It’s been stuck about twenty meters from you ever since she started
screaming. There’s no motion now. I—I could try to flush her out for you.”
“Yes.” Let’s be sure.

There was silence from Vendacious’ commset, and then Nevil’s voice
came from across the open area. Nevil seemed to be whispering, but the
volume was easily loud enough to hear. “Sst. Johanna? Are you okay?
Telemetry showed a problem with the skiff. Johanna?” This went on for
several seconds. Vendacious thought it was quite artfully plaintive.
Considering all the other evidence, it was wasted effort, but Vendacious
admired the craft.

Chapter   19
The second time she went down, Johanna knew she would not be
getting up. The first bites had been tasting nibbles. She’d seen that
behavior in the members of coherent packs—just before they went into a
feeding frenzy with unusual meat. Now her face and arms were slick with
blood. Swinging her equipment as a flail only seemed to excite the mob.
They butted her behind her knees in a coordinated way that sent her
down again. She covered her face with her arms and rolled onto her
front, leaving her knapsack covering part of her body. Paws and jaws
rolled her over, again and again. They were tearing at her clothes, pulling
her gear out of the knapsack.
And yet, the feeding frenzy never came, though the crowd was a
crushing mass upon her. It was almost as if they were battling each other
just to get a snout down and take a nibble. She tried to keep an airgap
between her face and forearm as she wriggled in the direction she
guessed would take her out of sight of Vendacious and company. The
crushing weight seemed to ease; the nips and jabs were distant pain, like
memories.
Huh? She was lying flat on her back, dizzy even so. Everything was dark.
She wiggled her hands and felt about her. There was the commset and
what was left of her knapsack. The ground was like slick mucous.
Nowhere did she touch Tinish fur or skin. Somehow, suddenly, she
seemed to be alone. Or maybe she had died. Okay. So what’s my next
move?
“Sst. Johanna? Are you okay? Telemetry showed a problem with the
skiff. Johanna?” It was Nevil’s voice, a loud whisper.
She reached for the commset—then froze and tried to be very very quiet.
There are betrayals and Betrayals. Until this moment, her worst suspicion

was that Nevil had been used by Vendacious. Until this moment, she had
not believed that Nevil was capable of Betrayal. She stared into the dark,
in the direction of the commset. I don’t have proof even now … only
certainty.
•  •  •
Nevil’s voice came back on Vendacious’ commset. “No reply,” said the
two-legs. “What about Pilgrim?”
“Both Pilgrim and the maggot are very dead,” Vendacious replied. In fact,
there might still be one or two members of Pilgrim alive, but past
experience showed that such did not come back.
Nevil was silent for a moment, and then he sighed. “Well, that simplifies
things, at least.”
Vendacious smiled to himself. Though they had rarely met, Vendacious
had studied Nevil Storherte thoroughly. Storherte was a young predator.
Until recently he had never killed anything. The creature thought he was
moved by virtuous necessity. He was still growing into his true nature.
Aloud, Vendacious said. “Indeed, it does simplify things.” All revenge
aside, my most dangerous lie is now much more secure. “And now it
should be possible to deal with our other great enemy.”
“Yeah. I’m going to enjoy giving you Ravna Bergsndot.”
•  •  •
Johanna lay still for some minutes, but Nevil had nothing more to say.
All things considered, playing dead was easy. The mob had departed, but

their warbling chant was still out there. Maybe that was enough to keep
Vendacious’ crew from searching for her corpse. The rain continued its
windless heavy fall. Water dripped through the pile above her; what
trickled down to her felt oily.
After a time, the Choir noise grew loud again. She could hear ten
thousand paws scuffing in her direction. She could hear individual voices
that made no sense, but just added to the grand susurrus. Now there
were members snuffling all around, so close that their mindsounds, even
though far kilohertz above human hearing, still made a buzzing through
her body. They crowded over her, much as before, snouts pushing, but
this time there were no painful bites, just gentle mouthing with soft
forelips. The smells and sounds were overpowering, but after a moment,
the swarm was flowing past her and almost no one was touching her.
Okay, so she was not to be eaten. And the mob’s noise would be ideal
cover, if only they would let her move. Johanna thought a moment, made
sure she was taking nothing with her that might betray her to Nevil. My
Knife? For sure. My light? She took a chance, kept that too. Then she
rolled to her knees, tucked her head down, and crawled deliberately
against the flow of the Choir, testing.
The mob was a tide of plush and flesh—but the Tines who rammed into
her weren’t biting. In fact, they seemed to be struggling to get out of her
way. It was the pressure of the myriad bodies behind them that made that
impossible. Then suddenly, as if some traffic information had been
transmitted upstream, the pressure eased and the mob slid around her.
Johanna crawled slowly through the roaring, warbling flow. She held the
lamp in her mouth, the faint violet light splashing over the mob. The
corridor’s beslimed walls turned this way and that. In places there were
forks or merges. Tines were coming from all but the lowest openings—
maybe those were under water tonight. Johanna found that when she
came to a fork, there were moments when the crowd was impassable,
and then they would spread apart for her once more.
She must have spent an hour in the soggy catacombs. When she finally
emerged, the rain had become drizzle and mist. Behind her, she could

see lights, faint in the murk. She stared at them for a moment, noting the
flickering, the occasional dark curling shadows that must be smoke. She
was seeing torches in sconces. When the drizzle faltered she could see
the straight edges of stone-and-timber walls, standard architecture from
northern lands. Vendacious’ landholding. The rest of the horizon was the
unrelieved moaning darkness of the Choir.
She limped quietly away from Vendacious’ lights, into the dark of the
Choir. Oh Pilgrim!
Johanna wandered numbly for a time, vaguely aware of her slowly
bleeding wounds, mostly remembering Pilgrim’s dying. Her violet lamp
was just bright enough to see her feet, to keep from walking into walls or
water-filled pits. She’d kept the lamp so dim because some Tines could
sense that violet color, if only as a nebulous patch at the edge of their
vision. That fact had gotten her and Pilgrim into trouble on one mission to
East Home. It really didn’t matter anymore; she brightened the lamp, saw
a few Tropicals ambling along their separate ways. None showed much
interest in her. If anything, they were avoiding her. Where she was
walking was almost like the middle of a city street. A city conceived in a
mad and contradictory delirium, rebuilt and rebuilt on its own muddy
ruins.
She proceeded along the gently descending street. In some places, the
surface was rain-slick fungimoss over stone; in others, it looked like
matted leaves. Where would downwards lead?
Silly question, when there was nothing more to lose.
And yet, just as she continued to walk, Johanna continued to think. Why
am I still alive? Vendacious had seemed in mortal fear of crossing into
Choir territory. He seemed to think the Choir would destroy Johanna as
surely as it had Pilgrim. Vendacious was not stupid. He must have had
precedent and observation to back up his belief.
On her left, the Choir noise was increasing. The simple solution to the
mystery was that her survival was to be very temporary. The mob was
thickening, oozing out from the vague walls. Their progress was the

same slanting, scissors advance that had caught Pilgrim. There was a
narrow cleft on the right, ahead. Maybe she should try to hide there.
Too late. The crowd was already upon her. But its touch was only
occasional, and as she slowly walked onward, her private space moved
with her. She still had no explanation for her survival, but it was clear that
after the initial attack, something about her had been discovered, and
communicated outwards from that contact.
After a time, the mob passed, and again she was almost alone on the
street.
The lights of Vendacious’ “safe” area were lost behind the muddle of the
Choir’s city. Johanna continued downslope, plans beginning to poke at
her despair. If she could survive, could somehow tell Ravna and
Woodcarver … This path would eventually lead to the River Fell. The
maps had shown it flowing south, just west of the agrav’s ground path.
Around her feet, the mud was ankle deep. As she continued into the
swampy mess, she heard creaking sounds. They were noises that Tines
could make easily enough, but … the buildings were moving. It was a
gentle, repetitive motion, up and down just a centimeter or two. She went
to the side of the street, and put her hand against the sodden mass of a
wall. Yes, up and down, but with small horizontal motions too. She
walked along the wall, still touching it. She crossed some irregularity in
the street surface—and now the street had joined in the same mild
motion. If she hadn’t had the wall to lean against, the surprise would have
sent her sprawling.
The edge of the street was floating in the River Fell.
Though she couldn’t quite tell where rooted buildings gave way to floating
rafts, the sound of quietly bobbing real estate grew louder as she walked
on. Her street was more than a sandbar and less than a pier, and it
extended into the slowly flowing Fell. In places, her light reflected off
dark, rippling water. Whatever had been moored there had sailed away
or simply broken off. In other places, the buildings were canted, piled two
or three deep, perhaps the careless result of incoming rafts running onto

occupied frontage. After heavy rains or a typhoon, all this might be swept
away and even this roadway destroyed.
Tonight she had seen thousands of the Choir, but not a single froghen,
not a single edible plant. However inefficiently, cargo must move into and
out of here. The road ahead narrowed, but the rafts were larger. A crazy
idea floated up; she knew where some of these rafts voyaged.
She walked onward, occasionally sending a violet light behind her,
watching for the mob she heard coming. Ahead of her was a dead end:
the tip of a peninsula. She could hear the Fell sweeping along like slow
syrup. Her light gave a clear view of “buildings” festooned with rigging
and jagged masts. Here and there, Tinish heads popped up from the
jumble. A half dozen came off the rafts, running toward her, hissing
displeasure. They circled close, nipping at her legs.
Meantime the main mob had returned from up the street. Okay, now she
was truly trapped. But as these hundreds arrived, surrounding her, the
Tines who had been hissing and nipping gave her space, merging with
the rest. The crowd jostled and swirled, the space around Johanna
disappearing as the hundreds behind came flowing into this bounded
area. She heard splashing sounds that must be the occasional
Choirmember squeezed off into the river.
The open space around Johanna was gone. Tines pressed upon her
from all sides, even as they resisted the force behind them. Then, almost
like a spring bouncing back, there was an easing of pressure and space
opened up.
And yet, this wave of the mob did not ebb—perhaps because there was
only one obvious way out. She watched the creatures mill around her.
Their gaze seemed mutely curious, as if they were waiting for some
insight.
Me too, thought Jo.
Around her, the empty spaces widened. The critters drew together in little
clumps and clots. From their posture, they looked almost like … packs.
An ad hoc fivesome approached her. Its members were almost naked,

though a couple carried ragged panniers. Four were balding, but they
looked healthier than the one with a full coat of fur. That fifth member
came very near Johanna. It was missing an ear, and an interrupted scar
ran across one shoulder. The scar could be evidence of an ax attack,
balked by an armored jacket.
It spoke Samnorsk: “Hei, Johanna. Some of me remembers you.”
There were less intelligible comments from the other transient packs. In
the mob beyond, Johanna saw occasional bobbing heads—singletons
who remembered the Domain and the Fragmentarium?
She looked at the masts in the moorage behind her, and then turned
back to the godsgift who had just spoken. “I think I remember some of
you, too.” The idea that had been percolating up as she walked down this
muddy path suddenly seemed quite reasonable … at least imaginable.
She adjusted her light so that it would be dimly visible to those around
her. “Do you suppose I could get a ride back to the Domain?”
•  •  •
By the time the mob finished wreaking enthusiastic havoc on the
riverfront, at least eight rafts had been pushed into the river. The
operation had not been entirely peaceful, as the small number of Tines
who’d been living in the rafts (squatters? caretakers?) were completely
taken by surprise by the sudden departure of their housing. Some of
these were chased away; others merged with the mob. As far as
Johanna could tell, nobody got seriously hurt.
She was thousands of kilometers from rescue, adrift on rafts that were
scarcely more than flotsam, crewed by accident. In cold fact, her situation
was as desperate as before she pushed off. But now remembering
Pilgrim did not jam all other thought.
The vague gray light of morning showed in the east, maybe her first and

last light on the grand landscape of the Choir. The city’s low, jumbled
silhouette still stretched across three-quarters of her horizon. A few lights
marked taller buildings in Vendacious’ safe area. She sensed something
huge and dark looming over them. It must be a cloud, but it doesn’t
move.
Her motley crews had raised sails on at least three of the rafts—though
at the moment there was scarcely a breeze and the Fell’s slow current
was steadily moving them along. They were drifting through the area
where she and Pilgrim had intended to hide. That plan would have
worked, too; there were stumpy trees and a canopy of leaves.
Johanna gave a little wave at the mystery disappearing behind her. I will
be back, Pilgrim. I promise I will find what became of you.

Chapter   20
For Ravna, time was shattered, cause and effect broken into rubble
enough for days. The smaller pieces were isolated snatches of sound
and sight and smell: Pain. A bumpy ride. Suffocating in offal-smelling
darkness. Gentle hands. Jefri’s voice, angry and loud.
Other fragments were twilight bright. In one small shard, she was
surrounded by warm, furry bodies. Amdi. He was talking to her, quiet,
urgent words. In another—maybe the same one—a pack with ragged
low-sound ears beat Amdi aside and nipped at Ravna the way a
carnivore might tease its food.
Shattered days and shattered nights. A pack sat with her in most of these
longer pieces of time. It had perfectly matched blazes on two of its
snouts. Screwfloss? The pack fed her, turned her head when she choked
on vomit, cleaned her as she soiled herself. He was not always nice.
Many times, he hurt her face with a wet cloth. And he fell into jaw-
snapping rages. “I’m just the prisoner’s asswipe!” he once said. That was
funny, but he also complained that she was delirious. “You’re repeating
what I say,” he hissed at her, a head close by her throat. “‘Prisoner’s
asswipe, prisoner’s asswipe.’ Can’t you just shut up?”
The longest pieces of time were in bright daylight. She was wrapped in
warm blankets, trussed to the top of a slowly moving wagon. When her
eyes were open, she saw variously: snowbound forest, Screwfloss
driving the wagon, Gannon Jorkenrud. Jefri, walking behind the wagon
behind hers. Jefri looked so gaunt.
There were other packs. Sometimes they paced along with her wagon,
and more than one shard began: “So. Will she die soon?” This from the
pack with the ragged ears. The creature was a sixsome, each member as
heavy as Amdi’s biggest, but more muscular-looking. Its Samnorsk was

crude, a patchwork of several human voices.
And Screwfloss replying: “Quite soon, my lord Chitiratifor. You can see
the injury to her snout. Day by day, she weakens.”
The two packs spoke softly. No human but Ravna could hear them.
“Don’t take shortcuts, Screwfloss.” Parts of the creature were looking
beyond where Ravna could see. “This must be a natural death.”
Maybe Amdi came to chat, but Ravna only remembered Screwfloss
chasing him off.
One other pack visited Screwfloss. This was a lean, small-bodied
fivesome. It spoke no Samnorsk, but it seemed to be interrogating
Screwfloss about Ravna’s upcoming death. The parts she could see up
close had pale, unfriendly eyes. There was deadly anger in its Tinish
gobbling.
Then came the longest single fragment of time. It began with another visit
from Raggedy Ears. The pack walked quietly along with the wagon for
some minutes, just watching Ravna. “She is not dead yet, Screwfloss.”
“Sigh. Quite so, my lord Chitiratifor.”
“Her breathing is different. Her eyes move. She is not weakening day by
day, like you say.” The raggedy-eared pack emitted an angry hiss.
“Humans should be easy to kill, Screwfloss!”
“But you said no shortcuts, my lord. Yes, the two-legs may survive after
all—but take a look at her crushed-in snout. She will never have more
mind than a singleton.”
“That may not be dead enough.” Chitiratifor looked away, watching
something—someone?—beyond the front wagon. Finally he said, “I’ll get
back to you, Screwfloss.” And he walked on ahead.
They rolled on for another minute or two, then Screwfloss gave her a little
jab in the back. “Getting better, are you?” he said.
Ravna didn’t reply. She remained still and lifeless throughout the rest of
the afternoon, watching all that she could without moving her head. They
were in a deep valley, and she had occasional glimpses of a white-

foaming river paralleling their course. She could hear a wagon ahead of
her. She could see a wagon behind her; it was the enclosed fodder
carrier that figured in some of her most incoherent memories. Behind the
fodder wagon walked Amdi and Jefri and Gannon. In times past, Jef and
Gannon had been—perhaps not friends—but at least fellow delinquents.
Now they scarcely spoke. When Gannon wasn’t watching him,
sometimes Jefri’s hands tightened into fists.
Sunlight had left the forest canopy. She caught glimpses of brilliant
snows on valley walls above that. This was far sunnier than … before. As
the afternoon slid toward twilight, she heard the low hooting of a Tinish
alarm. The wagons drove off the path, through the snow into the deepest
shade. Chitiratifor came racing back along the path, unlimbering
telescopes as he ran. He settled in the snow, angling the telescopes
through a break in the tree cover. The wagoneers hustled ’round to their
kherhogs and tried to quiet the animals. For several moments, everyone
was silent, watchful. The only motion was the slow rising of Chitiratifor’s
telescopes. He was tracking something, and it was coming this way.
And then, finally, Ravna heard it: the purring buzz of steam induction
engines. Scrupilo and Eyes Above 2. The airship’s sound grew over the
next minute … and then faded to silence in the minute after. Chitiratifor
set down his telescopes and started to get up. Some pack outside of
Ravna’s view emitted a preemptory hiss, and Chitiratifor dropped back to
a prone position. Everyone remained quiet for several minutes more.
Then Chitiratifor came to his feet and irritably waved for the wagoneers to
get back on the road.
As they drove into the deepening twilight, Ravna thought back over the
afternoon. She could remember it all as a continuous stream of time,
logically binding cause with effect.
It might be too late, but her life had resumed.
•  •  •

Pretending to be comatose might have been the safest plan, but Ravna
soon realized that was flatly impossible. The smell that drenched her
memories—that smell was her clothes, her self. Without Screwfloss, she
would surely have oozing sores. For all his apparent anger at her, he had
done miracles with a few damp rags and perhaps one change of clothes.
But now that she was coherent, she couldn’t go on like that. So be a
broken singleton, and hope that that is dead enough.
When they stopped for the night, she let Screwfloss set her on the
ground by the wagon. She let him rewrap her blankets. But when he
brought food and tried to tease it into her mouth, she wriggled her hands
out from the blankets, reached for the bowl. Screwfloss held back for a
moment, then he let her take the bowl. He watched her with almost
ferocious intensity as she sipped from it, but he didn’t say a word.
This evening was Ravna’s first good look at her captors. She counted at
least four packs spread out around a banked fire. Amdi and Jefri and
Gannon seemed to be doing most of the scutwork. They had their own
small campfire, whence Screwfloss had brought her food. Even in the
dim light, Jef looked as awful as she remembered. He was doing his best
not to glance in her direction. Amdi was less successful at that, but he
had more heads to account for. And Gannon? Gannon Jorkenrud did not
look like a happy camper, but he was eating heartily.
These three might not be prisoners, but they were very junior members of
the kidnap gang. Now that she had recovered her mind, Ravna had a
million theories. Jefri had betrayed her in the past … but this had to be
different. And Gannon? Another covert ally? That was much harder to
believe.
The syrup-grain didn’t quite make her sick, but now … Ravna struggled
to get her feet under her. “Gotta go,” she said to Screwfloss. The pack
hesitated, but this time very briefly. Then he brought over Jo’s old boots
and helped her put them on. As she stood up and he chivvied her into the
bushes, she heard Gannon laugh.
It wasn’t hard to act like a brain-damaged singleton. Even her staggering

progress would have been impossible without Screwfloss’ support. When
they finally stopped, she collapsed into a squat. Screwfloss steadied her
for a moment, then all of him stepped back. It might be too dark for any
pack to see, but Ravna noticed a wave of palpable joy spread across
Screwfloss. He was no longer the prisoner’s asswipe. And maybe his joy
was for more than that:
“You’ve finally got your mind back, haven’t you?” Screwfloss’ voice was
the faintest whisper, seeming to come from inside her ears. It was the
sort of focused audio that a coordinated pack could do. Ravna made a
nondescript affirmative noise. “Good,” continued Screwfloss’ whisper.
“The less mouth talk you make, the better … we have a lot to catch up
on.” But then he said nothing more.
As they lurched back to camp, Ravna noticed that Screwfloss had a small
limp of his own. He was the pack who had chased her out of her house,
the one whose leg she had smashed.
She was aware of numerous heads watching as Screwfloss settled her
down by their wagon. After a moment, the second-scariest kidnapper
came over and waved Screwfloss away. This was the lean, pale-eyed
pack. It poked around at her, talking Samnorsk that mainly showed it had
no real understanding of human language. Ravna moaned and swayed
and hoped she looked mindless. After several minutes of this, the
fivesome stood back. It seemed as irritated by her progress as Chitiratifor
had been. It turned, said something imperative to Screwfloss, and walked
away. So, thought Ravna, am I dead enough?
Most of the camp settled down for the night; the dimly glowing embers
were not bright enough for Tinish vision. That didn’t stop the two chief
kidnappers: a greenish light appeared atop the front wagon. Ah, they had
one of the tunable lamps from Oobii. Chitiratifor had spread something
across the flat of the wagon top. Maps? He seemed to be consulting with
the lean fivesome.
After a time, they put out the light, but at least one pack was still moving
around. She saw shadows sliding off into the undergrowth. A sentry
being posted? Time passed. There were little animal noises, and then

even that quieted. No doubt parts of the sleeping packs were still awake,
but they made no humanly audible sound. Far away, she heard the river
she had noticed this afternoon. She turned in the direction of the sound,
and saw a tiny flicker of greenish light, surely too faint for any pack in the
campsite to notice. So some pack had business down by the river,
technical business they wanted done away from their fellow-kidnappers.
Ravna saw the light a couple more times, in the same direction, faint and
vagrant through the underbrush. Eventually, one of Screwfloss shifted in
its sleep, blocking her view. The pack had made no more secret talk.
It was getting hard to stay awake. She resisted sleep for a time, inanely.
Consciousness was fun; what if she woke up without her mind again? As
she drifted off, she played with possibilities. She’d heard Screwfloss
conspiring about her murder, but since the abduction, his every action
had protected her. Jefri, Amdi, Screwfloss. What if they were trying to
save her? They hadn’t explained themselves, first because she was out
of her head, and now because they were in the midst of enemies with the
sharpest natural hearing of any race Ravna knew. Never mind that these
three had chased her from her house and grabbed her once she got
outside. Ah, what Flenseresque ambiguity! But if she had to bet her life
on a theory about friends and enemies, she knew what it would be.
•  •  •
The next day, Ravna sat among Screwfloss atop the middle wagon. He
made a big deal of bracing her with supplies and tie-downs, but in fact
she was suffering only occasional dizziness. She did her best to stay
slumped and motionless—and not touch her face! Her nose and cheek
still hurt, but it was touching the crushed bone and cartilage that that
made her cry out in pain.
Pretty obviously, they were south of the Icefang Mountains, and following
one of the long geological rifts that scarred this side of the continent.

Nothing like these rifts had been active during humanity’s time on Old
Earth (or Nyjora), but such structures were common on terrestrial
planets. On a time scale of centuries, these valleys suffered enormous
ground shifts and killing lava floods. Even more commonly, carbon
dioxide or methane would surge the length of a valley, killing everything
that needed oxygen, or causing tornadoes of fire. The result was a
turbulent patchwork of ecologies, full of paradoxes—at least to Oobii’s
simple-minded analysis.
Her kidnappers were either crazy or they had an expert guide, some pack
who knew the transient escape routes and understood the treacherous
peculiarities of whatever life currently survived.
The wagons stopped near midday. The packs spread out, hunting lunch.
Some of the results were humanly edible. Ravna was kept well away
from other humans and Amdi. Screwfloss risked a few more words of
focused whispering: “I think Chitiratifor has decided about you. I dunno
quite what to do.”
Late in the afternoon they crossed the boundary of some recent
cataclysm. In the space of two hundred meters, the dense undergrowth
and bushy trees were replaced by an open forest of tall, slim trees. The
direct sunlight had melted the snow down to isolated drifts. This might
have been a different world, except that the same river continued to roar
along just a few meters downslope of their path. The other wagoneers
looked around nervously. Chitiratifor paced the wagons, emitting blustery
encouragement that didn’t sound credible even to Ravna. She, on the
other hand, was cheered by the change. If Eyes Above 2 flew over today,
it would be much harder for these guys to hide. Pilgrim’s agrav skiff
would do even better; Chitiratifor would have no audible warning at all.
That thought was the most exciting event of the afternoon.
As twilight deepened, Chitiratifor went on ahead; Ravna saw him
consulting with the lean-bodied fivesome. When Chitiratifor returned, he
waved the wagoneers forward another hundred meters and then off the
road, into a relative dense stand of trees—tonight’s campground.

•  •  •
Dinner went much like the night before, though now she got a little
meat—and she was enormously hungry. She did her best to disguise her
appetite. Screwfloss helped with her act, but in an enormously irritating
way, cutting her meat into tiny chunks and pushing one piece at a time at
her. He made preemptory gobbling noises, as if encouraging an animal to
eat. Okay. Ravna played dumb, and did her best not to look across the
gloom to where Jefri and Amdi sat with Gannon.
This night, no pack came around to inquire about her medical status.
Yes, something had been Decided. Raggedy Ears and the fivesome had
another map conference and then it was lights out. The packs spread out
a bit, each hiding itself as few human campers would do. It was hard to
tell just where they all were, or who might be on sentry duty, but
somebody was moving around. She saw shadows departing in the
direction of the river. Chitiratifor.
Ravna gave it about ten minutes, then leaned toward the nearest of
Screwfloss. “Gotta go. Gotta go!” she said.
Screwfloss emitted complaining noises, but came to his feet quickly
enough. Even better, he didn’t object when Ravna started off in the
direction of the river sounds.
Between the tree tops, the stars provided just enough light to avoid low-
hanging branches. Ahead, the rushing river was loud, hiding whatever
other sounds there might be. She saw no gleams of greenish lamp light.
Finally Screwfloss drew her down. “Stay!” he said, in a focused whisper.
So he wasn’t willing to risk serious snooping. She should probably be
glad. But as she squatted down, she noticed Screwfloss slinking off
downslope on his own snooping expedition.
She had crouched down about as long as seemed reasonable, when she

heard soft gobbling. This was like Tinish Interpack speech, but with most
of the chords unstacked, the squeaks and hisses spaced out. If it had
been a little louder, she might have understood it. Someone was using
one of Scrupilo’s voice-band radios, speaking very carefully to
compensate for some kind of transmission problem. Even so, who could
be in range? Now the words were Samnorsk … Nevil speaking. Nevil
was giving them relay service via the orbiter! She stood, took a step or
two in the direction of the muttered conversation.
A hand abruptly covered her mouth. An arm went around her waist. She
was lifted off her feet and lowered gently to the ground. It was Jefri. They
lay for a moment on the chill moist earth, both silent. Amdi’s voice came
in her ear. “We have to go back now.”
Ravna nodded. Amdi was all around them. She and Jefri stood up and—
From downslope, there was an explosion of caterwauling, the sounds of
monsters tearing each other apart. Jefri dived for cover, drawing her
down with him. The night erupted with the cries of packs running from the
campsite toward the river. Screaming rage was all around them. They
huddled under something bushy as pack members hurtled past.
All the action was down by the river now. The fighting was louder,
punctuated by whistling screams of mouth noise. Somebody was being
murdered.
Jefri came to his feet and reached down to help Ravna out from the bush.
Her legs were tangled in the branches. Somehow she had wriggled in too
far! She twisted around, looking toward the battle noises. That was louder
now, but saner sounding too. Someone was shouting real language,
orders. There were lights. A search—but still down by the river.
“I’m stuck!” she whispered.
Jefri braced his back against the lower branches and pushed up. She
heard his knife slashing. Amdi had been at the edges of the undergrowth.
Now he pulled as Jefri lifted, and Ravna slid out.
Someone had come running up from the direction of the river.

Screwfloss, all five of him. “Get back to camp!” he said. With Jefri
supporting her, the walk took only moments. As they reached the
wagons, Jefri paused, let Screwfloss help Ravna the rest of the way.
Then he walked around the wagons into the campsite.
“What the fuck!” came Gannon’s voice, but this was no brave challenge.
When Ravna staggered in with Screwfloss, she noticed that Gannon
seemed alone. Even the kherhogs were clustered together as far as they
could get from the sounds of the fighting. The draft animals were making
their own frightened sounds, probably with as much sense as Gannon.
Now bright lamplight was visible downslope, but the noise consisted of
solitary screams and Tinish laughter.
A cold nose butted into Ravna’s hand. She stifled a squeak and slid her
hand around the head. It was one of Amdi, but his whisper came from all
of him, audible only in its sum. “I’m so scared, Ravna.”
“Amdi, get over here!” That was Jefri, already back by his bedroll.
Screwfloss settled Ravna down on her bedding and they both sat looking
downslope. The survivors were already coming back, dark shadows that
moved with the enthusiasm of hunters returning. She could smell blood
on them, but their triumphant gobbling was edged with unease. Minutes
later, six more shadows quietly moved into camp: Chitiratifor. She felt
sure that some of his heads were turned in her direction, but he did not
approach. All the surviving packs settled down and soon the night was
quieter than it had been before the deadly fuss. There were no whuffling
snores and less of the nighttime noise of small animals.
Ravna’s stark panic gradually eased, even as her mind raced around the
possibilities. She was sure that Screwfloss was entirely awake,
apparently resolved to keep silent. After a while, Ravna realized
something else. Now she really did need a potty break.
It was a very long night.

Chapter   21
Mere mayhem didn’t slow down Chitiratifor. By the time the sun peeked
above the valley walls, their little caravan had been on the road four
hours. At their first rest break, the ragged-eared pack paraded around in
the sunlight, as if to proclaim he was not skulking—or perhaps to show
everyone that he was totally uninjured.
Ravna took a count: both wagoneers had torn jackets and wounds on
various members. One of them had been a sixsome; now it was five.
Amdi was crouched by Jef; the two were talking in the semi-private
language they had used since they were little. Screwfloss stood all
around the seated Ravna, as if keeping guard on the prisoner. Gannon
Jorkenrud sat on the drivers’ bench of one of the wagons. He was
unscathed, but at least for the moment his cockiness had disappeared.
He didn’t even look sullen. Gannon was frightened.
The pale-eyed fivesome and one other pack were missing.
Chitiratifor swept close to each of the survivors; his gobbling sounded like
a combination of boast and harangue. The two wagoneers shrank from
his mindsound even as they cast nervous glances at each another. When
Raggedy Ears stuck a snout in among Amdi, the eight gave a frank wail
of terror and tried to hide behind Jefri.
And Jefri … Jefri did not flinch from the snapping jaws. He stared back at
the nearest of Chitiratifor and his tone was level and stony. “I have no
idea what you’re saying or what you want.”
That was probably an exaggeration. Jef had as much knowledge of
Tinish as any human. Nevertheless, Chitiratifor’s verbal momentum
faltered. He goggled at Jefri for a second and then emitted a very human-
sounding laugh. “I was talking to the coward.” He gave one of Amdi a

rough poke in the ribs. “I laugh to see one of us who thinks a two-legs—a
piece of lonely meat!—can be protection.”
Chitiratifor’s laughter morphed into the natural Tinish equivalent. But he
backed away from Amdi and Jefri. “And I forget my good manners. We
are allies.” Two of him looked in Gannon’s direction. That worthy perked
up, recapturing some of his usual arrogance. “That we are, Chitiratifor,
sir. Nevil told us to give you full cooperation. Just tell us what you want.
Sorry we don’t understand better.”
“Ah.” Chitiratifor rolled his heads with patronizing good humor. “Yes
indeed.” He paused, giving all three humans a calculating glance. “So
then,” he continued, “in words of simple Samnorsk, I say I found traitors
last night. They both are dead now, totally dead.” He jabbed a snout at
Screwfloss. “You. You speak Samnorsk.”
Screwfloss dribbled around Ravna to stand respectfully before Raggedy
Ears. “Oh, yes indeed,” he said, “better than some humans do, as a
matter of fact.”
“Whatever. I want you to explain things to the two-legs when they cannot
understand me.” I can’t be bothered with dumb animals was the
message.
Screwfloss made a grovelling smile. He was the picture of an intimidated
pack, but his Samnorsk was spoken with a sly, Flenser voice. “Yes, my
lord. I can be useful in other ways. I may be the only one left who can
advise you about the country ahead.”
Chitiratifor emitted a cheerful Tinish laugh, but his patchwork of human
voices said: “I’ll cut your throats if you say that to the others. Do you
understand?”
“Oh yes, your worship. This is just between you and me and some
humans who don’t really matter.”
“Very good,” said Chitiratifor, then added something jovial in Tinish. Amdi
remained silent, still hiding his heads behind Jefri, but the wagoneers
both chuckled back—surely as ignorant as rocks.

•  •  •
They were still following the river. The path was often steep, bordering
rapids and waterfalls. The valley walls climbed high above them. To the
west, the snow-covered heights were sun-bedazzled. Jefri was driving
the last wagon now; Chitiratifor had given the usual driver some kind of
scouting assignment. Raggedy Ears himself drifted up and down the
length of the caravan but made no attempt to hustle them past open
areas. Maybe Nevil had gotten control of the airship.
Several times that morning, Raggedy Ears consulted with Screwfloss—in
Samnorsk. He was totally ignorant of this territory, and just as clearly, he
didn’t care if Ravna knew it.
Perhaps the most striking change in the new order was that now
Screwfloss chatted quite openly with her. “I wasn’t in on the kill, but I
talked to the front wagon driver. The two traitor packs were killed.
Chitiratifor hunted down the last of them and dispatched them himself.
The pack called—” he warbled a chord or two “—the best you could
pronounce it would be ‘Remasritlfeer,’ he was one of Tycoon’s top
lieutenants. The other was his assistant. Apparently they both were
experts on this rift valley.” At the moment, Chitiratifor was some distance
up ahead. He might not be able to make out what Screwfloss was saying,
but he could surely hear conversation noise.
Screwfloss must have noticed the surprise on Ravna’s face. “Why am I
talking to you now?” he said. He shrugged. “Now that your small human
mind has recovered, you’re just someone to listen. What you know
doesn’t matter.”
Screwfloss was silent for a moment as he negotiated the wagon’s way
across a dip in the trail that at this time of the year was filled with fast-
moving water. Some of Amdi braved the cold directly, while about half of
him hopped on the back of the wagon and came across dry. They kept

their heads down so as not to mix mindsounds with Screwfloss, but
nevertheless that pack said severely, “None of your tricks! Understand?”
Among Ravna’s disconnected memories was the vision of Screwfloss
chasing Amdi away from her. What had that been all about? A moment
later she found out, when Amdi’s focused voice came in her ears:
“Screwfloss doesn’t believe I’m smart enough to talk secretly to someone
as hard of hearing as a human, not when there is any chance of
detection. But you have to know: With Remasritlfeer gone, Chitiratifor is
just looking for—I’m sorry—some fun way to kill you, maybe kill Jefri and
even Gannon.”
Screwfloss emitted a screeching hiss.
Amdi hunkered down at the blast, but his secret voice continued: “Heh.
He’s just guessing.” But then aloud Amdi said, “I’ll be good. No more
tricks. I promise.”
Anyone who really knew Amdi would know that he kept his freely given
promises. Apparently, Screwfloss was such a person. He gave Amdi a
long look, then replied. “Very well, Little Ones.”
In any case, that was the most informative, and frightening, moment of
the morning. Screwfloss quit talking. Maybe he was sullen, or thinking—
or listening to discover if Amdi would break his promise. They stopped
briefly for midday meal, but Amdi was away with Jef and Gannon, and
Screwfloss went with Chitiratifor to get a view of the way ahead. Back on
the wagons, it was well into the afternoon before Screwfloss got into a
talkative mood.
“It’s really too bad that we killed the traitors when we did. We’re entering
an especially dangerous area,” he said. “It’s like I told Lord Chitiratifor at
lunch. Little mistakes can be fatal here.”
Three of Amdi were sitting at the back of the wagon, but faithfully
honoring his promise. Aloud he said, “So has Chitiratifor told the
wagoneer packs?”
“Oh yes. Those packs are just city thugs. Till now, this job has been a fun
adventure—real hunting, live meat almost every day. But now they need

all the help Lord Chitiratifor can give them.” Screwfloss gestured
expansively at the forest all around them. “It looks so peaceful, doesn’t it?
But why do you think it’s mostly unknown to Tines? Because so few get
through it whole—or at all. The Old Flenser studied the rift valleys. So did
Steel. They got some of their most diabolical insights here.” Screwfloss
turned a couple heads Ravna’s way. “Yes, I know you starfolk can be
much deadlier, but we primitive folk, we do the best we can.”
Gannon Jorkenrud had been behind them, between wagons. Maybe he
had caught some of the conversation, because now he trotted forward
and jumped onto Screwfloss’ wagon, kicking Amdi’s members overboard
in the process. “You assholes have no business riding,” he said. He
settled down beside Ravna and gave her a big smile. “For that matter,
we’re being generous to let you have a free ride.”
Amdi followed along the left side of the wagon, objecting: “Ravna’s not
well enough to walk along. Chitiratifor wants her kept on the wagon.”
“Like I said, we’re generous.” He gestured Amdi away. “Why don’t you go
back to your great protector?”
On the wagon behind them, Jefri had risen from his driver’s bench.
Ravna knew that Jefri had some special recent hatred for Gannon; right
now, Jef’s expression was deadly. Then his wagon began to drift, and he
sat down and guided his kherhog back into line.
Fortunately Jorkenrud wasn’t really trying to start a fight. He was more
interested in chatting with Screwfloss. “You’re spilling Chitiratifor’s
secrets, eh Screwfloss?”
The pack shrugged. “It won’t do her any good.”
“So you’ve told her about the radio link to the orbiter?”
“No, but you’ve done that now.”
“… Oh.” Gannon thought about that for a second and then laughed. “Like
you said, it doesn’t matter what she knows now. I bet it’s fun to see her
reaction.” He gave Ravna a big grin. “The radio is just one of lots of toys
Nevil has given our little friends. Giving you to the dogs is a similar

gesture, and it removes a real inconvenience. It was a win all around.
Nevil knew that word of the snatch on you would bring Woodcarver’s
troops racing down from the castle. That would give us a chance to
disappear various gear we’ve been wanting.”
Ravna couldn’t help baring her teeth at this. “So now Nevil is unmasked.”
“Not at all! I don’t know the details, how they got rid of Woodcarver’s
guards, but the rumor is going to be that you weren’t kidnapped. You
defected because you’d been kicked out of your cushy place on the
Starship—and it was your agents who stole the equipment, maybe to set
up your own operation. When I’m officially rescued, I’ll confirm whatever
story Nevil decides on.” Gannon looked at the wagon behind them. “Jef
will too, if he knows what’s good for him.”
“That—” Ravna started to say, and was temporarily out of words. “That
can’t possibly convince anyone.”
“Oh? We did something almost as complicated when we snatched the
Children.”
“Those stupid Tropicals played into our claws on that one,” said
Screwfloss. He didn’t sound critical, more like he was stating a small
correction.
Gannon started laughing. “True. But Nevil says that’s the reward for good
planning. He tricked them into running like the guilty. Who’d have
guessed Godsgift would leave part of himself behind? He thought he
could get a hearing from Woodcarver and damn us all. Fortunately, we
got to him first.”
Ravna looked at Gannon and felt sick. “And you grabbed those Children
and killed their Best Friends?”
Some remnant of decency tugged at Gannon’s face. “Not me personally.
… Bad things happen, little lady. You should never have been put in
charge. Now fixing things is a mess.”
Amdi’s voice came up from beside the wagon. “We didn’t know, Ravna.”
Gannon gave a wave in Amdi’s direction. “The fatso pack is probably

telling the truth. He and Jefri have been very useful, but not for the rough
things. I know they weren’t supposed to be in on this current operation.”
Ravna closed her eyes for a moment and leaned back against the top of
the wagon. It wasn’t hard to see why Jefri hated this boy so much, but,
“Why, Gannon?”
Gannon looked back at her. It was clear he understood what she was
really asking. For a moment she thought he would make some sadistic
retort, but then something seemed to crumple inside him and desolation
stared out at her. “Once upon a time, I was smart. Back in Straumli
Realm, back in the High Lab. It was easy to understand what was going
on. Then I woke up here, where I understand nothing and all my mind
tools are gone. It’s like somebody cut my hands off, poked out my eyes.”
“All the Children have that problem, Gannon.”
“Yes, some more and some less, even the ones who don’t realize it. And
you know what, little lady? Countermeasure took our home from us,
exiled us here. You want to make that permanent. Well, it won’t work.
You’re going down. If you cooperate, help our little Tinish friends, maybe
Chitiratifor’s boss will let you live.”
Gannon stared at her for a moment, his face full of pain, for once free of
sadism. Then his gaze flicked away, and after a moment he relaxed into
his usual lazy bluster. He waved at the forest all around them and said to
Screwfloss, “So what makes you think these woods are dangerous? I’ve
been on expeditions before. I can spot weasel nests and weasel-made
rockfalls. Chitiratifor has a pack scouting around us all the time. We’ve
spotted one or two cotters’ cabins, but no organized settlements. So
what’s coming down on us?”
“There’s the bloodsucking gnats. They make arctic midges look like
friendly puppies. We’ll see them as soon as the weather gets a little
warmer.”
“Gnats? I’ve heard of those.” Gannon’s voice was full of jolly contempt.
Then an uncomfortable look came to his face. “Or do you mean these
ones carry some kind of disease?”

Out of Gannon’s line of sight, Ravna noticed Screwfloss exchanging
looks with himself, as if wondering how big a whopper he could put over
on the idiot human. Then he appeared to pass up the opportunity: “Oh,
no. Well, not that I know of, and you humans are mostly immune to our
diseases anyway—at least that’s what Oobii tells you, right?”
“Er, right.”
“Anyway, the really bad diseases are in the Tropics,” continued
Screwfloss. “The biting insects we’ll see are just extremely annoying.
What makes this here variety of forest dangerous is the—I guess the
simplest translation is ‘killer trees.’ Or maybe ‘arrow trees.’”
“Oh, I’ve heard of those,” said Ravna. Amdi made an agreeing sound.
Killer trees had been part of some of Pilgrim’s stories.
Gannon made a rude noise. “Bullshit. Where are you getting the know-it-
all?”
Screwfloss gave him a haughty look. “I was woods-runner before I
entered Flenser’s employ. I’m a renowned expert on the rift valleys.”
Ravna remembered Woodcarver describing this pack as one of Flenser’s
whack jobs. Whatever else, Screwfloss was an expert at telling tall tales.
Gannon had a narrower skepticism: “This patch of forest looks like
bannerwood. It’s rare stuff, but I’ve seen it before. I hear it makes great
building timber. Or are you saying these arrow killers are something rare,
hiding, ha ha, like in ambush?”
“You have my point, sir—but not quite the way you may think.
Bannerwood doesn’t like to be cut or chewed on—oh sorry, my lady
Ravna, I don’t mean to be an ignorant medieval. I know that trees can’t
think. I just don’t have the patience to dance with jargon. I leave that to
Flenser and Scrupilo. In any case, only a certain percentage of this type
of bannerwood has deadly capabilities.”
“What percentage?” said Amdi.
“It varies. It’s a very small percentage, though the killers are more
common in these rift valley crazy patches. I imagine it depends on the

nature of local herbivores and such.” He glanced at Amdi. “You, genius
little ones, could probably figure a good estimate.”
“Probably,” said Amdi. He seemed unperturbed that Screwfloss
constantly mocked him as “little ones.”
In any case, the gibe gave Jorkenrud a rather distracted chuckle. “I was
supposed to be rescued before we got this far,” he said. “How long can it
take Nevil to pry the dirigible loose from Woodcarver’s dogs?” He
seemed to be looking at the forest with a more personal interest now; it
might not be someone else’s amusing doom. The trees appeared to be of
a single type, tall and graceful evergreens whose needles ranged from
short and slender to long and thick. “Okay,” he said, “some of those
needles could make arrows—if you cut them down and had a proper bow
for them.”
“Ah, but there’s no need if you’re the killer kind of arrow tree. Next time
we stop, climb up to the lowest branches on one these trees—one I say
is safe. You’ll still be able to see the tensioning knot at the base of the
longer needles.”
“Maybe I’ll do that,” said Gannon. “You’ve told Chitiratifor about this?”
“Oh, yes. He’s spreading the word to the others. See?” Up ahead,
Raggedy Ears was indeed lecturing the front wagoneer, waving
emphatically at the trees. “Hei, but don’t worry. Very few of the trees are
deadly, and if we follow a few simple rules, we should get through fine.”
Screwfloss didn’t say anything more for a while; he definitely had
Flenser’s talent for teasing his listeners. They crossed over two more of
the spring freshets, chilly snowmelt spilling down to the river. In places
the beautiful, sometimes deadly trees came close to the trail, forcing
those on foot to walk behind or in front of the wagons. Amdi was looking
in all directions, but he seemed more curious than fearful. In this new
forest, there was scarcely any undergrowth, just the great, vaguely fungal
bushes that popped up around some of the trees. Ravna could almost
imagine Amdi estimating the cover they might provide, figuring the fields
of fire, generating a million questions that would break into the open if
Screwfloss let him dangle long enough.

Gannon was also looking all around, and it was he who finally broke the
silence, “Okay, you bastard, what are those ‘few simple rules’?”
Screwfloss chuckled, but he dropped his teasing game. He had lots of
definite advice: “Notice all the open space? Those spaces are deadly.
You can’t run far when you are full of arrows. If there was even one of the
killer variety within bowshot, and if it got triggered, that would be enough
to kill a two-legs. If there’s a cluster of the killer variety, then once one
gets triggered, the whole mob goes—arrows coming from dozens of
trees. You spacers would have lots of explanations once you studied
them. Maybe there’s pollen that gets released and that’s a signal to
others. Anyway, they all go off.”
“Are they aimed?” said Amdi.
“Not really. There’s a ripple of shooting that sweeps away from the
beginning tree. The point is, there could be thousands of arrows. They
can cut down whole packs, right to the last member. So rule one is, don’t
stay in the open. See those bushes at the base of the trees? Those are
the tree’s flowers—ha, the equivalent of a pack’s crown jewels. Very few
arrows will strike there. So the best strategy whenever we’re stopped for
any length of time is to stay near the bushes. Be ready to dive into them if
arrows start flying.” Screwfloss shrugged. “That may be too late if you’re
a two-legs, but it should be a life saver for us packs.”
When Screwfloss finished his advice, Gannon was thoughtful and silent.
Amdi scouted ahead and around, sniffed at some of the bushes. Now he
was in question mode. Amdi wanted to know everything Screwfloss could
tell him about what would trigger a shooter attack and about how clusters
of shooters might be arranged. Screwfloss was full of details, a weird
combination of technical analysis and medieval folktales.
Amdi ate it all up and had even more questions. By the time Chitiratifor
signaled that they were stopping to make camp, Jorkenrud’s interest in
safety procedures had been satisfied in mind-numbing detail.
Apparently, Chitiratifor had absorbed some brief form of this advice at
lunch time. Ravna could tell by Raggedy Ears’ nervous uncertainty in

setting up the night’s campsite.
As Ravna climbed down from the wagon, Amdi was standing all around
her. “You know,” he said, his voice quiet and casual but not really
secretive, “this really doesn’t make any sense.”
Then he trailed off in the direction of Jefri.
•  •  •
Half an hour after they had stopped, Gannon and Jefri were at work
with the evening housekeeping. Chitiratifor had decided on where the
campfires should be but he was still ordering the wagons and draft
animals moved around, trying to find the safest formation. Screwfloss
accompanied Chitiratifor, providing his expert advice. Every time the two
packs came within earshot Ravna listened with interest. One thing about
Screwfloss’ story, it might distract Raggedy Ears from planning the
murderous entertainment Amdi feared.
“Yes,” the ever-informative Screwfloss was saying, “you have to distract
the trees. The things they react to are vibrations and physical attack.”
Raggedy Ears objected: “But we don’t eat these plants; we’re not even
loggers. We won’t hurt the trees.”
“I’m afraid that doesn’t matter, my lord. The killer trees are more common
here than I’ve ever seen, and I suspect that the way ahead will be even
worse. Tonight we have some good luck, an opportunity to practice
proper technique. On this side of the road we’ve found a small area that’s
free of the killers, but our sounds will eventually cause a cook-off—that’s
a human technical term, my lord, for when weapons spontaneously
discharge. We’ll need to provoke a partial cook-off just to protect
ourselves.”
“The troops aren’t going to like that.”

“Present it as a perfectly safe test, my lord—which is exactly what it will
be. We’re camping on the west side of the trail, near the protection of the
root bushes. I suggest you cause some small trauma to the trees on the
east side.”
“Trauma?”
“I mean, cause some wound to the trees. You can have a single member
do the job, using a wagon to provide it with safe cover. The rest of us can
take shelter by the root bushes on this side of the road. We’ll get a good
idea of what to expect on the road ahead.”
Raggedy Ears emitted a thoughtful noise, but the two packs were walking
away and she couldn’t hear the rest of the conversation. The wagons
eventually were parked, and the kherhogs sheltered a little behind the
wagons. Jefri and Amdi were out of sight when Gannon and Chitiratifor
came strolling in her direction. He was carrying a utility axe in one pair of
jaws. Ravna suddenly realized that Raggedy Ears had figured out how an
entertaining murder could help solve his other problems.
The pack dropped the axe on the ground in front of her. “You!” he said.
“Go across the road and make cuts on the middle tree.”
•  •  •
“You’ll do what Chitiratifor told you!” Gannon waved her back to the
east side of the path and away from the wagons. “Now take the axe,
damn it.” He lobbed the utility axe across the trail. The spinning blade
sank deep into the ground two meters from Ravna’s feet.
At the sound of Gannon’s voice, Amdi and Jefri came around the fodder
wagon. They must have been feeding the kherhogs. The weather was so
warm now that there was no need for ferment-warming, but feeding the
hungry animals was still a messy job—the kind of work that even Gannon
managed to avoid.

“What are you doing with Ravna?” Jefri shouted. There was a good ten
meters separating Gannon from herself, so this was evidently no ordinary
form of harassment.
“He wants me to chop a tree,” Ravna shouted back.
“What?”
As Amdi and Jefri ran toward her, Chitiratifor moved casually into their
path. He’d pulled battle axes from his panniers and idly swung them back
and forth. Ravna noticed that the wagoneers had unlimbered their
crossbows.
Gannon waved Jefri back. “Hei, Jef. Keep cool.”
Jefri looked across the trail at where Ravna stood, alone. His gaze swept
up, across the trees. Abruptly, he turned on the nearest of Chitiratifor.
“You need her! That’s the whole point of this expedition.”
There was a lazy smile in Raggedy Ears’ aspect. He flipped a battle axe
adroitly. “You’re wrong. I don’t need the Ravna two-legs alive. I have a
good use for her now. More use than I have for most two-legs.”
Gannon gave a nervous laugh and said to Jefri. “Just go along with it,
Jef.”
Jefri glared at him and then around at the packs. The air was still for a
moment, and Ravna saw that Amdi had been absolutely right. With
Remasritlfeer gone, Chitiratifor was free to complete his mission. Please
don’t try to fight them, Jefri. Amdi seemed to feel the same. He uttered a
loud screech and tried to hold Jefri back by grabbing at the cuffs of his
pants.
“Fine,” said Jefri—and reached toward the nearest of Chitiratifor. “Then
give me an axe, too.”
“You craphead!” said Gannon.
For an instant, Ravna thought Raggedy Ears might slash at Jefri’s hand.
Then the pack gave a rattling laugh and flipped one of the axes out of its
mouth.

Jefri snatched the axe from the air. He kicked loose of Amdi’s grasp and
stomped across the path to stand by Ravna. Amdiranifani followed all
around.
Chitiratifor’s laughter swelled into full honking, and he said something to
Screwfloss and the wagoneers. They were all having a good time. Their
leader was going to show them just what all the killer tree fuss was about
—without putting anyone worthwhile at risk. He gobbled something
imperative at Amdi.
Amdi replied in human talk. “No, I won’t leave Jefri.” The words were
brave, but there was white around his eyes.
Chitiratifor boomed angrily. Then he said in Samnorsk, “You are of
interest, but you can still be punished. Would you like to be seven? or
six?”
Screwfloss put in: “Oh, let him stay, my lord. He can stand over by the
tree with the root bush. That should be relatively safe.”
Amdi cowered back, shuffling toward the tree that Screwfloss was
pointing to. Ravna noticed that the campsite had been very carefully
chosen. No tree near hers had a root bush.
Chitiratifor watched Amdi move; a smile spread across his aspect. “You
are a coward clown.” His attention returned to Ravna and Jefri, but he
had good humor for them too. “Now you, the female. Pick up the axe. Cut
the tree behind you. Is that the one, Screwfloss?”
“Quite so, my lord. That’s almost certainly a true killer, and the lowest
arrows look well-tensioned.”
“Are the kherhogs safely away?”
Screwfloss glanced at the carts and animals. “Oh yes.” The kherhogs
were milling around as if they realized that something extreme was in the
offing. “You’ve positioned them perfectly.”
Chitiratifor gobbled to the others. He sounded like he was putting on a
show. Ravna recognized the word for “wager” in his chords. “And you,
the male, stand by the second tree on the left.”

“But don’t chop anything yet,” said Screwfloss. “We want to see if one
attack can provoke the other trees.”
Raggedy Ears elaborated for his Tinish audience.
“I said, pick up the axe!” Chitiratifor boomed at her. “You have a good
chance at living if you do.” He said something to his audience. They
gobbled back at him, and he added. “Four to one odds in your favor. But
you’re sure dead if you don’t move.” His wagoneers had both cranked
back their bows.
Ravna grabbed the axe’s jaw handle and pulled it free of the sod. Flecks
of needles fell from it and the edge glittered in the late afternoon light. It
might be a utility blade, but it looked freshly sharpened.
On the other side of the trail, the wagoneers and Chitiratifor were
watching her in the intense, still way that always bothered her about
Tines. This wasn’t all a matter of entertainment. Except for the bow-
holding members, they had wiggled most of themselves into the
protective cover of the root bushes. Only Chitiratifor, Screwfloss, and
Gannon were still standing in the open. Gannon looked around, seemed
to realize his exposure. He turned and headed for the nearest
unoccupied bush.
And now the wagoneers were making noise again. They were chanting, a
blend of harmonics that made Ravna’s ears hurt. She knew the meaning:
Do it, do it, do it. There were packs who chanted just that at the kids’
ballgames.
Ravna turned to the tree behind her. On her right, Amdi danced around in
frightened excitement, edging nearer to the root bush that could protect
him. He had no secret messages, at least nothing he would chance on
human hearing. On her left, Jefri was looking at Amdi and then at her …
and suddenly she realized that he and Amdi were playing a game, just as
when they were very little, but now as a matter of life and death.
Do it, do it, do it.
“All right!” She walked toward the tree, gave the axe a little swing. An
ancient human might have described the thing as double axe head fixed

on a bale hook handle. There was no way she could get the full leverage
a human would have with a real, made-for-human axe.
But the blade was sharp.
This particular tree was about eighty centimeters across, the bark almost
as smooth as a baby’s skin, but a pale buff color such as you rarely saw
on modern Homo Sapiens. The tree seemed no different from the
thousands of bannerwoods she’d seen the last few days. Its straight trunk
extended some forty meters up, a beautiful slim tower. The lowest
branches grew straight out. The nearest were some thirty centimeters
above her head, their needles growing in great sheaves from the lumps
that Screwfloss called “tensioning knots.”
Do it, do it, do it.
She raised the axe and gave the smooth pillar a blow that was more a
tentative tap. The blade sank a centimeter into the wood. When she
eased the blade out, there was a film of clear sap on the steel and a little
more oozing down the side of the tree. The smell of the sap was a dry,
complex thing, somehow familiar. Oh. It was simply a sharp version of
this forest’s pervasive smell.
Most important, the scent seemed to have no effect on the peaceful
drowse of this late afternoon. Above and around her, the needle leaves
hung in greenish silence, unmoving.
On the other side of trail, the audience was not happy. The chant had
stilled, but the wagoneers gobbled irritably to each other. Screwfloss had
nothing to say, but there was an ironic smile in his aspect, as if he were
waiting for someone to say the obvious.
Chitiratifor’s voice boomed out, in Tinish and Samnorsk all at once: “Cut
the tree, human! Chop up and down. We will see its insides, or we will
see yours.”
The wagoneers laughed and swung their bows back toward her.
She turned back to the tree and began whacking. Her blows were still
weak, but she did as she was told, hitting upwards and then down, at

something like the same target line. At this pace, it might take her an
hour to cut the tree down, but she was gouging a deep notch in the wood,
revealing the growth ring pattern that was near-ubiquitous in the trees of
Tines World.
She paused, partly because she was out of breath, partly because she
heard Amdi make an anxious wheep sound. She noticed that Chitiratifor
had edged closer to the safety of a large bush.
The forest was no longer silent. She heard a clattering sound in the
branches above her. The nearest branches trembled, clusters of needles
shivering faintly, jerked about by the tensioning knots that anchored them
in place. The knots themselves, were … smoking? No, not smoke. It was
a heavy haze of pollen, drifting slowly on the faint currents of the cooling
afternoon. Where it floated through the brightest light, the reflection of the
sun from the peaks above, it shone golden green.
On the other side of the path, some of the sporting humor had
evaporated. The packs watched the drifting haze with wide eyes. As it
floated outwards from Ravna’s tree, the rattling of branches spread to the
trees around her and then across the wagon trail, creating a growing,
golden green alarm. The wagoneers squeezed back beneath their root
bushes; not even their bow carriers stood in the open now.
When the rattling reached the trees around Chitiratifor, he finally gave up
his brave stance and wiggled himself deep into his own bush. Only
screwloose Screwfloss was left unprepared. He hadn’t picked a big
enough bush and now he was mostly unable to get adequate cover.
For the rest: the kherhogs were staring at them in uneasy wonder.
Depending on how far the alarm spread, the wagons might not provide
sufficient cover.
A dozen seconds passed. The rattling had spread beyond hearing, but no
arrows had been triggered.
Screwfloss spoke up, sounding a bit nervous with his explanation: “When
it comes, it could be an avalanche of arrows, my lord. Perhaps we have,
um, overextended ourselves.”

Chitiratifor gave him an amused look. “Perhaps you have overexposed
yourself, you silly asses. I see a small bush behind this tree. It may be
enough for you. Burrow deep!” Then his attention finally returned to
Ravna. “Chop us more wood, human.”
She turned back to her tree. Out of the corner of her eye, she noticed that
Amdi was all hunkered down, stubbornly refusing to take cover. What’s
the game, Jefri?
Do it. Do it. Do it.
She held the axe by the handle and the haft and took out all her fear on
the poor dumb wood. Whack. Whack. Whack.
The arrow needles clattered louder than ever, and the alarm pollen grew
chokingly thick. When she triggered the cascade, the pain was like
arrows piercing her ears. She dived for the ground, trying to find cover in
even the most shallow troughs of the earth. But the pain was not from
real arrows. The pain was in the sheer power of Tinish screams.
“Get up! Run!” Some of Amdi was around her, trying to pull her to her
knees. She came up, saw the rest of him racing toward Jefri.
It was chaos that didn’t make much sense at the time. She staggered to
her feet, still crouching against the ambuscade. But there were no arrows
flying. Anywhere. And yet across the trail, the screaming grew louder,
backed up by the fainter, whistling mouth noises of Tines in terrible pain.
She couldn’t see either of the wagoneers. The bushes they had been
hiding under seemed lower and wider than before, and they trembled as
if something struggled beneath.…
Amdi pushed and pulled her. “Back to the wagons!”
As she stumbled along, she saw that not all the other Tines had
disappeared. Most of Screwfloss was standing just at the edge of a root
bush, hacking at its branches. His limper hadn’t been fast enough to jump
away; it was tangled at the edge.
Some of Chitiratifor was clear of the bush that was munching on him. He
was fighting back with all his remaining hand axes. He almost had his

bow carrier free of the trap. Then he noticed Ravna and Amdi. He gave a
roar of anger, and his three free members raced after her.
Ravna ran. Ordinarily, that would have been a futile gesture. On open
ground, pack members could outrun any two-legs, and packs with military
training could give up consciousness for a brief killing charge. But the
part of Chitiratifor that couldn’t follow must be in terrible pain. The three
that raced after Ravna seemed to be on an invisible leash. Never
slowing, they circled wide around, heading back to the rest of their pack,
where they resumed hacking at the bush that trapped them.
Screwfloss was doing much better. He had freed his one trapped
member. It staggered along with a three-legged walk, but the pack was
making progress in their direction.
“I’ve got him,” shouted Jefri. He was closer to the wagons than she, but
now he rushed back, scooped up Screwfloss’ limping member in his
arms.
“Help me, help me!” It was Gannon. The boy was on his elbows, his
lower body hidden by the bush that had flattened itself upon him. Stark
terror was on his face and his hands were reaching out to her.
She had not known Gannon Jorkenrud when he was a small child. At
best, he’d been a snotty teenager, growing more malevolent with each
passing year. But in the beginning she had seen him as she had all the
Children, as someone she could help. There had been a time when he
had not seemed evil.
By some miracle, she still had that axe in her hand. And now she was
running across the trail, toward Gannon’s beseeching hands.
Amdi was still pulling at her. “No! No! Please—”
Someone else just sounded angry: “Well, damn! Okay.” That was the
able-bodied part of Screwfloss, running back from where Jefri had set
down the wounded part. Jefri came right behind him. They circled around
in front of Ravna, blocking her from Gannon.
But they were doing what she wanted done. Jefri got to the tree, used his

reach to attack the bush near its base, where there was no danger of
striking Gannon. The four of Screwfloss used knives to cut the branches,
then grabbed at Jorkenrud’s jacket and began pulling him out.
Ravna was in the midst of Screwfloss now, pulling with him. She had
Gannon around the shoulders. Every blow that Jefri struck with his battle
axe sent a spasm through the bush and won another centimeter of
freedom for Gannon.
Screwfloss shrieked and staggered back, losing his grip on Jorkenrud.
Ravna looked up in time to dodge the metal tines. Raggedy Ears’ loose
members were among them, slashing. At least one part of a wagoneer
had freed itself and joined the attack.
Jorkenrud slipped from her fingers, the relentless pull of the bush winning
at last. As his body disappeared from view, there might have been one
last scream, silenced with a crunching sound.
Bodies tumbled all around, bleeding.
She was on her feet, staggering back. She had never been in a fight
before, but Johanna had regaled her with stories. Against even one pack,
an unarmed human would be the loser. Stay on your feet. Climb some
place where packs can’t follow.
Something slammed into her from behind, sweeping her off her feet.
Jefri! Then she was looking down, from over his shoulder. He was quickly
backing away from the battle, of which she could now see nothing! Parts
of Amdi swirled around them, bloodied. Amdi was unarmed, but Jefri still
had his axe. She could feel him swing it, hear the screaming. He
staggered, turned, and she had a glimpse of Screwfloss. That pack was
armed in every jaw and forepaw, even the limper. Between them,
Screwfloss and Jefri were making a controlled retreat from—not so much
a pack as a killing mob, three from Raggedy Ears, two from the
wagoneers.
They’d reached the nearest of the wagons. They had all of Screwfloss; if
she wasn’t counting anybody twice, Amdi was still eight. He had split into
three groups and raced ahead, heading for the kherhogs

Jefri shrugged Ravna to the ground. “Help Amdi. We’re getting out of
here.”
In this, Ravna really could contribute. One two-legs was worth at least
four pack members when it came to dealing with kherhogs. She got her
animal hooked up to the front wagon before Amdi was done with the
other animals. Her own kherhog was cooperative—maybe too much so;
the wagon was already moving forward. The kherhog didn’t want to be
near the screaming carnivores.
“Don’t let it run away!” shouted Amdi, even as he scrambled to guide the
second and third wagons. There was blood all over him, but he was eight
for sure.
Behind them, Jefri and Screwfloss were continuing the defense. The
enemy mob ran back and forth across the trail behind them, darting
forward repeatedly. Jefri held the center of the line, but Screwfloss—all
but the limper—was rushing back and forth, cutting and slashing,
matching the desperation of the attackers with his own brand of mad
rage, chasing any who tried to flank the rear wagon and go after Ravna
and Amdi.
Meter by meter, their three wagons proceeded away from the campsite.
Ravna walked beside the lead kherhog. It wasn’t pulling so nervously
now. She had no trouble keeping up and staying on her feet. She
glanced back. From somewhere under her own mortal panic, a tiny
horrified vision rose … of the nightmare that faced their enemy: The two
from the wagoneers, the three from Chitiratifor, they were now about fifty
meters from the trees that held the rest of themselves. They were beyond
the reach of their mindsounds. Pursuit would be mindless and would give
up any chance of pack survival.
The two wagoneer members broke first, turning and heading back toward
the campsite. The three of Chitiratifor shrieked rage at this desertion,
then shrieked rage at the escapees. The fragment took one more wild
charge at Jefri and Screwfloss, and then turned back, desperate to save
itself.

•  •  •
“The ones in the bushes, they’re all dead, or they will be soon, either
suffocated or crushed.” That’s what Screwfloss said when she asked him
about Gannon and the others. His words were flippant, even more than
usual. “Heh. What we gotta hope is Chitiratifor dies slowly, so what’s left
doesn’t come after us till we are well gone.”
They were pushing on as fast as they could go. It had been light when
they escaped, but now twilight was deepening into night and the wagons’
progress had slowed. For that matter, how do you do first aid when you
can’t see the injuries? The stolen lamps were somewhere on the wagons,
but they couldn’t stop and dig them out. When there had still been light,
she had seen the general size of the problem. Everyone was cut up to
some extent. Over the last ten years, Ravna had done her best to learn
about first aid. Jefri’s forearm needed a pressure bandage. She had
managed that, and he understood how to maintain it. Amdi had looked
ghastly, blood oozing now from three of his heads—and yet he seemed
to be thinking as clearly as ever. Okay, maybe they were just scalp
wounds, not near his tympana. She had wrapped his heads in strips torn
from their cloaks. That made it harder for Amdi to hear himself think, but
the bleeding stopped. “I’m fine,” he said, “I just gotta pay more attention
to where I’m at. Please. Check on Screwfloss.”
Now it was really dark. One of Screwfloss was aboard the rear wagon,
driving it along. The rest of him was sprawled in an exhausted jumble
atop the second wagon with Ravna.
“We should stop, get you properly bandaged up,” said Ravna.
“Naeh,” said Screwfloss. “We gotta keep moving. How is Amdijefri?”
Ravna looked around. Jefri was walking by the lead kherhog, guiding it
along. All eight of Amdi was trotting beside the middle wagon and its

kherhog, keeping them on the road. “I’m good,” said Amdi, but he was
looking up at Screwfloss anxiously. “Are you all right?”
Screwfloss replied, “You did great tonight, Little Ones.”
Ravna brushed her hand across the nearest of Screwfloss. “But are you
okay, Screwfloss?”
“Am I okay? Am I okay? What kind of an idiot are you? I still have the
broken leg you gave me; it hurts like hell. Then tonight you screwed us
into trying to rescue Jorkenrud. He was more of a dirtbag than either of
the wagoneers, you know that?”
Ravna was taken aback, remembering the moment when all she could
think of was saving Gannon. She’d never thought of herself as a racist.
That was a Straumer vice. She bowed her head. “I’m sorry, Screwfloss.
It’s just that I knew Gannon, I knew all the kids, when they were younger.
I felt responsible.”
Screwfloss emitted a soft laugh. “Would you have done the same if you’d
known he was the one who smashed your face into the side of the fodder
wagon? Never mind, I’m afraid you would have. You and Woodcarver are
both so soft-hearted.”
Woodcarver soft-hearted? Compared to what?
Screwfloss shifted uneasily under her hands, but let her touch and probe.
She could see so little now, but there was blood all over, like Amdi. Keep
him talking. “You were on our side from the beginning, Screwfloss. But
you were part of Nevil’s conspiracy, too.”
“Of course I was! Didn’t Flenser tell you he had tunneled into the
conspiracy? You can’t do that without being pretty damn credible.”
“You had me fooled about the trees, right up to when the arrows didn’t
start flying.”
“Heh, I had a good time with that. There really are arrow trees, you know.
Just not anywhere near here. The crusherbushes are much rarer, a
transient stage in the way these forests sometimes regrow. I couldn’t
believe our luck the other night when I saw that crusher grab you. My lies

practically told themselves, though Chitiratifor was the perfect ignoramus.
I don’t know why Vendacious put up with him all these years.
Remasritlfeer wouldn’t have been fooled. But then he wanted you for
Tycoon. We should be glad that’s not gonna happen. We have a chance.
We just gotta avoid Vendacious and Tycoon, and wiggle our asses back
to the Domain.”
It suddenly occurred to Ravna that she was in the middle of someone
who could explain most of the deadly mysteries, and who surely must be
a friend.
Twilight was past, but now the moon stood low in the south, its light
chopping the forest floor into silver and shadow.
She used an open stretch of road to peer down between Screwfloss’
huddled members. He wasn’t talking so much now, though the one on
the other wagon was peering alertly into the gloom, taking advantage of
the moonlight just as she was. Then she realized that except for the
outlier driving the rear wagon, Screwfloss was huddling, the dazed
reaction of a pack that doesn’t consciously understand how badly it is
injured.
“Talk to me, Screwfloss.”
The pack gave its human chuckle. “Yeah, yeah. I bet you have a million
questions. And I have lots of answers, though if we knew exactly what
was going on we’d never have wound up in this mess.” He mumbled to
himself for a moment. “We didn’t realize how important Vendacious was.
We didn’t realize he might double-cross Tycoon. We didn’t realize they
would grab so much and all at once.”
The words weren’t slurred. The actual sounds were coming from all the
pack. But there was a singsong cadence to the delivery; some member
was not pulling its mental weight. Ravna slipped her hands gently
between him, trying to encourage the pack to get out of its huddle. Here
and there a jaw snapped at her distractedly, but the four slid apart. There
was so much blood.
The one protected by the huddle was in a pool of it. The critter was

humming to itself, not really in pain. In the reflected moonlight she could
see it turn its head toward her, the faint glitter in its open eyes. She ran
her hand up its shoulder, felt a faintly pulsing gash just short of its neck,
the blood flowing past her fingers.
“Jefri!” she shouted.
•  •  •
Ravna and Jefri and Amdi did what they could, but it wasn’t nearly
enough. She’d stopped the bleeding. They’d found a clearing, coaxed
Screwfloss down to lie in the moonlight, where they could find all his
injuries. By then the one member was silent and unconscious, and it was
too late to save it. The death was a peaceful, painless ending. It might
not have happened if there had been pain and whistling screams.
Instead, the member had quietly bled and bled, its pack just dazed
enough to miss the mortal peril.…

Chapter   22
After that one stop, they rolled on through the night and into the next
day, till fatigue stopped humans and packs and kherhogs.
Ravna took another look at everyone’s wounds. Jefri and Amdi were
keeping a nervous lookout all around, but mainly back along the way they
had come. “I don’t think any of the surviving fragments could have
chased us this far,” said Jefri.
“So what does Screwfloss think of this theory?” asked Ravna.
What remained of Screwfloss looked more lively than Jef and Amdi. After
they stopped the wagons, it had slid off into the woods, a self-appointed
scouting party. Yet now the remnant hissed when she tried to tend its
wounds. The four were snouting around in the front wagon. After a
moment, it pulled emergency rations out of the depths of a cabinet and
began eating. It chewed grumpily, looking speculatively at the
surrounding trees.
Amdi said, “I’m afraid he can’t talk anymore.” Amdi detoured around
Screwfloss and brought both human and pack rations to where Ravna
and Jefri had settled. She ate as much as she could. She was so tired.
Everything was a bit of a blur. Today was actually warm. There was a
faint, keening whine all around, gnats rising from every pond and river
stillness.
Finally what Amdi had said percolated through her muzziness. “I’ve seen
many packs of four,” she said. “They can talk well enough.”
“If that’s how they’ve made themselves,” said Jefri. He was sitting at the
edge of Amdi, still a couple of meters from Ravna. She noticed that he
still avoided her eyes, but there was an occasional flickering glance,
challenging as often as not. He continued, “It should be obvious: the one

that died was a principal speech center. So no more Samnorsk. It looks
like his Interpack speech has gone, too.”
“We should keep trying,” said Amdi. “What’s left has some speech
capacity, I know it.” Amdi was shaking his heads this way and that, but
not as fierce negation; he was just trying to wave the gnats away.
Jefri brushed helpfully at Amdi’s nearest faces. “Could be. It’ll be a while
before we know what’s left of his mind.”
“So he’s a little like I was,” said Ravna. But he won’t let anyone help him.
Jefri nodded. “A little. But in many ways, he’s an able-bodied pack. He
drove his wagon well. His other wounds are minor.”
The subject of their conversation didn’t seem to be paying attention. He
came to his feet and ambled over to the middle wagon. Being only four,
his limping member seemed to affect the gait of the other three. Two of
him flipped up the door on the wagon and searched around inside. When
they hopped back to earth, they were holding a leather satchel and what
looked like soap and clean cloaks. He swatted at the swirling gnats with
his new cloaks, then turned and shambled off in the direction of the river.
Ravna gave a surprised laugh. “He’s going to wash up. I guess he isn’t
too concerned!”
Jefri came to his feet. “Yeah, but none of us should do that alone.” He
started after the foursome, but it directed a warning hiss back in his
direction.
Jefri settled back down. “Okay. I never understood Screwfloss, even
when he was whole.” He glanced sidelong at Amdi.
“Yes,” said Amdi. “Sneaky, funny, Flenser-renser.” He looked at Jefri and
Jefri looked back and Ravna wondered if the two were having one of their
cryptic conversations. It always seemed that there was more going on
between these two than she knew. It had been cute when they were little.
…
A gnat scored on her neck, another on her hand. She swatted them, but
there were clouds of replacements. The Old Screwfloss’ predictions

about bloodsuckers had really come true. If only he could say “I told you
so.”
She looked at Amdi and Jefri and saw that they were looking back at her.
In fact, all of Amdi was looking at her. “We have a lot to talk about,” she
finally said.
Amdi scrunched down into the moldering needles of the forest floor.
Some of him looked at each other, some looked at Ravna. “We are so
sorry, Ravna,” he finally said.
Jefri was silent for a moment, then slapped the ground angrily. “But we
did what I thought was right!” he said. His glance flickered back to her
face. “I couldn’t believe Nevil was behind the murders and kidnappings,
but then Screwfloss told us you were being snatched. We figured that we
might be able to get you out of your house first. And you did escape—”
Ravna nodded. “Screwfloss got me down the stairs and out-of-doors.”
And probably quicker than any civilized explaining would have.
“Y-yes. It almost worked, but Chitiratifor was too fast. He had a crossbow
pointed at your back once you got into the street.”
Ravna leaned back against a wagon wheel. Chitiratifor would have
welcomed a fatal “accident.” So Jef and Amdi had made a big deal of
grabbing her and then coming along. She could believe that. “Okay, Jefri.
But why earlier? Why at Nevil’s big meeting…” Why did you betray me?
Jefri the teenage lout might have shrugged angrily, or thrown up some
counterattack. This Jefri let the pain and anger come into his face, but his
voice was level. He was making an honest attempt to explain: “I thought
—Powers help me, I still think—that you and Johanna have the most
important things exactly backwards. Something very bad happened at the
High Lab, but I know our scientists were the best of Straumli Realm. They
would not have been as stupid as you think.”
“I’ve never said they were stupid.”
“Never those precise words, but oh, we kids know you, Ravna. In the
early years you were as close as a Best Friend. We could tell by your

silences, by what you didn’t say about our folks and the High Lab—we
could tell what you think of them.”
Ravna couldn’t deny his accusation.
Jefri gave a little nod and continued. “Nevil brought all the facts together.
He convinced me to speak unforgivable lies about you. But Ravna, I
remember the High Lab. We Straumers had things going our way. We
were becoming something … awesome. It was Countermeasure that was
the poison.”
“Johanna doesn’t believe that.”
“I love Johanna, but she’s never been tech-oriented. She saw less of the
High Lab than some of the Children. Now she’s a lot like the Larsndots,
turning away from our destiny.”
“You’re a Denier.”
“Don’t call me that! Most of the Children, if you really talk to them about
their memories of the High Lab, would agree about this. They’re just very
shy of correcting someone they … respect … as much as they do you.”
“Even so, Jefri. You recognize that Nevil is evil?”
Jefri looked away from her, as if refusing to answer. After a moment,
Amdi said, “You know he’s evil, Jefri.”
Finally, Jef said, “I tried so hard to believe otherwise. Maybe there were
sensible explanations for the strange things Amdi and I noticed when we
were chasing the Tropicals. Or maybe even, Nevil had been duped by
some monster like Vendacious … but when I saw Gannon smash your
face into the side of the fodder wagon…” His gaze flickered back to
Ravna. “Every day afterwards, I had to listen to his detailed bragging.
And you know what? Almost all the mayhem Gannon committed was at
Nevil’s explicit instruction. So yes, Nevil is evil.”
Amdi was nodding, yes, yes, yes.
Jefri wasn’t finished: “And now, I’ll do whatever it takes to get you safely
back to the Domain, and to … deal with … Nevil. But when that is
done”—his gaze was defiant and desperate all at once—“there are still

the Greater Threats, and I’m afraid they’ll leave us as absolute enemies.”
Oh, Powers. These last ten years, Ravna had imagined the future as a
long climb to a faraway confrontation. What deadly foothills stood in the
way of that! “Okay, Jefri. One step at a time. Don’t worry about being
enemies someday.”
Blessed Amdi. He brightened instantly. “Yes! Let the future take care of
itself.” He bounced to his feet and flowed around Jefri to sit in snuggly
closeness with both humans. Clouds of gnats followed him along. The
bugs really did like Tines more than humans. “We have serious problems
in the here and now.”
Ravna leaned forward, counting noses. “Where’s the rest of you, Amdi?”
“Oh! I’m strung out into bushes that way,”—he jabbed a nose—“making
sure that Screwfloss is okay. He won’t let me come close, but I can hear
him splashing around. If he has a problem, we can come running.
Meantime, we’ve got to decide what to do next.” He wriggled against her
and patted her hand. “We should take inventory…”
•  •  •
Amdi was right. Thinking about the problems of the next day and
tenday was almost a comfort. They might be caught, they might be killed,
but at least they weren’t busy betraying each other.
They didn’t go any farther the first day. Ravna was nervous about that;
parts of several packs might still be following them. But the kherhogs
were exhausted and the day remained clear and bright. What they could
see of the forest ahead provided very little cover, at least where they
could drive the wagons. A few days ago she would have prayed to be
spotted by one of the Domain’s aircraft. Now she was terribly afraid that
Nevil had control of the air.
When Screwfloss came back from his bath, Amdi asked him about the

safety of camping here. The remnant gave every impression of
understanding. It looked almost as cocky as when it had been five,
emitting a Tinish laugh at Amdi’s question. Okay, then.
Amdi gobbled some more at the remnant, asking it to stand guard while
they went down to the stream. The pack wandered off, hopefully to do as
it was asked.
The day was much too cold for real bathing, but washing off the blood
and the sweat suddenly was about the most important thing that Ravna
could think of. Jefri insisted on going first, with Amdi making a watch line
between the stream and the wagons. “You just stay with this end of Amdi,
okay, Ravna?”
She shrugged. “Sure.” She had known these two since they were little
kids. Modesty was an absurd notion here.
But when Jef returned, all of Amdi went down to the stream with her and
kept watch. She knelt, drinking from the edge of the fast-moving water,
away from the standing water and the gnats. She stared for a long
moment at her reflection. This was the first time she had seen her face
since Gannon smashed her. It was even worse than her touch had
promised. Well, the blow had practically killed her. She shouldn’t be
surprised that her face was a disaster area.
She took off her awful, stinky clothes. The pants and shirt were padded
canvas, oversized and misshapen—what Tines might create based on a
description of human form. Clearly, some of the kidnappers had intended
to take her alive. What nice fellows. She soaked the fabric and soaped it,
then soaked it again. Cleaning her own skin was easy by comparison,
though that was like scrubbing with ice cubes. Amdi had brought unfilthy
cloaks as towels and temporary wraps. They felt so good. Funny how
much this improved her outlook.
When she returned to the campsite, she discovered Jefri pacing about
impatiently. Amdi looked back and forth between them and said, “So, I
thought we were going to start an inventory?”
“Of course,” said Jef, a bit abruptly. “I was just keeping watch.” He

walked off toward the wagons, Ravna and Amdi trailing behind. Maybe
Jef had been afraid she’d accuse him of hiding things if he started the
inventory without her. Ravna realized she had still not figured out Jefri
Olsndot.
The two cargo wagons were big enough for gear and supplies. And for
hiding places—such as for those maps that Chitiratifor and Remasritlfeer
had been using. Jefri broke into the locked cabinets. There were no
maps, but one of the boxes held clean blankets and two more changes of
crude human clothes! The main supply bays were more familiar territory.
The food was mostly gone, especially the kind that humans could eat.
There had been one unexpected human on this expedition, but even so,
maybe Chitiratifor had expected an end to this trip—or to the humans—
relatively soon.
Ravna had seen most of the camping hardware before, but rarely in good
light. Some of this equipment was not the sort that Scrupilo’s factories
made, but neither was it medieval. Jefri held up two canteens. They
looked identical, stamped from tin or pewter. “You noticed the logo,
right?” Both canteens bore the same impression, a godlike pack
surrounding the world.
“That’s the mark of Tycoon,” said Ravna. Johanna had shown the design
at an Executive Council meeting. At the time it had seemed a very poor
payoff for three tendays scouting Tycoon’s East Coast headquarters.
“A twelvesome,” said Amdi. “He’s a confident fellow.” God was usually
shown as twelve. Any more and there were comical implications of a
choir. “I’ll bet no one has ever seen Tycoon because he’s really just a
wimpy four.”
The middle wagon contained Nevil’s technological gifts. Nevil had not
been overly generous: there was a camera and the lamps, all originally
from Oobii. The radio was locally made, one of Scrupilo’s creations. It
was as dumb as a rock, but still the Domain didn’t have enough of them.
“The radio we’re going to have to dump,” she said regretfully. It was
something that Nevil could track via the orbiter. If he was clever, he could
probably pulse the orbiter’s transmitters hard enough to get an echo even

if the radio’s charge had leaked away.
“Yes,” said Jefri, looking nervously at all the equipment. “We should get
rid of all this gear.” To him, a child of the High Beyond, machines were
capable of unfathomed sneakiness.
Ravna gathered up the camera, and poked around under the lamps. “The
cam will have to go.” She was no High Beyonder, but anyone from a tech
civilization had default assumptions about such machines. “On the other
hand, I’ve used these lamps. They’ve got a security local mode. I’ll set
that. If we’re careful when we use them, they should be fine.”
“Okay,” said Jefri, looking dubious.
Amdi was still snouting around in the cabinet. “I want to know where the
maps were. This should be where Chitiratifor and Remasritlfeer kept
them.”
Their hour or so of direct sunlight had passed. Even the snow dazzle
from high peaks was fading. “What in hell are we going to do?” said Jefri,
sounding very tired.
“One way or another,” said Ravna, “we have to get back to the Domain,
on our own, without getting ‘rescued.’ If we can get close to Oobii, I can
—” It hurt that she was afraid to tell them all that she could do.
Jef didn’t seem to notice the hesitation. “Well, I don’t want to go back the
way we came. Parts of various nasty packs may still be alive. And I don’t
want to go forward. I’ll bet there are some complete nasty packs waiting
for us ahead.”
Amdi emitted annoyed squeaking sounds. “So help me find the maps!”
“Okay.” Jefri walked forward to where Amdi had climbed up on himself to
rummage in the wagon. “Though maybe Chitiratifor had them in-pack.”
“No! Not yesterday. They’re in this wagon.”
Jefri leaned over the pack and looked down into the compartment. “There
really is nothing more there, Amdi. Trust my human vision on this.”
“Well then, it must be above or below. I watched Chitiratifor almost every

time he got the maps.”
“A secret compartment then.” Jefri walked along the side of wagon,
tapping it above and below. “It must be small and well shielded. I could
get one of the axes and open this thing up a little.”
Some of Amdi was trailing along behind him. “Maybe there’s no need. I’ll
hear it eventually. You keep tapping on the wood, and I’ll…” He built a
little pyramid of himself and snuggled close to the hull of the wagon. The
rest of him had climbed up on the wagon and hunkered down in various
places. “… and I’ll listen.”
Now the snow in the higher hills was just a lighter shade of gray against
the sky. Ravna heard something behind her. She looked around with a
start, saw four dark shadows gliding toward the wagons. It was
Screwfloss, returning from sentry duty. She gave him a little wave, and
wondered at the remnant’s on-again off-again diligence. Screwfloss lolled
about, watching Amdi and the two humans. If this had been the entire
Screwfloss, she would have been sure that he was amused by their
searching. He had his old personality, less the cheeky repartee.
She cocked her head at him and asked, “So you can do better?”
Screwfloss emitted a burbling sound, probably a chuckle. Then he got to
his feet and shambled past her. He nosed around under the wagon.
She heard a metallic click, but from the top of the wagon.
“Nice camouflage sound!” said Amdi.
“He did something down here,” said Ravna, and she ducked under the
wagon. Screwfloss was standing around, his aspect smug. One of him
was pointing at a narrow wooden platform that had swung down from the
belly of the wagon. Ravna reached up, felt a narrow ledge. She felt silken
paper within.
“Aha!” She drew a heavy, flat object into the open. “Huh?”
Yes, she was holding oilskin paper, but it was just a bag. Jefri helped her
open it. Inside was … the most opulent suite of Tinish clothing she had
ever seen, clean and new as if never worn.

Jefri thumbed through the thin wooden holders. “Six sets,” he said. “What
was crazy-asses Chitiratifor thinking?”
“This is for when he returned to his boss in triumph.”
“Maybe, but—” Jefri felt further into the bag, pulled out a small,
bejewelled disk. It glittered even in the dim light, showing Tycoon’s logo
in tiny gems. “Packs use this kind of badge the way we would a comm
token, to establish authority. I wonder—”
Amdi had swept around them. “Never mind. Where are the maps?” He
stuck a couple of snouts deep into the secret space, sweeping back and
forth as a human might search with hands. “I found them!”
Ravna and Jefri set the fancy clothes on the top of the wagon, then
helped Amdi bring his finds into the open. They stepped aside so Amdi
could unscroll them. Ravna had a glimpse of suspiciously fine graphic
artwork. Okay, it was Nevil’s data, but who did the print job?
“Wow!” said Amdi, then after a second, “But it’s so dark now, I can’t see
the details; we need those lamps.”
“I don’t want to use the lamps when the night is clear,” said Ravna—
though maybe it didn’t matter, if Nevil was tracking the radio.
Jefri reached past Amdi and lifted the maps up to a flat surface on the
back of the wagon, where the last light of day was brightest. In a
moment, Amdi was topside, heads weaving about to get the best view.
“Ha!” he said. “This is really detailed.”
“Now if we only knew where we were,” said Jefri.
Amdi glanced up into the twilight. “With maps this good, we should be
able to match to landmarks. Meantime”—three of him were still peering
nearsightedly at the map—“I know we’re about here.” He tapped the
paper with a nose.
Jefri was standing by the wagon; he was tall enough to see the map. He
looked at the spot Amdi had indicated and said, “Oh-oh.”
“What?” asked Ravna. She should get up there with Amdi.

As she climbed up top, Jefri enlightened her. “There’s a snout-drawn ‘X’,
just a few kilometers ahead. I bet we’re almost to Chitiratifor’s welcoming
committee.”
“Yup,” said Amdi.
She settled down with Amdi and looked where Jef was pointing. The ‘X’
was in a widening of the valley one to three days’ drive ahead, depending
on their own precise location. “They have a fort this near the Domain?”
“I don’t think there’s a fort there,” said Jefri. “That looks like a wide place
in the valley, not a choke point. And the ‘X’ mark is in the middle of the
open area. I’ll bet Chitiratifor—or Remasritlfeer—intended to meet some
larger party there.”
“Ha, yes,” said Amdi. “They may even think Chitiratifor is doing fine, on
schedule … except he won’t be checking in with them tonight.”
Ravna shrugged. “So we can’t go forward. And we can’t stay here. We
haven’t seen anything of Chitiratifor. Surely it can’t be that dangerous to
go back?”
“Okay,” said Jefri, but he was shaking his head. “You realize that once
the bad guys realize we’re free, that’s just the route they all will be
searching.”
Amdi was still snuffling at the map, oblivious to their dilemma. “This valley
doesn’t stay steep and cliffy forever,” he said. “See, right before the ‘X’,
there’s all sorts of paths up the eastern wall. We could wriggle out
sideways. Who’d ever think?”

Chapter   23
Johanna Olsndot roamed the strange raft, and watched her fellow-
travelers. She had no sailing skills herself, but she had been aboard
seacraft of the Domain. A common design was the multiboat, a
meshwork of pack-sized boats; individual packs could retain their identity.
Multiboats might have a central structure for larger cargo items and be
big enough so a number of packs might comfortably meet.
Even the largest Northern multiboats were smaller than the rafts in this
flotilla of ten. Johanna wondered how the mess managed to sail together.
Every raft had masts and sails, but nothing like packs to manage them.
On her raft, the mob wandered here and there, collecting in little groups
that might tug on a tiller, while others climbed in the rigging (and
sometimes fell off into the sea!). The squeaks and chirrups from above
might have been directions, though very few of those below paid any
attention.
One by one, these rafts must surely founder, perhaps the last ending up
on some faraway shore, like the shipwrecks that used to wash up on the
rocks below Starship Hill.
On the second day, she sought out one of those temporary almost-packs
that gathered near the booms and was tentatively pulling the sheets this
way or that. Not all of these Tines were sparse-haired Tropicals. Some
had deep fur pelts, scruffy and ragged and surely uncomfortable in the
heat, but very Northern-looking.
“Hei, Johanna. Hei, hei.” A clot of five was all looking at her and the
Samnorsk words were very clear. When Johanna sat down by them, the
almost-pack surrounded her, the heads bobbing with friendly regard.
“We sailing north, I think,” it said. That might be nonsense blather, since

actually they were sailing west, and the coast of the continent was just
few thousand meters to the north. But if they sailed west far enough to
round the Southwest Horn of the continent, then it would be north to the
Domain. She took a closer look at the five heads. The nearest had a
white star splash on the back of its head. It was hard to remember all the
fragments she’d known over the years, but this one … she reached out
her hand. “Cheepers?”
“Hei, some maybe, some,” it said. Wow. Cheepers would count as a
failure by broodkenner standards, but he had survived his flight from
Harmony’s Fragmentarium, and made it all the way to the Choir. Over the
years, others had too, but there were still only hundreds spread through
all the millions of the Choir. When Vendacious chased Johanna into the
Choir, when the killing swarm knocked her down, the image and the
strangeness of her must have spread at near-soundspeed across the
city. Here and there, the sight had reached some few who remembered,
and mercy percolated back. Just in time.
The almost-pack stayed with her a moment longer, then was joined by
others and reassorted. Some of them wandered off to another mast while
others merged with the larger mob that was tricking seabirds to come
down for lunch.
•  •  •
By now all the Tines on her raft seemed to recognize her. She had no
more aborted, hostile encounters. And yet, the mob did have moods. Five
nights out to sea, there was a deadly riot. Johanna hunkered down,
listened to mouth-screams of mortal pain. The next day, she saw dark
stains smeared across timbers near the edge of the raft. I hope they
weren’t fighting over me. Maybe not. Even milder fights were rare, but
she eventually saw one or two in daylight, sub-mobs of Tines facing off.
She couldn’t see any motive, nothing like food or sex—and there didn’t

seem to be enduring fighter cliques. Singletons were scarcely smarter
than dogs, but something like memes must battle around in this choir.
After a while she learned to recognize the crowd’s most harmful moods
and craziest rules. For instance, she always got in trouble if she tried to
open any of the storage boxes that were stacked everywhere, highest at
the middle of the raft. Maybe that reaction was some vagrant meme left
over from the raft squatters; maybe it was something kinkier. The wooden
sides of each box were marked with circular burn marks, a little like
Northerner hex signs. For whatever reason, nobody messed with cargo.
Perforce, Johanna spent hours each day studying her mob. This wasn’t
like the Fragmentarium; random sex and mindsound was perversity to
coherent packs, and the broodkenners did their best to suppress it. Here,
perversity was the name of the game. But these singletons rarely did
really stupid things like pissing in the raft’s rain cistern. In fact, they had
some sailor skills, and they were quite coordinated in their diving for fish.
That last was good for Jo, though raw fish could not sustain her
indefinitely.
Most coherent packs didn’t like to swim, couldn’t stand the way the water
interfered with their mindsounds. The members of the mob were not so
squeamish. In the water, they zoomed around like they were born of the
sea. Parts of her crew were in the water almost all the time—except
when something black-and-white and larger than any Tines swept
through the area. The Children called those animals whales; they
spooked the Tropicals as thoroughly as they did Northern packs.
The whales must have been loud and relatively stupid, because the Tines
seemed to know when it was safe to go back in the water. By the fourth
day, Johanna was swimming with the Tines. Over the next tenday, she
visited all the other rafts. The mobs on each were similar to those on her
own. In the end, she became familiar with all the “crews.”
On every raft, she eventually communicated the same question: “Where
are we going?” The answers were mostly variations on “we go north,” “we
go with you,” and “this big river is fun!”
She eventually returned to the first raft, partly because Cheepers was

there, but partly because she had decided that this raft had been
intended as the primary vessel of the fleet. It was the largest, certainly. It
also had an open area near the masts: the space was bounded by
drawered cabinets—not subject to the cargo taboo, though the drawers
were mostly empty. If she hadn’t hijacked the fleet, perhaps these
drawers would have held equipment for the proper crew.
The first couple of tendays were all cloudy and rainy, with open sea on
one side, and coastal jungle on the other. They were going generally
west and at a fair average speed. She did some arithmetic—not for the
first time she thanked goodness that Ravna had forced them to learn that
manual skill—and concluded that soon they would round the Southwest
Horn. Truly, this fleet might be headed for the Domain. Was I really that
persuasive? Or was this flotilla supposed to go north, and I just forced a
premature departure?
Johanna had a lot of time to think, perhaps more time than ever before in
her life. Most of that time was useless circling; some of it might save her
life.
Nevil had turned out to be evil beyond anyone’s imagination. She saw so
much in a different light now that she understood that. Since well before
he had betrayed Ravna, he had been spreading lies. She thought of all
the times he had persuaded Pilgrim and herself to steer clear of the
Tropics. For years they had searched for Tycoon, everywhere but where
he was. Now, perhaps, Nevil had overreached himself. Woodcarver and
surely Ravna had known of this flight to the Tropics. Not even Nevil’s
marvelous persuasiveness could cover things up for long now.
The first time Johanna looped through that logic, her spirits had risen—
for about three seconds, until the implications came crashing down upon
her. Who else did Nevil murder the night he crashed Pilgrim and
Johanna? If she ever got home, what allies might still live?
There will be allies. I must be smart enough to get home and find them.
So she spent a lot of time thinking about everything Nevil had ever said,
assuming every word a lie. There was a world of consequences. Nevil
said the orbiter’s vision was barely a horizon sensor, with only one-

thousand-meter resolution. What if it was better? She remembered the
orbiter; she and Jef were the only Children who had seen the inside of it.
She remembered her mom saying that there was nothing useful left
aboard. So Nevil’s claim had been plausible—but wouldn’t one-
centimeter resolution be equally plausible? Unfortunately, just assuming
Nevil lied about everything did not give her definite numbers!
The first time she’d run through this reasoning was only a day out to sea;
up until then, there’d been very little clear sky, and that had been at night.
She’d looked up into the rain and overcast and concluded that probably
Nevil’s “horizon sensor” could not see through clouds—else she would
not be around to think about the issue. And even in clear weather, the
orbiter’s surveillance could not be much better than one-meter resolution
and/or not effective at night.
Two tendays into the voyage, the sky was often clear, and stars were
visible at night. The rafts were truly headed north; Johanna was all but
certain that they had rounded the Horn. By day, she kept under the sails,
or hunkered down in a little cubbyhole she’d made for herself in the
jumble at the center of the raft. At night, she would carefully peek out.
The orbiter was a bright star, always high in the southeastern sky, further
east than it had ever been since Nevil took control. How does he explain
this to Woodcarver? Does he have to explain anything anymore? What
service does this do Vendacious and Tycoon? She had lots of such
questions and no way to get answers. The good news was that if Nevil
was searching for her, he was looking in the wrong place! She became a
little less paranoid about exposure to the sky.
Perhaps another thirty days would bring the rafts to Woodcarver’s old
capital. Then the life and death of Johanna and her friends might depend
on how quickly she could discover just what was going on in the Domain.
For a while she stewed on possible scenarios. A few more days passed.
There was only so much she could do with scenarios. She needed some
clues about where this fleet had originally been headed. She needed to
break into the cargo.
How could she persuade the mob to let her do that?

By now, Johanna had been all over the surface of all the rafts. Every one
of them was Tropic chaos, and yet they were nothing like the wrecks she
had seen in the Domain. Somebody coherent had suggested specific
design tricks. The masts and spars and rigging were much like
Woodcarvers’. The cargo boxes were regular and uniform, quite unlike
everything she associated with a choir. Now that she’d had time to study
them, she realized that the burn marks on the sides were a version of
Tycoon’s Pack of Packs logo.
Those boxes aside, the mob was quite happy to have Jo around. She
was often a real help, with her clever hands, and with her very sharp and
durable knife. In many ways the mob was more fun than coherent packs.
These creatures were all among themselves, playing and fighting like
young children—leaving aside their occasional fits of madness and their
rule about cargo tampering.
Sometimes, they would break apart in the middle of some serious job and
start playing with the elastic balls that seemed to have no other function
than mob amusement. (The balls floated in water, but every day a few
more were lost overboard. They would not be an unending source of fun.)
Other times, especially at night, the Tines would gather in a mass on the
highest part of the raft. Across the water, the same would happen on the
other rafts. All together, they roared and hissed, and sometimes sang
pieces of Straumer music overheard years ago in the Domain. At dawn,
most would come down and fool around in quieter ways. Some would
dribble off the edges of the raft to fish. Johanna had plenty of opportunity
to try little experiments. She had almost ten years of experience with
packs and singletons and pieces of packs—but that was under
broodkenner rules, and Northern notions of acceptable behavior.
She’d found lots that was new and bizarre here. Choirs were almost as
strange compared to coherent packs as the packs were, compared to
humans. She found a shaded spot high on the raft. She could stand there
and be seen by almost everyone on board. When she shouted to them,
some heads would turn in her direction. The few who understood
Samnorsk were enough so that all the mob had some idea of her

meaning. Of course, this wasn’t a super-intelligence, but it was a
different-intelligence. In some ways dumb as a dog, yet a choir could do
local search-and-optimization better than any pack or natural human. She
could ask it questions—“Where are the play balls?”—and within seconds,
all the balls on the raft seemed to be bouncing in the air, even ones that
she had carefully hidden the day before. She looked across the hundred
meters of sea to the two nearest rafts. Yellow balls were bouncing into
the air there, too!
Hmm. Choirs could do miracles of local optimization, but they couldn’t
see the big picture, they couldn’t see across the vastness of the search
space to connect results. They were like a spreadthink toy without an
aggregator. That limitation applied to everything from the space of ideas
to the space of … fishing.
Once she had the idea, making it work took almost a tenday of preaching
to the choir—and the choirs on the other rafts. Often, they didn’t want to
play. Since the fleet had turned north, the sea and the air had gotten
steadily colder, the storms deadlier. The water was too cold for even the
Tines to comfortably fish. The mobs’ mood was grumpy and sullen. But
day by day, she achieved more complex results. Finally there were
temporary godsgifts who would climb the masts and shout out fragments
of Interpack or Samnorsk about the schools of fish they were seeing.
Eventually, the coordination included the part-time sail masters, and the
fleet managed to catch enough fish with just a fraction of the swim time.
Credit assignment was a near-incomprehensible idea for a choir, but
Johanna liked to think that the Tines trusted her more after this success.
They certainly tried harder to understand what she asked of them—and
were quicker to do what they thought she wanted. Maybe it was safe for
her to break into Tycoon’s cargo boxes.
From furtive experiments, she had learned that the boxes were tough, not
designed for easy in-and-out privileges. Her knife was not up to the job.
Okay. But she’d found a steel prybar in one of those drawered cabinets
by the masts. It looked a lot like the leveraging tools used by packs up
north. Given the prybar and some time, she could break into a cargo box.

After a morning storm—the sort of meatgrinder that had killed several
Tines before her riverboat sailors got serious about safety tiedowns—
Johanna noticed that one of the cargo boxes had slipped partway off the
central mound. As usual, the mob tried to prevent more slippage. As
usual, the result was a mishmash of ropes, fastened with variously
effective knots. She noticed a crack in the box’s wood panelling, black tar
oozing out—waterproofing?
She watched the crowd swirl around the box, Tines bobbing and
bouncing, somewhat more incompetent than usual. Another time, they
might have noticed the crack, but not today. Johanna waited till the crowd
drifted away, mostly to huddle together under a “stolen” sail on the lee
side of the raft. The cold weather affected the Tropicals the most, but
everybody was suffering. Sorry guys. If I hadn’t persuaded you to hijack
this fleet …
This side of the raft was about as Tines-free as it ever got; Johanna
grabbed her prybar and scrambled across to the damaged cargo box.
“Just doing repairs,” she said. Her words should be audible to everyone
on the raft, and they might give her some protection via the Tines who
understood Samnorsk. She slipped the prybar into the cracked panel—
and hesitated an instant. The sound of breaking wood could bring all hell
down her.
She didn’t get a chance to test this possibility, for even as she hesitated
there came a bass honking behind her. She glanced over her shoulder.
Powers! It was Tines on another raft, up in the rigging. Maybe it was a
crazy-diligent fish watcher, but now it was watching her—and raising the
alarm!
Within seconds her own mob came surging back, hissing all around her.
Johanna dropped to her knees, tilted her head to the side and turned her
hands outward. That was about as nonthreatening as a human could get
with Tines.
Jaws snapped close, lunging, tipping toward a killing flood. But the crowd
coming up behind the first wave wasn’t pushing inward. Here and there,
thoughtful clusters tried to form. Just now there was too much anger and

chaos for that to work: the almost-packs lasted for bare seconds before
they were shouted down, before they shouted each other down.
Johanna leaned back against the cracked cargo box. She hoped the
gesture might seem protective of it. In fact, some of the most threatening
heads moved back a bit, and the roar of humanly audible sound
diminished. She looked around, trying to spot any grouping she might
use as an intermediary. No, they were still all mobbed together. Okay.
She had talked to the whole mob before: “Please listen to my words,”
Johanna said. “We go North. True?”
The mob’s effort to comprehend was so strong she could feel the buzz.
Finally a single word of Samnorsk sounded. “Yes,” and then a dribble of
other words, like echoes: “To Domain.” “To home.” “To old home.”
Johanna bobbed her head, a singleton form of a nod. “I can help. But I
need to know more.”
The mob continued to dither, the buzz of mindsound growing stronger
and stronger. This was a situation where a godsgift would really be one.
But the mob didn’t make the space. Instead it swayed back and forth, its
Tines shuffling about. After some seconds, another bit of Samnorsk
floated in the air: “Trusting you.”
•  •  •
So Johanna got a peek into the damaged cargo box, maybe a big
insight into Vendacious’ master plan. As the mob watched, all quiet and
nervous looking, she split open the wood covering, pulled back the tarry
waterproofing goo … and a cascade of yellow play balls bounced onto
the deck. The crowd forgot itself as it variously grabbed and bounced the
balls, sending most of them right back in Jo’s direction.
Okay! A fix for the incipient shortage of play balls! Behind the yellow balls
was a wall of tidy bricks. But they were soft to her touch. She used her

prybar to lever the tightly wedged objects free, then pushed the loose
mass out into the open. When she recognized the cargo, she stepped
quickly out of the way and gave a loud whistle. The crowd continued to
play with the balls for a few seconds, but Jo could see a ripple of
understanding pass around it. The cargo box was mostly full of heavy
jacket-cloaks. In another second, the yellow balls were forgotten as the
mob swarmed down on the promise of warmth.
•  •  •
The box didn’t contain enough cloaks for everybody. There was much
pushing and shoving all around the crate, but nobody got killed. Very
quickly, the notion of breaking into more of Tycoon’s cargo outweighed
the taboo against such activity. Johanna led the way with her steel
prybar. They found many more cloaks, another box that was mostly play
balls, and a very well-sealed store of smoked meat. At this point, the mob
was totally preoccupied with the plunder. Johanna decided not to risk
spoilage with more exploration. She wrapped herself in a couple of
cloaks and retreated to her usual cubbyhole to think about what had been
discovered: So the top layers of cargo were just supplies, set by planners
who expected this to be a long voyage. Was Tycoon’s deliverable cargo
further down? Or maybe she’d stolen the fleet before both its proper crew
and main cargo had been put aboard.
All over the raft, Tines were playing with their new clothes, trying them
on, making little tents out of them. At the same time, they were passing
around the smoked meat. She’d never seen such Tinish enthusiasm for
cold, dead flesh; well, it wasn’t fish.
Very loud gangs of Tines had gathered at the edges of the raft, flaunting
their warm cloaks at the rest of the fleet. Their shouting was mainly
Interpack but she heard her name in it.
Johanna watched the Tines on the other rafts. At first, they responded

with bogus counter-brags, but there was also much clueless cocking of
heads.
Finally the mob on the nearest raft—the one with the snoopy Tine who
had ratted on Johanna—seemed to get the idea. The mob swarmed their
top cargo boxes, slashing at them with claws and jaws, pounding them
with weighted ropes. This went on for five or ten minutes with no
success; the Tycoon boxes were proof against unaided Tines. What the
mob needed was Johanna’s prybar—or someone of human or pack
intelligence.
The futile assault subsided as the mob backed off and hunkered down.
Any second now, its unity of purpose would dribble away.… But no: The
mob spread out, creating a kind of belly-down mesh across their raft.
They were chanting, rhythmic whoops that swept up through Johanna’s
hearing into silence, and then started low again. After several minutes,
the chanting ended; the Tines hesitated, silent. Abruptly, they scrambled
to their feet and began dancing. Well, hopping up and down, anyway.
They danced on and on, a beat that circled their raft in time with the sea
waves, and in time with the movements of their cargo. Almost
impercepibly, the whole platform began to tip and sway. The oscillations
grew. The cargo boxes at the top of the raft’s pile were free to move
since the mob’s initial assault had cut them loose. First one crashed
down and then another and another. The effect was worse—or more
effective—than storm damage. The avalanche of shattering wood swept
half the pile into the sea. So much for Tycoon’s cargo taboo!
Now the sea around the raft was crowded with boxes and pieces of
boxes. She could see heads in the water and Tines hanging on to the
main wreck. It was much like the raft disasters she remembered in the
Domain—except that in this case no one was being smashed into a rocky
shore. Tines paddled out from what remained of their raft in some kind of
salvage and rescue operation. As the sun slid down to the sea, it looked
like most everybody had managed to return to the surviving part of their
raft.
That evening, the sounds from the other rafts seemed generally happy.

Each had succeeded with its own “shakedown” demolition—though the
Choir on the half-wrecked raft sounded more boastful than any. The
gobbling and honking only got louder as the wind picked up. Johanna sat
in her usual place, but well-fed and wrapped up toasty warm. What
wonderful things were Tinish storm jackets—even if they were narrow
and short, and the tympana cutouts so terribly drafty.
She watched as the moon rose higher and the festivities became wilder.
It was the usual mix of chanting and orgy and mad rushing around. And
yet, tonight there was a difference. Every few minutes a singleton or a
duo or trio would shyly approach her. Almost every group brought her
some gift, an extra cloak, a block of smoked meat. In some ways, this
reminded Johanna of the Fragmentarium. There, too, she had wistful,
friendly relations with creatures who could not quite understand what was
going on—but who were grateful for her help. For all the hard times of
this voyage, the rafts were a happier place than the Fragmentarium. Here
her friends weren’t haunted by the fear that they would never become
people again. Choirs didn’t look at these issues the way broodkenners
did!
The celebration peaked around midnight with a serious attempt at
synchrony between all the rafts. The screeching pounded a rhythm that
beat against similar sounds from across the water. For a brief time, the
combination warbled like a single voice, a huge, slow, coherence.
Johanna drowsed. She was vaguely aware that even though the
celebration had quieted, individual Tines were still snouting around. They
weren’t going to get into any more cargo boxes without her prybar.
Hmmm, unless they tried to shake the whole raft apart; that was
something she’d have to discourage … tomorrow. She burrowed deeper
into the warm cloaks and gave in to sleep.
Some unknown time later: “What’s this? What’s this? What’s this?” A
snout was poking her shoulder.
“Whuh?” Johanna struggled back to wakefulness. It wasn’t morning. Not
at all. The moon was only halfway down the sky. By its light she could
see the crowd surrounding her. A trio that included Cheepers stood

closest.
“What’s this?” Cheepers said again, and another of the trio stepped
toward her, giving her a small box that glittered like dark glass in the
moonlight.
“Powers!” she swore softly. What glittered in the moonlight was the solar-
electric side of a torsion antenna. This was one of the analog radios
Scrupilo had built. Each had taken significant effort. Pride aside, Scrupilo
had had important uses for each of them. She remembered him
complaining every time one was missing.
“What’s this?” Cheepers—the whole crowd, really—continued to ask.
Johanna looked up. “It’s a radio.” At best, its peer-to-peer range would be
a few kilometers, but with the orbiter relaying, it could reach across the
world—all the way to Vendacious and Nevil.
“Where did you find it?” she said.
The Cheepers trio gestured toward the pile of junk around the masts. Ah,
up where she had found the prybar, maybe. This radio must have been
intended for the proper crew.
From somewhere in the crowd, someone else said, “Heard it.”
Heard it? She held the box close to her ear. If it hadn’t been in the sun,
its charge should be down and—she heard faint sounds! The orbiter’s
signal must be strong. The message was Tinish, a simple chord repeated
again and again: “Answer if you hear.”
“It’s not dead,” Cheepers said helpfully.
“… Yes,” said Johanna, thinking fast. She noticed that the send button
was in the off position. “But it’s dying, right?” she said.
Heads drooped, a wave of despondency that spread beyond her vision.
“Maybe. We shout louder and louder, but it not hear.”
The trio thought a second more, maybe listening to advice from the larger
group. Then it added, “Voice sound dead.”
Yeah, it wasn’t surprising the transmission sounded strange. No doubt it

was an audio loop. Tines could repeat sounds with great fidelity, but
doing so again and again bored them.
“We bring to you, right? You fix?”
Sure. Fixing it would amount to waiting for sunrise and then pressing the
send button. Then her friends could chat with Vendacious and innocently
report that Johanna would arrive in the Domain some tenday soon.
She looked around at Cheepers and all the rest. She had to lie to them.
Closer to the Domain, this gadget might be very useful, but for now she
should just disable the snout-friendly send button. That could be tricky.
She had seen how this mob played with objects that interested them.
They’d bounce the radio around, maybe even break it—but they’d also
tweak and push at things in ways she hadn’t imagined. Watching the mob
play with puzzles reminded Johanna of little Wenda Larsndot. That girl’s
naive fumbling was a constant source of surprise. Once she’d even
bypassed a cabinet lock to play inside the gear train of her parents’ loom;
Wenda, Jr. was lucky she hadn’t killed herself. These Tines would
eventually either break the radio or get it into send mode.
Johanna turned the box this way and that, pretending to inspect it. Finally
she said, “It’s almost dead, but I can help it.” A happy movement swept
across the Tines. “But it may take days.”
The Cheepers trio drooped, and as Jo’s meaning spread, wider distress
was evident. But the choir trusted her now more than ever, and over the
next few minutes the crowd dispersed. Johanna made a big deal of
taking extra cloaks and making a nest for the sacred object. Then she
wrapped her own cloaks around herself and the nest.
Cheepers and his trio were all that remained nearby. They looked at her
hesitantly.
“I will care for the radio every minute,” Johanna promised.
They dithered a moment more, maybe wondering if they should break
apart or stay the night with her. Then they bobbed their heads and turned
to leave. Whew.

“We go,” said Cheepers and his friends. “Listen to the other radios.”
“What?”
“In boxes. Fours of fours of fours of radios.”

Chapter   24
Bili Yngva was the number two player in Nevil Storherte’s Disaster
Study Group. Privately, Bili considered himself the brains of the operation
and Nevil the smooth-talking mouth. Thus Bili was always amazed at how
much scutwork he ended up with. For instance, somebody had to do
maintenance aboard Oobii. The starship was the center of power on this
world and the highest system technology for lightyears around. Lose
control of Oobii and the DSG would fall in a matter of days. The traitors,
the know-nothings, and the dog-lovers would take over. More likely, the
local warlord would kill all the humans, dog-lovers or not. Woodcarver
was a deadly threat even when she was at the mercy of Oobii.
Whoever did maintenance had to have admin authority over the starship.
Very rightly, Nevil didn’t trust anyone but himself and Bili Yngva with that
power. So, natch, Bili ended up here most nights, “master of the world.”
Bili switched from camera to camera, snooping around through places
that Woodcarver and Scrupilo thought were their private territory. It might
have been fun if it weren’t so tedious. Without a doubt, Oobii was the
dumbest piece of automation Bili had ever encountered. In the High
Beyond, there were ribosome plugins smarter than this starship. Sitting
here at the local Pinnacle of Everything just reminded Bili of how low they
were in the pits of hell. He could almost see why the dog-lovers had gone
native. If you wanted to do anything with the Oobii, it had to be done
manually. The ship couldn’t think tactically, much less do strategic
planning. All that must be done by Nevil and—mostly—Bili. The starship
was simply too dumb for a real genius like Gannon Jorkenrud to use. And
if you let the ship putter forward on its own defaults, all sorts of terrible
crap would start to happen.
This was where Bili really missed Ravna Bergsndot. Powers, what a

slope-skulled Neanderthal that Sjandran was. Yes, she looked like a
human, but just talk to her for a few minutes and you realized you were
trying to make points with a monkey. On the other hand, her limitations
had made her a perfect match for Oobii. Bili remembered the thousands
of hours she had spent here, working out the tedious details that made
this little settlement possible. Hell, it was what he was trying to adapt for
his own project. It was a shame she’d been so bloody dangerous.
Bili pulled up the notes he had compiled for his Best Hope planning: they
just sat there, drawing only the simplest conclusions from the latest spy
camera surveillance. Both Johanna Olsndot and the pack Pilgrim were
definitively out of the picture. That had weakened Woodcarver as much
as the disappearance of the Bergsndot woman, but there were a lot of
loose ends.
Gannon must be retrieved. Unfortunately, Eyes Above 2 was proving
hellishly difficult to operate; after all, it was a machine from before the
dawn of technology. For that matter, Oobii had lost track of Gannon’s
expedition! Bili had shifted the orbiter some degrees eastwards, trying to
get a better view of the search area. So far he had found nothing.
Nevil’s contacts with Woodcarver’s enemies claimed Ravna Bergsndot
was dead, or soon would be. Okay, if that’s the way it had to be. But even
with her gone, Woodcarver had managed to co-opt more of the Children.
If they demanded another election and if Nevil couldn’t smooth-talk his
way to another victory—well, then Nevil said (very privately, just to Bili)
that maybe they should use Oobii against their own classmates. Nevil
figured it would just be a few deaths, a temporary tyranny. Besides, he
said, tyranny was the natural organizational form Down Here. Maybe so,
but Nevil had gotten way too bloody-minded; now he’d upgraded the
ship’s beam gun with an amplifier stage. We should be protecting
humanity. We need everyone if we’re going to climb back to the
Transcend. Bili was working on an alternative plan to cope with a
Woodcarver attack, something that wouldn’t harm any more Children,
whatever their loyalties—and would leave the Disaster Study Group in a
position to counter-move at its leisure. He just had to model the thing

clearly enough to convince Nevil.
Bili forced his mind to plod through the endless detail that was necessary
to work with Oobii. How had humankind ever survived the dark ages of
Slow Zone programming…?
When next he noticed the time, it was nearing morning. This was going to
turn into an all-nighter. He must have been at it for another hour or so,
when Oobii began acting strangely. That wasn’t unusual, of course. Any
time you asked Oobii for something novel, however simple, you were
also asking for new stupidity. At first, this latest weirdness just looked like
more bugs: three million lines of intermediate code had just collapsed into
a few squiggles of script that Bili didn’t recognize. The so-called “results
window” started scrolling sentences in simple Samnorsk. At first he
thought it was another of those infinitely useless stack tracebacks that
happened every time the system claimed that Bili had made a mistake.
Something was flashing a friendly shade of green at him. It was a
warning from the resource monitor. He’d set that up to watch for secret
grabs by players such as the Bergsndot woman. With both her and
Ristling gone, this would be somebody else messing around. Øvin
Verring? Øvin was more and more a pain in the neck, but he wasn’t the
kind who conspired. Wait. Resource use was, huh, over one hundred
percent. For a moment Bili couldn’t make sense of the representation—
and of course Oobii made no effort to enlighten him. Now usage was at
100% times ten thousand! Maybe Oobii had found a new way to go
wrong. Over the next five seconds, usage increased to 100% times
seven million. And then he noticed that the user was listed as … Bili
Yngva.
Somebody is jerking me around. And this was not some school-chum
jape. He searched wildly for options. Could he shut this down? That
green resource alarm—he’d never seen that before. He queried help, and
for once got a relevant reply:

The resource monitor notes that the ship has upgraded to standard
processing components. The ship is now handling your planning job in
state—0 which is only ten million times greater than the capacity of the
Slow Zone emergency processors. For more reasonable performance,
you should consider asking for non-deterministic extensions.
“Holy shit,” he said softly. This could mean only one thing. The great
darkness had ebbed; Tines World was no longer in the Slow Zone. The
walls around him shimmered, jobs wakening. Some of these tasks must
be ten years old, suspended when Pham Nuwen had done his killing.
Most of the jobs flickered into termination, the ship recognizing that they
were no longer relevant. A few jobs grew across Bili’s vision. His painfully
constructed planning program was being rewritten, being merged with the
Oobii’s tech archive, which was now running with something like internal
motivation.
Bili watched the process for several seconds, shocked into immobility.
The displays were mostly unintelligible, but he recognized the inference
patterns. This was mid-Beyond automation, perhaps the best Oobii had
ever been capable of. Bili was surprised to feel tears come to his eyes,
that something so simple-minded could bring such a surge of joy. I can
work with this. He waved for an interface, but felt no increased
understanding. Shit. Maybe all the salvage wrecking they’d done on Oobii
had destroyed the capability. Or maybe the ship had never been that
capable. He leaned forward, watching the patterns. It didn’t really matter.
He could see that the basic patterns were Beyonder. Reality graphics
should be possible, even if they had to bootstrap from natural matter. He
looked from process to process, probing with questions, thinking about
the answers and the consequences. Most of the thinking still had to go on
inside his head, but after ten years he’d gotten pretty good at that.
Then he hit the most important insight of all. And apparently it was a gift
from Ravna Bergsndot: a set of simple windows that pointed him where
he should have been looking all along. The bitch had known something
like this could happen! She’d set the Oobii to run a zonograph, to monitor

the relevant physical laws. But what had just happened was orders of
magnitude greater than that program’s detection threshold. It was so
great that Oobii had restarted its standard automation.
He pushed the other projects aside, waved for more detail and
explanation.… Okay, Bergsndot had used a seismic metaphor for shifts
in the zone boundary. Bili’s lips twisted into a smile. That made sense,
depending on your model’s probability distribution. In this case, hah!
Maybe the better metaphor was the ending of sleep state. The shift had
begun one hundred seconds earlier, but had risen so fast that Oobii could
go to its standard mode automation less than ten seconds later.
Improvement had leveled off over the next minute, but now the physics
was mid-Beyonder. A reasonable starship—even the Out of Band II, if
they hadn’t gutted it—could fly at dozens of lightyears per hour. For this
region of space, that was better than status quo ante Pham Nuwen. And
that meant …
Rescue was not centuries in the future, the remote promise that
Bergsndot’s twisted mind considered a threat. She had always claimed
that the rescue fleet was just thirty lightyears away. Now on Tines World,
the Zone physics was still improving. What was it like thirty lightyears
higher?
Bili turned the zonograph program this way and that, trying to see the
state of near interstellar space. Oobii was smart enough that it should be
helping. Oh. Explanations hung all around his various demands. The only
accessible zone probes were onboard. If the ship had slightly more
distant stations—even a lightyear away—a reasonable extrapolation
might be made.
Bili waved down the objections and forced an extrapolation, presumably
based on historical gradients. The result came back in the pale violet of
extreme uncertainty. Bili was warned. Nevertheless … the windows
showed a fleet of dozens of starships, translating under ultradrive. The
rescuers were thirty lightyears zone-higher, and the violet estimate
showed a pseudo-velocity of fifty lightyears per hour. Rescue was not
centuries or even years away. It would arrive within the hour.

The hard numbers from the ship’s instruments showed that the Zone
improvements had leveled off. It didn’t matter! After today, this exile
would just be a very bad memory. With working ultradrive, the rescuers
could take them higher and higher, finally reaching the Transcend. There,
borkners like Gannon and Jefri (at least if this world had not completely
destroyed Jef’s potential) could rebuild the High Lab, complete what their
parents and all of Straumli Realm had dreamed of.
In less than an hour they could say good-bye to this soul-sucking trap.
Huh? In the violet display, the estimated fleet velocity had fallen to thirty
lightyears per hour. Yeah, but that was vaporous conjecture. Oobii’s
zonograph still showed—Bili’s eyes flickered around the displays; data
fusion was next to impossible Down Here. The ship’s zonograph showed
local conditions degrading. Maximum possible ultradrive velocity right
here, right now, was fifteen lightyears per hour. Twelve.
So what does it matter? Rescue might be an hour away, or a day. Or a
tenday. But a sickening chill spread up from Bili’s gut. Maybe Pham
Nuwen’s Zone Shift was not a diseased sleep. Maybe Ravna Bergsndot
had had the right metaphor.
Conditions still degrading. The hard local estimate: five lightyears per …
year. No, no, no! The violet fleet was just twenty lightyears out,
broadjump distance if you were at the Top of the Beyond.
Two lightyears per year. Operation alarms were flickering all over. Oobii
couldn’t maintain standard computation in this deadly environment. Bili
waved for it to try.
Afterwards, Bili realized that it was unwise to make demands of Beyonder
automation when it was near its operational limits; you might win the
argument. The zonograph estimate hit 1.0 lightyears per year—and all
around him the displays reformatted, or simply crashed. The ship’s
lighting brightened, but Bili knew that it and he and all of Tines World had
fallen back into stygian darkness.
He sat in the programmatic ruins for a moment, too shocked to move. For
just—193 seconds according to a surviving clock display—salvation had

been at hand. Now it was jerked away. He just wanted to start bawling.
Instead he forced himself to survey the damage. During those three
minutes, the Oobii had probably done more solid computation than it had
in the last ten years. There were the results of his planning project—now
reinforced with technical details for using their surviving equipment, and
political options for Nevil. There was the record of the Zone surge itself.
Maybe they could learn from that what more progress might be expected.
There was … there was ongoing data loss! The ship had run on its
standard processors right till the Slow Zone crashed down on it. The
transition to backup computation had been successful, but translating
data to passive/dumb formats had been interrupted. Absent intelligent
refresh, the physical memories themselves were fading. What was left,
even the passives, needed manual backup immediately.
Bili hunched forward, waving commands. Don’t panic. He had lots of
practice getting things done in this environment. Don’t skip any steps,
don’t make any mistakes. Don’t panic. If Nevil and Øvin or Merto had
been online, all working together, they could have saved almost
everything. Yeah, but what did the dogs say? “If wishes were froghens
we’d never go hungry?” The dogs knew the limits of their world, even
though they didn’t recognize them as limits.
Bili managed to capture almost all the data from his planning program.
From the headers, it looked like good stuff, insight that would help him
persuade Nevil that Best Hope was doable. Unfortunately, he couldn’t tell
how much detail had survived reformatting. And partway through his
rescue of the Best Hope data, a burning smell rose from the zonograph
displays, the classic diagnostic for lost data. Damn it, I can’t be
everywhere at once! He riffled through Bergsndot’s notes. The program
itself was a simple sequential, something that would have made sense to
the earliest humans. That kind of recipe did not easily get lost. But the
violet analysis and the raw zonograph session, those were gone.
He ran a quick heal on the zonograph spew and restarted the program.
Meantime, he finished an oh-so-gentle foldup of his Best Hope output.
And finally, he did what Nevil would complain that he should have done

first thing:
“Ship, give me a secure link to Nevil.” Bili was firmly back in caveman
mode now. He even remembered to specify that the link be secure.
Among other things, that meant the comm would go to Nevil’s head-up
display, or by direct line of sight to Nevil’s town house.
Unfortunately, there was only one HUD left, and Nevil was just as careful
as Ravna Bergsndot had been about using it. Nearly ten seconds
passed, and then a woman replied: “Yeah?”
“Um, hei Tami. May I speak to Nevil, please?”
“Hei Bili. Nevil went up to Newcastle—you know, getting ready for the big
protest against Woodcarver’s conspiracy. He made me stay behind to be
his answering machine. So what’s your message?” There was a pouting
tone to her voice. Tami was no Johanna Olsndot, but she could be
trouble in other ways. Bili wasn’t quite sure what Nevil saw in her.
“No, that’s okay, I’ll catch him at the meeting. Thanks, Tam.”
•  •  •
Bili stared at the zonograph display for a moment more. It was showing
low levels of random noise. Most likely, the Slow Zone was again
lightyears deep above them. But that could change in seconds … or
years. And Nevil had to be told immediately. Nevertheless, Bili took a few
minutes to make sure nothing open-ended was running, nothing that
would fry its own output if there were another surge/crash.
He hustled off the command deck, down to the great meeting hall. For a
wonder, the place was empty. Somehow, Nevil had persuaded
everybody, even the die-hard dog-lovers to attend the rally. Maybe folks
were finally getting the message: with Bergsndot and Johanna gone, they
had only one hope for salvation and that was Nevil and the DSG.

He stepped out of doors, into a solid wall of cold. Fortunately, the air was
still and he didn’t freeze anything. He stepped back into the relative
warmth of the entranceway and buttoned up his jacket. Even as he stood
there, the first rays of the morning sun lit the hillside above him, showing
the town houses along Queen’s Road all the way to the roofs of
Newcastle town. Beyond that stood the castle’s marble dome—the Dome
of the Lander.
It was another perfectly normal morning at the nether end of nowhere, all
thanks to Pham Nuwen and the fungus that came down with the Lander.
Bili knew the stories about the day Pham Nuwen raised the Slow Zone
high, how the sun had gone dark and the packs had danced in madness.
The surge this morning—Bili couldn’t see any evidence of it. Most likely
he was the only person on this world who had noticed a thing. It had not
been a grand change in the universe. It had been just a tiny slip back
toward the natural equilibrium.
As Bili started the long walk to Newcastle, some of his frustration slipped
away. Salvation had been snatched away at the last second, but this was
a message. Rescue was on the way, and it would arrive sooner rather
than later.

Chapter   25
“Escape by wriggling out sideways.” Amdi’s suggestion was much
easier said than done. The wriggling began with a midnight sneak several
kilometers closer to the sinister ‘X’ on Chitiratifor’s map. They forded the
river at a fast-moving shallows, under a merciless rain. Once safely
across, Ravna decided to be heartened by the weather. The storm might
mask them from any enemy scouts. The clouds (probably) meant that
Nevil’s orbiter could not see them. And the rain had swatted down the
armies of gnats that had so enjoyed yesterday’s sunny warmth.
The path Amdi had found on the maps should eventually take them over
mountain passes into another rift valley. The “Wild Principates” was one
of the less geologically active rifts, but its name was a confession of
ignorance. Its last valley-long blowup had occurred perhaps a thousand
years earlier. Afterwards, settlers had trickled into the region, risking
merely local catastrophes. Two hundred years ago, such an eruption in
the northern part of the valley had suffocated every last member of
Woodcarver’s colony there. Queen Woodcarver had a long memory for
such things; she had not been back.
Compared to the alternatives, the geological risks were entirely
acceptable to Ravna and company.
As they climbed out of the valley, the wind picked up and lightning
slammed into the cliffs above them. Nothing came falling down, but their
path was narrow and the racket made the kherhogs nervous.
After about half an hour of this, she noticed that the lightning had
somehow triggered the tamper alarm on the lamps in the middle wagon.
The alarm pattern flickered from cracks in the cabinetry. This didn’t
further upset the kherhogs, but it was very distracting to Ravna—and to
Amdi, some of whom were driving the wagon behind her.

“It’s all the lamps,” he said to her. “Um, um, They’re coordinating in
phase! See the rainbows along the side of your wagon?”
“I know. Don’t worry, Amdi. It should stop after the storm,” unless Nevil
was smart enough to be probing from the orbiter—but even that would be
a useful bit of information. “Just keep your eyes on the road.” It was
better advice for her than for him, considering how many eyes he had
available.
The alarm display lasted only another minute or two. Eventually the
winds calmed and the lightning retreated. The rain continued, sometimes
in icy sheets so dense she couldn’t see beyond her kherhog’s ears. Then
there would be a minute or two during which she could see partway
across the valley, to where the storm looked more like drifting fog. They
were far above the valley forest. Good-bye crusherbushes and arrow
trees and stately bannerwood. Up here, the trees were thick and twisted,
guarding snowbanks slowly melting in the rain.
The one of Amdi beside her had hunkered down, looking miserable; the
rain was a powerful damper on his mindsound. She just hoped the ones
on the rear wagon were enough to keep it on the road. In places, the path
was defined by cliff rock on one side and vague mist on the other. When
the downpour eased, she had scary views of how far she would fall if her
kherhog strayed off the path.
Screwfloss kept close together, mostly ahead of Jefri’s wagon. Last night,
after revealing the maps, the remnant had been no help at all. When
Amdi explained to him about cutting east and asked about the risk of
detection, the remnant just stood around cocking its heads in all
directions, a kind of sarcastic shrug. But today the pack was really
helping. When the path disappeared or appeared to fork, Screwfloss
would scramble above and below them. Then he’d come back into sight
and lead them forward. Several times they’d had to dismount and lever
rocks clear of their way, but they’d always made progress, more
eastward and upwards than not.
Just now, Screwfloss was heading toward the last wagon. The Amdi
member beside her twisted around to watch. “I think he’s checking on the

spare kherhog,” he said. The extra draft animal followed the third wagon,
on a short tether.
As the remnant passed she glanced down. As usual, the limper affected
the pack’s collective gait, but … She had gotten very used to the pack’s
appearance. There were two members with white blazes across their
heads, so perfectly symmetrical they had to be littermates. One was the
poor fellow whose leg she’d broken. The limp made the critter impossible
to miss, but now the border of its white blaze was smeared like … like a
cheap dye job.
Huh? Aren’t there enough mysteries? The thought flitted through her
mind, and then her kherhog slipped a half-meter downslope—and all her
attention was back where it should be, on surviving the day.
•  •  •
The rain continued into the afternoon twilight, but now they were past
the worst of the climbing. Their little caravan trundled along the edge of
alpine meadows. If not for the overcast, the orbiter’s cameras could
probably have spotted them. Jefri cajoled additional kilometers out of the
kherhogs, finally stopping where Amdi judged a cliff side would keep
them out of sight of the orbiter even in sunny daytime.
“Unless Nevil maneuvers it again,” said Ravna.
“Yes.” The eightsome looked skyward nervously. “I gotta think. I spread
myself too thin today.”
Screwfloss did some climbing, maybe looking for rockfall threats. When
he came back, he circled forward, indicating where they should put the
wagons.
By now, everyone but Ravna had plenty of practice with the scutwork.
Despite the rain, they soon had the fodder set out for the kherhogs.
Screwfloss started a campfire and they sat down to eat.

“Even cooked, this stuff still tastes like crap,” said Jefri.
“The salted meat is worse,” said Amdi.
“Ah,” said Ravna. “Then the good news is that we’re almost out of food.”
Screwfloss did not add to the chitchat, but he was chewing
unenthusiastically. Being crippled and only four, maybe he wasn’t up for
normal Tinish hunting. She noticed that he kept a speculative eye on one
of the kherhogs, the nearly lame animal they’d been keeping behind
Amdi’s wagon. Screwfloss and Jefri had worked on the kherhog’s front
paw, removing a jammed rock. The creature might do some work
tomorrow, but it was smart enough to realize that the implicit contract with
its meat-eating masters was in jeopardy. Now, it uneasily returned
Screwfloss’ gaze.
“Well, I figure we’re at the midpoint of the cut across,” said Amdi.
Ravna remembered what they had seen on the maps, in the valley that
lay ahead. There had been scattered settlements. “We’ll find some place
we can stop and trade for food.”
Amdi said, “The Tines we’ll meet down there, very likely they’ve never
seen humans before.”
Ravna looked from Amdi to Jef. “You think they might attack us out of
hand, the way Steel’s troops killed your parents?”
Jefri looked around thoughtfully, then shook his head. “Steel was Old
Flenser’s madpack, conditioned for over-the-top treachery.”
“It won’t be like Steel,” said Amdi. “There are still a lot of unpleasant
possibilities. I’m sure that people in the Principates have heard of
humans, but—”
“Okay,” said Ravna. “Maybe Jefri and I could stay out of sight at first. You
and Screwfloss could pose as lone travellers. If we have to, we could
trade them our lamps, maybe other things. We can get past the initial
encounter, guys. The question is, what then? We have to get home fast,
and without anyone noticing—until we want to be noticed.”
Jefri hunched forward, his hands making a thatchy mess of his hair.

Abruptly he sat back. “I’ll bet we’d be rescued by now if Jo and Pilgrim
were still around. Nevil must have acted against more than just you,
Ravna. We may end up having to rescue everyone else.”
“I can do it, Jefri,” said Ravna. “Just get me to Oobii.”
He gave her a strange look. “You can take control so easily? And yet you
let Nevil just push you aside?”
Ravna felt her face warm. “You think I was a fool for that?”
Jef looked away. She couldn’t tell if he was angry, or contemptuous—but
when he continued, his voice was mild: “Counting Nevil, we have three
enemies looking for us. We have evidence that none of them is above
betraying the others, but we don’t know exactly what each wants. Maybe
Tycoon really wants us for some kind of zoo. Vendacious’ goon was
mainly interested in quietly killing us—you, anyway—while pretending to
take us to Tycoon. I think Nevil just wants you out of the way. With you
gone, he’ll have Oobii all to himself.” He looked back at her. “In any case,
by now all three factions must know that we’ve slipped loose. If we try to
signal for help, one of them will get us. We have no place to hide out. The
best we can do is what you’re saying: get over these hills, hike home
through the Wild Principates, and … and then get you to Oobii.”
Amdi made a whining noise, not objecting, just very unhappy. “And I’ll be
the one who has to do all the talking, to strangers!”
Jefri: “You know Screwfloss may recover some of his Interpack speech,
Amdi.”
“Maybe,” said Amdi, hope creeping into his voice. “He was always—”
“Where is Screwfloss, anyway?” Ravna said. Somewhere during the
conversation, the remnant had wandered off.
Jefri gave a disappointed sigh, belying his optimistic comment of the
moment before. “He got bored, I suppose. I’m not sure how much he
understands about strategy. Hopefully, he’s settling in for sentry duty.”
That reminded Ravna of what she had noticed earlier in the day. She
described the remnant’s smudged pelt coloring. “So what is he hiding?

How many layers of secrets are there?”
Amdi gave a tentative laugh. “Oh, that Screwfloss. Being murdered has
hurt his self-image. His grooming has gotten so careless…” His voice
dribbled off. Some of his heads tilted as he exchanged a look with Jefri.
They were deciding whether to clue her in.
Finally Jefri said, “It’s your story to tell, Amdi.”
The pack gestured them nearer, until she was sitting shoulder to shoulder
with Jefri, and two of Amdi were leaning onto their laps. This had worked
more comfortably when Amdi had been little. “It’s two secrets really.
Please don’t blame me, Ravna, but … I’ve been ’prenticing with Flenser
since, well, for a long time.”
The one by her lap twisted its neck to look up at her. Its eyes were big
and dark. “It wasn’t a Nevilish thing. We weren’t betraying anyone,
though you and especially Woodcarver might not see it that way.”
“Yeah, don’t ride Amdi about this, Ravna. We all have our issues.”
Ravna nodded, suppressing a smile. “Amdi, I know a little about what
Flenser was up to. He promised you some kind of medical help, right?”
Amdi emitted a squeak and all his heads came up. “How did you know
that?”
“Later,” said Ravna. “It’s about the only secret I knew, and I didn’t believe
it at the time.”
“Okay, but you’re right.” Amdi’s heads dipped. “I know my problem is
cowardice. You humans are brave; you lived with death for so long. Like
you, I was born all together and I am so … afraid of dying.”
Ravna petted the one that leaned onto her lap. “I don’t think it’s
cowardly.” She wondered just what Flenser had promised Amdi. “But you
were going to tell me about Screwfloss,” she said.
“Oh, yes. About his disguise!” Some of the perkiness came back to
Amdi’s delivery. “Helping with Screwfloss was a more successful project.
I’m proud of what I did, even if Woodcarver might call it treason. I knew
Flenser-Tyrathect is mainly good.”

Jefri gave the one on his lap a light tap. “Are you deliberately tantalizing
Ravna? Get to the point!”
“No, no! I’m circling in on the truth.” He huddled in even closer, took a
sweeping look at the darkness. The rain had started up again, but it was
gentle in the windless night. “It’s not a figure of speech to say that
Flenser-Tyrathect is mainly good. Three of him is from the schoolteacher
he murdered. She’s running the show, even though the pack doesn’t
consciously interpret events that way.”
“I know,” said Ravna. “Flenser even jokes about it, but in a sly way that
implies it’s all a lie.”
“Well, it’s not a lie.” This was asserted with un-Amdian truculence. “The
one with the white-tipped ears is the critical connector, but all three
contribute.”
“I knew that, too,” said Ravna.
Mischief crept into Amdi’s voice: “I’ll bet you didn’t know that all three
have had puppies within the pack.”
“What?” Even her broken surveillance system should have noticed that.
Unless, “Was this when Flenser went missing up north?”
“Yup.”
That had been five years ago. Woodcarver had pitched a fit, coming
close to making war on what was left of the Flenserist movement. “So
Flenser-Tyrathect was trying to recruit from within himself for when the
Tyrathect members die?”
“Yes, but that part of it didn’t work out. Flenser had all sorts of
broodkennerish explanations, but it came down to the fact that what was
left of the Old Flenser was capable of rejecting the puppies … So, he
gave one to Wretchly and I helped him place the other two.”
Ravna looked out into the rainy dark. If this story was going somewhere,
she could guess what became of the other two puppies. “Then who is the
rest of Screwfloss, Amdi?”
“Jefri and me, we smuggled the two puppies into the veterans’

Fragmentarium—where the remains of Steel were being held prisoner.”
“Ah. I suppose that was right before Steel’s ‘suicide.’”
“Yes,” said Amdi. “Somehow, Flenser persuaded Carenfret to fool
everyone, Woodcarver included.”
“Yeah,” said Jefri, “I’ve always wondered what Flenser had on Carenfret.”
“I don’t care,” said Amdi. “Mr. Steel was a monster, but when I was very
little, he was—I thought he was—my first friend. Anyway, the whole thing
worked out the way Flenser and Carenfret planned. What was left of Mr.
Steel was crazy, but part of the insanity was because Steel had always
wanted to prove himself to the Old Flenser, to become something truly
worthy. After he stopped trying to kill the two Tyrathect puppies, they fit
with him perfectly. Some of the result still looked like the original Steel, so
he needed the pelt painting for disguise.”
Screwfloss’ sneakiness and killing rage had saved them all, but it was his
patient caring that had brought her through the days she lay mindless.
Could he really be from the pack that got Murder Meadows its name? It
wasn’t a form of redemption available to humans, at least not Down Here.
No one said anything for a moment. There was just the rain and the tiny
fire dying down to embers. Finally, Ravna said, “So which of him got
murdered last night? Is Steel half, or three-quarters, of what’s left?”
“Ah, um.” Amdi’s voice was a little too cheery. “Don’t worry. You know
personality doesn’t go by percentages. Three quarters of the remnant is
from Steel, but the four is still a reformed soul.”
•  •  •
The object of their discussion did not show up for several hours,
though Amdi said he could hear him patrolling around the camp. “He
figures none of us make good sentries,” said Amdi. “I bet he’s going to

sleep a perimeter.”
They’d made the kherhogs as comfortable as possible in the lee of the
steep hillside where it was about as dry as anywhere. As for their own
sleeping arrangements: there were some waterproof cloaks in one of the
cabinets as well as the clothes that Jefri and Ravna had worn the day
before.
They changed and Amdi and Jefri laid out the waterproofs. The two
huddled together as they had on the cold nights of the trip south.
“You can lie with us, Ravna,” said Amdi, making space.
Jefri hesitated, then said, “It makes sense. We need the warmth.”
The issue hadn’t arisen the night before, when their sleep consisted of
brief catnaps on top of the wagons.
“Right.” She lay down behind Jefri and let Amdi cluster all around. She
hadn’t cuddled these two since they were small. Now … when she
slipped her arms around Jefri, it was very different.

Chapter   26
The highlands were easier going than the climb up, even where rain
had left centimeters of loose muck. The kherhogs could graze on tender
meadow grass—though water lay just below the green, disguising deep
holes. It wasn’t raining anymore, but the sky was densely overcast—ideal
weather for making unobserved progress. Remnant Screwfloss
(Remnant Steel?) behaved as he had the day before, scouting ahead of
the three wagons, pointing out usable paths. His limp slowed him down,
but it didn’t seriously affect his agility.
The maps were stowed, but Amdi had memorized them: “These
mountains dribble off to the west more gently than to the east. There’s a
steep descent up ahead.”
Ravna remembered that; “steep descent” was too kind a description. The
map’s contour lines had merged into a single curve, a sheer cliff. Amdi
didn’t deny that, but at the moment he was worrying about something
else: “In a few more hours—two days at most—we’ll run into a village, or
an inn, or just farmer packs. What are we going to say to them?”
“It depends on the situation, Amdi,” said Ravna. Poor guy. He was trying
to plan for an ad lib performance. Of course, while he was doing that, he
didn’t have to think about the coming descent, or the fact that they were
out of food (for all values of edible that Ravna wished to consider), and
were being hunted by as many as three different gangs. And now, a wind
was sweeping across the meadows. Maybe it wasn’t arctic cold, but it
jammed icily against her sodden jacket. And they were all tired and filthy
and cold and.… Think about something else:
Screwfloss had moved to the rear and was snooping around huge
boulders that were scattered in the meadow. His alertness was a comfort,
though with every passing day, it seemed more likely that Chitiratifor’s

gang was safely lost behind them. Amdi was not comforted. His heads
snapped around to follow the foursome. “Wah! We could run into local
packs even before we get to the dropoff!”
Ravna noticed that Jefri had slowed the lead wagon, and was watching
Screwfloss’ investigation, too. In fact, these meadows didn’t look much
different from old-style farms of the Domain. Before genetically modified
fodder crops, the packs’ idea of farming was much like the human notion
of a game preserve. Traditional Tinish farmers simply made the land
more hospitable for prey, keeping their animals fed and protecting them
against other predators. Sometimes farm “fences” could be mistaken for
natural tree lines and rockfalls—though she had seen nothing really likely
hereabouts.
Caterwauling erupted from behind the boulders. Something member-
sized came racing out, heading away from the meadow. Three of
Screwfloss outflanked it. The creature made a turn so tight it was a flip
and headed into the meadow—but Screwfloss’ limper was waiting for it
there. The thing had no choice. It made another hairpin turn and was
sprinting along the path, straight at the wagons. Three of Screwfloss
were closing fast.
It was far too big to be a weasel—and if you saw one of those, you saw a
hundred, and then you were probably the weasels’ lunch. Besides, this
thing had two extra limbs at its midsection! As it raced past her wagon,
she realized that its “extra legs” were the torn and muddy remnants of a
travel cloak.
Then lots of things happened at once. She almost lost her reins as her
kherhog spooked away from the runner. Up ahead, Jefri and one of Amdi
had jumped down from the front wagon.
“Gotta go!” said the one of Amdi beside her. He bailed out, just as
Screwfloss stampeded through, followed by the rest of Amdi.
Jefri moved back and forth to block the creature’s escape.
Ravna rose from her bench. “Be careful—” was all she got out before the
runner skittered around Jef. But the faster of Screwfloss had caught up.

They circled, forcing the singleton back. And now all of Amdi was ranged
in front of Ravna’s wagon. Corralling the thing was probably an accident,
but it looked like a masterpiece of teamwork. The fugitive had stopped
running. It was crouched low, still shrieking monstrously loud.
Nobody moved for a second. Three seconds. The hissing stopped. The
creature looked back and forth at its antagonists, then focused on the
least numerous: Jefri. A pack could be deadly. What about a singleton?
Jefri looked very calm. He kept his eyes on the runaway, but his words
were directed elsewhere.
“Ravna, sit back down. Don’t let your kherhog overrun us.” His own
wagon had run forward almost fifty meters, then off a little ways into the
meadow. “Amdi, you’re doing fine. Just stand up a little straighter.”
She suddenly noticed that Amdi was trembling. His members were large
and there were eight of them, but he’d spent most of his life thinking like
a human child, with none of the internal role models of normal Tines. But
Amdi did his best, all eight rising to alert poses. And he was talking, both
to the singleton and to Screwfloss behind Jefri. That pack had been
edging around the human, as if planning a sudden rush on the singleton.
Now it backed up a little and settled for blocking the singleton’s exit.
“You’re carrying some snacks, right, Amdi?” Jefri asked.
“Yech, if you can call them that.” He reached into one of his panniers and
pulled out a big sausage, green with mold. “Not even all of me can still
eat these things.” He held it gingerly in the soft tips of a muzzle.
“Why don’t you toss it to our new friend here.”
“Ah! Okay.” Amdi said something to the singleton, then lobbed the
sausage toward the creature. It landed just beyond the animal’s reach.
The singleton didn’t move toward it immediately. Its head swept across
Amdi, then quickly turned to check out Jefri and Screwfloss, and then
sharply looked back at Amdi. It was strange to see a member working so
hard just to see what was around it.
After a second more of warning watchfulness, the singleton leaped upon

the sausage, flipping it into the air and biting. Big surprise: this food was
rock hard. It dropped the sausage to the ground, held it in place while
gnawing vigorously. As it ground away, it shuffled around, trying to keep
an eye on all the threats.
Suddenly the singleton was gobbling Tinish. The sounds boomed loud
from its shoulders. Ravna recognised the chord for “afraid.” Or maybe
there was a negation there: “not afraid.” That repeated, became a stream
of sounds that was much more complicated.
“It’s a talker, isn’t it,” said Jefri.
Everyone relaxed a little. Ravna let her kherhog turn from the path, just
far enough to munch on the attractive grass. “Who is it from, I wonder,”
said Ravna. “One of the wagoneers?” Surely this wasn’t part of
Chitiratifor. The singleton looked starved, its ribs marking high ridges in
its ragged pelt. Chitiratifor’s had all been too fat to be so transformed in
just three days.
Jefri went down on one knee for a closer look. The singleton raised its
head, and its babbling turned into one of those ear-piercing hisses. When
Jefri made no further move, it gave a look all around. Then it set the
sausage back on the ground and resumed struggling with it.
After a moment, Jefri said, “I don’t think it’s from either of the wagoneers.
What’s left of that cloak doesn’t look like what they were wearing.”
“I recognize her markings,” said Amdi. “She’s one of Remasritlfeer.” He
threw a second sausage in the direction of the singleton. “But Chitiratifor
claimed he killed him all.”
Jefri grinned. “Well, Chitiratifor was a bragging liar … and this is one
tough animal.”
•  •  •

They called the singleton “Ritl” even though Amdi wasn’t certain that
had been its given name.
Ritl ate both sausages and then threw up, all the while making
threatening noises. Then it drank of the meadow water and more or less
collapsed in the middle of the road. She was silent except for occasional
hisses, mainly directed at Remnant Screwfloss.
Amdi circled around and persuaded Screwfloss to back off. Then he and
Jefri sat down and chatted gently at the critter.
“I’ll bet that was the last of her strength,” said Jefri.
Ravna had climbed down from her wagon and walked forward until Ritl
started hissing at her. “You figure she was a speech center?”
“We won’t know for sure till she’s rested.” Jef shrugged. “Sometimes
language ability isn’t concentrated in one member.”
“I’m like that with math,” said Amdi. “All of me is mathematical.”
“Yeah, but you’re one of kind, pal, a genius in every part. Lord Steel…”
Jefri hesitated, possibly because much of Lord Steel was right behind
them, grumpily climbing aboard the middle wagon. And Jefri had his own
terrible history with the original. “… Lord Steel made you of puppies from
the greatest geniuses he could kill, gull, or kidnap from.”
Jefri reached out tentatively in the direction of Ritl. The singleton
responded with another hiss, but it seemed to be running out of energy. “I
don’t think Remasritlfeer was ever a great linguist.”
“If Ritl were friendly, could she tell us much about Tycoon?”
“A singleton? Probably not.”
Amdi gave a sad little laugh. “She probably remembers useful things, but
they would come out as nonsense riddling.”
Ravna thought a second. “You know, there is the obvious thing. It would
solve two of our problems at once.” She glanced over her shoulder. All of
Screwfloss was sitting atop the middle wagon, looking down at them.
“Can you understand Samnorsk?” she said to it.

Screwfloss’ gaze continued intent and calculating, but the pack didn’t
respond.
“I don’t think Screwfloss understands human language,” said Amdi. “I’m
not even sure how clear he is on Tinish.”
“Okay. I was just wondering … maybe if what’s left of Screwfloss could
get together with Ritl…”
Jefri grinned. “That would be a win, but I’ll bet it doesn’t happen. Ritl is so
emphatically hostile.”
“Maybe she’s just frightened,” said Amdi. The singleton was babbling
again. The noise was less painful than her hissing, but it didn’t sound
friendly.
“Yes, but Screwfloss doesn’t look interested either. Accepting Ritl would
probably mean a flip in pack gender, and that’s usually an issue.” Jefri
gave an impatient shrug. “If Ritl doesn’t run away then this will be
something to think about. Meantime,” he glanced at the sky, “we really
want to be on our way.”
“She’ll just run if I back off,” said Amdi.
“Naeh. I’ll bet she’s been chasing us; you know how singletons are.”
“Well, okay.” Amdi said something comforting to Ritl, and retreated from
the confrontation. At the same time, he was talking to Screwfloss, maybe
asking him to look less threatening. Jefri walked back toward the front
wagon.
The critter watched all this from its hunkered-down position. It was still
blabbering.
Jefri translated: “Mainly it’s threatening what will happen to us if we
misbehave.”
Abruptly, Ritl came to its feet and sprinted off—but stopped when it
figured it was out of sight in the meadow grasses.
Jefri and Amdi walked forward to where the first kherhog was grazing. In
a few minutes, they had persuaded the animal to drag its wagon back

onto the path. Amdi came back to drive the rear wagon and they were on
their way once more.
•  •  •
As usual, one of Amdi sat with Ravna on the middle wagon. As the
afternoon passed the humidity fell, and Amdi seemed to be thinking
faster. That was not necessarily a good thing. “This is the last day when
things will be easy,” he said. “Can’t you hear the waterfall? We’re almost
to the big dropoff.” He had escalated the “steep descent” to something
more realistic. “We’re gonna meet strangers real soon.”
She guessed he was saying similar things to Jefri up ahead. Amdi was
like a worrywart on ultradrive. She took one hand from the reins to pat his
shoulder. “We can’t do anything about that till we get there. Meantime,
you should be paying attention to that wagon you’re driving, and keeping
watch on Screwfloss and Ritl.”
“Oh, I am, I am.” He glanced up at her, wriggling under her hand. “If you
could see me all at once, you’d know I’m looking every which way.
Screwfloss must have understood what I told him. He’s staying behind
us. And from Jefri’s wagon, I can see that Ritl is just a little ahead of the
wagons. She hasn’t run off, though she’s trying to stay out of sight.”
As a matter of fact, Ravna had no trouble tracking the singleton. It never
strayed more than thirty meters beyond Jefri’s wagon, sneaking from
hiding place to hiding place. At the same time, the critter was trying to
keep track of the wagons and Screwfloss. Sometimes Ritl would stop in
plain view, twisting her neck back and forth—then see them watching
her, and abruptly run for cover.
Amdi gave a human-sounding sigh. “I feel so sorry for Ritl. You’re right. If
only she and Remnant Screwfloss could accept each other, they would
be so much better off. Do you read romance novels, Ravna?”

“Huh? Tinish romance novels? Where—?”
“Pilgrim lets me into Woodcarver’s library.”
She had no idea Amdi researched such topics. “Have you read any of the
romance stories in Oobii?” she asked. When Ravna worked for Vrinimi
Org, she’d noticed customer interest in romance literature. It was
probably the most idiosyncratic of all written art forms. No surprise there;
when it was intelligible, romance lit gave more insight into an alien culture
and psyche than anything this side of Transcendence.
“Our romances are nothing like as weird as in Oobii, but we Tines have
more kinds of romance than other races! See, there’s pack-level
romance, like Pilgrim and Woodcarver. Then there are romances about
injured packs looking to become whole, either from within or without. And
one type of story is about packs romancing singletons and vice versa.”
“From what Jefri says, that’s a long shot in our case.”
Amdi said, “Yup. Maybe that’s why people like to read stories where it
works out well.” Amdi rode along for a minute or two without saying
anything more. He lowered his long neck and rested his head on his
forepaws. When she glanced down, she noticed that his eyes were
closed. For a wonder, the worrywart was taking a break! Or maybe he
was worrying about his larger problems, what had driven him to Flenser
in the first place. After a time, he raised his head and continued:
“Romance is such a weird thing. It’s how we Tines sneak past death. I
think it’s like that with other races, only more metaphorical. I read your
human romances especially. This kidnapping is just like in some of your
stories, bringing people together, showing them how much they need
each other. Don’t you see how good you and Jefri would be for each
other?”
“Amdi!”
“What? What? I just want you to be happy.”
•  •  •

Events intervened before Amdi could make further unsettling
comments.
They were descending into scrub forest, and the mud was now a serious
problem. Streams cut across the path, and water was coursing through
the meadow on their right. As best as they could tell from the maps, they
were within a few hundred meters of the “steep descent.” The sound of
falling water was loud even to Ravna’s ears. Jefri and Amdi hiked forward
to take a look, while Ravna slayed with the wagons. Ritl was nowhere to
be seen, but Screwfloss was patrolling some kind of perimeter.
Ravna got down and walked around the wagons, checking that the
kherhogs were secured. She was surely the wimp of this expedition. She
could barely keep standing, but right now she was too sore to sit down.
She leaned against the middle wagon and struggled to stay alert. Since
her delirium, she’d been irrationally afraid of the sleepiness that crept
over her in the middle of the day. What if my mind comes undone once
more?
Perhaps twenty minutes passed. Jefri and Amdi emerged from the scrub.
Amdi was huffing and puffing to keep up.
“The maps lied,” said Jefri. He was speaking in a lowered voice, almost a
whisper.
A few seconds later, Amdi arrived. “No,” he said, also speaking softly,
“the maps were made from orbiter data. They can’t show what’s out of
sight.”
Jefri shrugged. Like most of the Children, he tended to attribute
motivation to artifacts. “The point is,” he continued in the same soft tones,
“there are buildings on the valley floor. It looks like a caravanserai.”
“Yes,” said Amdi, “and there’s a winch station up here, at the edge of the
dropoff.”
She noticed Screwfloss walking around the wagons, rousting the
kherhogs as if to continue the drive. He was making no effort to be quiet
about it. “Screwfloss seems to know what he wants to do.”

Jefri glanced over his shoulder. “I get his point. He figures we’ve already
been spotted. We might as well go forward. Now, about our cover
story…”
“Our cover story?” Ravna’s words came out in a kind of incredulous
squeak. Two aliens and a jumble of Tines come strolling in, with the most
amusing story. “Sorry. Right. We two-legs should keep out of sight to
begin with, let Amdi do the talking.…” Both she and Jefri were looking at
the eightsome.
Poor Amdi was beside himself, each member trying to stay out of sight
behind the others. “I can’t! You can’t do this to me!”
“You’re the only one who can even speak the language, Amdi.”
“Wah!” wailed Amdi. “This isn’t fair!” He hesitated briefly, then launched
into a string of mostly illogical objections. “Those could be the bad guys
up ahead, Vendacious and Tycoon waiting to pick us off.”
Jefri shook his head. “I think Screwfloss would suspect if that were the
case—and look at him.” The remnant had mounted the front wagon and
was looking back at them expectantly.
“We could go back. We could hunt and trap! I know Screwfloss could.
You could. I caught a fish the other day!”
Ravna went to her knees among Amdi. It was not entirely a controlled
gesture. Amdi seemed to realize this; she felt him close in, steadying her.
She slipped her arms around his nearest necks, and after a moment the
dizziness passed. She could feel the cold soaking her knees, and Amdi’s
fur against her face. What to say? “You’re the smartest pack in the world,
Amdi.”
“That’s … probably true. Mr. Steel made me that way. He got a very, very
smart coward.”
“Okay, that’s probably what Old Steel expected. I don’t think what’s left of
him believes it.” She looked up, gave a nod in Screwfloss’ direction.
“Maybe, but—”
“Steel made something smarter than himself. I can tell you—personal

experience of a Mid-Beyonder—that means the rest of what he expected
is vapor. You have a power tool, and no one knows what you can do with
it.” Her point applied to peer intellects as well, but Ravna was too tired for
full disclosure.
Amdi didn’t say anything for a moment, but she felt a buzzing through his
fur.
“We’ll come with you,” said Jefri, “openly. There’s no pointing in hiding us
two-legs if we’ve already been seen.”
“We could advise you,” said Ravna.
That might be an empty offer, considering how much fast talking was
needed. And yet, Amdi eased back from Ravna and angled his heads
together, thinking intensely. “Advise, yes. With the right cover story …
hmm. I’ll bet the local packs only have rumors about humans, stories of a
supernatural race so intelligent that even their singletons are as smart as
a Tinish pack. Maybe I could claim to represent the two-legged godlings.”
Ritl had crept into sight. It sat down near the edge of Amdi’s mindsounds.
Amdi gobbled at it, and it responded with a long ramble.
Amdi laughed. “Ritl likes the idea—even if she doesn’t understand a word
we’re saying.” And now he was full of supporting ideas: “With you as
gods, then I’m just the middleman, the interpreter! We’ll have plenty of
time to get our lies right, even if there are surprises. And then…”
•  •  •
They decided to take just the first wagon and three kherhogs. If this
meeting worked out, they could hire someone at the winch station to
bring down the other two wagons and the lame kherhog. Meantime, they
wanted to put on a good show.
They moved the stash of lamps—their most exotic tradables—to the front

wagon. The maps got moved, too, though they were emphatically not for
trade. There were no clean human clothes, though Jef’s Oobii weaves
were presentable.
And they finally had a use for Chitiratifor’s flashy outfits. They carefully
removed one set from the oilskins. The cloth was so clean it fairly
glowed, and the fine stitching was almost machine precise. There was a
cape and matching jacket—even leggings. Chitiratifor had been big-
bodied, but nowadays Amdi was big, too. There were enough outfits for
six of him. Amdi immediately slipped into the clothes, adjusting the
various belts and clasps.
Amdi strode around the wagons, admiring himself and making final
tweaks to the outfit. He was on a roll, his anxiety either forgotten or
forcibly suppressed. Ravna studied the beaded designs on the jackets.
They probably represented something, though it might not be evident if
you couldn’t get your eyeballs more than ten centimeters apart. “Any
chance this outfit is a uniform of some kind, Amdi? Maybe now you’re a
colonel in the Vendacious Bastards Army.”
“Oh, no,” said Amdi. “This is just a super-nice rich-pack thing.” He looked
away from himself. “Now we have to decide where to put you two-legged
gods.” He wanted Jefri and Ravna to keep apart so the locals would
know they were sufficient even as singletons. “Later, when you are
together—then they can tremble in fear of you!”
Jefri was nodding, but he looked seriously at Ravna. “Are you up to
walking?”
“Yes.” She did not want to get back on a driver’s bench.
“Okay, then. I’ll walk forward with Amdi. Ravna, you stay near the rear of
the wagon.”
“Something I can duck behind, eh?” She noticed that he didn’t smile fast
enough at her joke. “Why should you take the greater risk?”
“Don’t go Age of Princesses on me, Ravna. It’s … it’s one of your most
irritating habits.”

Okay. She was the weak one here. In fact, she might need the wagon to
steady herself.
When they finally rolled forward, the overcast had lowered to a foggy
gloom and it was deep twilight.
They’d set the best-charged lamps to cast long, narrow beams past the
three kherhogs pulling the wagon. The exhausted animals were doing
their part for the show, making it look as though the wagon held
awesomely massive cargo.
The two of Amdi that had no costumes were driving the team. Screwfloss
walked at the front, behaving like a bodyguard. He was followed by most
of Amdi, his beaded cloaks sparkling in the spotlights. After Amdi’s six
came Jefri, not so gaudy, though the lamps did strange interference-
fringy things with his clothing. Ravna, no doubt invisible in the glare,
walked near the back of the wagon. Everybody but her was a fine target.
Amdi was bumptiously loud now, piping the equivalent of cheerful
humming. “Just wanna make sure they don’t start shooting out of
surprise.”
“Not much chance of surprise,” said Jefri, looking up into the trees around
them. The wide, low-set limbs should be easy to climb, even for Tines.
“I’ll bet they’re tracking us with nocked arrows.”
As if to prove the point, something member-sized dropped from a low
branch and ran forward around the rightmost of Amdi, and then out in
front of Screwfloss. That pack started to give chase, then brought itself
back.
The newcomer was Ritl. Maybe it was her employer who was lying in
ambush.
But the singleton did not keep running. About ten meters beyond
Screwfloss, it settled into a sedate promenade and started to blabber on
its own. It sounded like doors crashing shut.
“Powers! What is that animal doing?” said Jefri.
“I think she’s trying to announce us.” Amdi dithered a moment, stopping

the wagon. “She’s playing something like royal pomp, but with her own
nonsense lyrics.” On the ground, Amdi spread out a little, and Ravna
guessed he was focusing audio on Ritl. The singleton stumbled, and
briefly looked back at Amdiranifani. Then the creature executed an
indignant flounce and pranced on, its cacophony louder than ever.
The lights on their wagon showed trees thick on both sides of the path,
the remaining twilight a dim patch of gray overhead. The sound of the
waterfall was clear and loud ahead. They were truly committed. Forcibly
retrieving Ritl and starting over was not an option.
Amdi must have concluded the same. The six resumed their walk, while
the two on the wagon cautiously eased the kherhogs into the descent.
Ravna caught her first glimpse of what Amdi called the “winch station.” It
looked like a small ferry mooring—except that it hung from the side of a
cliff. Next to it was what seemed to be a large waterwheel, an arc of
shadow biting into the river. Their own path led down to a building close
by the waterwheel.
“See the arrow slits?” said Jefri, but he wasn’t talking about the view
below. He pointed to the side of the road just ahead, to pitch-dark slots
cut in a timber barricade. “We didn’t see that this afternoon.”
The wagon’s lights would be blinding to anyone that close. “Amdi,” said
Ravna, “dim the lights.” Sometimes, intimidating the other side just got
you killed.
“Okay.” One of him on the wagon glanced back at her. Amdi’s sound
effects ceased, leaving just Ritl’s flourishes banging away up ahead. The
lights stayed bright.
“Well?” said Ravna.
“Urk. I’m thinking what to do!” Then he was speaking Tinish, fast and
unintelligible.
Maybe there was a sound behind her; maybe it was Amdi’s sudden
weirdness. Ravna looked behind her. She was not alone. The closest
pack held a crossbow with an enormous quarrel—the point of which was
less than ten centimeters from her nose.


Chapter   27
Humans and kherhogs were forced down the hill, into a large shed that
was smelly and filled with hay. A few tendays ago, Ravna Bergsndot
would have thought this was serious mistreatment. But indoors, with the
kherhogs, it was warm enough. And the hay had no fermenter stench.
“Maybe we still have a chance with the godling scam,” said Jefri. He was
tied to a pillar at the far side of the barn from Ravna.
“Yes, and we rate heavy weapons.” Two packs, each with a huge
crossbow.
“Yeah, what foolish—”
The pack nearest to him hissed loudly and crashed its weapon against
the side of Jefri’s head. He went down without a sound.
“Jefri!” Ravna pulled against her tether. The pack guarding her pushed its
weapon into her midsection, knocking her back. She lay quiet for a
moment, then rolled slightly forward and looked across the floor. A small
mantle lamp hung from a rafter above Jefri. It must have been very dim to
Tinish eyes, but for her it was more than adequate. She saw Jefri’s hand
move in an “I’m okay” gesture. She signalled “okay” back. The guards
didn’t react. Jefri’s hand moved slowly into other gestures.
It was the sign language the Children had invented in their first few years
on Tines World. By nature, Tines had an enormous advantage when it
came to covert communication. The Children used their signing as a
counter strategy. Some of their Tinish friends had learned to understand
the signing, but in semidarkness, the packs couldn’t even see it. Ravna
remembered the kids chortling over their secret “message channel.” It
had been endearing and silly … and Ravna had never bothered to learn
much of it.

After a moment, Jefri seemed to realize she couldn’t understand. He
gave her another “okay” sign and settled back. She watched him for a
long while. There were different degrees of “okay.”
•  •  •
Remnant Screwfloss showed up an hour later, herded in by another
guard. Screwfloss didn’t rate a permanent guard, but he was a prisoner.
He paced around at the limits of his tethers, more talkative than she had
seen him since his partial death. He seemed to be arguing with the
guards. They didn’t beat him up, though after a bit of chitchat, one guard
flicked a long whip at him. The remnant retreated, looking more surly
than intimidated. He settled down in apparent silence, peering around at
Jefri and Ravna. Jef had rolled onto his side to look back, but didn’t try to
communicate.
Ravna drifted uncomfortably in and out of sleep, vaguely aware of the
kherhogs shuffling around their big manger. She had dreams, and
thought she heard Tinish music. What had become of poor Amdi?
The new day was leaking gray light under the eaves when someone
pounded on the barn door. Two members from one guard slid the door
open. Ravna squinted into the brightness, which in fact was no more than
drizzly morning twilight. Something—Ritl—came bounding in, loud and
argumentative. Behind the singleton came Amdi, and a sociable distance
behind him there was another pack. Amdi looked in all directions. “Jefri?
Ravna?”
“Over here.” Jefri’s voice was a groan.
“And here,” said Ravna.
“You’re hurt!” Amdi surrounded Jefri, patting him, touching his face.
“Hei, not there! It’s just a bruise, Amdi.”

“Okay. But they were supposed to treat you well.” Two of him looked
back at the stranger, hissing at him in Tinish. Ravna had never seen
Amdi complain to another so firmly.
Maybe … “So what about the god scam?” she asked.
“I—I blew it. The locals are nervous about humans, but many of them
don’t believe you can think at all. Even so, I might have had a chance
except that this stupid, blabbering singleton kept—”
Ritl was circling Amdi, crowding into his personal space and chording all
the while. Amdiranifani turned all his heads on Ritl and blasted her with a
focused hiss of annoyance. The singleton gave a whistle of pain and
retreated to a far corner of the barn.
“Sorry, sorry. I don’t mean to hurt anyone, not even that silly idiot, but she
came close to getting us all killed—” He said something Tinish to the
guards and the third pack, and they all honked raucous laughter.
Evidently, he was carrying on two very different conversations.
Jefri came to his knees. His eyes were on the nearest guard and its
crossbow-cum-club. “So what is the deal, Amdi? It looks like you have
something going with these guys.”
“I do, I do. At least it’s better than nothing. Look, I’ll explain on the way
down okay? The Winchmaster wants us on our way while the storm
runoff is still manageable. If we hustle, there’s time for you to get some
hot food first. I negotiated—”
Now Ravna could smell it. One of the guard packs was rolling in two
steaming wheelbarrows of … slop? No, not quite. The wheelbarrows
themselves looked like they had hauled their share of slop, but just now
they contained piles of boiled yams. There were also tankards of broth,
the sort of thing that the Tines themselves liked to use to garnish cooked
meat. It was mouthwatering if you were hungry enough, and even under
normal conditions it would have been tolerable, a rare example of Tinish
cuisine that worked for humans.
There were no utensils, not even Tinish jaw-knives. The filthy barrows
were simply shoved close to their faces. It was more the treatment of

farm animals than gods. They were given a few moments to feed and
then the guards marched them outside, still keeping the two humans well
apart.
Their wagon was up ahead, parked next to the odd-looking wooden
structure that was the winch station.
“Potty stop once we reach the valley floor,” said Amdi. “I’ll see you all in a
minute.” He started off ahead of them.
“What did you have to trade them, Amdi?” shouted Jefri. “Do we still have
any lamps?”
“And the maps?”
“Yup. And the wagon and the two best kherhogs.”
“Wow,” said Jefri.
“So what did we give up?” said Ravna. The other wagons and kherhogs?
Amdi had crossed the yard to talk to a couple of packs standing near the
winch station. Behind Ravna, Screwfloss was driving two of the kherhogs
out of the barn. The remnant seemed to have a better idea of what was
going on than did Ravna or Jefri. As the beasts plodded past, Screwfloss
stayed mainly on the downhill side of the path, keeping the beasts away
from the tasty grasses that edged the stream-grown-to-flooded-river. Ritl
brought up the rear, nipping at the kherhogs and emitting skirling chords
that might have been commands directed at Screwfloss.
The morning was both chilly and humid, with little droplets of water
forming on every exposed edge. They were in a rain cloud just before it
burst. Ravna squished through the mud, struggling to keep her balance.
The river showed little crescents of white water as it raced past the winch
station, almost swamping the big waterwheel. Beyond that, the flow met
an unnaturally near horizon. The sound of falling water was a roar. The
winch station looked quite different today. For one thing, last night, the
place where their wagon was parked had been off the edge of the cliff.
Now that space was occupied by a gated platform, almost like a gazebo.
The top of the structure was hidden by a squat wooden tower.

Jefri reached the platform first. His guard pushed him to the far end and
tied him to the railing there. Screwfloss drove the two kherhogs aboard
and tied them down. Then it was Ravna’s turn.
The kherhogs shifted uneasily about on the platform—which moved
perceptibly in response. A local pack came aboard; it checked
Screwfloss’ knotwork and then shouted to the packs who remained on
solid ground. It retreated, heads together, as Amdi came aboard.
Most of Amdi strutted around the kherhogs to be with Jefri. The rest
stood at the railing near Ravna. His splendid outfits were mostly in good
repair, and his posture was pompously self-important. But at the same
time he was hooting cheerfully with the Winchmaster, his human little-boy
voice was tentative and fearful. “I’m sorry, I’m sorry. Every story I’ve told
these guys has got us into worse trouble.”
From other side of the kherhogs, she heard Jefri laugh. “It sounds like
you’re their great chum, Amdi.”
“Oh, I guess I am, but I just know they’ll see through me. I can’t keep this
act going much longer.”
“So what is the act, Amdi? If we aren’t gods then what—”
Whoa! At that instant, the platform was cut loose from its moorings. It
swung through at least five degrees. Timbers creaked loudly as the
kherhogs staggered against their ties, lowing their startlement.
Even their crew pack looked a little nervous at that. Somebody shouted
an apology from the tower above them.
Amdi shouted something back. Ravna recognized the chord as good-
natured forgiveness. Then in human talk he said, “The Winchmaster says
he’s sorry. The waterwheel is overpowered by the river surge. The clutch
system is very tricky … I got a tour. The gears are all wood. I could make
it a lot safer with a few days’ work, but—”
The platform lurched downwards in jolts of a centimeter or two. Ravna
could imagine what Amdi was talking about. In her early days on Tines
World, she’d seen similar devices in Scrupilo’s factories. The use of

wooden gears didn’t bother her as much as the manual control. Even
after ten years, she still got the shakes when she realized there were no
software controls monitoring and protecting against the whims of gears,
fools, and nature.
The jolts became smaller and swifter, and soon their descent was almost
stately. The air was full of spume and waterfall noise, but they seemed to
be descending a protected notch in the cliff face. Just beyond her arm’s
reach stood naked rock. Here and there, straggly trees and vines
scrabbled for purchase.
Fifteen seconds passed, smooth as silk. “This looks like a couple of
meters per second,” said Jefri.
The platform emerged from the cloud layer. Suddenly she could hear the
sounds of faraway birds, and to her left—Powers! They must be a
thousand meters up. The cliff wall marched off toward a misty horizon.
She turned away from the view. Funny, vertigo had never been a
problem for her in the Beyond.
Their crew pack looked calm enough. He clambered around the railings,
all without using any safety lines. On top of the wagon, Remnant
Screwfloss seemed positively relaxed, enjoying the view.
“Well, I guess this must be safer than it looks,” said Ravna. “This local
guy doesn’t seem worried. How many years has this been operating?”
She turned back to look at the view.
“Um, they started last summer,” said Amdi. “It’s a leasehold that Tycoon
bought, trying to encourage traffic among the wilderness valley chains.”
Since last summer? Tycoon? What a variety of scary news to cram into
just a few syllables. Ravna stared at the rock wall … and realized that
she was looking at the splintered pieces of a platform not too different
from what was transporting them today. Okay.
Amdi saw the same thing and his voice took on a forced chipperness.
“But really, today should be an easy ride. The Winchmaster told me this
carriage is a madhouse when it’s doing pure third-class passengers and
no freight. Before they had all the risks figured out, they squeezed ten

packs into this space. There was a choir and a panic and the platform
crashed into the rock … um, like you see us passing now.”
They were all silent for a moment. Ravna noticed that Ritl was perched
on the railing halfway between two clumps of Amdi. The singleton would
stare into the abyss, then quickly look up to check on Amdi’s position,
then stare back into the abyss. Its claws were extended deep into the
wood, and it seemed to be muttering to itself.
“Okay, Amdi,” said Jefri. “Consider us all comforted. Now, while we have
a few minutes of peace and quiet—what story are you peddling to the
locals?”
Amdiranifani’s human voice made a whimpering sound. “I did the best I
could, Jefri.”
Ravna remembered how hard it had been for Amdi to undertake even the
smallest part of this. “You got us this far, Amdi. Whatever you’re
pretending to be—” she waved to indicate his costume and grandiose
manner “—it looks marvelous.”
“Yes, but what is the scam?” There was laughter hiding behind Jefri’s
annoyed tone.
“Okay. Things will be busy once we hit—I mean, touch—the ground, so
now is probably the best time to tell you. The ‘humans-as-gods’ story was
in trouble from the start. They ambushed us too easily for us to have
super-Tinish powers. Things got worse when I claimed you two were only
weak because you were apart. That almost got you killed.”
Ravna nodded. “And it’s why we’re kept apart.”
“Yes. I’m sorry.”
Jefri said, “Never mind. We all thought it was a good idea.”
“Yeah, well, the current plan is something I had to make up on the spot.”
He turned all his heads to glare at Ritl. “Even before the ambush, the
singleton was messing us up. She screwed us into this.”
“I don’t think she’s smart enough to scheme, Amdi.”

“She’s a trouble-making animal. Didn’t you understand what she was
saying last night?”
“When she was marching on ahead of us? I got some of it. It sounded
like royal flourishes, something Remasritlfeer must have picked up
around East Home. Coming from just one member it sounded a bit silly.”
“Yes! She never makes sense and she always gets in the way—like right
now she’s squatting in the middle of me, making it hard to think.” Amdi
darted a member angrily at the singleton. It hunkered down on the railing
and hissed back. “Last night her background chatter just made me look
like a fool. More of a fool.”
“We’re still here, alive and breathing, Amdi. And we held on to all our
important things. You must have done something right.”
“We lost the other wagons. But yes, I got us through the night. I’m not
sure I can get us through this day. We are in such deep trouble. These
packs are all employed by Tycoon, at least indirectly. The inn at the
bottom of this winch drop is owned by Tycoon. That pack is spreading his
influence all through the Wild Principates, not conquering anybody, just
making money.”
Jefri was silent, so Ravna said the obvious: “But Tycoon is hunting us.”
“Yup. The temporary good news is that Tycoon’s schemes are so spread
out that he can’t keep track of them. Heh,” Amdi emitted a Flenserish
chuckle. “The Winchmaster knows humans are important, but he doesn’t
know we’re fugitives. Same for the Innmaster below. For the moment,
they think that helping us will get them Tycoon’s good will and make them
some money in the process.”
The platform shuddered, its smooth descent shifting back to jerk-at-a-
time mode.
Amdi said something to the crew pack, and at the same time stuck a
head over the railing. “Looks like we’re less than a hundred meters up.
Our pilot says we’ll be slowing soon.” He fell back from the railing and
hissed at Ritl. “I can’t stand it. This monster is feeding me pictures!”
Some of him staggered around for a moment, then settled securely on

the decking. “… Okay, where was I?”
“Explaining how you persuaded these folks to cooperate.”
“Yes. Once I realized they were Tycoonists and that they were ignorant of
us, I thought maybe we could pretend to be almost what we are. I
showed them Chitiratifor’s badge of introduction.” Amdi stuck a snout into
one of his pockets and pulled out the edge of the jeweled badge. “I told
them we were on a special mission from the North, how you were an
embassy from the humans, and to be protected.”
“That’s good, Amdi!”
Amdi brightened at the praise. “It might have worked, too. I doubt if there
are any of our stolen radios in these parts. It might be tendays before
Tycoon hears about us.” He slumped a little lower. “The problem was that
everybody was laughing too hard to take my story seriously.” He glared
at Ritl. “The animal just kept blabbering around, making everything I said
into a stupid joke. The Winchmaster finally congratulated me on my act!”
“Huh?” came Jefri’s voice. “He thinks you’re acting about what?”
Their platform jerked to a full stop. The crew pack—their pilot?—
scrambled up a ladder to the roof. She could hear him spread out across
the lightweight planking. His shouts were very loud, and seemed to be
directed upwards. Faint shouting came back in response. Ravna leaned
out, looked up. Their cable disappeared into drizzle and cloud deck. It
occurred to her that shouting back and forth was the only feedback
system available. This made flying in Scrupilo’s first Eyes Above seem
like a happy holiday.
But now they were almost even with the gables of a half-timbered
structure, the ground just a few meters below. She saw packs there,
peeking out from beneath heavy awnings.
Their pilot spoke an imperative chord.
Amdi translated: “Stay back from the railing!”
The platform edged downward, five centimeters to a jerk. The kherhogs
were getting wild-eyed, but Screwfloss’ intimidating hisses kept them

knees-down on the platform. There was a prolonged crunching sound
from beneath the platform. They fell another couple centimeters, and
then Jefri’s side tilted down a couple of centimeters more. Chorded
yodeling sounded from beyond the railing, something Ravna recognized
as “Well done, well done!” Their pilot came hustling down the ladder,
looking all casual and professional. Ravna noticed, however, that he
flinched as much as anyone at the extended crashing noise on the roof
he’d just left. Falling cable slack? In any case, the crashing stopped; the
Winchmaster, somewhere up beyond the clouds, must realize that the job
was done.
As the pilot lifted the railing gate, Screwfloss was all over the kherhogs.
Out in the rain, a pack was adjusting a ramp next to the tilted edge of the
platform. Yeah, just another routine sky-ferry touchdown. It seemed very
appropriate that Ritl chose that moment to clamber atop the wagon and
start shouting orders at everyone.
Amdi gathered himself together, adjusting his cloaks and leggings. The
human little boy voice gave an occasional whimper, but in a few seconds
he looked as imposing as he had when first she saw him this morning. As
the winch-pilot came back and undid the ties on the livestock—kherhog
and human—Amdi strolled over to the gate and waved a gracious snout
or two at the packs who were coming out from the inn. “I’ll go ahead. If
you come down right after me … well, I’ve got my speech planned, the
story I finally had to settle on: See, the Innmaster thinks we’re a travelling
entertainment 
troupe. 
‘The 
Magnificent 
Amdiranifani, 
Master 
of
Fragments and Zombies from Lands of Mystery.’ And”—wail—“our first
big show is tonight!”

Chapter   28
Jefri and Ravna were housed in a stable again. Otherwise, things were
much improved. Amdi had persuaded these people that the humans
could not form godlike packs. True, they were amazing creatures,
naturally clever singletons. Jefri and Ravna recognized the word for
“walking corpses” when they were paraded from the winch carriage. The
notion predated the arrival of humans: imagine thought without sound.
Apparently, this added enormously to the interest in Amdi’s upcoming
show.
The inn’s stable was high-ceilinged, dark, and only moderately smelly.
Like the rest of the inn, it stood well away from the deadly jumble of
boulders at the base of the cliff.
“After last night, I don’t even mind these,” Jefri said, shaking the kherhog
fetters that bound his wrists. Since Amdi and the innsfolk had left, Jef had
scouted out the loft and the various wagons parked on the main floor.
“And for the moment, I think we’re as safe as we’ve been since before
Chitiratifor.”
“Yes.” Ravna munched on the last of the yams—served on wooden
platters, the kind the local Tines themselves ate from. “It helps to have a
friendly guard.”
“Guard” was how Amdi had identified Screwfloss to their new hosts. The
term was at least an overstatement. Remnant Screwfloss was content to
sit by the main door and watch the outside through various knotholes. He
hadn’t been at all bothered by Jefri’s explorations. And yet, when the
locals were around, he was surprisingly guardlike, flicking a whip
threateningly at Jefri and Ravna.
Jefri walked back from the kherhog stalls and squatted down just a meter

from the remnant pack. “You’re more together, aren’t you?”
The pack’s whip didn’t twitch. After a moment, his heads bobbed and he
gobbled a few chords.
“Wow. That sounds as though he understood your Samnorsk!”
“Yes. He didn’t say much more than ‘I’m okay,’ but it matched my
question.” Jefri reached out to pat the nearest shoulder. “That happens
sometimes, you know. A member with a critical talent gets killed, and the
other parts slowly learn to fill in the function. He may never be really
smart, but…”
Ravna eyed the pack’s smudged disguise. “But we know he was a mix of
very clever parts.”
“Um. Yes.”
•  •  •
Throughout the afternoon, they heard wagons and packs outside.
Through the knotholes, they could see two packs just beyond the walls.
Were those to keep the curious out, or the zombies in? In any case, Jefri
and Ravna had time to clean up and speculate on what kind of show a
two-legs circus act could put on. Ritl came down from the loft and
blabbered and blabbered, despite obvious threats from Screwfloss. Most
of her complaints seemed to be about being locked up here, but when
the real guards opened the door in mid-afternoon to bring in water,
Ravna noticed that the singleton stayed clear of the doorway. Maybe she
was saving her serious troublemaking for Amdi—or maybe she had a
certain animal caution: In some Tinish cultures, loose singletons were fair
game for murder, rape, or impressment into transient slave packs.
About an hour after the water delivery, Screwfloss abruptly came to his
feet. Ritl gave a startled yelp and made a quick retreat toward the loft, but
Screwfloss’ attention was on the knot holes in the stable wall. He

gestured Jefri and Ravna to back away.
Now Ravna could hear the gobbling of multiple packs approaching.
Riding above that noise was a little boy’s voice: “Hei Jefri. Hei Ravna.
Look harmless!”
Then the stable door was slid to the side. Besides the two fellows who
had been there all day, there were three other packs, one of them Amdi.
They strolled in, each clumped together—the normal comportment of
strangers. One of the visitors was a swaggering sixsome, with members
as big as Amdi’s.
Amdi waved for Screwfloss to back off and give the visitors space. He
was talking to the strangers, saying something grandiloquent. At the
same time, he said in Samnorsk: “The six-pack is the Innmaster. He
wanted to see you before the show. He’s fascinated by the whole
concept of two-legs, but I think he’s a little frightened of you, too. If we
can convince him you’re no danger, things could go a lot smoother.”
Jefri said, “You could order me forward, Amdi. Then let this guy get
close.”
“Okay. But you gotta look meek.”
There was gobbling back and forth between Amdi and the other packs.
Everybody was speaking more slowly than packs usually did. Ha. Ravna
suddenly realized that Amdi had his own language issues with these
fellows. The result was a substantial simplification in everybody’s speech.
The words weren’t stacked quite as deep and there was some repetition.
Amdi was assuring them there was no need to restrain the humans.
Abruptly, he waved at Jefri. Jef came out of the shadows to stand just
centimeters from the nearest of Amdi. Then he dropped to his knees.
Now his face was just about at eye level with the largest pack members.
“That meek enough?”
Amdi cocked a head in the direction the Innmaster. “I don’t see how we
could do better.” He said something encouraging to the Innmaster—and
then all of him stepped back and waved encouragingly for the sixsome to
approach.

Ravna realized that she was holding her breath. She rarely saw any
Tines who were unfamiliar with humans, and when she did, they were in
no position to do harm. Here, now, Jefri was meeting a dangerous
stranger.
The Innmaster had lost his swagger. His eyes had widened and some of
him fidgeted with the jaw hatchets in his panniers. The prospect of getting
closer to Jefri was clearly unnerving. But after a moment, the pack
seemed to remember he had witnesses. He stood a little taller and—
thank the Powers—stopped fiddling with the hatchets. He boomed
something confident at the other packs and sidled around Jefri. Now he
was making the sort of placating sounds that packs (some packs—not
Screwfloss) made when they were trying to gentle a kherhog.
Jefri sat back on his heels and made no effort to track the members who
were circling him.
The nearest of the Innmaster was well inside Jefri’s reach—and suddenly
the critter seemed to realize as much. It stopped, licked its lips. Then it
jabbed out a nose, tapping Jefri on the shoulder. Jefri just smiled back,
not showing any teeth. The sixsome hesitated a moment more, then
closed in all around, slapping Jefri on the back, almost as hard as one
would pat a kherhog. At the same time, most of him turned to face the
doorway and made loud conversation with the other packs.
Amdi provided some translation: “‘See,’ he’s saying, ‘it’s every bit as
docile as I knew it would be.’”
The critter was grinning from one end to the other. If these people had
had cameras, he surely would have been demanding the others take
video of his triumph.
“Now he wants me to prove that you’re clever like a pack.” Amdi gabbled
something at the Innmaster. “I told him that would have to wait for our big
show tonight.”
The sixsome huffed impatiently. Two of him were pulling Jefri’s shirt out
of his pants, examining the fabric. For a moment, Ravna thought the
fellow was going to argue. But then the Magnificent Amdiranifani moved

a little closer and delivered some kind of bombast. If Ravna hadn’t known
him for ten years, she would have been intimidated. Certainly, the
Innmaster was impressed. He gave Jefri a couple more patronizing
thumps, at the same time surreptitiously trying to tear off some of his shirt
—but then he stepped back.
Innmaster and maestro chatted amiably for a few moments. It wasn’t
quite casual, since the Innmaster was still mostly watching Jefri, and two
heads were aimed at Ravna; she’d finally been noticed lurking in the
shadows. But he was no longer insistent. In fact, he looked downright
thoughtful. He asked if Amdiranifani needed anything more. Amdi’s reply
was something about privacy and … huh, toys?
In the brightness beyond the doorway, a crowd of locals had gathered,
standing so close to one another that there was some actual pushing and
shoving. They were so close and dense that Ravna could feel the
buzzing. The Innmaster stepped out of the stable and jabbered rapidly at
the crowd. Ravna heard the “big show tonight” chord several times.
As the crowd dispersed, the Innmaster’s assistant returned with a
wheelbarrow piled high with colored balls and cloaks. He brought two
more loads of mysterious gear. Then he and Amdi cooperated in sliding
the door shut.
And they were alone, their guards presumably keeping the curious away
from the stable. The secret preparations of the Magnificent Amdiranifani
could begin.
Amdi unlocked the fetters that bound Jefri and Ravna. He and Jefri lit a
couple mantle lamps and hung them above the wheelbarrows. Ravna
was already digging through the “toys.” There were colored balls, four
whips, cloaks, and wooden tines. All that was just in the first
wheelbarrow. She looked up from the junk, at Amdi. “Jefri and I have
been trying to imagine what this big show is going to be.”
The Magnificent Amdiranifani drooped. “Yes. Me too!”

•  •  •
As usual, Amdi was very short on confidence. However, he did have
the beginnings of a plan. There was a purpose for the gear the Innmaster
had left them. “It’s from the last circus that came through here,” said
Amdi.
Jefri picked up one of the colored balls, tossed it at a nearby pillar. The
rebound was lively; this must be Tropical latex. Such items should not be
cheap in the local economy.
“Why would a circus just leave these things?” asked Ravna.
“Well, um, they went bankrupt. That’s what the Innmaster told me. He
foreclosed on them.” Amdi looked nervously at Ravna and Jefri. “Maybe
this gear couldn’t help a troupe of performing packs, but anything you do
will be new and magical. I thought we could be something like those
circuses that come through the Domain. I-I would introduce you and
you’d come out and juggle, maybe tie knots…” His voice dribbled off into
anxious silence.
Jefri gave the ball another bounce, then glanced at Amdi. “Your idea is
lightyears ahead of anything I’ve come up with … but no matter what we
do, do you think the Innmaster will let us leave afterwards?”
“I—maybe. I can see how much he’d like to steal you and Ravna. If he
guessed Tycoon is looking for you, he’d grab you in an instant. But I think
I’ve convinced him that we have Tycoon’s protection. If we do well, I
really think he’ll make good on his promises. He’ll give us the circus
wagon, these supplies, and half the admission fees.”
Ravna had a different problem: “Is this show going to be out of doors,
Amdi?”
“Yes, there’s an arena behind the inn. You couldn’t see it from your side
of the winch platform. Why—”
“I know this place isn’t on Chitiratifor’s maps, but since Nevil has moved

the orbiter eastwards—”
“Oh yeah!” said Amdi. “I thought about that. The new position still doesn’t
have a line of sight on us. I mean, unless he’s moved it again.”
Ravna pondered the foolishness of this chitchat. They didn’t really have a
choice. Aloud, she said, “So let’s give this Innmaster a show. It sounds
easier than playing with arrow trees and crusherbushes.”
That brought a weak smile to Jefri’s face. She could almost see him
summon the appearance of confidence. “For sure. And when I was
twelve years old, I was a really good juggler.”
Ravna smiled back. She remembered. For several tendays, little Jefri had
been a frustrated and frustrating nuisance, bouncing beanbags and sticks
in all directions. It had even strained his relationship with Amdi, since the
pack of puppies had learned to juggle with ease.
“Okay,” she said. “We’ve cleaned up our outfits. Your costume is still in
good shape, Amdi. You just have to come on strong. You’re the
Magnificent. What else can you introduce besides the juggling?”
“Knot tying? Can you do that, Ravna?” Amdi was pulling cordage from
one of the wheelbarrows.
“Sure.” Better than a Tinish singleton, anyway. “And what about the
comic relief?” That was a big part of circus performances in
Woodcarver’s Domain.
A glint came into Amdi’s eyes. “I’ve been thinking about that.” Three of
him were fiddling with a leash, making idle loops of it. “There’s a certain
singleton that has been has been making me look the fool. Maybe now I
can turn that around—”
As they’d been talking, Ritl had circled in on Amdi and was blabbering
more and more loudly. She was now well within Amdi’s personal space.
Five of him turned abruptly on Ritl, throwing the leash in a coordinated
attack so that the singleton’s neck, forelegs and hindlegs were
simultaneously caught in three separate loops. Ritl exploded in shrieking
fury as Amdi flipped the creature onto her side. From the loft, Screwfloss

hooted laughter.
Amdi stepped back, keeping tension on the various loops of leash.
“Where was I?” he said. “Oh, yes. Ritl still needs her costume.” Two of
him walked to the far wheelbarrow and took out a conical leather collar.
He passed it from member to member, and those standing by Ritl’s head
fastened the cone around the critter’s neck.
Ritl twisted about, jaws snapping on empty air. Her hissing spiked
painfully loud. The conical collar stuck forward all around her head,
drastically reducing her field of view. Her screeching quieted as she
seemed to realize her total helplessness.
Amdi noticed the look on Ravna’s face. “I haven’t hurt her, honestly. This
is a standard costume for clown singletons. Isn’t that right, Jefri?”
“Um, true.” But Jefri had a surprised expression on his face too.
Amdiranifani was so rarely aggressive. More than most packs, the
eightsome had sympathy for the oppressed.
“Right! Now it’s time to put on the clown paint.” He passed a couple of
dye sticks to Ravna. “I’ll tell you what to draw. Just don’t touch her eyes
or tympani and she’ll be fine.”
Ravna looked uncertainly at the two sticks. The handles were especially
broadened for easy jaw handling. Amdi had plenty of free members to do
the job himself.
“Go ahead, Ravna. The mindsound is awful, even from a singleton. I
don’t want any more of me to stand near Ritl.”
“Okay.” Ravna knelt beside the animal, drew her hand in a gentle petting
stroke along its back, much as the Children did with their Best Friends.
Ritl shrieked and tried to scratch at her, but gradually settled back.
“Now start with big pink circles around the shoulder and haunch
tympana…”
It took about fifteen minutes, and Jefri helping with the other colors, but in
the end Ritl was dolled up more than any member Ravna had ever seen,
including Godsgift.

When they were done, Amdi refastened the leash to a clasp that hung
from Ritl’s collar. Then he let it go loose. Ritl was quiet for a second, then
raced across the stable to where the brightest bit of sky light shone on
the straw. The singleton spun around and around, futilely trying to get a
look at what they had done to its body. Finally, the poor thing got tangled
up in the leash again and tipped over.
“See?” said Amdi, though not quite with perfect enthusiasm. “The
audience will think it’s hilarious.” He pointed a snout upwards.
“Screwfloss thinks it’s hilarious.”
In fact, Screwfloss’ heads were rippling up and down in amusement. That
cut short when Amdi sang out a sequence of chords that meant
something like “now it’s your turn,” and gestured at the remnant to come
down to ground level.
All heads but one jerked back, out of sight. Ravna heard sullen gobbling.
Amdi replied with something cheerful. Three of him gathered up the dye
sticks, the others looking up and gesturing to Screwfloss.
One by one, the remnant came down the ladder, the limper last of all.
The four grouped at the bottom, glowering at Amdi.
Ravna and Jefri exchanged glances, and Jefri said, “Be careful, Amdi.
Remember who that is.”
“I … I remember. I’m not going to force anything on him.” Amdi started
toward the far end of the stable, where the harness gear was hung. It
was cozy, but with enough room for two packs to have a private chat.
After a moment, Screwfloss followed suspiciously. The two disappeared
behind the harness racks. There was the sound of quiet discussion. “I
can’t tell what they’re saying,” said Jefri. Half a minute passed and still no
battle sounds. The loudest sounds in the stable were the kherhogs
fidgeting in their stalls and Ritl hissing to herself.
•  •  •

It was getting noisy outside. Ravna recognized the wheezy music that
announced entertainment events.
Screwfloss and Amdi broke off their rehearsing. Amdi hustled around the
stable, getting everyone together, making sure the necessary props were
all in a single wheelbarrow. Screwfloss moved close to the door. His
smudged disguise had been wiped away—not that a disguise made
sense this far from Woodcarver’s Domain. Now his pelts were decorated
with a black and white checkered pattern. He held Ritl on a leash.
Screwfloss didn’t look happy, but that might have been Ritl’s fault. Ravna
walked over to give the pack some encouragement. Screwfloss looked
up at her and spoke the first Samnorsk she’d heard from him since the
night that part of him died: “We make big laugh. You see.” One of him
gave her a gentle bump.
Outside, a pack thumped on the door and gobbled loudly.
“They’re ready, guys!” said Amdi. “Ravna, please get on my general left.”
Jefri was already standing on the other side of the eightsome. “Don’t
worry. Don’t worry. I’ll give you plenty of cues. We’ll be okay!” Wail.
The door was already sliding open, the music shifting to a fast tempo.
Screwfloss lurched into the daylight, Ritl perforce accompanying him.
Beyond the musicians (one or both of their guards were making all the
wheeze), Ravna could see a well-spaced crowd, nothing like the mob of
earlier in the day.
Screwfloss still had his limp, but now he was faking another limp on the
other side of himself. The two of him who were holding the leash walked
close together as if they were suffering from lateral hearing impairment. It
was the gait he’d been practicing since he’d finished putting on the
checkered makeup. Ritl might not be acting a part, but her dogged efforts
to inconvenience her “master” were a perfect foil for Screwfloss’
performance: the fool and the fool’s pet. It was cruel medieval humor,
and the crowd’s laughter drowned out the music.
Then Amdi stepped out into the daylight, flanked by the two humans. The

crowd’s laughter faltered, and there were wondering hoots. The two
guards walked forward, clearing the way. One of them was dragging the
barrow like a small cart.
“Just stroll along after the guards,” said Amdi. “The Innmaster told me
these are paying customers, charged double to see us both here and
then again for our performance.”
The guards followed a flagstoned path leading to the inn. There were
wagons parked everywhere, even near where the winch platform sat like
a cockeyed gazebo in the roar and the mist of the waterfall.
More packs were watching from the portico of the inn, but now the guards
swung wide around that building, leading both the performers and the
high-paying customers on a long parade that ended at the largest
amphitheater Ravna had yet seen on Tines World.
•  •  •
Amdi’s troupe paused under awnings at the edge of the arena, hidden
from the view of the crowd.
The Innmaster walked to the center of the arena. The flagstones were
fitted in an intricate design, but here and there were dark splatter marks
that were not part of the design. Ugh. Animal sacrifice?
The Innmaster was giving some sort of speech. That went on for only a
few seconds before there were shouts from above, and a then a steady
chanting from all sides. Amdi had a couple of heads in public view, but
the rest of him was crouched down. “Hei! They’re shouting ‘We paid our
money and we don’t have to listen to you!’”
Out on the arena, the Innmaster tossed his heads in a disgusted gesture,
and stomped off to his box in the grandstands.
“Does that mean we’re on?” said Ravna.

The eightsome huddled down lower.
“Amdi?” said Jefri, cajoling from the pack’s other side. “You’ve done fine
so far. Go!”
“I, I, I haven’t had enough time to plan. I—”
The crowd chanted louder and louder. A very rotten yam splashed across
the awning, sending little splatters down on Screwfloss. He made a
disgusted noise and lost his close hold on Ritl’s leash. The singleton
bounded into the open, her caution of earlier in the day forgotten. She ran
in a wide arc, all the while gobbling loudly. She stopped, pranced about
on her rear legs for a moment, then lost sight of the ground behind her
collar/blinder and tipped over. She bounced up, still shouting. She was
bragging about something, almost certainly nonsensical. But the eerie
thing was how much she sounded like the Innmaster giving his spiel.
The crowd’s chanting turned to laughter.
Ritl hesitated, nonplussed. She hopped back and forth, demanding
serious attention. When the laughter just came louder, she charged the
nearest of the tiered stands—and was hauled up short by Screwfloss’
leash. She darted off to the side, pulling on the leather. Meanwhile,
Ravna noticed Screwfloss’ heads bobbing in surprised amusement. He
slid a glance in Amdi’s direction, and then—still out of sight of the
audience—very deliberately dropped the leash.
In the arena, poor Ritl almost fell over again. Then she recovered and ran
along the edge of the stands, trailing her very long leash.
Screwfloss bumbled out into public view, his members covered with that
checkered design, limping on two sides. He chased after the singleton’s
leash, remarkably missing it again and again. Finally he did a four-way
body flop on the stone flags, trapping the leather somewhere under
himself. He rose, the leash grasped firmly in four pairs of jaws. He bowed
triumphantly, and started making his own speech. But the fool’s pet was
not cooperating: Ritl ran round and round the foursome, faster and closer
as the length of free leash diminished.
Finally, Screwfloss tripped on the leash. He staggered around,

squawking indignation. The crowd thought this was still funnier. More
rotten vegetables splattered down, but this was crude applause. One
caught Screwfloss on a shoulder, splashing color across his checkered
design. Ritl seemed to be laughing about this, but she had her own
missiles to avoid, and without success.
Screwfloss dithered in apparent panic, then all of him turned toward
where Amdi and company were hidden. Even Ravna could see the
melodrama in his pose. His Tinish plea meant something like: “Master.
Master! Come out!”
And so Amdi was forced into action. He gave a low, heartfelt wail … and
bounded into the arena.
The laughter changed to cheers, and the rain of rotten vegetables ebbed.
Amdi was walking more proudly than Ravna had ever seen him, with the
ones in the middle pointing their heads straight up. If this were a human,
it would be a guy holding his arms up for the audience’s acclaim.
Jefri slid across the space Amdi had vacated. He had a huge, wondering
grin on his face.
“What’s he saying?” asked Ravna.
“It’s too fast for me. He’s promising them things—”
Consider the local dialect differences, Amdi was probably talking too fast
for much of his audience—but maybe that just added to the glamour.
Amdi waved grandly to Screwfloss and Ritl. The two left the arena, still
very much in character—though Ravna was convinced their behavior
was only an act for one of them. Screwfloss slid under the awning and
tied Ritl to one of the wood pillars. He was grinning and grumbling—and
taking turns trying to swab the juice off his pelt. He glanced across at
Ravna and Jefri and there was something wicked in his smile, something
that seemed to say “your turn is next!”
“Jefri! Ravna!” Amdi’s human voice spoke as he continued his showman
gobbling. “I’m just about ready to invite you out. Jefri comes to me and
Ravna stays back out of mindsound range. Okay?” It was essentially
what they had discussed back in the stable.

“Okay!” Jefri shouted back.
But then the clouds briefly parted and Amdi was standing in late
afternoon sunlight, his cloaks’ beadwork aglitter, his painted footgear
shining like real silver tines. Somewhere in the midst of him were the two
members that didn’t have fancy costumes, but Ravna couldn’t see them.
Amdi glanced up at the sunlight, startled. Then: “Very good!” he boomed,
now making a simultaneous translation. “I give you the wonders of the
northern world, the creatures from beyond the sky, the creatures who can
think without sound, who can think each by itself. I give you … the two-
legs!” Four of him jammed their heads straight up, and the other four
swung around to point where Ravna and Jefri were hidden beneath the
awnings. By golly, there was even a musical fanfare coming from the
eight.
“Do you suppose that’s our cue?” said Jefri.
“Unh,” said Ravna, finally feeling stage fright herself.
They walked out from under the awnings, and stood at their full height,
visible to all. Just as when they emerged from the stable, the audience
fell nearly silent. Jefri and Ravna turned in opposite directions, raising
their arms to show off their hands. Ravna was scanning the crowd,
watching for yam throwers. These stands were similar to Woodcarver’s
meeting place at her old capital, but even larger. Each tier was built
almost directly above the one below, and the “seating” was delimited
mainly by quilted sound absorbers and premium boxes. Amdi’s moment
of sunlight was past and the grandstands were in deepening gloom. It
was hard to say how many packs were up there; they were crammed
together closer than she had ever seen. There were heads everywhere,
almost all focused downwards, on the two humans.
And then she and Jefri were face to face again. She reached out,
brushed his sleeve with her hand. “I never guessed we’d end up here.”
Jef’s tense expression broke into a smile. “And I’ll bet you never guessed
that my juggling was a survival skill.” He caught her hand for an instant
and then they parted, Ravna retreating to the edge of the arena.

Amdi surrounded Jefri, continuing his showman’s spiel. He wasn’t
translating anymore, but Ravna recognized the chord “five-tentacle
paws.” He walked to the wheelbarrow that was set near center of the
arena, and tossed three colored balls to Jefri.
Jefri began cautiously, with just the three balls in a simple up and across.
Then he launched them higher and higher, brought them down low,
bounced the cycle of tosses off the ground. Amdi threw him a fourth ball.
That had worked well enough when they were practicing in the stable—
but now Jefri lost control. It took him several tries to keep all four in the
air. Ravna looked across the stands. Still no rotten yams, and the storm
of clicking sounds was applause. To these packs, the impressive thing
was that this monstrous, teetering singleton could juggle anything at all.
The most popular part of Jefri’s act was a bit of luck right at the end: A
persistently rowdy pack in the second tier tossed a single yam down at
Jefri. Jefri snagged it without getting splattered—and now he was
juggling five!
“Toss it back,” said Amdi, and shouted some kind of warning into the
stands. Jefri brought the other balls down to earth, then stood eyeing the
stands. No pack could have seen much in the beclouded twilight, but
after a moment, Jefri stepped back and threw a high, slow lob—that
plinked exactly the member of the pack who had tossed it.
Ravna held her breath. She had no idea what such an insult might mean
to these creatures. But everyone was laughing. The fellow looked
around, even its own heads bobbing with amusement. It had other
veggies, and after a few tries—and a sturdier yam—the pack and the
two-legs were playing catch.
Before there could be more audience participation, the Magnificent Amdi
waved Jefri out of the arena—and gestured to Ravna. Her show business
debut was at hand.
•  •  •

Alas, the knot-tying made a limp finale. Even with the heavy ropes the
Innmaster supplied, there wasn’t much for the audience to see, especially
in the fading light. On the other hand, it didn’t challenge her sense of
balance—and no one tossed rotten yams at her. As she held up her
latest creation, she looked across the stands. The applause wasn’t wild,
but she sensed a kind of somber speculation looking back at her.
Perhaps she had not proved her super-singleton intelligence, but she had
demonstrated that, for close work, a two-legs was defter than any full-
bodied pack.
In any case, her act did not go on as long as Jefri’s. Amdi began to wind
things down, waving at Screwfloss to do one more comedy go-around.
But as the remnant untied Ritl, the Innmaster came strolling out from his
private box in the grandstands. His gobbling carried liquid overtones. He
was asking for something, all very politely. Whatever he was saying met
with loud approval from the audience.
Amdi dithered in surprise. Jefri was walking out onto the arena.
“What? What?” said Ravna.
Jefri gave her an odd smile. “I think our host wants permission for a
select few of the audience to come down and … um … pet us.”
Amdi had turned his attention to Ravna and Jefri, and for the first time his
posture slumped out of magnificence. “That’s exactly right. None of these
packs have met humans before; if even a few are hostile … what do you
want to do?” Now all of him was looking at Ravna. And so was Jefri.
“I—” she looked up at the crowd. At this moment the vast majority were
actively friendly. And we may need that tomorrow, when we try to leave.
It was the story of her life on this world, making scary near-term bets.
“Tell them ‘yes,’ Amdi.”
“Okay.” Amdi boomed his agreement, for a change speaking very slowly
and simply. Then to Ravna and Jefri he said, “I told them only one at a
time. The Innmaster’s guards will stay near enough to make sure no one
plays rough.”

The packs in the first tier surged onto the field, maneuvering for the
privilege of a close encounter with the zombies. The Innmaster set his
guards to regulating the customers’ approach—incidentally collecting still
more coinage.
Amdi arranged himself generally behind the two humans while
Screwfloss brought Ritl out and settled on Ravna’s right. Ritl blabbered
away self-importantly—but she toned it down when the remnant drew her
near and began snapping at her.
The first of the “select few” of customers had gotten past the guards. The
fivesome approached at an enthusiastic trot, then slowed, even backed
up a little. All five of its heads were craned upwards, intimidated by Jefri’s
height. The customer right behind squawked at the delay—but it didn’t try
to circle around.
Jefri went to one knee and extended a hand, gesturing the pack forward.
Amdi shifted nervously. “This isn’t the Innmaster; you don’t have to take
chances.”
“It’s okay, Amdi. This is just like our first expedition to the Long Lakes.”
Jef’s body language was relaxed enough, but his voice was tense.
The five spent almost a minute variously inspecting Jef’s clothing,
mouthing his fingers with the soft tips of its own muzzles, and chatting
with Amdi. “He complimented me on how well I’ve trained you, Jef,” Amdi
reported, as he passed the customer on to Ravna.
Some of the strangers were like that first one. Others mugged around for
friends who lurked at a distance, as if to say “Look at me, up close to a
monster!” Many tried to talk to Jefri and Amdi, echoing the humans’ own
words and watching for a response.
As twilight deepened, fire circles were lit at the corners of the arena. The
flames climbed bright and high—adequate light even for Tines. And the
customers kept coming. A few of them even took time to compliment
Screwfloss on his act. Ravna wondered if the Steel inside had ever been
the object of honest praise; in any case, the remnant seemed pleased.
Ritl didn’t know quite what to make of the chitchat, but she clearly

considered herself a co-equal entity in the receiving line.
And there were a few, a very few, who came close to doing what Amdi
had been worried about. One pack jostled Jefri. When Amdi complained,
the creature seemed to apologize, easing past Amdi to get close to
Ravna. The pack was seven, but scrawny and misshapen. Put some
checkered makeup on this fellow and it could play a mean version of
Screwfloss’ character. It swirled close around her, all yellowish eyes and
Tinish bad breath. Amdi was watching it closely and he translated the
creature’s gobbling: “He’s saying to everybody that even up close, you
are making no mindsound.” When Ravna remained silent, it squealed
something that might have meant “alive” (or “not alive”)—and slammed
into her knees.
Ravna fell, but before the creature could do anything more, Jef and Amdi
jumped in on her left and Screwfloss on her right, all grabbing at the
stranger. For a moment, bodies were flying in all directions. Ravna
struggled back to her feet. The attacker was scattered, out of easy
thinking range of itself. Its members looked around dazedly, then
skedaddled to the edge of the arena, ran back together, and disappeared
through one of the openings between the stands.
“That’s it!” shouted Jefri. “Time to close down!” He reached out to Ravna
and said more softly, “You okay?”
“Yes, I—” She hadn’t been hurt at all, just reminded of the risks.
Amdi was talking over the crowd, at the Innmaster. That worthy was
standing near his money collectors. Amdi’s words sent him into a frantic
dance. The crowd of packs started protesting, too. Nightmare visions
came to Ravna’s mind.
Amdi reported, “The Innmaster is promising us the sun and the moon, if
we’ll just stay in place a little longer.”
“We’ve got to stay,” said Ravna.
Amdi raised four of his heads high, and gobbled loudly across all the
voices. “I’m repeating what the Innmaster is promising us,” he said. “I’m
saying we’d love to cooperate, but we want everyone to make sure that

all promises get kept.”
The Innmaster was bobbing heads in agreement. Ravna could see the
reason for his enthusiasm: The panniers on his guard packs were
swinging heavy with the loot. This was jackpot night for the guy.
Jefri was nodding too, but not with enthusiasm. “Okay, you’re right; we’ve
got to see this through.” He returned to the pack he’d been chatting with
right before the blowup. Interactions were strained for a few moments,
but now in fact everyone was watching for troublemakers. The flow of
customers and cash resumed.
Afterwards, Ravna wasn’t clear how late into the night they stayed. The
packs just kept coming. She noticed an occasional pack give her an
aggressive stare, but none of them misbehaved. As for the rest … she
came to see why Johanna and Jefri and the other explorer kids had loved
their dangerous jaunts beyond the Domain. Most Tinish strangers, once
they got over their initial unease with humans, seemed to revel in their
ability to get close, to deal with apparently intelligent singletons. As the
evening progressed, and the fires were renewed and renewed, more of
the packs were trying to echo talk with her and Jefri. Some packs, who
had been through the line and saw that they would not make it back for a
second turn, hung around at the edge of the arena, shouting suggestions
at the customers who were closer.
Here might be enemies and monsters, but also potential Best Friends for
future generations of the Children.

Chapter   29
Things were very different after their show at Winch Bottom. They had
a real circus wagon now (the one lost to default by its unfortunate original
owners). The wagon had a passenger cabin and was so large that it
really needed its four-kherhog team. Under the watchful eyes of
customers who had stayed overnight, the Innmaster had also given them
food supplies and crossbows. Perhaps as important, he’d given them an
official-looking letter, advising that as Tycoon’s manager at Winch
Bottom, he and Tycoon were pledging safe conduct to these marvelous
entertainers. That, combined with the Tycoonist badge that Amdi had
found in Chitiratifor’s gear, could count for a lot. Ravna hoped the fellow
wouldn’t be in too much trouble when real word from Tycoon finally
reached these parts.
When they left Winch Bottom, there were at least a dozen packs who
wanted to sign on with the circus, to guard them and guide them in the
journey northwards. Chances were good they were all sincere, but Amdi
turned them down. The more famous they became, the easier it would be
for Tycoon and Vendacious and Nevil to find them. The moment word of
the search overtook them, even honest packs might turn them in.
So when they departed Winch Bottom, only a few fans had followed,
furtively straggling along some hundred meters behind the circus wagon.
Amdi passed up the first villages to the north, picking his way around
them on paths he’d discovered on the maps. As they rolled past each
successive village, they lost more of their retinue. These were ordinary
packs of the Wild Principates, peasants and small landowners. No matter
how intrigued they might be by the two-legs, they did not have the leisure
time of fans in a more technological society.
On the third day, Screwfloss scouted all around and reported they had

lost the last of their followers. Now it was time to change the course from
what Amdi had advertised back at Winch Bottom. “There are plenty of
alternative paths on these maps,” said Amdi. “The problem is, whichever
we choose, we’re going to run out of food before we get back to the
Domain.” They’d have to engage in some skilled woodcraft … or stage
more shows.
When this stark choice was presented to Amdi, he’d dithered a moment
and then a shy smile spread across him. “I—I guess I could take another
turn at being Magnificent.”
Over the next few days they looked at each little village they came
across, with Screwfloss scouting for threats and friendliness, balancing
the risks with the current state of their supplies. Most places they still
avoided, but eventually they performed three times, once indoors at a
farmers’ meeting hall and twice in open fields under cloudy skies. The
days stayed mild, with cold rains and muddy roads, but altogether more
pleasant than what had gone before.
Their shows improved. Ravna’s own act was still a loser, but she had
tweaked their lighting system into being a major part of the event. Even
Ritl seemed to enjoy performing; she tried to upstage Amdi in more and
more hilarious ways. Amdi was now completely fluent in the local dialect.
His presentation had become positively polished, except that he seemed
genuinely to be angered by the singleton’s antics. The high point of the
show was always the petting zoo routine, and they had that worked out
so well that it felt almost safe. Already, their fame had gotten ahead of
them: when they tried to bypass a town, there were often packs on the
side paths, begging them to stop and perform.
“These lands are just too civilized,” Jefri said one evening, after they had
set up camp for the night. Moonlight trickled down through the trees, but
hopefully they were out of sight of the primitive optics on the orbiter.
“Once upon a time, they really were wild, too dangerous for most
explorers. Now there’s trade everywhere. The arena at Winch Bottom
was huge, and new.”
“And the towns are growing,” said Amdi. “They’re even bigger than what’s

on Nevil’s maps.” Those maps might have been honest information for
Chitiratifor, but they were already out-of-date.
“Yeah,” said Jefri. “Tycoon’s finished goods are everywhere. I’m getting
sick of seeing that Pack of Packs logo. It’ll be a miracle if we get to the
Domain before news of us gets back to him.”
Ravna gave a gloomy nod. “And I’ll bet Nevil is waiting ahead, probably
with Eyes Above 2.”
Amdi was humming, which was often the sound of good ideas being
born: “But Woodcarver will be there, too,” he said. It was almost a
question. Both Jef and Amdi were getting more and more afraid for
Johanna and Pilgrim. And what about Woodcarver?
Ravna thought back to that strange final conversation she’d had with
Woodcarver. “I’ll bet she’s still running the Domain, Amdi. And she’s not
fooled by Nevil.”
“Well then. She’ll have loyal troops looking for us all along the frontier. If
we can get to her people, we can get you back to Oobii.”
“If you can get me back to Oobii, it’s show over for Nevil.” It’s what Ravna
told them every night.
“Hmmm,” emitted Amdi. “So what can we do that will—”
Ritl interrupted Amdi’s thinking with a loud suggestion of her own. When
it could, the creature would creep near them, quiet and innocent until she
was unseemly close—and then insert herself into the conversation.
This time she got a laugh out of Jefri: “That almost makes sense, Amdi,
at least if kherhogs had wings.”
Amdi was not amused. He bounced to his feet. “She’s just a damned
troublemaker! Can’t you see that?” The eight flounced off into the
moonlight-spattered dark.
“He’s getting even more sensitive about Ritl,” said Ravna. “I wonder
whether the Magnificent Amdiranifani is really acquiring a showman’s
ego.”

“I heard that!” Amdi shot back at them. “If I can’t think, I might as well do
guard duty.”
Remnant Screwfloss had returned from ranging around the camp. He
was over by the kherhogs, setting down fodder for them. Now one of his
heads turned to follow Amdi’s departure. When he was done with the
kherhogs, he settled down beneath the wagon and commented, “Ritl
make him a fool.” The remnant was speaking a fair amount of Samnorsk
these days, though not with the teasing sarcasm of when he’d been
whole.
Ravna looked around the wagon. Normally, Screwfloss staked down the
singleton on the other side of the kherhogs. It was more peaceful that
way. “Hei, Screwfloss. Didn’t you have Ritl tethered?”
The pack cocked its heads, looked out from under the wagon in the
opposite direction. Maybe he wasn’t going to answer. But then he said,
“She get loose.”
Jefri gave a little laugh. “Ritl must be learning from your rope tricks,
Ravna.”
Ravna smiled back. “She’s just a good wriggler.” Ritl had slipped loose
once or twice before; no one but Amdi seemed to get very excited about
it. She looked across the dimly glowing embers at Jefri. “Could Ritl be a
threat? Remasritlfeer was an enemy—maybe not as bad as Chitiratifor—
but still one of Tycoon’s henchpacks. Given the opportunity, won’t she
betray us?”
Even in the dimness, she could see the grin on Jefri’s face. “Ah, paranoia
speaks.” He scooched around the dying fire in her direction. As usual,
they had set their pallets out of arm’s reach. With Amdi’s eight filling the
gap between them, there were plenty of warm bodies. Besides, the last
few nights had ended in the usual unpleasant arguments. Last night was
the first time Ravna ever heard the Blighter fleet called a rescue party. In
a way, hearing Jefri say that had been more terrifying than all the rest of
this ordeal.
Jefri warmed his hands above the glowing embers. “If and when we run

into Tycoon, what Ritl would do is hard to say. Old Screwfloss said
Remasritlfeer was one of Tycoon’s top lieutenants. Depending on just
who comes after us, it’s quite possible Ritl would betray us—though I’ll
bet she’s not smart enough to do much more than shout ‘Hei, Boss, look
here!’”
“Okay. I guess it is silly to worry about that here.” She watched Jefri
silently for few moments. She’d known him for ten years, had watched
the loving child grow up to be their best explorer—and a man who
believed the most terrible lies she could imagine.
Jefri looked up at her silence. “What?” he said. There was still a smile on
his face, but she could see the wariness in his eyes.
If she said one wrong word, they would slip into another night of
argument. But I have to try. “Jefri, we have this terrible disagreement
about the Blight and Countermeasure. You know what I think; you know
the sacrifices your parents made to escape the Blight. On the other side,
there’s—”
“There’s Nevil, right, a certified monster.” Jef’s agreement was angry.
“But so what? I remember the High Lab. And Down Here, I saw how
Countermeasure murdered Pham. Even you admit that Countermeasure
raised the Slowness, and probably destroyed civilization as far as we can
see the stars on a clear night. What counts is not who’s nice and who’s
not, Ravna; what counts is the truth.”
“I’m not talking about being nice, Jefri! I’m talking about trustable
observations. You were just a—”
“Just a young child? That’s what you said last night!”
But that’s what you were! And she would never forget how Jefri and Amdi
had tried to comfort her after seeing Pham die. She hesitated, trying to
think of something to say, something sensible, something that would
make this go right. “Jef, have you ever thought that there might be
existing facts, things to be discovered or tested, that might change your
opinion?”
“You want me to put my beliefs under review? How very nice. Are you

willing to do the same?”
“I—”
“Never mind. At this stage, what undiscovered evidence could there be?”
Jefri turned back to the fire. He sat hunched forward, hands extended
over the embers. He was silent for a long moment, then: “We’re going to
get you past Tycoon and Vendacious, safely back to Oobii. Then you’ll do
what you think is right. If you can’t stop Nevil, I will get rid of him myself.”
His gaze returned to her face. “But you know what? There will still be a
Disaster Study Group. And its new leader won’t be Bili Yngva.”
•  •  •
Ravna drowsed. The moon set and the fire’s embers cooled to
darkness. She heard an occasional snarfling snore from the kherhogs,
but none of Ritl’s irritating chatter. Eventually, she heard someone
entering the campsite; that would be Amdi, come to wake the next sentry.
The thought brought her almost fully awake. She usually took the second
watch—though she was sure that neither Amdi nor Screwfloss trusted a
human sentry. Some of them would be listening all through the night.
Faint and far away, she heard what might have been Ritl, but not quite as
querulous as usual. Then the night exploded into hissing and squealing.
Some number of creatures chased each other through the surrounding
brush, fighting as they ran.
“Amdi!” shouted Jef. There was no answer, but Ravna heard somepack
—Screwfloss?—scramble over the startled kherhogs and bound to the
top of the circus wagon.
The shrieking continued, the noise coming together on the far side of the
wagon.
Ravna kept one of the lamps with her at night. Now she shook it into
surveillance mode. The light flickered in pseudo-random hops, scanning

into the underbrush in a pattern that should confuse anyone trying to spot
the source.
The sounds of the monster cat fight continued, but she saw no sign of
attacking packs. If Ritl had betrayed them, it wasn’t to a simple ambush.
“Let me point light.” That was Screwfloss from atop the wagon, where the
second lamp was stored. He swept the illumination onto something
beyond the wagon. Looking beneath the wagon, Ravna saw Tinish legs
scrambling around.
“That’s part of Amdi!” Jefri started around the wagon. He had his
crossbow up and cocked.
Two packs of four came racing round the wagon, one on each side. They
ran towards each other, jaws snapping. All were dressed in plain
workcloaks just like Amdi wore when they were on the road.
“Huh!” Jefri said. “Amdi?”
All eight collapsed in a heap. The lamplight swung in to spotlight the
crowd. Indeed, this was exactly Amdi.
“Are you okay, Amdi?” Ravna knelt beside the pack, looking at each of
him. There were cuts and scrapes. One of his ears was torn. “Who did
this?” And is it still out there? But she could see that up on the wagon, all
of Screwfloss was watching Amdi; he wasn’t worried about an attack.
Amdi was hissing and sputtering, but she heard a high, keening whistle
behind all his sounds. The pack was in terrible pain. Finally, he slipped
into Samnorsk: “No attack. There was no attack. No one’s sneaking up
on us, though Screwfloss should take sentry duty.” He emitted two or
three chords. Screwfloss sang something back. The remnant dropped off
the far side of the wagon and walked into the bushes.
Amdi wriggled miserably in the bright lamp light, exchanging looks with
himself, darting glances at Jefri and Ravna. “Turn off the light, okay?”
Ravna did, and Amdi’s voice continued in the darkness. “It was Ritl.”
“I don’t understand,” said Ravna. “If there’s no one else out there, how
could she do so much harm?”

Ravna heard a muffled click, Jefri safing his crossbow. “I think it’s more
complicated than that,” Jef said, and she heard him go to his knees
beside the pack.
Amdi was making a strange medley of sounds. There was the
whimpering, almost the sound of a human child. There were chords that
she didn’t understand, and there was the pack’s little boy voice speaking
in tones that were full of self-loathing: “The Ritl animal has been a
troublemaker from the beginning. She is not smart, but she is always
saying the wrong thing when I try to perform. You saw that too, right?
She almost got us killed at Winch Top. At the same time, she is in my
personal space every chance she gets.”
Jefri’s voice was soft: “She’s a singleton, Amdi. She can’t live apart.”
The whimpering got a little louder. Ravna had a sense of quick motion
within the pack, heard a pair of jaws snapping on air. Jefri made soothing
sounds. “Don’t be so hard on yourself, Amdi.”
After a moment, the little boy voice continued, “Sigh. I knew Ritl was an
issue the moment she turned up, but I thought—I hoped it would be like
in the romances. Ritl would make Screwfloss whole again! It would have
solved both their problems. Instead, that stupid remnant has no interest
in her. And Ritl doesn’t like Screwfloss either. Then she made, um,
advances towards me. But so what, I thought. I am so perfectly matched.
There is nothing that having another member could cause me except
harm.”
Amdi didn’t say anything for a moment, though the whimpering
continued. “… Tonight I was strung out all the way around the campsite.
It’s really kind of an interesting way to be. I get very stupid, but I can see
so much and the thoughts rattle around one step at a time, each of me
adding a little insight.” The whimpering got louder. It wasn’t a group
sound; it was coming from the three members hunched down closest to
the ground. “Ritl came in among me. She didn’t sneak up exactly; I knew
she was there. She started bothering the parts of me…” Amdi’s voice
rose into keening: “the parts who like her.” He twisted around, jaws
snapping. Jefri reached down, risking some nasty cuts to caress a head

here and there. After a moment, coherence returned to the eightsome.
“Ritl is tearing me apart!”

Chapter   30
The maps showed a town thirty kilometers up the road. There were
nearer ones on other roads, but this was their best bet for a full
provisioning. 
From 
there, 
they 
could 
sneak 
forward, 
scouting
Woodcarver’s border forts for the safest one to approach.
This would be their last show, and then the real climax would be ahead.
Meanwhile …
Ravna rode atop the wagon. Nominally, she was driving, though she
suspected that all by herself, Ravna-from-the-stars could not have
managed a team of four kherhogs. Their cooperation was more likely due
to Remnant Screwfloss, who was almost always here and there around
the animals, bullying them along.
Jefri and Amdi walked together, dropping further back than usual, their
forms almost lost in the morning fog. The eightsome was clustered tight,
the posture a pack normally used when in a crowd or coping with bad
acoustics or needing to do hard thinking. The fog alone couldn’t account
for that posture. Since his midnight collapse, the pack had been like this,
cheerless and quiet, talking in low tones to his Best Friend.
Ravna gave the reins a tentative slap, just to let the kherhogs know that
she wasn’t asleep. She glanced at her companion atop the wagon. “So is
that what you are, Ritl? A pack wrecker?”
Ritl cocked her head toward Ravna. It was hard to see any expression in
a singleton’s posture, but the animal seemed to have some
understanding. Is she laughing at me? This morning, Ritl’s leash was tied
short to the cargo railing behind the driver’s bench. Getting her up here
had been a struggle. She seemed to think that after last night’s
shenanigans she had achieved privileged status. Her hissing complaints

had continued some minutes after they got on the road. Then she had
settled into near silence, staring back along the road in Amdi’s direction.
Every so often Ravna felt a buzzing sensation through the wood of the
driver’s bench, probably a side effect of Ritl’s shouting ultrasonic
endearments.
Ravna continued her one-sided conversation with the creature: “You
know, among humans, it’s considered very bad form to break up
another’s relationship, even if you’re needy yourself.”
“Very bad form, very bad form,” Ritl looped on the phrase a few times.
Then her gaze returned to the object of her immoral advances.
Calling Ritl a “pack wrecker” was not just a figure of speech. Poor
Amdiranifani was simply too big to take on another member. That’s what
he claimed, anyway, and Jefri agreed. Amdi probably couldn’t even retain
a puppy born of his own pack. Accepting an unrelated adult member
would surely split the eightsome. The three male members who were
enamored of Ritl would break away. Amdi said that one female was
wavering. Either possibility would be the end of Amdi.
Screwfloss shouted something at her, and abruptly Ravna was brought
back to the present. The kherhogs were making frightened noises and
pulling the wagon to the side, into the undergrowth. Screwfloss had
abandoned the animals and circled behind the wagon. Whatever he was
saying had brought Jefri and Amdi running forward.
Ravna struggled with the reins. The roadside brush hid a gully and deep
mud. She rose from the bench, bracing her legs and pulling as hard as
she could at the reins. “Need some help here!” Then she heard the
sound. It came out of the fog ahead, the buzz of steam induction engines.
Scrupilo’s airship! The aircraft was still hidden in the mists, but it was
getting closer.
Amdi and Jefri ran past the wagon. “We should get off the road, Ravna,”
Jef called to her, but softly. Ritl piped up with complaints. Amdi hissed a
“be quiet!” at the singleton, and for a wonder, it fell silent.
So now it was Ravna on the reins, and Screwfloss and Jefri and Amdi up

ahead guiding the kherhogs into the brush. Fortunately, this was the
general direction the animals wanted to go. They just needed help
negotiating the roadside gully.
Meantime, the sound of Scrupilo’s steam engines had grown louder. Was
this salvation, or Nevil’s gang? She put the question on hold as the
wagon tilted sideways. She didn’t quite lose the reins, but now she was
aware how easily she might be dumped and crushed.
Then the front wheels were climbing over the far edge of the gully, and
she was back in her seat. Leafy branches swept the top of the wagon.
Without thinking, she reached up to rescue Ritl from her perch at the top.
They huddled together beneath the scraping branches.
“Sorry,” came Jef’s voice. “I didn’t realize the fit was so tight.”
“We’re fine.” Ravna pushed at the heavy, wet foliage. They were well
protected against eyeball detection from above. She started down the
ladder-stairs from the driver’s seat. Behind her, Ritl was complaining. The
singleton’s voice was still soft, but growing toward loudness. “Okay, you
can come, too.” Ravna unlatched the leash from the wagon. Ritl
immediately scrambled across her shoulders and leaped to the ground.
A moment later, Ravna was standing ankle-deep in the mud. She backed
away from the wagon, staring upwards. The buzz of the airship’s steam
engines was still growing, but with the fog and forest cover she couldn’t
see anything.
“Amdi!” Jefri’s voice was scarcely more than a whisper. “Spread out and
get a look-listen.”
But Amdi stayed heads together, hissing softly at Ritl. “I can’t move with
that animal so close,” the pack said. “She’d come between me.”
Okay … Ravna went back along the way the wagon had come. If the
airship had real surveillance gear, then hiding the wagon was a waste of
time. If not, well, she might be able to learn more about them without
revealing herself. She moved along the gully, staying under the thickest
of the brush, but looking for a view of the sky.

Something scuttled through the brush around her: three, no, all four of
Screwfloss. One of him nipped at her pants leg, drawing her down to an
opening the pack had found. She went to her hands and knees and
followed him up to the edge of the road. Yeah. Ahead was the perfect spy
hole.
Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz, the sound of steam induction engines
flying just a few meters overhead, moving south but no faster than a
human could run. She reached the break in the bushes and cautiously
looked out, just in time to see … the form of the Eyes Above 2
disappearing into the murk, spinning out a helix of foggy spume behind it.
Powers take it! A second earlier and she might have seen recognizable
faces! Around her, Screwfloss poked a couple heads into the opening.
She held her breath for a long moment, listening for any sign that the
airship might be turning back; their wagon’s maneuvers would have left
signs that might be visible from above.
For better or worse, the engine sounds became steadily fainter, vanishing
into the south. They stayed low in the dripping foliage for some minutes,
but finally even Screwfloss seemed to give up on the possibility of a
return. They stumped back to the wagon, where everyone was full of
questions.
“We were too far away to see or hear anything,” said Amdi. “Did you?”
“You didn’t hail them,” said Jefri. “Was it Nevil’s people?”
“I couldn’t see. Sorry. Maybe I was too cautious.” Maybe I should have
just run out into the road. Very few Deniers could be bothered with
primitive gadgetry; surely, Scrupilo would have had a crew aboard.
Amdi and Screwfloss were gobbling back and forth. Ritl stood unseemly
close to the eightsome, injecting noise into the conversation. Abruptly,
Amdi turned on the interloper, screeching and snapping at it. “Tie it up! I
don’t have to be nice to it anymore!”
The singleton danced back out of everyone’s reach, making sounds that
seemed mocking even to Ravna. Catch me if you can!
Jefri leaned down and snatched the singleton’s leash where it lay near

his feet. He gave it a wiggle, catching Ritl’s attention. The animal shot
him a wide-eyed glare, then raced around Amdi, trying to trap the pack’s
legs in the leash. This not being a circus act, Jefri and Amdi managed to
outwit the creature, and in a few moments it was bundled—clawing and
biting and squawking—up the ladder-stairs to its tie-down point atop the
wagon.
“Okay then,” said Amdi, ignoring the continuing complaints. “Screwfloss
was listening to the flier while Ravna was watching it. He says there were
Tines aboard.”
Jefri was partway down the ladder. He stopped, considering. “He heard
mindsounds?”
“No, it was too far away and humid for that. But he heard Interpack
speech.”
“I didn’t hear any voices,” said Ravna. “But that’s not surprising. Did he
recognize anyone? What were they saying?”
Screwfloss had been following, heads cocking back and forth. Now he
answered in Samnorsk: “No sense. No words. But the sound is like two-
legs can’t make.”
Ravna squatted down by the remnant. “Did you hear any humans?”
Screwfloss thought a moment. “No.” He gobbled some elaboration.
“He says that if there were any humans aboard, they didn’t say anything
during the time he had good hearing, and that was at least two minutes.”
Ravna stifled an unhappy laugh. “I should have waved them down.”
“They’ll be back, Rav.”
“Maybe. Or maybe they’ll just keep searching south. Either way … I don’t
see how it changes things now.
•  •  •

Twice that morning, Amdi and Screwfloss claimed they heard the
sound of the airship. Both packs spread out from the sides of the road,
trying to get a baseline on the sound. All they could be sure of was that
the aircraft was far to the south.
Meantime, they had their final show to prep for. As the fog gave way to a
misty rain, Jefri and Ravna climbed into the wagon and worked on the
costumes and props. Screwfloss drove the kherhogs, and he and Amdi
alternated riding on the top of the wagon—except that when Amdi was up
there, Ritl was exiled to walk on a leash behind the carriage.
Mostly Amdi seemed to be worrying about what they’d do after this show,
how to get out of town and thence to the border with the Domain.
Ravna smiled as she polished the lamp emitters. “Hei Amdi, if this were a
tenday ago, your stage fright is all we’d be hearing about.”
Amdi’s little boy voice drifted through the open window of the cab: “Oh, I
still have stage fright, but now it’s a solvable problem, like math of
tractable complexity.” He was silent for a second or two. “Ritl is a different
sort of problem. If I can just keep away from her, I think I can stay
together. And as long as I can stay together, I can manage easy
problems like stage fright.” He was silent for a longer time, and then, “I
want to thank you for giving me courage, Ravna. I was ready to give up
back at Winch Top.”
What did I say at Winch Top? Oh yeah. “I, I just told you the truth, Amdi.
Steel created you for his purposes. At Winch Bottom you discovered you
were something more.”
“No, I don’t mean what you said. It’s what you did, what you do. You’re
just a single person and you’ve been so terribly banged around. Back at
Winch Top you could barely stand, but you just kept going.… I’m going to
see this through, too.”
Jefri had look up sharply at Amdi’s words. Was he irritated? Surprised?
“Just be careful, Amdi.”

•  •  •
As they neared their destination, they realized that a discreet
reconnoiter was not possible. Even far south of the town, the farm lanes
were crowded with wagons and packs.
“They say they’re here to see the two-legs perform,” Amdi reported after
chatting up the strangers.
Jefri looked out from the curtains they had drawn across the cab’s
windows. “This welcome is bigger than anything we’ve run into before.
Somebody’s organized it.”
Ravna pushed curtain aide and leaned out. The wagon ahead of them
was painted in lively colors. Beneath a rain tarp, she could see canvas
bales imprinted with the ubiquitous twelve-pack logo. A little sign
advertised the contents as “fine cloaks.” Two of the driver were looking
back in her direction. The fellow gave out a little whoop and waved at her.
She waved back. “Maybe we’re just famous. What do you think, Amdi?”
The eightsome’s voice sounded from beneath the window. “They say the
local prince sent messengers out early this morning, proclaiming a
special festival day, complete with ‘real mythical two-legs.’ They think it
has something do with the big creature in the sky—they’ve heard the
airship. Look, I should go on ahead and talk to somebody who can make
us a deal.”
Ravna and Jefri exchanged glances. Usually, they would stop just
outside of town, and wait for some local landowner to make them a deal;
often that could take a day. Amdi’s plan would save time, but it would
leave them with the dubious diplomatic skills of Remnant Screwfloss.
Just now, that worthy was atop the wagon and apparently following the
conversation: “Amdi go ahead.”
Jefri looked out at the traffic jam around them. “Okay, Amdi. But keep it
simple.”
“I will. One show, stipulated payment. And then we’re gone in the early

morning.”
“Be careful,” said Ravna. Maybe she had encouraged him too much.
“Hei, I’ll be fine without Ritl!” Amdi was already running on ahead of their
wagon, and shouting something to one of the few official-looking packs in
sight.
•  •  •
This might be a frontier village, but it was not small. Amdi eventually
returned with directions, guiding them to a pavilion by the town square.
“The local boss calls this place ‘The Northernmost End of Civilization.’”
Amdi laughed. “Woodcarver would not be amused!”
Ravna walked around their wagon, taking in the view of downtown.
Woodcarver had her sculpture, but this was the first place on Tines World
where Ravna had seen heroic statuary. Each work depicted a single pack
in some grandiose pose, climbing tall on itself to wave around swords
and shields. According to Amdi, they all represented the local boss,
“Prince Purity.” The pack was no Innmaster; Purity ruled from a huge
castle of whitewashed stone. The structure sat on a rise north of town. It
was impressive, until you noticed that most of the whitewash covered
naked bedrock with a relatively small building at the top. Amdi shrugged.
“Except for the wealth that Tycoon’s trade has brought, I figure this guy is
phony. Most of the construction I see is new. I’ll bet that ten years ago,
Northernmost was a tiny village.”
Jefri was looking around, nodding. “And we know that fifty years ago, this
was uninhabited badlands.”
“Purity claims to be a continuous hereditary ruler, back to times of
legend.”
“Hmm,” said Jefri. “We’ve seen that sort of lie in some downcoast
kingdoms. Woodcarver wannabes.”

Nevertheless, modern-day Northernmost was a bustling place. Across
the square, carpenters were putting up wooden stands for tonight’s show
—but every other wide-open place was occupied by street vendors. The
guy with the “fine cloaks” was selling to packs who were already climbing
onto the finished benches. Lots of heads were looking at the shadowed
pavilion where the humans were standing.
The parts of Amdi that were in the open gave this audience a grand
wave, but his voice stayed local: “This looks like a small version of the
South End marketplace, doesn’t it?” He came all back into the pavilion
and began putting on Chitiratifor’s glitzy uniform. “Nevertheless, this is
the first place we’ve visited where the people actually seem to be
intimidated by who’s in charge.” Despite his somewhat ominous words,
Amdi sounded chipper. Maybe that was because Screwfloss had
tethered Ritl by the kherhogs, well beyond the range of mindsound.
“Do you think he might renege on paying us?” said Ravna.
“Ah,” Amdi said as he fiddled with his last cloak. He hadn’t yet donned
the fake tines; that would be the final touch, just before showtime. “He’s
more villainous than anyone we’ve run into since we escaped Chitiratifor.
On the other hand, I showed him our safe passage from Tycoon. And you
know how the airship was flying around here last night? Well, I told him
we had Woodcarver’s protection, too.”
“What did he say to that?”
“He tried to laugh it off, but I could tell he was taken aback.” Amdi looked
up at Ravna and Jefri. He seemed to notice their anxious looks for the
first time. “If he knew Tycoon was after us, we’d be locked up already. I
figure if we can keep him wondering, we’ll be okay.”
•  •  •
The show was their best yet. Part of it was the enthusiastic audience.

The rumors of the wondrous two-leg circus had had longer to ferment
here than anywhere else. And part of it—the strangely pleasurable part—
was that all the performers, in some sense even Ritl, had truly gotten
their act together.
Ritl started things off, chased by a comically inept Screwfloss. Every time
Screwfloss’ leash-carrying member got close, Ritl would skitter away,
sometimes to stand mockingly near one of Screwfloss’ others, sometimes
to run along the stands and carry on nonsense conversations with the
nearest of the audience. The second time around, Ritl found the member-
wide servant steps that led to the ruler’s personal seats. Ritl danced
along the ledge of the royal box, orating.
Jefri leaned close to Ravna. They were still both hidden from the crowd.
“Those are statesmanlike noises,” he said, grinning. “Ritl is coming on
like a visiting monarch. I think she’s promising the sun and the moon if
the prince will meet her … requests? demands?”
Ravna wasn’t quite so amused. “I just hope she doesn’t get us executed.”
“Well, there is that.”
The crowd was hooting laughter. Maybe nervous laughter. The prince’s
private box was draped in deep acoustic quilting that might double as a
form of armor. Guard and servant packs stood all around the box, but the
interior was as dark as a cave. Pure this prince might be, but he did not
project amiable lightness. Ritl didn’t seem to notice, and her boldness
was rewarded. Ravna saw three bejeweled heads move into the fading
daylight. There were other heads too, but still in the shadows. The prince
boomed a response to Ritl, who preened and blathered some reply. Now
the crowd’s laughter seemed more natural; Prince Purity too was playing
to the audience. Ravna recognized the rippling of his heads as a mocking
bow. Everyone but Ritl could see Screwfloss’ leash-carrier sneaking up
the steps behind her.
The crowd hooted even louder when Screwfloss pounced and then
dragged the arrogant singleton back down the steps. Screwfloss
shambled once more around the square, bowing this way and that. Ritl

was dragged part of the way, complaining loudly. Ravna made a note to
check the beast for cuts and bruises. This was conventional local humor,
but Ravna Bergsndot wouldn’t use such excuses.
Then Screwfloss was running back toward the circus pavilion, Ritl racing
ahead of him. As she passed into the shadows, the singleton let out an
impudent squeak and dived toward Amdi. The eightsome shrank away,
and she honked singleton laughter.
“Damned animal!” Amdi said sotto voce. He slid the last of the wooden
tines onto his paws, and pranced into the open. The sky was heavily
overcast, so there was no risk in using the lamps: the spotlight tracked
the Magnificent’s progress toward center stage. The light sparkled and
coalesced, synthesized from emitters that Jefri and Amdi had mounted
along the top edges of the pavilion. For pre-tech creatures such as this
audience, the dissociation of lightsource from light was magical. Amdi
was always careful to claim that without special knowledge, the gadgets
were useless. That was close to the truth, though the control interface
was pretty intuitive. So far no one besides Screwfloss-as-Idiot had tried to
steal the lights, and Screwfloss’ attempt was a gag routine in which he
made off with pseudo-sources that turned out to be kherhog patties.
The high point of the show was still the performance of the “clever
singletons.” That was Jefri and his juggling, then Ravna and her rope
tricks, and finally some bogus spelling tests intended to impress those
who insisted that intelligence meant more than juggling and knot tying. As
usual, Jefri got the most attention, though Ravna’s act now included a
simple lasso trick. She walked around the square, followed by the
spotlights and a sound show from Amdi. She got near enough to the front
row packs that they could hear the silence of her mind, and see the
awesome flexibility of her hands. As always, there was the goggling
surprise of such first encounters, the combination of amazement and
uneasiness and interest.
Then Ravna came to Prince Purity’s box. The guards below it were a
sharp-eyed bunch. When they looked up at her teetering height, jaws
twitched crossbows. No lasso flicking at these fellows. Ravna stepped

back and played to the prince in his box. The three crowned heads came
forward, and after a moment, another appeared with a puppy on its
shoulders. The pack was saying something, complimenting her? Maybe
not. One of him was looking back, into the darkness of the box. It was
almost as if there was some other pack in there. Who could be so close?
She rose up on the balls of her feet, trying to get a better view into the
dark. What if it’s a human back there? With that thought, she lost her
balance and control of the lasso. She hopped around, trying to make it all
look like part of the act.
“You okay?” Jefri’s voice was a shout from across the square.
“Yes!” She didn’t dare say the truth. Maybe there’d been no humans on
that airship because Nevil’s gang had already landed here—and they
were here, now!
Ravna danced away from the prince’s box, but now she was seriously
distracted. She stumbled on her rope a couple more times, and even
botched some of Amdi’s spelling questions.
Finally, thank the Powers, Amdi segued into the finale, the pseudo-
impromptu invitation for the audience to come down and be introduced
“paws-to-tentacles” to the marvelous creatures from beyond the sky.
Prince Purity said something from his box, and the packs queued up for
the privilege. These people were more orderly than any they had run into
before. Maybe it was the armed guards that materialized from the side
streets. There were more of those than they had seen before, too. Prince
Purity’s operation looked more like tax collection than salesmanship.
Jefri cut across the square to be next to Ravna. For the petting zoo part
of the performance, they were always together. Tonight … Ravna
grabbed his arm. He stepped close, put his head close to hers: “What
happened?” he said, almost whispering, somehow guessing that they
mustn’t be overheard.
Ravna put her lips by his ear and spoke as quietly as she could. “Keep
watch on the prince’s box. What do you see in the back?”
“Ah.” Jefri didn’t look up immediately. Arm in arm, they strolled back to

the center of the square, to Amdi and the beginning of the “reception
line.” Partway there, Jefri casually looked back over the stands, at the
prince’s box. “The prince is still up there,” he said in conversational tones.
“I’d hoped he would come down for the petting zoo.” And then very
quietly: “I don’t see anything else.”
And then they were overwhelmed by the meeting and greeting. More
than ever before, there were packs who wanted to faux chat, repeating
Ravna’s Samnorsk back at her. This far north, maybe they had heard
rumors about the Domain; if Prince Purity wasn’t already dealing with
humans, he soon would be. Ravna looked out at the crowd, and
suppressed a groan; even if second visits weren’t allowed, this could last
as long as the show at Winch Bottom.
Or maybe not: the prince’s guards were bugling.
Amdi looked up at the royal box. “Prince Purity has announced the end of
the public performance. He’s going to bless us with a personal audience.”
The packs who had already paid were allowed through, but the guards
encouraged them to trot quickly past the humans; there was no more
extended chitchat. Ravna noticed more than one head looking nervously
at the prince’s box.
Ravna noticed Jefri signing to Amdi, out of sight of the royal box. Amdi’s
eyes widened in surprise. He waved to Screwfloss to take Ritl further
away. “She’s not going to mess me up with the prince.” Amdi spread
himself out into the newly vacated space, and looked very attentive as
Prince Purity came down his private staircase one by one.
Jefri stood tensely beside her; he was looking at the prince, actually
looking over his members. From here, they could see further into the
royal box than had been possible standing right in front of it. And when
the last of Purity came down the steps, there was no one standing
between them and whatever mystery lurked within.
“Nothing as tall as a human is standing there,” came Jefri’s whisper.
No, but there was something, and now it moved partway out of the
shadows. She still didn’t have a clear view, but this looked like a

singleton. Unlike the prince’s members, this one’s cloak was very dark.
The creature didn’t follow the prince down the stairs.
Ravna glanced at Jefri and he gave her a little shrug. If that singleton had
been up in the box the whole time, it should have been difficult for the
prince to keep his mind on the show. “Different customs?” he said softly.
“Or maybe this prince is just personally kinky.”
As the prince came across the square, the last of the commoners were
cleared away. None were left in the stands either, but a number of packs
still clustered on the streets that led into the square, standing as close to
one another as packs could comfortably come. Others looked down from
tiny windows that faced the square. Their audience was still large, but
somewhat subdued, almost as if trying to pretend that it did not exist.
Ravna noticed Amdi surreptitiously playing with the lamps, making sure
the spotlight followed the prince across the plaza. Hopefully, this looked
like an honor—but one that would also remind the fellow of powers
beyond his ken.
No commoner clothing for Prince Purity. His capes and jackets were
sewn from the pelts of hundreds of weasels. Ravna had seen such
pieces in the Domain, but only for leggings and singlecapes. The fur-
dressing process created a white that Tines prized for its purity—though
to human eyes it was more a pale and grubby puce.
As the prince advanced, two guard packs circled wide around Amdi and
the humans. Amdi was forced to close in on himself, but the guards didn’t
approach Jefri and Ravna. That privilege was reserved to the autocrat.
Purity walked to within a few meters of them, visibly squinting in the
spotlight. The creature was a fivesome, mostly overweight except for one
puppy that stayed behind the others, its beady eyes just visible over their
rumps. The four adults sat for a moment, heads bobbing in a pattern that
Ravna took for a cocky smile. Unlike some in their audience tonight, the
prince could not fully overcome his uneasiness about two-legs. Instead,
he sent a couple of his members to walk close to Jefri and then Ravna.
The two brushed around the humans’ legs, tasted at the fabric of their
clothes. Then as they retreated, the two gave Ravna a coordinated

shove. Jef’s hand kept her upright.
Amdi squawked a “Hei now!” chord.
The prince gobbled something back. Amdi started translating even as the
autocrat spoke. The voice he chose for the prince was smarmy and sly:
“No harm intended, Circus Master. I must say, these tottering creatures
can scarcely keep on their feet.” The prince’s forward members
continued to circle Ravna and Jefri, but just out of arm’s reach.
Amdi puffed up, managed to look indignant despite the armed guard
packs standing around them. His Tinish reply was overlaid with a
Samnorsk translation: “We are honest performers, Sir. Have we not
provided you with profitable entertainment?” Amdi poked a head
meaningfully at the bags of loot that the prince’s fee collectors were now
counting into strongbox wheelbarrows.
Prince Purity hooted softly, a chuckle that Amdi didn’t bother to recast
into human mouth noise. He gobbled on. Amdi’s overlay was: “Of course.
My people enjoyed every minute of it and they’ve paid handsomely. But
you held my center square here for hours. No traffic could pass. We are a
trading town, my circus-minded friend. We can’t ignore the damage that
loss has caused to the market folk displaced.”
Amdi gave an indignant squeak, dropping out of Magnificence for an
instant. Meantime, the prince rattled on. Amdi’s voice-over hurried to
catch up: “You shouldn’t be surprised that there are additional fees
involved here.”
“Um, perhaps we could contribute part of our agreed-upon payment to
cover these expenses.”
“Good, good!” Amdi’s Purity voice got even more snotty. Somewhere
under all the deadly tension, Amdi was having a good time mocking this
villain. “I’m sure we can work something out. These laws after all—I make
them. We will talk more on the problem tomorrow.”
“Tomorrow? But milord, if you will recall, the whole point of performing
tonight was to pay for supplies and be on our way before morning.”

“Oh, I’m afraid that will be impossible. You are far too valuable to simply
disappear into the night.”
Amdi dithered a moment. What could he do? From under the pavilion,
Ritl started squawking. It wasn’t the focused sonic mayhem of a pack, but
she was screeching louder than any human could shout. She bounced
out to the end of her leash, blasting imperatives. Was that support for her
fellow circus members or something more like “Stop thief!” and “Seize
them!”
Amdi was looking off in all directions. The commoners had moved back
from the wide streets. Some of them were bumping into each other,
competing for space under awnings and doorways. Heads pointed
upwards, and to the south.
Amdi spread out, actually invading the space of the two guard packs.
After a silent moment, a knowing smile spread across his aspect. “I
showed you my letter of safe passage, my lord.”
Prince Purity emitted a dismissive noise. If he knew they were fugitives,
that safe passage would count for nothing.
But Amdi continued, “I also mentioned to you that I had the protection of
the Domain of Woodcarver. That nation may have seemed far away
before now—but the sounds you heard over your principate just last
night, that was the magic flier of Queen Woodcarver. You laughed when I
mentioned our protection. You laughed when I suggested that her airship
might come back to find us. Now please reconsider.” And then Amdi shut
up, as if he had made some stunning, winning play.
In fact, Purity didn’t have any zippy reply. He was grinning much the
same masterful smile as Amdi. He too had spread out, almost doubling
his area on the ground. For a moment they looked like two frauds trying
to out-bluff each other. Then Ravna noticed that both packs were looking
off into the night, all in the same direction as the packs around the
square. Amdi and Purity had spread out because they were listening.
Ravna and Jefri turned and looked up with the others. Full night was an
hour old. The dark was starless, the cloud cover complete. Now … even

to nearly deaf human ears … there was the sound of the airship’s steam
engines.
Powers above, don’t let this be Nevil.
Amdi and the prince continued their proud poses, still grinning at each
other. Purity’s guards were buckling up their armor; maybe they weren’t
as confident as their boss.
Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz. It sounded as close as this morning, but there was
an undertone that had been missing then. “There’s two of them out
there,” Amdi said in his little boy voice.
Sound became substance, looming out of the dark. The aircraft coasted
toward them above the south road, descending gently into the plaza.
There was plenty of room for Scrupilo’s airships to land here, but the
packs on board had extended poles to push the craft sideways to the
edge of the open space. Eight members—two packs—tumbled out,
carrying mooring lines in their jaws. They raced around, tying the airship
to Purity’s heroic statuary.
Amdi was playing with the lamps: multiple spotlights splashed along the
airship’s hull. They were looking at it head-on, but what she could see
was Oobii’s design, adapted from aircraft of myriad terrestrial worlds,
optimized for Tines World.
“That’s too small to be—” Amdi started to say, but he was interrupted by
the prince’s laughter. A singleton was racing along the edge of the
square, toward the airship. For an instant, Ravna thought Ritl had
escaped. But this creature was larger than Ritl, and wore a dark cape. It
came from the prince’s box. Amdi brought down a spotlight, tracked the
running creature till it disappeared among the crewpacks who had
dismounted from the flyer. That moment of light was enough for Ravna to
notice the golden highlights in the glossy blackness of the cape.
There was only one cloth in the world like that. So the stolen radio cloaks
had not been lost, and—
The engines on the grounded flyer hummed down to silence while the
buzz of the other continued to grow. She stared into the darkness above

the southern road: the second craft was slightly bigger than the first. Its
circular cross-section almost filled the space between the buildings. Amdi
brought the lamplight to bear on it, diffused to reveal the expanse of what
they faced.
Ravna saw that Screwfloss had probably been right this morning,
claiming that there were no humans flying above them. Nevil’s gang was
most likely two hundred kilometers away, still at Newcastle on Starship
Hill. But so was Woodcarver and anyone who could save them. The
wash of light from Amdi’s lamp revealed the design painted around the
bow windows of the second airship. It was the disk of the world,
surrounded by a godlike pack of twelve.

Chapter   31
The face-off between Purity and Amdiranifani didn’t end quite as the
prince might have wished. Some minutes passed while the airship crews
made sure of the tiedowns; the prince’s statues were more fragile than
they looked. The radio-cloaked singleton went from one ground crew to
the other. The creature didn’t behave like any singleton Ravna had ever
seen, not with the bombastic nonsense of Ritl nor the plaintive silence of
a less articulate fragment. It seemed to be talking to the packs in a
sensible way.
Finally a stairway was dropped from the second airship and one pack, a
small-bodied foursome, emerged. Each member carried a pair of sticks
that looked like the stocks of crossbows. They were strapped along the
back, the metallic tubes extending to just short of the shoulder. They
looked a bit silly to Ravna, until she realized they were lightweight guns—
very much like the firearms she and Scrupilo had designed. The gun-
toting pack approached Prince Purity, the radio-cloaked singleton walking
almost shoulder to shoulder with it.
Pack and singleton stopped a few courteous meters away from the
prince. When the singleton spoke, Amdi’s voiceover translation sounded
in Ravna’s ears: “Well done, my good pack. You delayed the fugitives a
fine amount of time.”
Prince Purity gobbled back, Amdi’s voiceover as snotty as ever: “It was at
great expense, my lord. We all suffered, setting aside the Great Square
for so many hours, pretending to enjoy this monstrous performance.
Surely there will be some additional consideration for the unexpected
unpleasantness of it all.”
Ravna looked sharply at Amdi. “Quit exaggerating.”

“I swear,” said Amdi, “Purity really said that.”
“Oh yes, Purity is as s-silly as your eightsome says.” The new voice
sounded like a frightened little girl, though the sense of the words was
sardonic. It was the singleton, speaking Samnorsk.
Amdi rocked back on his haunches, all his eyes on the singleton. “Who
are you?”
Now the singleton sounded like an adult human, vaguely familiar: “You’ll
find out soon enough, my fat friend.”
The radio cloak covered most of the singleton’s pelt pattern, but in any
case, it was hard to identify a pack from a single member. Somewhere
out there, each wearing its own cloak, was the rest of this pack. But
where did the little-girl voice come from?
Prince Purity was staring at them all, perhaps realizing he was out of his
depth. He repeated his demand for money, but more tentatively. The
radio-cloaked singleton laughed and pointed its snout at the
wheelbarrows of coin already collected.
The humiliation! Purity rose in heroic anger, his puce cloaks fluffed wide.
All around the square, his soldiers unlimbered their crossbows. Two more
gunpacks descended from the airships, and the local thugs wilted.
Apparently they had seen what these firearms could do. Purity’s gaze
swept the guards, the crowd. He came down from himself and walked
with stiff dignity from the square. No doubt tonight’s story would be recast
in his later speeches—but only when the contradicting facts were far
away. His packs dragged the loot from the plaza. The crowds were gone,
though Ravna could still see commoners, hiding in the shadows,
watching with fearful fascination.
Tycoon’s packs left Jef and Amdi and Ravna alone in the center of the
square while the radio-cloaked singleton directed a search of the pavilion
and the circus wagon. They grabbed both lamp interfaces and all the
emitters, even the ones placed on the far side of the plaza. Then they
took jaw axes to the beautiful circus wagon. Strange, thought Ravna, I
never really thought of the tinted wood and worn filigree as beautiful till

now when it’s being hacked apart. The radio singleton showed no care
for the folk art, but it directed the operation with great caution, evidently
thinking there might be more magic toys to be found. All they found were
the maps.
Meantime, Ritl had been released from the pavilion. She wandered
around the demolition of the wagon. She looked mystified and maybe
even sad, but soon she was giving advice to the ax-wielding packs.
When her blathering was recognized as non-informative, the radio-cloak
singleton took her aside. There was a short conversation. Then Ritl gave
out a whoop and danced across the square, heading toward the airship
with the Tycoon logo. She ran through the center of the square, gobbling
even louder than usual. She dodged into Amdi’s personal space and
warbled something questioning. Amdi lunged out at her, jaws snapping.
Across the plaza, the radio singleton said something imperative. Ritl
backed off, looking at Amdi with her head cocked, very doglike. Then she
turned and resumed her run to the airship.
“What did Ritl say, Amdi?”
Amdi had piled into a defensive bunch, glaring in the direction of the
departing Ritl. “I don’t want to discuss it,” he said.
The tech trinkets, including the maps, were all put aboard the ship that
bore the sign of Tycoon. The radio-cloaked singleton walked back to the
center of the square. One of the gunpacks followed, with Screwfloss. The
remnant was complaining about something. The chord for “loyalty
understanding” kept popping up. The singleton just ignored the remnant.
He looked at the two humans and spoke in the adult human voice it had
used before. “Such a long chase, but now it has ended happily. Come
along.” It started off for the airship that had landed first. Then it stumbled
and turned. Its little girl voice spoke: “Correction. The humans go aboard
Tycoon’s ship … squeak rattle gobble—” That last was some command
to the gunpacks.
As one of the gunpacks herded Ravna and Jefri across the square,
another moved to stop Amdi and Screwfloss from following. The

singleton turned to Amdi: “Not you, my fat friend. You go on my airship.”
Jefri wheeled. “Now wait a minute! We all stay together or—” He closed
in on the singleton, towering over him. The creature staggered back, its
butt striking the cobblestones. One of the gunpack’s members shifted its
shoulders and its twin barrels slid forward till the muzzle silencers were
well past its head. Another member stepped behind it, sighting between
the barrels at Jefri. Ravna noticed that the other member of the gunpack
was watching her attentively.
The singleton came awkwardly to its feet, but its adult human voice
sounded amused. “I think in this case, you will not stay together. Fatso
and the remnant are coming with me.”
Jefri glanced at the twin barrels facing him. His hands were in fists.
Amdi came around his friend, pulling him back from the confrontation.
“We have to, Jefri. Please. I’ll be okay.” But Ravna noticed that Amdi was
trembling.
The singleton chuckled, started to say something, and then its voice
shifted to the tones of the little girl: “Don’t be s-scared. You’ll like m-my
ship.”
Jefri unclenched his fists and stepped back. The anger in his face was
replaced by wonder. “This thing”—he gestured at the singleton— “isn’t
anybody. It’s just a comms network!”
Amdi was nodding. “What a dumb use for radio cloaks. We never
guessed they’d be so—”
“Enough!” said the singleton, and the gunpacks pushed and prodded the
captives toward their respective flying jails.
At the base of the ship, the air stank of fuel oil. It smelled exactly like
Scrupilo’s concoction. But Tycoon’s industrial plagiarism was not
complete; the dropdown stairs were pack-wide, grandiose compared to
Scrupilo’s design. I wonder if they got the trick of stabilizing the hydrogen
in the lift bags?
Partway up the steps, she turned and looked across the square. There

was no sign of Prince Purity, but she could see townsfolk and peasants
still watching from the shadows. We had a great show tonight. The
thought flitted inanely through her mind. Over by the other airship, the
radio-cloaked singleton was still on the ground; Screwfloss and most of
Amdi had already gone aboard. Two of Amdi’s heads looked their way,
and he chirped something encouraging.
Jefri stooped to look out from under the curve of the hull. He waved back
at Amdi. Then the pack beside Ravna waggled its gun barrels and Jef
continued up the steps, Ravna close behind. To aft, the steam induction
engines were buzzing up to speed.
•  •  •
Tycoon’s airship was the collision of Tinish imagination with the
engineering realities of Oobii’s original design. The passenger carriage
had been crudely split into two levels, the resulting interior decorated in a
grand East Coast style. The main corridor was polished softwood veneer
(easy on the hearing, you know), with frequent padded turnouts; packs
could walk past each other with only moderate mental discomfort. The
ceilings were mostly one meter thirty high—airy for Tines, but not high
enough for a human to stand.
“I wonder what Nevil thinks when he comes visiting?” said Jefri. The two
humans had been stuffed in a—well, to be fair, it might be a stateroom.
The distance from the door to the outer hull was about two meters. The
walls were heavily padded, probably thick enough to make a pack
comfortable even though there might be other passengers within
centimeters, in the rooms on either side.
“I guess Nevil’s allies have about the same respect for him as he has for
Tines,” said Ravna.
A pair of fifteen-centimeter portholes were mounted in the hull, far

enough apart to give a pack a good parallax view. The ship had turned
and moonlight splashed across the cabin. “There’s some kind of metal lid
here in the corner.” She lifted the cover. There was a faint whiff of potty
smell, and the engine noise came louder. Ravna laughed. “A stateroom
with its own toilet.” The sanitary facilities aboard Tycoon’s flying palace
might be adequate—as long as you didn’t care about the folks living in
the lands below.
Jefri crawled to the hull and looked out one of the portholes. His face was
a pale blur in the moonlight. “We seem to be heading south. I don’t see
the other airship.” He stared out for a long moment. “Nothing!” He turned
away from the port and continued more quietly, “I’m so afraid for Amdi.”
“I don’t know, Jef. Tycoon seems to be treating us decently.” Her
optimism sounded weak even to Ravna herself.
Jefri shook his head. “Only for the moment. There were two packs
speaking through the radio cloak. The one who took Amdi had a voice
like in Oliphaunt’s tutor programs. I’m betting that was Vendacious.”
Ravna bowed her head. “And the other voice, the little girl—”
“That was Tycoon. The monster said as much. And he dared to use the
voice of one of his victims to speak the words.”
Tines often favored a human voice based on their first language tutor, but
the little girl’s voice had been frightened and shrill, almost
unrecognizable. How long do you have to torture someone to learn their
language? “Geri Latterby,” Ravna said softly.
•  •  •
In the end, their speculation and futile planning fell into uneasy
drowsing. Jefri shifted uncomfortably on the cabin’s mat. Of course,
neither of them could stand up in the tiny space, but at least it was wide
enough for Ravna to lie flat. Jefri was not so fortunate. Even with his feet

propped up on the toilet lid, he was still cramped.
The sound of the airship’s engines was a steady buzz, making the floor
and walls hum in sympathy. Sleep eventually came.
•  •  •
Dawn was brilliantly bright. Ravna awoke thoroughly disoriented.
Where could she be to see sunlight on embroidered pillows? Then she
felt the buzz of the engines. She looked around. Jefri was watching her
silently from the other side of their tiny cabin. The sunlight was from the
twin portholes. The “pillows” were the room’s acoustic quilting; their soft
fabric was decorated with elegant landscapes.… And somehow she had
annexed most of the floor space.
“Oops, sorry,” she said, moving back to her side. “I didn’t mean to thrash
around.”
Jefri just shrugged, but she noticed that he was quick to use the freed
space to get close to a porthole. After a moment, he spoke: “It’s all clouds
down there, but we’re still heading south. So much for the theory that
Tycoon’s headquarters is on the East Coast. I think—”
He was interrupted by the sound of something rolling down the main
corridor. A moment later the door bolt lifted—but the door itself remained
shut. Whoever was in the corridor tapped politely, emitting chords that
Ravna recognized as a cheerful request to enter.
Jefri turned on his knees, crawled to the door, and slid it open. Outside
stood a small-bodied foursome, dressed all in blue capes, surely a
uniform. The creature stepped back a little fearfully, but then—perhaps
because Jefri’s eyes were at its own level, or perhaps because it was
putting on a brave front—two of it pushed forward with a tray of food.
“Twenty-three minutes. Twenty-three minutes, okay?” The words were
spoken with Geri Latterby’s voice, but they sounded like rote repetition.

This creature scarcely seemed a torturer.
The food came in soft wooden bowls and consisted of overcooked
vegetables and curd soup. Ravna guessed that it had been carefully
chosen by someone with a secondhand knowledge of human diet. It
tasted so good. Strange that in the clutches of Tycoon she was eating
better than in all the time since the kidnapping. She lost herself in the
food for a moment. When she looked up she noticed the Jefri had already
finished and was watching her intently. Had he said something to her?
“Um. So what do you think is going to happen in twenty-three minutes?”
said Ravna. They take us off to interrogation? They come back for the
dirty plates?
“Dunno. But till then, let’s check out the view.” He returned to his
porthole. Ravna downed the rest of her breakfast, then went to the other
window. The sun was out of her face now. She could see clear sky above
unending, brilliant clouds. Many kilometers away, a thunderhead broke
the horizon. Details were lost in the distorted window glass, another
example of what happened when Tycoon customized Oobii’s design.
Abruptly, the engine noise increased and she felt a chilly breeze.
“Jefri!” Somehow he had managed to open his port! Now she noticed the
metal clasps and hinges.
“Hei, the benefits of low tech,” he said.
“Um.” Of course, it should be safe. They weren’t more than three
thousand meters up, with an airspeed of only a few dozen meters per
second. She popped the other tiny hatch and pulled the glass inwards.
The engine sound became a buzzing roar, and eddies of frigid air blasted
around the cabin. But the view was utterly clear. She stared into the
cloud deck, seeing detail within detail.
Jefri looked down as steeply as he could. “I figure they’re taking us to the
Choir!”
For a moment, Ravna’s mind looked out much farther than the physical
windows. So Nevil had been conspiring with just about every one of the

Domain’s antagonists. Who was villain-in-chief?
“Wow.” Jefri’s voice was muffled by the wind, but it brought her back to
the physical view. The thunderhead was closer now, its tower a maze of
light on dark, its anvil climbing out of sight above them. Flying with
Pilgrim on the antigravity skiff, Ravna had come much too near such
things. Pilgrim loved to fly right into the vertical drafts of great storms.
The pitch of the engines changed. The ship was angling away from the
storm, but losing altitude at the same time. Soon the cloud deck had
become fog, curling up to them. The turbulence grew.
“I hope these people know what they’re doing,” said Ravna.
“Maybe that was what the steward pack meant when it said ‘twenty-three
minutes.’”
Yes, a courteous warning.
The clouds closed darkly around them. They motored along for some
minutes. Still descending? The clouds had come into their cabin. She felt
tiny droplets of moisture condensing on her face and eyelashes. Outside,
lightning flashed electric blue, diffused by the dense mist. The deck tilted
as thunder crashed. Their breakfast bowls were scattered all over the
cabin.
The lightning gradually diminished and after some minutes the airship
broke through the bottom of the clouds. There were still more clouds
below, but they were scattered flotsam in the grayish-green depths. A
steady rain ricocheted off the hull. The turn and descent had brought the
other airship into view. It was pacing them, perhaps a thousand meters
away, but it was almost invisible except when silhouetted by the glow of
distant lightning. Jefri was silent for some time, just watching the other
craft.
•  •  •

In the hours that followed, the thunder and lightning were more distant,
but the airship was not the stable platform of before. It rode up and down
like a boat on ocean swells, except that this motion was much more
arbitrary and abrupt.
They spent most of the time at the portholes, watching their progress
from forest to jungle and swamp. They were flying so low that when the
rain lessened, they could see flowers in the treetops and wader birds in
the open swamps. This was very much like the environment of equatorial
Nyjora, when the Techie had battled both the exploiters and the plague
that was killing the last of their men. She glanced at Jefri; how little of that
history made any sense here.
Jef didn’t seem to notice her look. He was staring downward more
intently than ever. “I still don’t understand what Vendacious and Tycoon
are doing here. We seem to be as far south as coherent packs can
survive.”
“How can you tell?”
“I can see a bit under the trees when we pass over rivers. There are
Choir settlements—at least that’s what I think they are. When these
settlements begin to connect together, there’s no way that packs can
penetrate and still keep their minds. Look down there. Around the trees.
That mottling, I think that’s floating shacks.”
“… Yes.” She could see a change in the texture of the river shore. And
here and there, she saw polygonal shapes that might have been real
buildings. Within an hour, they were flying over settlements in open
clearings. As the day darkened into true twilight, the settlements merged
and the forest was replaced by an unending, chaotic jumble of
vegetation, swamp, and artifact.
By the time their little steward showed up, it was night outside—and pitch
black in their cabin. The cabin had a small mantle lamp but it had
seemed to be disabled. Besides delivering dinner, the steward showed
them how to light the lamp. The foursome was a cheerful creature, not at
all the jailer Ravna would have expected.

After dinner, the rain slackened and—strangely—the air became steadily
warmer. They doused the cabin lamp and returned to the portholes.
There was no more lightning, but no stars or moonlight either. Here and
there, what looked like campfires shone below. The air coming in the
ports smelled faintly of compost and sewage.
“We’re descending,” said Jefri. “We’ll come down in the middle of that.”
But an hour passed. Two. They fell asleep as the rain increased and the
air grew choppy.
•  •  •
The door bolt clicked, lifting open. Someone was scratching at the
cabin door. Ravna struggled to wakefulness, confused. The steward
would have tapped politely on the door and sung out for them to rouse
themselves.
Jefri was up on his elbows. “What—?” he said, but very softly.
“Maybe we’re finally landing?” Ravna noticed that she was whispering
too. Pointlessly. Any Tines on the other side of that door could hear them
fine.
The furtive scratching continued.
She put out a warning hand, but Jefri was already at the door. The hall
beyond was lit by a single gaslamp. Two members were visible, but only
in silhouette. One stuck a snout into the room, peering about. Then it
wriggled past Jefri.
Powers above, it was Ritl! And quieter than Ravna had ever seen her.
The singleton looked over her shoulder and gestured at the—pack?—
beyond.
Not a pack, a piece of Mr. Radio; in the lamplight, Ravna could see an
occasional glint off its cloak. The creature hesitated, perhaps communing

with far off employers. Then it squeezed past Ritl and blundered around
in the dark, evidently not much good at echo location. It flinched back
every time it stepped on their legs, but there wasn’t very much human-
free floorspace. It ended up scrunched against the wall.
Ritl slid the door almost shut, then sprawled across Ravna’s shins and
pressed her head close to the narrow door opening, as if listening out into
the hall. The light from the hall lamp made it easy for Ravna to see,
though for the Tines, the room must seem very dark. The radio-singleton
looked seriously nervous. And Ritl? Well, maybe she was scared quiet,
but more likely she was just being animal crafty.
After a moment, Jefri said dryly—but softly!—“Well, who do we have
here?”
The radio singleton looked up at the sound and seemed to relax. “Jefri, is
it just you and Ravna there?” The words were barely the breath of
whisper … but the voice belonged to Amdi.
Jef gave a stifled whoop. “Amdi! Are you okay? How—?”
“Shh shh! Gotta be very quiet. If you get discovered, it’ll be almost as bad
as if I do. But I’m fine, specially now that I’m talking to you. Part of our
good luck is that Vendacious is indisposed, some kind of upchuck bug.
That’s why you didn’t see him in person; he’s still talking snooty, but he’s
barfing from half his mouths. Anyway, two of me are jammed in Ut’s off-
duty compartment. Ut and Il are the radio-cloak members on this ship.
Your guy is Zek. Anyway, we have the door cracked open and the rest of
me is next door. There’s just enough of a sound path that I can think
straight.”
Jefri was silent for a moment, seemingly stunned by the turn of events.
On the other side of the tiny cabin, Ritl gobbled softly. It wasn’t an alarm,
just a variant of her usual scolding. Amdi’s voice was resigned: “That Ritl.
Even when she’s helping, she’s a pain.” Then he continued, “We had to
try and talk, Jefri. There are things you have to know, things we have to
plan.” To Ravna these assertions had a rushed, questioning quality.
Certainly, Jefri heard that too. His tone was reassuring: “It’s okay, Amdi.

How did you manage this? Who—what—is Mr. Radio Cloaks?”
“Utzekfyrforfurtariil is a Vendacious creation—though Tycoon doesn’t
know that. Vendacious figures that by controlling the Mr. Radio network,
he’s the puppetmaster of everybody.”
Ravna looked at Zek suspiciously. “So what went wrong?”
Zek relayed Amdi’s very human, little-boy laughter. “What do you think?
Vendacious himself. He’s smart, but he’s the craziest, meanest of
Woodcarver’s offspring. And he’s still all-male.”
“Still?” said Jefri. “Any other pack with that makeup would have self-
destructed years ago. That’s Vendacious’ miracle and a disaster for
everyone else.”
“Not necessarily,” said Amdi, “Even his minions hate him. In any case,
Vendacious isn’t as smart as Old Flenser. And he’s nowhere near as
smart as me.” Amdi’s voice filled with confidence. “It’s been scarcely a
day, and I’ve already figured how to talk along paths Vendacious can’t
hear. That’s how I contacted Ut, right under Vendacious’ snouts. That’s
how we smuggled out Ut’s cloak during his off-duty time. Of course, it
helped that most of Vendacious was barfing sick at the time.” His voice
trailed off. “Vendacious has already figured out who Screwfloss really is.
Vendacious, he capered when he learned the truth. Poor Screwfloss. Oh
Jefri—” His voice collapsed into weeping, all confidence fled. “Oh, Jefri,
this isn’t like my show in the circus.” The sounds of weeping abruptly
stopped, and his voice continued: “Th-this is something I have to do. I’ll
do my best; I promise.”
Jefri started to say something comforting, but was interrupted by another
voice:
“I help.”
“Who spoke?” said Ravna. There was a moment of silence, long enough
to be aware of oppressive meat breath and animal body heat. Finally:
“I’m sure that was some part of Utzekfyrforfurtariil,” said Amdi. “Every one
of him hates Vendacious.”

“But I thought Mr. Radio was being used like a line? How smart can it
be?”
Amdi said, “As a line or a ring or a star, he’s as dumb as you’d expect,
just good enough for Vendacious’ purpose. I think if he were all in range
of himself, he’d be smarter than most packs. But he hasn’t been together
much since Vendacious’ broodkenners first assembled him.”
Jefri took a closer look at Zek. “But even partially connected, he’s still
smart enough to learn some Samnorsk. Or is he just a blabber like Ritl?”
Amdi emitted a snort (via Zek): “He’s much smarter than that idiot
singleton. In fact—and this is something Vendacious doesn’t know—big
parts of Mr. Radio sometimes have mutual radio communication. Right
now, there’s three of him on these two ships—not enough to be very
smart. But depending on atmospherics, he can reach several others and
be almost a complete person. That doesn’t happen very often, and so far,
Mr. Radio has kept it a secret from all the packs who are using him.”
“Hmm,” said Ravna. “I wonder if he’s smart enough to play Princess
Pretending.”
“Huh?” The word came from both Amdi and Jefri. After a moment Ritl
chimed in with a mimic interrogative of her own.
“Sorry.” She had violated her personal ban on Princesses. “Straumers
call it a ‘Man in the Middle’ attack.”
“Oh yeah,” said Amdi, “I thought of that. The problem is Vendacious has
conditioned all the members to follow certain forwarding protocols. At
best Mr. Radio is variably intelligent. From moment to moment, he may
be smart enough for simultaneous lying. In between, he’ll drop the ball.”
Jefri nodded. “And if he fluffs even once, the game is over.”
“Right.”
Zek’s own voice spoke over Amdi’s: “Besides, I still not good to be a
person, even when I can think with all of me.”
Amdi’s voice: “His whole life has been torture, but if he ever gets himself
together, I’ll envy him. That’s our radio future! And I’ve never even gotten

to use radio cloaks!”
Ravna smiled. Amdi had never given up on having his own radio cloaks.
Even at the edge of a torture pit, that annoyance could still distract him.
“Amdi, when we get out of this, I promise we’ll get you your own cloaks.
You, you all have worked a miracle here.” Even Ritl.
“Yeah,” Jefri was nodding. “Can we meet again, Amdi? Safely?”
“I’ll figure something out. We’ve talked too long this time. One last thing.
Vendacious and Tycoon are both scary, but they’re very different, and
Vendacious is lying to Tycoon about lots of things. Vendacious doesn’t
want you talking to Tycoon. Your greatest near-term danger is that
Vendacious will assassinate you. He would have killed you back at
Prince Puce’s, except it would have been too hard to disguise from
Tycoon. He was very angry that you got put on Tycoon’s airship.”
There must be a bright side to this. “Could Tycoon be turned into an
ally?” said Ravna.
There was a moment of silence. Then: “Maybe. But see, Tycoon really,
really hates humans. And one in particular.”
Ravna thought of what Tycoon must have done to little Geri. If this was
what the creature did to lesser enemies—
“So who is his number-one enemy?” asked Jefri.
“Johanna.”
“What!”
“Why?”
“I don’t know!” Amdi’s voice was plaintive. “Johanna has always been the
most beloved human in the Domain—sorry, Ravna, but you know what
Jo did for the veterans. You’d be second, though!”
“Ah, thank you.” She glanced at Jefri. “We’ve got to figure this out.”
“And not get killed.” That was probably Mr. Radio, but the point was valid,
whoever made it.
“Yes,” said Amdi. “Now we gotta go. I…”

Amdi seemed to hesitate, then Zek gave a squeak and collapsed across
Ravna’s middle. He remained silent as Ritl gobbled softly at him.
Jefri bent to stroke Zek with his own forehead, much the way a pack will
try to rouse an injured member. Ravna was surprised that any good could
come from a human making the gesture, but after a moment, Zek
struggled back against the wall. He swayed, still disoriented.
“He must have lost comm very abruptly,” said Jefri.
Ravna heard no alarms from the hallway. Without Radio, their activity
here might remain unnoticed for some time. “Amdi’s side could be fine,”
she said.
Jefri nodded. “But we have to get these two back to wherever they’re
supposed to be.” He said something to Zek. It sounded like he was
humming and whistling at the same time, but different tunes. Ravna had
never figured out how some of the Children could manage such
coordination. But Zek waved his head uncomprehendingly. Next to
Johanna, Jefri Olsndot might be the most Tinishly-fluent human, but it still
took practice for a pack to make sense of humans attempting Tinish.
“Okay,” said Jefri, speaking Samnorsk now, “can you understand me?”
“I hear,” Zek said.
“Amdi?”
“No.”
“He’s making sense,” said Ravna. “He may still have a link to some other
members.”
Jefri nodded. “You alone now?”
Zek gave another uncomprehending shake of the head.
Jefri glanced at Ritl. “Together, these two could probably get back where
they came from … at least if they don’t run into somebody who wants
explanations.”
“They got here okay,” said Ravna.
“Yeah, but that was when Radio had most of his mind and Amdi was

along for the ride.” He paused. “Well, if Zek is nearly single now, there is
something that might work. After all, Ritl is already a desperate singleton
and Mr. Radio Cloaks must be a loosely-held soul.” Jef reached out and
softly patted Zek’s shoulder. Then he slipped his hand under the
creature’s cloak, pushing it away from where it covered Zek’s shoulder
tympana.
Zek flinched back with a whistling sound. Lots of needle-sharp teeth were
just centimeters from Jef’s face.
“Not to worry,” Jefri spoke the words gently, calmingly … to whom? “If
this is like Flenser and his cloaks, Zek has sores all around his tympana.
I just have to be very gentle. And Zek has to trust me.” He lifted the cloak
free of Zek’s left side. The creature was trembling, but it didn’t bite.
Jef folded the left side of the cloak over Zek’s back. “You’re really out of
contact, aren’t you, kiddo?” He looked at Ravna. “This is a long shot, but I
can’t think of anything else.” He waved for Ritl to come close. The
singleton hesitated, maybe taking one more close listen on the hallway,
then it crawled close to Jefri. Ritl’s eyes were on Zek, her head shifting
uneasily back and forth. Jefri scooched himself out of the way, then
tugged at both creatures, urging them close together. Now they were
both sitting mostly on Ravna.
Ritl made a Tinish “yech” sound, then gobbled on, softly complaining.
Now that Zek was out from under his cloak, his mindsounds would be
loud to any nearby member. This close to each other, the two creatures
were in a fight, flight, or merge situation. For normal pack members,
“merge” would have been by far the least likely outcome. Even in this
desperate situation, the two acted like debutantes confronting sexual
perversion.
“Well, crap.” The human words seem to come from the space between
the Tines.
“They synched up!” Jefri’s voice was full of wonder. “Can you understand
me?”
“Yesss.” The voice sounded more annoyed than frightened. Ritl plus Zek

might be smarter than either was separately, but it wasn’t a happy
camper.
Jef said, “You lost contact with the rest of yourself, right?”
“Hurt noise, lost all radio.”
Ravna said, “Zekritl? Can you make it back to your cabins?”
Puzzled head-weaving was the reply.
Jefri rephrased: “Go back? Safe and quiet?”
The duo looked at each other. “Okay. Will try.” The two climbed over Jefri
and Ravna, an elaborate dance that endeavored to keep Zek’s exposed
side available to Ritl’s hearing. Ritl lowered her head and slid the door
open. A moment later she was out in the hall, turned so that mutual
thought was still possible.
Zek followed, but the top of his cloak caught on the door. Jefri helped
undo the snag and guided him out. Jef peeked out into the hall, blocking
Ravna’s view. She heard someone say softly, “Bye bye.”
Jefri watched them for a few seconds more. Then he slid the door shut
and jiggled its bolt into position. He was shaking his head. “By the
Powers, they look like Tami and Wilm staggering home from the pub.”
He lay back, silent.… “You know, it could have been a low charge
problem. Scrupilo’s radios fail like that. When they’ve been away from
sunlight too long—bam, no error message, no bit-rate backoff, just
silence.”
“Right,” said Ravna. “I’ll bet these cloaks were at the end of a long-use
period.” She thought about it for a second, imagining innocuous
explanations for the apparently global failure. They were possible.
After a moment, Jefri said, “Oh, Amdi. You didn’t have to be a hero.”

Chapter   32
The next morning, it was the friendly steward, not the gunpack, who
was at their door. “Amdi must be okay, too, Jef,” said Ravna. Believe it.
The airships were cruising lower than ever, but the cloud cover was
incomplete. Sunlight slanted down in misty shafts, shining in fragments of
rainbows where it found patches of rainfall in the greenish dark.
The city extended to the limits of their vision. It was still chaotic; you
could see it was a slum. But now Ravna sensed patterns lurking in the
landscape. If you ignored its constituent junk, this place had a claim to
beauty, a clash of fungus and forest pretending to be a great city. And
even the details were not all unpleasant. She could smell cooking fires.
The food smells were good, almost covering the sewage taint that also
hung in the air.
“Powers. Look, Ravna, the Tines just swarm!”
Most of the streets were hidden by surrounding structures, but she
saw … plazas? Most were just five or six meters across, but they were
connected to occasional larger open spaces. In the distance she could
see what might have been a hectare of stony open space. Tines were
everywhere—on rooftops, in the streets, in the plazas. Myriads of Tines,
but crowded so close together there surely could be no packs at all.
“Ten years ago, this looked different,” said Ravna. “Oobii took pictures as
it approached Tines World.” The Tropics had been in the whole disk
images only, and there had been only a few breaks in the jungle cloud
cover, but, “What we saw back then was not so crowded and somehow—
well, it looked simpler.” She watched silently for a moment, wondering.
Down Here there was no possibility that the Choir itself was super-
intelligent. For that matter, there wasn’t even the communication

technology to support wide-area cognition: Mindsounds would take
minutes to percolate across the megacity. And yet, there was some form
of group activity. The mob seemed to have greater and lesser densities,
and not just where Tines gathered around the piles of rotting vegetation
that filled many of the smaller plazas. There were places where she could
see the ground, where members were separated by meters of empty
space. Such open areas couldn’t be for coherent thought, though, since
there was no pack-like clustering. It was almost as if.… She focused on
one particular empty area, watching until the airship had passed it by. Ah!
“Those empty areas? They’re moving.”
“What?”
“Just look—” Given that they each had their own tiny porthole, it was
impossible for her to point. “Look down that street,” zigzagging into the
distance, mostly unobscured by surrounding structures, there was only
one thing she could mean.
“Right … okay, I see a couple thin spots in the crowd.” He watched for
the minute or so that they could keep the path in view. “Yes,” he finally
said. “I think the uncrowded areas were slowly moving further away. Huh.
I suppose you would see that in pre-tech cities. Didn’t they have special
policemen to order the traffic around?”
“I don’t think it’s traffic control. The sparse areas also shrink and expand.
Look at that plaza.”
For a moment the view was nearly perfect for Ravna’s purpose. Thinning
swept in from a side path. Then the plaza and the main street became a
little less crowded, Tines moving slightly to the sides of the street. As
they drifted back to the middle of the street, it became as packed as ever
—but the thinning continued to propagate down the side path.
“Yeah,” Jefri said slowly, amazement in his voice. “These are density
waves moving across the city, but we can only see them in the streets
and plazas.”
“It’s like the Tines are swaying to music.” Truly a Choir.
The airship executed one of its long, slow turns and their view swept

across territory that had been directly ahead. Now the nearest lands were
hidden by low clouds, but pillars of sunlight shone into the far distance …
upon the largest structure Ravna had ever seen on Tines World.
“Powers,” she said softly. “There was nothing like this in the approach
photography.”
They were too far away to see details, but the main structure was
tetrahedral. Its edges were slumped and irregular, but on average, the
pyramid’s lines were perfectly straight. Parts of the surface gleamed
golden even in the haze. Secondary pyramids sat at the base of the huge
one, each quite possibly larger than Newcastle—and at the corners of
those were still smaller pyramids. Smaller and smaller, Ravna followed
the progression down to the limits of her vision.
Their airship was turning again. The pyramid slid out of sight. “There’s
the other airship,” said Jefri. The craft was well below them, descending
into the lower cloud deck. It swirled the cloud surface like a fish diving
through sea foam. Then it was gone, and a moment after that they, too,
were in the clouds. They broke through into a drizzly gray morning. The
ground below looked nothing like the jumbled slums or the great pyramid.
She caught sight of spires and domes very like the palaces of East Coast
royalty. I’ll bet that’s where Vendacious and Tycoon lord it over the locals.
Directly ahead of the other airship, the ground was as open and flat as a
tabletop. The landing field would have been recognized by any low-tech
inhabitant of an earthlike planet, though this one was marred by
floodways and several large ponds.
Five structures hulked at the end of the field. They were small by
comparison with the pyramid, but each was large enough to shelter an
airship. The clamshell doors on two of them had been slid open.
•  •  •
Vendacious stood by his ship’s landing pylon and watched the ground

crews work to lash down Tycoon’s airship.
How I hate the Tropics! The thought surfaced every time he returned
here. The heat and humidity were as bad as any he’d known in his well-
remembered life; this morning’s drizzle counted as comfort by the
standards of this place! Then there were the parasites, the gut worms
and flesh burrowers, and all the diseases—themselves caused by
microscopic predators, according to the ever-cheery Dataset. He never
used to get the vomits, and now that happened regularly. In the early
years of his time here, Vendacious had lost two members to disease.
Finding appropriate replacements had been no small challenge, even
with an endless stream of raw material to choose from.
And yet … part of Vendacious was gazing to the left, at the magnificent
palace Tycoon had built for him. Vendacious couldn’t have risked such
magnificence up north, not with Woodcarver’s death sentence hanging
over him. Now that two of Vendacious were Tropical, sometimes he
actually felt an insane fondness for the place. In Dataset, Vendacious
had read about natural selection. The notion was quaint and obvious, but
no fun when you were doing it to yourself! It was frightening to realize
that if his triumph were delayed long enough, he might prefer this hellhole
to the north.
Meantime, he’d have to put up with both the climate and Tycoon. The
local fragment of Radio stood just a few meters away, providing a link to
the great Tycoon. Ut looked even more miserable than Vendacious felt.
Part of that was the heavy, muffling cloak the creature had to wear. Part
of it was the fear in the creature’s eyes. Ut had been taught to fear and
obey and keep secrets. The lessons necessarily had been delivered in
covert ways, unseen by those outside Vendacious’ inner court. After last
night, Ut had even more to fear. What had the animal been up to, playing
with the cabin keys? The guards said he hadn’t been wearing his cloak,
so whatever it was had been mindless and confined to the ship. That was
the only thing that had saved Ut from a proper and final punishment—no
matter how suspicious the death might look to Tycoon. Nevertheless Ut
faced some strict discipline; no more deviations would be tolerated.

Ut fearfully came closer. When it spoke, it was to relay Tycoon’s
confident and demanding voice: “Recall, Vendacious, I want both two-
legs delivered to me. What’s left of Remasritlfeer, too.”
No doubt Tycoon was lounging about in the comfort of his palace. The fat
bastards’ notion of “surviving in style” was to have Vendacious do all the
hard work. Eight years of practice had not made it any easier to suck up
to the fool, but Vendacious managed a respectful response: “I
understand, sir. Their airship is just now being moored.”
“What about the two packs who were captured with the humans?”
Vendacious had been expecting this question. With the right strategy, he
wouldn’t have to release them. “They’re loyal dupes, but eventually I
should be able to undo the humans’ influence.”
Ut relayed a sigh. “That’s the way it has so often been with these two-
legged monsters. One wonders how they can fool anyone.”
“Their technology gives them an overwhelming advantage, sir.”
“Of course. But in the end, that will not protect them from me.”
Vendacious grimaced. You couldn’t talk to Tycoon for more than a minute
without his ego slopping out. Of course, that was half the reason he was
so easy to manipulate. “Your time will come, sir.… I see the ship’s hatch
has opened. I’ll have a wagon deliver the humans directly to you.”
Mercifully, Tycoon wasn’t interested in further conversation; there was no
need for more groveling. Vendacious stayed near the landing pylon but
spread out to watch the prisoners coming down from the other ship:
Ritl. All that was left of Remasritlfeer. He watched the singleton as it
pranced regally across the concrete, a bit of flotsam that could still cause
trouble.
Ravna and Jefri. With Johanna gone, these were the two most
dangerous humans alive. They could destroy everything he had created.
From interrogating Amdiranifani and the Steel remnant, he knew how
Chitiratifor had botched his mission.
Still, a clean solution might have been possible if Tycoon had not

meddled in the follow-up search. And now? Perhaps it was just as well
these two weren’t in his clutches. The temptation to end them would have
been irresistible and alas, he’d already spent far too much of his
credibility by murdering others he’d held for Tycoon.
He watched the rickshaw wagon pull away with the two humans and the
singleton. Tycoon’s guard padded along after.
What then was the good news in this debacle? Amdiranifani. He was
perhaps the ideal hostage and certainly an entertaining victim. Breaking
down a genius was often the most fun, especially in this case, in which
the victim still thought it could outsmart the interrogator.
•  •  •
When the airships landed, Timor Ristling was up in his dungeon. The
early morning had brought the usual rain, but also a good breeze. Maybe
it wouldn’t get too terribly hot today. He sat in the westside window,
enjoying the rainy breeze, doing his best to ignore all the old aches and
pains. They were still there, but if he gave in to them, he would not have
a life.
Timor’s dungeon was in one of the four spires that surrounded Tycoon’s
palace. This was the highest point anywhere in the Reservation—though
the Choir’s pyramid was so much taller that on sunny mornings most of
the palace was in its shade. From his westside window, Timor could look
down on the airfield and the cuttlefish ponds, as well as the factories
beyond. He kept his ankles wrapped around the nearest window pillar
and leaned back firmly against the wall. Just sitting on a ledge so high up
was deliciously scary.
The lead airship was audible now. It slanted down toward the pylon in
front of Vendacious’ hangar. Okay, so nothing officially belonged to
Vendacious—but he controlled that area and the palace annex, and all

who lived there. It was a miracle that Geri had survived her tendays in the
annex.
He watched the landing crew tie down the first airship. The airships
reminded him of insystem freighters floating on agrav; the similarity
always made Timor sad. Someday, someday, if Ravna can only win …
we’ll make it back to the Beyond.
Several packs got off the first ship—and now the second aircraft was
coming down. Tycoon had been unusually secretive about what to
expect. In principle that should mean Timor was almost clueless, since
very few packs in Tycoon’s palace spoke Samnorsk. On the other hand,
the cuttlefish gave him occasional clues in their scatterbrained way, and
Timor had become adept at building speculations out of Tycoon’s
silences and complaints and brags and favors. Five days ago, these two
ships had abruptly left. Tycoon had let slip that Vendacious was aboard,
so action against humans was probably planned. If no humans were
aboard this second ship … well, that might be a very bad sign.
Someone was coming out of the second ship! It was a singleton or
maybe a small human child. Timor’s eyesight was almost as bad as the
average pack member’s; all he was sure of was that this passenger was
not a pack. Timor climbed down from the windowsill and grabbed the
binoculars Tycoon had given him. The gear was heavy and—of course—
without a bit of stabilization or enhancement. Timor had had to wheedle a
connecting frame out of Tycoon; the guy had complained about the
inconvenience of dealing with human limitations, but Timor could tell that
he was secretly proud to show off. Tycoon claimed that telescopes were
the invention of his own pack brother, more than ten years ago. “We
really don’t need you humans, you know.” Tycoon said that a lot.
Timor rested the device on the window ledge and looked through it,
seeing nothing but a lot of rain-wet concrete. No sign of that small first
passenger. Ah, now he was looking at some part of the airship. The main
hatch was hidden beneath the curve of the hull, but he could see a pack
near the entrance. It was watching something that it thought was
important. Timor looked for a second more, holding the optics as steady

as he could.… A gunpack came smartly down the stairs, its gun muzzles
down, but watching in all directions. It looked like Mr. Skeetshooter, the
fellow who usually guarded Timor.
And then there was a human. A guy, tall. From this angle, it was hard
to … that was Jefri Olsndot! But I thought he was one of Nevil’s toadies?
The thought flitted out of his mind because a second human had
appeared.
Ravna!
Timor hunched forward, losing the view for a moment. When he found
her again, Ravna had descended the stairs. She seemed to be leaning
against Jefri. Seeing her here was the best thing he could imagine … or
was it the worst? He’d know when he saw which direction they were
taking her. Mr. Skeets herded Ravna and Jefri to a little rickshaw wagon.
There was the singleton, already aboard.
After a moment the rickshaw driver pulled them away, followed by Mr.
Skeets. They were headed here, to the House of Tycoon! The rickshaw
disappeared beneath his tower’s view. He watched the airships a few
moments more, but saw only crew and maintenance packs.
Timor slid down to the floor, the binoculars now unnoticed in his lap.
Maybe he should keep watching, but he was too busy thinking about
what this could mean and what he should do: Tell Geri. Decide how to
approach Tycoon on this. Timor had gotten better at guessing how the
big guy would react to developments—even if the reasons for the
reaction were not always clear. In the beginning, Timor had tried to
explain that Ravna was a good person who should be an ally. That had
not worked very well, though Timor was sure—almost sure—that Tycoon
would not kill her out of hand the way Vendacious wanted.
Suddenly he was overcome by the need to move; he’d plan on the way.
He climbed to his feet and set the binoculars in their velvet box. Geri’s
cell was above his. Getting up the stairs was always a pain, though
Tinish steps were easier for him to climb than steps the size most
humans preferred. He’d considered complaining about the problem—but

there was no way to make the stairs more convenient for his bad legs. If
the Big Guy took him seriously, he might just move Timor out of the tower
entirely.
The tiny stairwell was cool, the walls and steps slick with condensation.
The door at the top was metal, edged with a rubber sealing ring. He
tapped politely on its surface, then popped it open.
“Hei, Geri. It’s me, Timor.” Actually, it couldn’t be anyone else, not
through this door. “Can I come in?”
There was no answer, but Geri replied only on her really good days.
Timor eased the door open and stepped into the cold semidarkness.
Actually the room was pretty warm by Domain standards, but it was at
least ten degrees cooler than outdoors, and unlike in the stairwell, the air
was relatively dry. Timor himself had lived in this room for a few tendays
—till the lack of windows and the hassle of moving in and out of the heat
had gotten to him. Geri would have that problem too if—when she felt
well enough to leave the room.
“Geri?”
Shadows shifted and a head poked up. “She here. She say no visit.” That
was the jailer, a not very bright foursome—but one of the few packs who
spoke some Samnorsk.
“Hei, Jailer,” and he tried to gobble-whistle the Jailer’s given name.
As usual Jailer bobbed a smile, but whether she was amused or pleased,
Timor had never been able to figure out. The pack was gathered together
all on one side of the bed. Geri became visibly upset when a pack
surrounded her. As Timor settled down on the other side, Geri shifted
uneasily under her blankets, shrinking away from him. She stared
determinedly away from both Timor and Jailer. This must be one of her
bad days, when she couldn’t bear to be touched, much less hugged.
Darn the luck, but he had to tell someone. Timor rested his hand on the
edge of the five-year-old’s blankets. Geri was years younger than Timor
now, but he was still only a little taller than she was. Once upon a time,
Geri surely had understood that Timor was older, just stunted down to

her size. Now she often seemed to confuse him with her Academy
playmates. Since her time with Vendacious, there was a lot she was
confused about, and lots more she refused to think about. “Geri, I have
good news. Ravna is here! I saw her myself!”
Her violet eyes shifted in his direction; some distant emotion passed
across her small, dark face. Timor took any expression that wasn’t fear
as a positive thing. The little girl seemed to consider him for a second.
“What did she say?”
Um. What a smart and deflating question. Geri could do that. He
remembered the four-year-old he’d known back in the Domain. Back
then, she’d been inquisitive all the time! “I haven’t actually talked to her
yet. I’m going down to Tycoon right now. Maybe I can help her.”
Another pause, but Geri didn’t look away. “Can I come? Can Edvi come?
We can help too.”
She liked Tycoon, but this was the first time she’d ever talked of going to
see him. Unfortunately, Edvi was almost certainly dead. “Not this time,
Geri. I have to get down to Tycoon right away. But I’ll tell him that you
need Ravna.”
Interest dimmed, but after a moment Geri replied, “Okay.”
•  •  •
The stairs extended downwards only as far as the veranda at mid-
tower. When Timor got there and emerged into the heat, it was like diving
into a pool of very warm water.
The veranda was the only way in or out of the tower—and that only if you
could convince two gun-toting guards to let you pass. One of those packs
stood around the door now, watching Timor impassively. Timor gave him
a wave and limped a few meters around the curve of the tower to where
the other pack—it was Mr. Sharpshooter this morning—sat by the

elevator dock. “Hei, Sharpsie. I want to go down. Must see Tycoon.”
Sharpsie rolled his heads in an officious, irritated way. He exchanged
some hooting and gobbling with the pack by the door. The gunpacks
really didn’t like to leave just the one guard here. On the other hand, it
was Tycoon’s rule that Timor was not to be allowed to run around by
himself. In the end—no big surprise—Sharpsie caved in. The four of him
came to their feet. One of him slid open the elevator gate, while two
others grabbed Timor’s shirt and pants to make sure he didn’t fall through
the space between the veranda and the elevator carriage. These guys
thought Timor’s tremor was much more dangerous than it really was. He
had only fallen that once, and that was on the stairs.…
The elevator cable extended from the tower dock, diagonally down to a
point on the palace dome. The ride was always exciting, the carriage
slightly swaying, nothing but thirty meters of empty air between them and
the dome below. Tycoon claimed that elevators were just another of his
long-lost brother’s inventions. Maybe, but the thin little cable was made
by char-burning woven reeds in just the right way—surely that was
another trick stolen from Ravna’s starship.
Five minutes later, he was safely at the dock on Tycoon’s own residential
level. Mr. Sharps didn’t object when Timor took the shortcut through the
aquarium room, though he insisted on walking both in front and behind.
They weren’t more than five steps into the room before the cuttlefish
spotted him. “Hei Timor! Timor! Hei Ti’Timor! Hei—hei—h’h’h’hei!” The
squeaky voices started nearby, sweeping away from the door he had just
come through, along the walls of the aquarium, all the way to the far end
of the hall—where the little squeakers could not even have seen him yet.
Timor moved as fast as he could down the aisle between the leaky glass
tanks. Any other time he would have stopped in wonder, and stayed to
chat. The aquarium had a water ladder down to the pools and streams of
the airfield, so there was often news here from very far away. The
cuttlefish were such marvelous creatures. The torpedo-shaped bodies
were just thirty centimeters long. Their eyes covered one end; their
tentacles extended the rest of their body length. Hundreds of them

tumbled and turned as they swarmed to follow his progress. I don’t have
time, little ones! Their greetings had shifted into questions. The cuttlefish
were not mindless, but they were differently minded. The cuttlefish were
scatterbrained and careless of their own lives. But they spoke Interpack.
Tycoon claimed that they had spoken a Southseas version of pack talk
when they were first discovered. They had learned a little Samnorsk just
since he had started talking to them.
Two of Sharps ran a little way ahead. One looked around the corner in
the direction of Tycoon’s audience hall—and suddenly the whole pack
seemed to go on parade, all its steel claws clacking on the floor in
unison. Something strange was going on ahead. Timor slowed down,
provoking an irritated hiss from Sharps’ two behind him.
He reached the corner, and peeked around. The audience room doors
were shut! Tycoon hardly ever did that. He liked to wander back and forth
and schmooze with the cuttlefish. Not today. He must be running the air-
conditioning a lot, like he did when he really wanted to impress someone.
Okay, that was good.
Unfortunately, there was a pack standing by the doors, glaring in their
direction. That was Sharps’ boss, what would have been the royal
chamberlain back in Woodcarver’s palace. Timor straightened up as
much as he could and approached him. Mr. Sharps’ two walked in
formation with him, then merged with its two members that had gone on
ahead. All four stopped and came to attention. Sharps’ maneuver was
supposed to be fierce and impressive, but to Timor he just looked like
doggies with toy guns strapped to their backs.
Timor walked on forward, right up to the boss pack. He really needed to
get through these doors. If Tycoon would give Ravna a fair hearing, they
were all home free. The problem was, sometimes the Big Guy would go
running with his preconceptions. Vendacious was always trying to take
advantage of that. What if Vendacious is in there too? Timor stifled the
thought.
“Hei, Boss.” He waved at the doors. “Tycoon want me now. I help with
words.”

The boss pack stared back impassively. This one had no sense of
humor, and today he seemed even less jolly than usual. Several of him
looked past Timor at Sharps. There was a warbling exchange of views.
Timor could only pick out a few of the chords, but he made up the rest
with this imagination:
Boss pack: “Hei, Sharpsie. Did this two-legged clown really get an order
from the Big Guy to come down here?”
Sharps, doing his best to stay at full attention: “No way, Sir. Jailer is the
only one who’s been to the tower today.”
The Boss turned all his attention back to Timor, and what he actually said
in Samnorsk came as a surprise even to Timor’s imagination: “You no go
here. Tycoon make that real order. To me, about you.”

Chapter   33
Tycoon’s great palace might not have been where Ravna had
expected, but it was every bit the grandiose thing she had imagined:
huge, domed, and spired. Unfortunately, she and Jefri spent the rest of
the morning stuck in the lowly outskirts of the place, even as the rickshaw
whisked Ritl merrily off to some more honored destination. The gunpack
guided Ravna and Jefri toward magnificent twenty-meter-wide stairs—
then off to the side, where there was an awning-shaded area. Packs
brought them food (yams!) and some kind of weak beer. So they sat and
looked across the airfield at the airships and the long barracks-like
structures beyond. Eventually the airships were wheeled into their
hangars, but there was no end to mysterious comings and goings near
those barracks. The clouds scudded away and the sun beat down and
things got really hot, even here under the awnings. Jefri paced to the
limits that the gunpack would allow, looking at everything, arguing with
gunpack and the occasional servant, even though nobody seemed to
speak Samnorsk. Finally, he came back, looking as wilted as Ravna felt.
“You okay?” he said.
“Yeah.” This was very much the setting of the Age of Princesses, and yet
another blow to her childhood fancies.
“I think this is some kind of psychological warfare,” Jefri said.
“They’re softening us up?”
“Maybe.” He looked around. “You know, a lot of this doesn’t look so regal
up close. I see mildew, water stains. Choir aside, there are good reasons
why Northerners never settled here. Maybe Vendacious and Tycoon
came here out of weakness. Maybe they’re moving the furniture around
right now,” he jerked a thumb at the palace’s main entrance, “polishing up
the part we’re going to see.”

Hmm. Ravna looked across the airfield. The hangar doors had been slid
shut, and there was no further activity around them. This side of the
mysterious barracks, there were hectares of open space with just a pack
or two, perhaps fishing at one of the ornamental water pools. This
emptiness was in the middle of the most densely populated place on the
planet. Somebody had some clout. Rather than fraud and façade, maybe
this was Tropical reality.
The sun had slid into afternoon before they were finally ushered into
Tycoon’s grand palace. Yes, it was grand inside, too. Everywhere she
looked, packs hustled this way and that; most of their members had the
plush pelts of Northerners. Ravna and Jefri were led through vast
carpeted rooms, up more stairs to only slightly smaller rooms, their walls
draped with acoustic quilting. She noticed the kinds of imperfections that
Jefri had mentioned. There was a faint odor of mildew, an occasional
squishiness in the carpet. But the walls soared, and the dome overhead
almost seemed to float. Tycoon and company had been cribbing a lot of
tricks from Domain designs and, at least indirectly, from Oobii.
After the fourth set of stairs, Ravna would have been just as happy to be
back under the outside awnings.
Up here the rooms were not large. Their guide opened doors to reveal a
short hallway. At the far end, a pack stood by another set of doors. This
pack was dressed in full cloaks that would have made sense on a
summer day up North—but which looked a bit silly here. Gunpack
waggled its rifles, urging them forward as the doors behind them swung
shut.
The shutting of those doors seemed to be a signal to open the inner
doors. Almost like an airlock. The thought flitted by at almost the same
instant as a breath of cool air swept through the opening. They walked
forward, into a room in which the air temperature couldn’t have been
more than 25C. She stumbled at the surprise; the sudden change was
both a relief and discomfort. Jefri helped her across the room to benches
set before a cluster of Tinish thrones. This was some kind of audience
chamber.

Sunlight spilled through muddy glass. It was their first view to the east
since they had left the airship. A second-degree pyramid towered high,
but the second-degrees were like foothills before the immensity of the
first-degree pyramid. Ravna had to look up through the ceiling windows
to see the top of that.
It was an odd thing to see in a throne room. Ravna had to forcibly yank
her attention back from the windows. Directly ahead were elevated
throne seats. A smaller perch—for a singleton?—was set close by. All of
those were unoccupied, but the room was not: To the right, a sevensome
spread across a set of lesser thrones. Some meters to the right of him
was a second pack. At first she thought it was Godsgift—but no, it wasn’t,
though it was dressed with the same harlequin gaudiness as the Godsgift
she had known in the Domain.
The first pack gobbled something at the gunpack and then spoke in
Samnorsk: “You don’t recognize me, do you?” Two of the pack had
patchy Tropical pelts. “Not even the voice I’m using?”
Vendacious. At least it was the voice they’d heard via Zek, doing
business with Prince Puce.
Jefri gave him a stony look. “Where are Amdi and Screwfloss?”
A smile rippled across the pack. “They are guests in my annex. They are
cooperating with my investigation. They have nothing to fear. You have
nothing to fear if you cooperate equally.” He jabbed snouts at them as he
spoke. Now he paused and sat back in a dignified posture. “In a few
moments you will have the honor of meeting the great Tycoon.”
The Tropical pack popped into the conversation with, “I’m sure we’ll get
along famously if we all cooperate.” The speech was chipper and
unthreatening—and where did this fellow learn to speak Samnorsk so
well?
The question was forgotten as the gunpack came to attention and bugled
out royal flourishes. An instant later, the pack-wide doors behind the
thrones were pulled open. A single member came strolling through,
wearing a radio cloak. It looked well-fed and rested and almost certainly

wasn’t Zek. The critter headed for the low seat by the thrones.
Immediately after the singleton was seated, a heavyset eightsome came
through the doorway.
Ravna had seen packs as numerous—Amdi was eight, too—but several
of this fellow’s members were hulks, bigger than Pilgrim’s Scar, even if
not as tough-looking. The pack wore plain silk cloaks that would have
been understated elegance, except that one or two had drag stains.
Ravna watched the eight settle themselves on the thrones, their gaze
focusing implacably on Ravna and Jefri. So this was the pack at the
center of all their problems the last few years. What sort of creature could
conspire with Vendacious—and still be alive after all those years?
The gunpack’s bugling stopped, but now Vendacious took over with,
“Bow to the great—”
There was an angry squeak from behind the thrones. One more figure
came into the room. Could a pack as numerous as Tycoon be raising a
puppy? No, this was Ritl—and as loud as ever. She was dragging a large
stool, and Ravna guessed her squawking meant something like, “I could
use a little help here!” Ritl dragged the stool across the carpet, toward
Tycoon’s thrones. She tipped it down unseemly close to Tycoon, then
scrambled aboard and looked around. You really couldn’t see much
expression in a single Tines, but somehow Ritl looked … smug.
Ravna glanced back at Tycoon; he was still all staring at her and Jef. The
pack waited a moment for Vendacious and Ritl to pipe down. When he
finally spoke, it was with that totally inappropriate and self-damning Geri
voice they had already heard via Mr. Radio: “I have waited far too long for
this.” He switched to Interpack for a moment, then back to Samnorsk:
“Vendacious, which is the leader, the one your puppet deposed?”
“That’s the smaller of the two, sir. Ravna Bergsndot. She managed the
Domain’s invention development program.”
Tycoon hooted gently, a Tinish chuckle. “Ah yes. The machine operator.”
He pointed at Jefri. “And the big fellow? Is that really…?”
Vendacious replied in Interpack. Ravna only recognized the name

“Johanna,” superposed on a connection marker.
Jefri must have understood: “Yes, I’m Johanna’s brother,” he said.
Tycoon leaned forward, all of his eyes on Jefri. He stared for a full ten
seconds while Vendacious gobbled on, urging Tycoon to do …
something. Finally, Tycoon shook his heads, an irritable negation. Some
of him looked at Ravna; one of him was watching Ritl. “You two humans
should have been here seven tendays ago. Instead you murdered
Vendacious’ best assistant. You murdered most of Remasritlfeer. Then
you managed to trek almost all the way back to your precious starship.
Was this magic technology, or are you simply much deadlier than even
my friend Vendacious has always claimed?”
Jefri’s face clouded. “Neither, and you are full of lies. We—”
Ravna interrupted: “What does Ritl say happened?”
The singleton in question was glaring at Vendacious, a low-level faceoff.
A strangely large percentage of Vendacious was glaring right back. It
occurred to Ravna that Ritl might be one of the few creatures with whom
Vendacious had no leverage.
Tycoon reached down and focused a soft hooting sound on the singleton.
As Ritl twisted to look up at him, he said, “Poor Ritl. I tried to question her
before this meeting. She is a talker, but not very smart. It’s quite possible
that she doesn’t remember exactly how the rest of her pack died.”
Vendacious gobbled something.
“Speak human,” said Tycoon. “I want these two to understand what we’re
saying.”
“Yes sir. I just said, we’ll eventually figure out what these two humans
did. After all, I still have their servants to question.”
The eightsome waved dismissively. “However you humans escaped, you
only hurt your cause by doing so. Events have passed you by.”
Jefri: “We’d be dead now if we hadn’t escaped.”
“Nonsense!” said Vendacious. “My lord Tycoon’s purpose in this

expedition was to show Ravna that cooperation was her only choice.”
Ravna had the feeling that murder and conspiracy were piled in very
deep layers here. She touched Jefri’s arm. Put the Olsndot temper in a
bottle, okay? After a moment, he settled back on the bench, seeming to
get the unspoken message.
She looked up at Tycoon. “You say events have passed us by. What is it
that you want from us now?”
“I want nothing from the Johanna sibling.” Perhaps Tycoon didn’t notice
that he was clawing the thrones as he said that. “But from you … I want
to convince you that opposing my wishes and those of”—he glanced at
Vendacious—“what’s the stooge’s name?”
“Nevil Storherte, my lord.”
“Yes. Opposing me and Nevil is suicide. You and Woodcarver must
accept the coming alliance—ah, but you don’t know about that either, do
you?”
Ravna tried to smile. “As you say, we’ve been out of touch. Why would
my opposition matter?”
“You still have the loyalty of many of the two-legs. You may have
technical knowledge that will help us manage two-legs machines. And
you may have influence with Woodcarver.”
I bet Woodcarver is still the Queen, and Nevil has his back to the wall.
Nevil is so desperate he’s finally gone public with his foreign allies. She
tried sit up a little straighter, act like she had some kind of power in the
world. “I mean no disrespect, sir, but how did you intend to convince
me?”
Tycoon looked back and forth at himself, nonplussed. “Didn’t you look out
the windows as you flew here?”
“Yes. We saw hundreds of kilometers of chaos, and then this reservation
you’ve built in the middle of it all. Is there some secret weapon that we
missed?”
“I suppose I’m the secret weapon.” The voice came from the other side of

room, from the harlequin-cloaked Tropical. “Or in proper terminology, I
should say that I represent the secret weapon. I am the Choir’s gift.”
“Godsgift?” said Ravna. “We ran into another of you up North.”
“You murdered another of him up North,” said Tycoon.
Next to her, Jefri was all but shaking with outrage. Lies and truth, how to
untangle them?
The local version of Godsgift was watching them intently. “Don’t bother to
deny the murder,” it said smoothly. “Some of that godsgift escaped,
enough to tell us how it left part of itself behind to attempt negotiating. We
know what happened.” It waved the issue away. “It’s not a great matter.
We gifts come and go, rather like a feeding clump in a city square,
though we are rarer and globally significant.” The pack slid off its seats
and strolled around the other packs to come closer to the humans. The
gunpack had to retreat to make room.
The Tropical walked up to them with the ease of a pack who knew
humans—or who didn’t fear losing its mind in others. In either case, it had
none of the aggressive posture of Tycoon or Vendacious. “Our secret
weapon has been all around you. The Choir.” It gestured through the high
windows at the mountain range of pyramids.
“And your god is speaking through you?” Sarcasm edged Jefri’s voice.
The godsgift cocked a head. “Oh no. Or only indirectly. But by this
evening the Choir will know everything that is being said here now.” The
creature pointed again at the pyramids. “Surely you see the gathering?”
Ravna looked through the crudely made plate glass. Sunlight was coming
almost straight down, mottling the golden surface of the grand pyramid.
Jefri’s voice was soft and wondering: “Those shadows, Ravna—I think
they’re mobs of Tines.” Individual members were visible as dots on the
closest of the second-degree pyramids. On the great pyramid, the
thousands were a finely mottled discoloration, creeping higher and
higher. This surpassed Pilgrim’s most extreme Choir tales.
“Are you impressed?” said Tycoon. “I’m impressed, and that is not easy

to do.”
Ravna looked way from the windows. “… Yes,” she said. “But just how
does this make a secret weapon? I know the Tropical Choir has existed
at least as long as the northern civilizations, but it has never mattered
except as a barrier to land travel between the north and the south.
There’s no way that the Choir could be any smarter than an individual
pack or human.” Not down here in the Slow Zone. There were group
minds in the Beyond, but even they were never more than witless
hedonists. You had to go into the Transcend to do better—and there
large group minds were just one of a number of paths to real Power.
“Ha ha!” said Tycoon, his high-pitched voice like a child teasing. “They
doubt your Choir’s godhood.”
Godsgift had settled itself on the carpet around the humans. Now it
laughed. “You doubt the Choir’s godhood, too, O Tycoon.” The pack
shifted around in its harlequin cloaks. Its mangy pelt had big bare
patches, altogether consistent with the ragamuffin clothing. Ravna
wondered how uncomfortable the fellow was with Tycoon’s air
conditioning.
Godsgift continued with a kind of sly diffidence: “In truth, all I remember
from the Choir is an enormous feeling of well-being. I pity you Northern
packs who won’t give yourself to it. I pity the humans even more that they
can never become part of it, even if they wished. Both you and they are
so upset about the murders the humans committed. How little you have
to lose that you squabble over a member here, a pack there.” But now it
paused. “I suspect that as a matter of cold fact, Ravna Bergsndot is right
about us. The Choir is not smarter than a unitary pack. But there are
places and times—millions of places and times every day—where it is
almost as smart. And sometimes, the Choir’s gifts—those such as myself
—last longer. It is a sacrifice, since for a time I am left as limited as you.
“So yes, the Choir as a whole may not have what you call intelligence,
but it is a happier way to know reality than is your stunted existence.”
Godsgift was silent for a moment, most of the fellow staring out at the
pyramid—doing a good imitation of thoughtful yearning. Abruptly the pack

gave a start. “It just occurs to me that you two humans could satisfy your
curiosity about the Choir in a way that no unitary pack ever could.”
Tycoon leaned forward. “What can they do that I cannot?”
“Well, sir,” replied the godsgift, “you could experience the Choir, but it’s
unlikely your parts would ever reassemble into that unitary self you value
so much. On the other, um, hand,” he waved a paw in an artificial
flourish, “these two humans could ascend with the crowds. They could
witness the highest pinnacle of the Choir, where myriads stand within the
diameter of a single song, where even such as I would dissolve. Their
minds would survive—by the fact that, alas, they can never be more—
and they could report back on the experience!”
Vendacious perked up. “I think that is a capital idea!”
Tycoon had his heads together, apparently giving the suggestion serious
thought. “I don’t think it is as simple as you say. A few years ago, I had
Remasritlfeer build a closed and padded rickshaw wagon, one that he
could propel from the inside. The idea was similar to what you’re
suggesting but without the humans—and of course the rickshaw couldn’t
have climbed any pyramids. Even so, the project was a failure.
Remasritlfeer wasn’t more than twenty meters outside the Reservation
when the mobs attacked his rickshaw and tipped it over.” Tycoon was
watching Ritl, but the singleton just continued grooming its claws,
oblivious. “He would have died in the experiment, except that we had a
cable attached to the wagon and were able to drag it back before the
mob could get to him.”
“Ah, but consider the ecstasy lost!” said the godsgift, carried away by an
ecstasy of its own salesmanship. “I think it’s likely the Choir was simply
trying to free what it regarded as imprisoned members. I know you
Northerners have all sorts of terrible myths about the Choir, but in fact,
except for boundary fights and occasional pyramid sacrifices, individual
foreign Tines are rarely killed by the Choir. For humans it should be even
safer, since the creatures have no mindsounds to provoke aggression.”
“Hmm,” said Tycoon. His technical curiosity reminded Ravna a little of

Scrupilo: nothing was too gross if it had an experiment in it somewhere.
“But wouldn’t the two-legs be dealt with as corpses or invading animals?”
“Oh, no, I doubt that would happen.” The godsgift waved breezily. “In
fact, I’d wager that no human would ever be harmed at the heart of the
Choir.”
Ravna glanced at Vendacious. She saw a smile flicker across the
members Tycoon couldn’t see. So Vendacious knew this claim was false.
The godsgift and Vendacious were doing a good job of maneuvering
herself and Jefri into a front row seat at the Tropical sacrifices. The
godsgift didn’t have Vendacious’ air of palpable menace, but maybe that
just meant that he was the more dangerous of the two.
The godsgift rattled on enthusiastically, ignorant of or ignoring
Vendacious’ sly smile. “I tell you, I almost wish I could be human. You
could go to the very top. You could see everything there is to see—and
still exist afterwards to remember it! Maybe there is something beyond
the sounds of mind there. Either way, you would know!”
Ravna raised a hand. “No. I think we’ll pass.” She noticed Jefri nod
emphatically. “Perhaps another time.” When we’re not being held
prisoners under threats of torture and death. “In any case, I thought your
point was that the Choir was Tycoon’s secret weapon.”
“Oh! You want the crass details.” The pack sounded hurt that it had failed
to sell them on a hike up sacrifice hill.
“Enough of this religious talk,” said Tycoon. “The crass details are the
important part. Here we’re sitting cool and comfortable in the middle of
endless mind death. From the safety of the Reservation, I do business
with the Choir. The combination of their multitudes and my genius makes
me the greatest power in the world.” He waved at the radio-cloaked Tines
that sat silently on a nearby stool. “With my radio network, I am watching
across a market domain that is ten times wider than your royal Domain.
My factories create more goods than all the other businesses in the world
put together. I’ll wager you’ve seen some of them yourselves. My
presence simply can’t be disguised anymore. My inventions are changing

the entire—”
Ritl had been uncharacteristically quiet. Now she let loose a chittering
complaint.
Jefri leaned close to Ravna’s ear. “Ritl says Tycoon brags too much!”
Tycoon gave the singleton a couple of heads of attention, and gobbled a
rather mellow form of “Keep quiet.” Ritl grumbled almost the way she
used to around the campfire, but settled back on her seat.
For a brief moment, Tycoon looked a little embarrassed. “The whole of
that one was a good employee,” he said. He looked back and forth at
himself, as if recovering his train of thought “Nevil Storherte understands
the situation. In less than a tenday, he and I will reveal our alliance. But
even now, if I can convince you of my power, there could be a place for
you in the new order of things.”
“I’m eager to be convinced, sir,” said Ravna. Can it be? I actually have
some leverage with this guy? Okay, then: “We’ve always been impressed
by your successes, even though we had no idea how you managed
them.”
The pack actually preened. “Heh. Be prepared to learn then. This
afternoon I’ll show you one of my factories. Multiply that by a thousand
and you’ll know what you’re up against Today. Multiply by a million and
you’ll know for Tomorrow. You could be a valued junior partner.”
“I’m grateful.” She wondered who had provided the job recommendation.
“There is a matter of trust, however—”
“You are not in a position to set conditions, human.”
“Nevertheless, there is the matter of the three young humans that you
took.”
From across the room, Vendacious said, “Both humans will be returned
unharmed.”
Jefri burst out with, “Both? You fucking murderer! And what about the
Tines killed in the kidnappings?”

“There were no killings,” Vendacious replied flatly, “not by our packs. Of
course, we can’t know all that Nevil Storherte may have done.”
Tycoon’s heads were turning unnecessarily back and forth between Jefri
and Vendacious. “Yes,” he said, “humans don’t really care about the lives
of packs. Despicable maggots.… Understand: I dislike you two-legs as a
race, but I’ve found that business can bring cooperation between
anyone.” Heads flicked in Jefri’s direction. “Almost anyone.”
Jef shook his head. “Hei! At least tell us the names of the surviving—”
Tycoon shifted forward, all heads weaving in Jefri’s direction. “You dare
make demands of me, Jefri-brother-of-Johanna?” His Geri voice climbed
in pitch, stretching into an inhuman hiss. “Jefri-brother-of-Johanna-who-
killed-my-brother.”
Jefri came up off the bench, but his anger seemed swept away by
shocked understanding. “Brother? Powers above, you’re Scriber
Jaqueramaphan’s brother?”
Tycoon swarmed down upon Jefri. Maybe what saved Jef was the fact
that godsgift was still sitting close around him. That pack emitted a
surprised squeal and exploded in all directions, incidentally getting in the
attackers’ way and knocking Jef backwards over his bench.
Ravna dove sideways along the bench, trying to block the surge. She felt
two of Tycoon slam into her, then had a glimpse of his members lunging
under the bench, claws reaching. At the edge of the fray the gunpack
was maneuvering around in confusion—trying for a safe shot?
“Wait! Stop it! Stop!” she shouted, but in fact the madness had ended. It
couldn’t have lasted more than a second or two or she wouldn’t have
been around to shout. Tycoon was all around her, but his jaws weren’t
snapping. Four of him were on the other side of the bench now. They
dragged Jefri Olsndot off the floor, set him on the bench behind Ravna’s.
Their claws made little spots of blood where their grip sank through his
clothes, and two of them had jaws right by Jef’s throat.
For his part, Jefri was sitting very still. Ravna remembered when he was
little, how Jef and Amdi would mock fight. Sometimes that would get out

of hand, and Jefri had learned the safest thing to do was just become still
and submissive. It was certainly the right strategy now.
Tycoon held him tightly for several seconds. The eightsome’s voice
boomed around the room, hissing and screaming that certainly wasn’t
Samnorsk, and wasn’t Interpack either. Finally he gave Jef a hard push
and backed away from him. All eight stared at Jefri for a moment more,
then dabbed at the froth that dribbled from various jaws. Finally, he
turned a couple of heads toward the uncertain gunpack and gobbled at
him. Ravna recognized an imperative and the word “dungeon.”
So maybe no factory tour today.

Chapter   34
The “dungeon” was actually a suite of rooms near the audience
chamber. It had running water and air conditioning. Was there any closed
area in this palace that wasn’t air conditioned? Dinner was delivered—
more yams and beer.
Once they were alone, Ravna walked around the high-class
accommodations. “I assume these walls have ears pressed against
them,” she said.
Jefri shrugged. “The truth is one thing that jackass really needs to hear.”
Jefri had a long bloody slash on his face where one of Tycoon’s claws
had grazed him. He thought a second and then shouted: “Jo didn’t kill
your brother, damn it!”
“But do you think he really is Scriber Jaqueramaphan’s brother?”
Jefri sat back on his chair. The seat actually had a back to it, though not
quite what would suit a human. “Once upon a time, I think he was. Now, I
think the pack is a rebuild.”
“A what?”
“That’s a word Johanna came up with for something she saw
occasionally at the Fragmentarium. Sometimes a pack—usually a rich,
foolish pack—tries to recover a prior form of its personality by
incorporating several new members.”
“Wouldn’t that just be a merge pack?” These creatures had more
reproductive modes than any dozen races she had known in the Beyond.
“Not exactly. Rebuilds are much rarer; the broodkenners find puppies that
are likely to contribute such skills and mind styles as were in their client’s
former personality. Then the client tries to mold itself and the puppies into

what it was before. You noticed that four of Tycoon are a lot younger than
the others?”
Ravna shook her head. “They all looked grown to me.”
“They’re all adults, but—my theory is that the four older ones really were
a fission sibling of Johanna’s Scriber. The pack is trying to recover what it
was before the split.” Jef’s face twisted into an unhappy smile. “Scriber
and Pilgrim were Jo’s first friends here. You know how she always talked
about him: Scriber Jaqueramaphan, the mad inventor. He was a fairly
recent fission product, and he always seemed a bit unhappy about it—
like a human regretting a broken marriage.”
“And it looks like the other half of the fission felt the same way.” Ravna
was quiet for a moment; now here was a story for Amdi’s collection of
romance novels!
Jefri was nodding. “This would explain a lot: the commercial empire
building—that’s from the old entrepreneurial half; the wild inventiveness
—that’s what the pack imagines of Scriber; and even the murderous
hatred of humans—somehow Vendacious has convinced him that
Johanna killed Scriber.”
So perhaps Tycoon was not a villain … not naturally a villain. They sat for
a moment in silence. “Okay, then,” said Ravna. “We know what we’re up
against. That has to be an improvement. We’ve got to convince this
fellow of the truth—”
“—without triggering more violence.” He gave another smile, this one not
despairing. “I’ll be my very nicest, no provocations.”
“I’ll be properly respectful, too. We’ve got to find out which children are
still alive.”
Jef nodded. “Yeah. I’m afraid for Geri. Tycoon’s Samnorsk vocabulary is
adult; he’s obviously been reading. But Geri’s voice, when Tycoon uses
it, that’s like a confession of—”
Of torture at least, thought Ravna. She raised a finger to her lips. If there
were ears pressed to the walls, there was much that should not be

spoken. “Another thing: somehow we have to learn more about
Johanna.”
Jefri gave a little nod, and seemed to be choosing his words carefully.
“Yes. Tycoon wants her dead—which means he thinks she’s still alive.
But he doesn’t seem to know where she is. And no one mentioned
Pilgrim, either.”
They stared at each other for a moment. When Pilgrim and Johanna
were missing together they were generally off snooping in the agrav skiff.
She had told Jefri about their mission to the mouth of the Fell. In the past,
Johanna and Pilgrim had hidden for tendays at a time near foreign cities.
Hiding within Tycoon’s operation would be much more difficult than any
of that, but it was possible that right now the two were—she leaned
toward Jefri and traced a circle with a dot on the arm of his chair—right
here.
He gave another little nod. “It could be. It’s another thing to watch for.”
•  •  •
The next morning, they were wakened by a pack bringing breakfast. It
waited impatiently for them to dress and eat and then hustled them out of
their cool “dungeon” and down all the stairs they’d had to climb the day
before.
It had been raining, but now the sky above was brilliant blue.
Thunderheads still hid both the great pyramid and the sunrise. The air
was sopping wet, but this was probably the nicest moment of a tropical
day. Considering how much cooler and drier it had been back in the
dungeon, Ravna could not fully savor the moment.
She and Jef were piled into one of the rickshaw wagons and rolled
across the landing field, accompanied by the usual gunpack. On the
north side of the field, two of the hangars were open. Packs were working

around the airships, but at this distance it was impossible to tell what they
were doing.
Maybe it didn’t matter, because their driver was not taking them toward
the hangars. This might be the factory tour Tycoon had advertised. Their
course angled to the south, occasionally crossing bridges over the
floodways they had seen from above. The morning air was much clearer
than on their flight in. What had been lost in cloudy mists was now
visible … dozens of the long, barracks-like buildings. But even now, she
could not see the most distant of them.
As they neared the first structure, she realized it was at least fifteen
meters from floor to ridge and almost forty meters wide. The ground
around it was littered with huge piles—of what? Refuse? No. Up close
she saw lumber and finished metal stampings, all more or less neatly set
on pallets. Lines of Tropicals dragged carriers back and forth, moving
the … factory inputs, that’s what they had to be … into the main
entrance. Their rickshaw had to angle even further south to avoid that
traffic.
They turned again and rolled straight toward one corner of the entrance,
out of the way of the haulers. An eightsome was standing under the
portico: Tycoon, here to greet them in person. And there was his radio
singleton and the godsgift pack. There might have been another gunpack
back in the shadows.
“Powers be praised,” Jefri said dryly, “I don’t see Vendacious.” There was
only one other pack in the apparent entourage, a small-bodied foursome.
As Ravna climbed down from the rickshaw, she heard a childlike human
voice. At first she thought it was Tycoon, but the voice was shouting,
“Ravna! Ravna!”
She turned and saw—“Timor!”
The boy had come through Tycoon and was limping toward her as fast as
he could go, his arms outstretched. Ravna ran across the concrete
toward him, Jefri right behind her. They met just a few meters short of the
waiting packs. Ravna knelt, hugging him as she might a child as young

as Timor looked. Today, he didn’t object. “I am so glad to see you!”
“I’m so glad to see you!”
When she set him down and let go, Ravna saw the tears streaming down
Timor’s face. He was laughing or crying, maybe both. After a moment, he
looked away from Ravna and took a step toward Jefri.
“Hei, Timor,” Jefri said solemnly and stretched out his hand. “How are
you?”
Timor reached out, shook his hand. “I’m fine. Are you helping Ravna
now?”
“I—” Jef glanced at Ravna. “Yes, Timor, I am.” He hesitated, then
nodded. “I really am.”
“Have you seen Geri and Edvi, Timor?” said Ravna. “Are they okay?”
“Geri is getting better. We’re both in dungeons up on the main spire.” He
gave a little wave toward the palace. “Edvi, I’m afraid Edvi is—”
“Edvi Verring succumbed to one of the bloating diseases. I did my best
for him, but alas—”
Ravna looked up at the interruption and saw that all of Tycoon was
watching them intently. But the voice, that had been the one Vendacious
normally used, and a radio-cloaked singleton was standing near Tycoon.
She couldn’t help but glare at the poor innocent. “So then, Vendacious,”
she said. “You had custody of Edvi? Has anyone looked at the body,
verified your diagnosis?”
As she spoke, Timor slipped his hand around her fingers. She felt a
warning squeeze.
But Vendacious did not seem upset by the question. His voice came
breezily, “The diagnosis was obvious. I’ve preserved the remains,
however. You are welcome to inspect.”
Timor’s hold was still tight.
“There’s no immediate need,” she replied.
Tycoon made an impatient noise. “That’s good.” He said, “You are not

the boss of us, Ravna Bergsndot. I’ve brought you here to discover if you
can work for me.” Some of him was staring over her shoulder at Jefri.
•  •  •
It was a bumpy start to their factory tour, but Tycoon’s mood seemed to
shift as often and as fast as sunlight and clouds. They went into the hall
and climbed up to a long platform that ran the length of a production line.
Tycoon insisted that Ravna walk with him, at the front of the group. Now
the eightsome sounded very much like Scrupilo, the proud engineer,
pointing out this detail and that, full of opinions about everything. His
snouts swept the length of the hall. “This is twelve hundred meters long,
with two thousand Tines working at full shift. This is one of the older halls,
so it is not wired for electricity. All the main power still comes from steam
engines. And yet, I’ll wager you have nothing so grand as this single
factory up in your Domain.”
Okay, he was even more a braggart than Scrupilo. Still, this was
preferable to some of Tycoon’s other moods. “You’re quite right, sir,” she
said, and that was the truth. The far end of the hall was almost lost to
sight. All of Scrupilo’s North End operation would have fit in this one
building. She could see no coherent packs on the floor below, but Tines
were crowded almost shoulder to shoulder at work points long the line.
The activity was rapid and intricate, unceasing, like the sweatshops that
the Princesses had overturned. She tried to think of something nicer than
that to say—perhaps an admiring question. Wait. There was one part of
this picture that didn’t fit any of the ancient file images. A water stream
flowed just this side of the production line, almost directly under the
elevated walkway. This channel was like the ones out on the airfield, and
seemed to run the length of the hall. Where the skylights let the sun fall
upon the water, she could see tiny squid-like beasties flitting about.
“What are those creatures in the water, sir?” she asked.

From behind them, Timor piped up, “They’re cuttlefish!”
Tycoon shrugged. “In Interpack they’re called—” and he gobbled a simple
chord. “It means small swimmers with eyes on the sides and grabbers
streaming from one end. This particular variety can remember and repeat
simple phrases. I use them to carry short messages, when no packs are
at the destination.”
Ravna leaned a little further out and looked straight down. Yes, the
critters had enormous glassy eyes. Their tentacles were long and moving
all the time. And Tycoon didn’t seem to have anything more to brag about
them! Interesting. She brought her gaze back to the assembly line itself.
“What are you making in this factory?”
“Today? Today, this line is set up for rain gutterage gardenware.
Hmmph.” He was making little annoyed sounds at himself, as if realizing
that this did not fit his grand image. He turned a head and rattled
Interpack at his radio singleton. A question, it sounded like to Ravna. The
singleton was silent for several seconds, but when it replied, its gobbling
was much more musical than normal Interpack. Ravna realized that it
was chanting numbers stacked into chords. Tabular data. Tycoon
summarized in Samnorsk: “Ta reports two hundred tonnes of product per
day, five thousand rain gutters per hour. Still to run four more days on
this lot.” Somewhere Tycoon must have a radio singleton stationed with
an army of clerks. “The rain gutters are mainly for use within the Choir
region. Nowadays internal sales are my greatest source of income,
certainly of raw materials. But in four days, we’ll be making something
else here. Productivity. Flexible productivity!”
“Yes, sir,” said Ravna. “We saw all manner of your goods while we were
in the Wild Principates.” That was flattery, but again the absolute truth—
and another mystery resolved. “But how do you design the actual steps
to be performed, the—” Workflow was the term she would have used if
she were dealing with Oobii.
Tycoon waved airily. “That is where my genius for detail work comes into
play. There is the high-flying inventor part of me and then there is my
interest in the smallest detail”—Two of him had been looking back as he

spoke, and now suddenly he was off on a new topic.—“Timor! You are
delaying me!”
Tycoon had separated Timor from Ravna when they entered the hall.
Since then, the boy had been limping along behind the Ta singleton.
“Sorry,” he said, hustling forward.
“Where is your rickshaw?” said the eightsome.
“Um, back at—oh, there’s another one.” Timor pointed at a small utility
wagon by the outer wall.
Tycoon reached out a member and snagged the little red wagon,
dragging it back to Timor. “Get in. I won’t have you holding things up.”
Two of him glanced at Ravna, “Normally I have a servant to take care of
this, but there isn’t room for one with this crowd.” He waved at the various
packs accompanying them—and then seemed to notice Jefri. “You!” he
said. “Come over here and pull this wagon.”
“Yes, sir.” Jefri gave a Tinish bow and came forward. Ravna thought she
saw a smile hiding just below his solemn manner.
“Now, where was I?” Tycoon said, proceeding along the walkway. “Yes.
Details! In fact, I’ve discovered an assistant for that. Timor is quite good
at detail planning, better than any pack besides myself. He’s even
devised methods for planning the planning. Quite remarkable.”
Ravna glanced at Timor, now riding along in the little wagon. Timor
looked back, smiling hesitantly. “I hope it’s okay, Ravna. It’s the sort of
thing you do, but you do it so much better.”
She grinned. “That’s only when I have Oobii. Good for you, Timor.” And
now she knew who had given Tycoon the glowing job recommendation
for her.
As Jef pulled Timor along, the boy pointed out features of the factory
floor, where intermediate parts were brought through side doors, how the
racks on the steam-powered main line held the parts so that simple
Tinish actions could complete each assembly step. For a wonder, Tycoon
kept quiet, letting someone else do the bragging.

Jefri nodded, looking down into the mob. Finally, he glanced at Tycoon.
“Everyone is working so closely. I don’t see a single pack.”
The question and tone were very polite, but Ravna held her breath.
Tycoon walked along for several seconds, not replying, maybe waiting for
Timor to answer. When the eightsome finally spoke, he seemed to ignore
the question: “You know, I pioneered the factory line. I had the original
idea back in the Long Lakes even before I fissioned. Then I actually
implemented the invention when I moved to East Home. The easterners
are open-minded; they even had a primitive form of the idea. You see,
most work doesn’t need a full mind. In fact, if you really had to think about
what you’re doing, you’d go mad with boredom. So I thought to myself,
why not take the idea of a sentry line and make it a just a little more
complicated, having each member do some simple, repetitive task?”
Ravna nodded. “We have something similar in the Domain. Street
diggers work as a large team, then when they’re done with their shift they
revert to separate packs, and collect their pay—and enjoy the rest of the
day.”
Tycoon made an irritated noise. “As I said, primitive forms of the idea
have always been around. I raised it to a high art at East Home. I’m sure
you in the Domain heard of me there. The problem was, there were those
bothersome labor guilds, and the local aristocracies had to be bought off
—”
“And your other inventions were becoming too grand for a place so small
as East Home.” That was Vendacious’ voice coming out of Ta.
“Yes, yes. I’m not forgetting you, Vendacious. Your, um, advice about my
other inventions was indispensable even then. I had to find larger pools
of labor, without petty squabbling—and out of the view of Woodcarver’s
Domain.”
Ahead, the walkway opened into a kind of terrace, wide enough so that—
if the two gunpacks stayed at the ends of it—all the rest of their party
could stand together. Tycoon stopped there, and some of him walked to
the edge of the terrace, waving for Ravna to follow. “Here in the Tropics

is the place for my ideas. The workers can be molded into whatever form
fits my purpose. No northern factory could function with this perfection.…”
His heads tilted slyly at her. “You really can’t hear it, can you?”
There was a lot to hear: the distant pounding of steam engines, the
steady crash, crash, crash of the assembly line, wheels on supply lines
clattering across the factory floor. In an open-topped room directly below,
several Tines had their heads together, almost like a coherent pack.
Maybe in fact, they were: A steep stairway led from there up to where
she now stood. But she heard no Interpack gobbling. “Hear what?” she
said.
“Mindsounds! From all up and down the row. The factory is a-roar with
them.” He jabbed a snout in the direction of the silent little foursome who
had accompanied them along the walkway. “Have you wondered who
this fellow is?”
“Well…” The question seemed a complete non-sequitur.
The foursome squeaked something in Interpack, but almost inaudibly
high-pitched.
From the radio singleton, Vendacious gave out a sigh, “Yes, my lord, I’m
told you are pointing at Aritarmo. I admit my weakness. I’ve never been
able to come to the factories in person. The radio provides me voice and
ears to accompany my lord Tycoon. My assistant Aritarmo sends
descriptions of what it sees, what the radio might have missed noticing.”
He gobbled something more in Interpack.
Tycoon laughed. “Quite right, Vendacious. But my point was simply that
this factory hall is a mild form of the Choir. Not all packs can tolerate it.”
Godsgift had been silent to this point—at least where humans could hear.
The pack had crowded close the railing and all of it was looking down. “In
fact, my lord Tycoon,” it said, “this is Choir territory, not part of your
Reservation.”
“Ah, um. Quite so.” Then almost to himself: “It’s beyond me how a mob of
millions can remember fine print that some godsgift saw seven years
ago.”

More of Tycoon came to the railing, stuck some heads over, then
retreated. “It takes real strength of character to face that roar. A bracing
test of discipline.… My point is that these factories are fundamentally
different from those of the north. These are factories that know their
goals, and can manage the flow of raw material coming in and finished
product rolling out. There are waves of attention and decision crashing
back and forth the length of the hall. My assistants provide the overall
design, the basic product models, but it is the mob that makes the details
work. See down there, that room with five Choir members all heads
together? I’ll wager there’s some local bottleneck in production,
something that requires coherent attention. Those five are a form of
godsgift.”
“A very temporary form,” said the godsgift standing by the railing.
“How flexible can they be?” asked Ravna. “You say this factory’s current
run goes only four more days, but how long does it take for a factory to
retarget on something entirely different?”
“Entirely different? That depends,” said Tycoon. “What the Choir can’t do
is the original design and invention, however much a godsgift may brag.
It’s been my genius that has lifted the Choir out of its eternal misery.”
Where is Ritl when we need her? thought Ravna.
“The Choir was not miserable,” objected the godsgift.
“We could argue about that, my friend. I remember how you lived when I
first negotiated the Reservation. Physically at least, what you have now is
a paradise.”
“Well, physically, of course.” The godsgift waved dismissively. “The Choir
would never cooperate with you if that much were not true.”
“Whatever,” said Tycoon and gave his heads a little roll of exasperation.
“The hardest part of any new product is convincing the Choir that the
effort is needed. That takes a combination of market research and animal
handling. I’ve become very, very good at it. Once I have a new invention
properly working and a factory and shipping plan, it takes one to ten
tendays for the Choir to build and start a new factory. Do you understand

now why I couldn’t hide from the Domain anymore, even if I wanted to?”
All of Tycoon was staring at Ravna now, as if he thought what he said
had impressed her. And it certainly does, she thought. Tycoon’s bragging
amounted to massive understatement. Without a shred of real
automation, he had recapitulated the power of an early technological
civilization.… And done almost everything she’d been attempting the last
ten years.
•  •  •
That night, back in their air-conditioned, perhaps snooped-upon
dungeon:
“In fact, Tycoon does have automation,” said Jefri. “He’s persuaded the
Choir to be his personal automation. Powers! This is more than the Old
Flenser ever dreamed of doing.”
“This pack is no Flenser. Tycoon is a…” Ravna looked around at the
walls, thought better of saying naive buffoon.
Jefri laughed. “You don’t have to spell that one out. Yeah, Tycoon isn’t
Flenser, either Old or New. But he’s accomplished far more.” He glanced
at Ravna. “What I’d like to know is how he wedged a snout into the Choir
in the first place. Packs have been trying to penetrate the Tropics for—
well, for centuries. Explorers went in, frags and singletons and small
mobs dribbled out. Their stories were full of madness and member
sacrifice and ecstasy—but never a hint of reason. The closest thing to
trade was the occasional wreckage that drifted into the Domain. Maybe
we shouldn’t be surprised that the Choir can manage complex
procedures when it is convinced of future payoffs—but how did Tycoon
get close enough to do the convincing in the first place?”
“A human could have done it.”
“Hah. No human we know, not if this operation is as old as Tycoon

claims.”
Ravna hesitated, wondering whether to voice her suspicions about the
“cuttlefish.” Finally she gave a shrug. “Okay, there are still mysteries. I
may just ask him straight out. I think that despite all his”—bragging—“all
his pride and confidence, Tycoon really does value human technical
knowledge.”
“Yes! And your expertise in particular!” Jef grinned. “You can thank Timor
for some of that.”
Ravna sighed. “Timor has done better than any of us. You talked to him
more today than I did.” The boy had been whisked away at the end of the
afternoon, an ugly finish to a very strange day. “Do you think he’s okay?”
“Yeah, I really do. He was less upset than you when Tycoon dragged him
off. I think he wanted to get back to Geri.… I don’t think she is doing
nearly so well.”
“We have to see her,” said Ravna. She hesitated, did her best not to look
at the walls. I hope this doesn’t sound like a planned statement: “You
know Jefri, after what I’ve seen today, I think I could work with Tycoon.
What he’s achieved here—well, if we could use it to assemble the output
of Scrupilo’s Cold Valley lab, the combination would give us one hundred
years of progress in ten. On the other hand, if we can’t see Geri, if we
can’t return all the stolen kids, then I’m not sure that it makes sense to
hire on with Tycoon and, um,”—a tip of the hat to the main monster, in
case he was listening too—“Vendacious.”
The terrifying thing about her little speech was that it was mostly true.
•  •  •
The factory they visited the next day was almost ten kilometers away.
This time their wagon was drawn by kherhogs, the first large animals they
had seen in the Tropics. They rolled past the airfield, past the south end

of dozens of factory halls, and through one morning rainstorm.
Immediately to the left of their path, the ground was an urban marsh,
much like what they’d seen on their flight in. In the east, behind them, the
palaces and hangars were lost to sight. The great pyramid stood above
the mists like a distant mountain.
When they finally disembarked, they found Tycoon and company already
waiting for them. The eightsome was talking even while Ravna was still
greeting Timor: “You think this was a far ride, do you? Maybe a year or
two ago it was, but the factory count is still doubling. I have smaller
reservations a hundred kilometers from here. We’d have to take an
airship to get them. Come along now, stop fussing with Timor. I have so
much to show you.”
He dragged them through another rain shower to look at a coal-fired
power plant. This rank of factory halls needed no steam engines. The
equipment inside was entirely driven by electrical gear of various sorts.
The factory next to where they had stopped seemed to be running some
sort of drop forge. Tycoon claimed the one on the other side was for
electroplating. Ravna thought all this must be the reason for the long trip
—until she got indoors and discovered what this particular factory made:
Radios.
The devices were stacked at the output end of the factory. Tycoon
snagged one from a departing pallet, then stood on his shoulders to put it
in Ravna’s hands. Ravna turned the boxy contraption around, not
immediately recognizing it. Perhaps that was because it seemed to be
gold plated, a mirror-perfect job. She turned it over, saw the dark
glossiness of an ordinary solar cell, the same as on radios built up north.
Okay. Leaving aside the useless gold plating, this was the analog radio
design she had created from Oobii’s archives. Scrupilo must have made
dozens of the devices over the last few years. Ah. She looked past
Tycoon. The bin he was standing in front of could easily contain a
thousand radios.
All she could think to say was, “So why the gold plating?”

Tycoon suddenly was looking lots of places besides at her. “Yes, well, my
local market likes them gold plated.”
Ravna raised an eyebrow. “The Choir?”
Godsgift was watching; it seemed amused: “Who but the Choir can know
what is truly valuable?”
Tycoon made an irritated noise and snatched the radio out of Ravna’s
hands. “They like shiny things,” he said. “It doesn’t matter. We’ve made
many more of the usual kind. Come along and I’ll show you the
production steps.”
Inside was much cleaner and—to Ravna’s ears—quieter than yesterday’s
factory hall. That was not really a surprise considering this place
produced a form of tech gear, and the power was electric. Tycoon was
full of detailed explanations. This building was the final assembly point for
the radios. More than the making of rain gutters, making the radios
showed that production depended on physical networks of factories,
going from raw materials, to components, to intermediate assembly, to a
factory like this. No doubt each step was plagiarized from Oobii and
Scrupilo, but the networking was a separate design achievement. Though
Tycoon never said so, Ravna guessed that planning those networks was
also his greatest limitation.
“And I have improvement plans,” said Tycoon, “not just for silly things like
gold plating. I’m working on re-creating the design of full radio cloaks.
Consider the use I have made of the single set of cloaks that Nevil, um,
acquired for us. If radio cloaks were common and if we could use them
safely, it would revolutionize my operations!”
Ravna almost laughed at this. You have improvement plans? So Nevil
has not been able to dig up the original design for the cloaks, has he?
They walked some meters further, Ravna silent and Tycoon blathering
on. On the other side of the pack, Jefri was pulling Timor’s wagon. Close
behind came the Ta singleton and, almost as close, Aritarmo and the
godsgift. A gunpack or two drifted around behind them.
“Isn’t it so?” said Tycoon. Oops. His latest bit of bragging had ended with

a question.
“I’m sorry sir, what—?”
“Isn’t it so, that my inventions surpass your own achievements?”
Perhaps it was time to approximate reality: “Sir, you and the Choir have
accomplished miracles of production—”
Tycoon preened.
“—but the basic inventions, those are from the Domain.”
“Nonsense!” Tycoon was all glowering at her. But his heads weren’t
weaving around; this was not the killing rage of their first meeting. After a
moment, some of him looked away. “You are a little bit right. Much of my
success, I owe to Vendacious and his superb espionage service.”
“Thank you, sir, thank you.” That was Vendacious, via Ta. The monster
must think this tour was important, to be listening to every word.
Tycoon gave a gracious wave, where Aritarmo could see. “That said,” he
continued, “when I was whole, I was an inventive genius. Over the last
seven years, I’ve recovered that genius. I have ideas all the time.
Inventions for flying, inventions for swimming beneath the sea. I keep
notebooks full of them. But I am just one pack, and I’ve learned there are
myriad details that must be resolved in order to go from insight to
accomplishment. In fact, that’s what caused the breakup of the first me.
My current success is based on three things: my genius and drive, the
Choir, and the hints and details that Vendacious’ espionage service
provides.”
“From us humans,” said Ravna.
Tycoon shrugged. “From the archives you stole. I doubt if you humans
have ever invented anything for yourselves.”
Jefri was listening with an expression of unguarded surprise. Be cool, Jef!
But no: “Humans have invented some form of every single thing you’ve
made! We did it thousands of years ago! Every civilized race does as
much—and then goes on to do the hard things!”

Tycoon was silent for a moment. “The … hard things?” He seemed more
intrigued than offended.
“There’s always something more, sir,” put in Ravna, and gave Jef a look
that she hoped would shut him down.
“Yes,” said Tycoon. “Spaceships. Starships.”
“Yes, sir.”
“But I’ve had ideas for those, too.” They walked on a few paces, and
perhaps honesty or sanity forced him to say, “Of course, I know those
may take some years more work. Is that what the Johanna-brother
means by ‘hard’ problems?”
Jefri replied, “Of course not.”
“What then?”
Vendacious popped up with the answer: “We’ve talked about this before,
my lord. The sky maggots were trying to become god.”
Tycoon hooted, “Yes! The god thing.” He tilted a glance at Ravna. “That
was our original wedge into human affairs, the religious warfare between
your two factions.”
Vendacious gobbled enthusiastic agreement, then reverted to Samnorsk,
“In fact, their superstitious beliefs are the best argument that they are
fools.”
As usual, the godsgift had been drifting along at the edge of the walkway,
mainly looking down at the assembly line. Now his heads looked up and
he said mildly, “I object to this deprecation of religion. My god is real
enough. If you doubt that, I invite you to take a walk on the factory floor.”
•  •  •
Tycoon mellowed as they proceeded down the production line, and
Ravna managed to avoid any further criticism of his originality. It really

wasn’t difficult; there was so much that could be honestly praised. By the
time they reached the midpoint of the hall, it was raining again. The
sound came as a distant drumming on the metal roof, and even the
skylights were dark, except for occasional lightning. Electric arc lamps
had come on over critical stations on the production line, rather like an
automatic system responding to the environment.
Just as in yesterday’s factory, there was a terrace at the walkway’s
midpoint. Today, Tycoon waved at the others to stay back, and took
Ravna out onto the terrace as if to have a private conversation. She
glanced back at the entourage. Private conversation? Certainly Timor or
Jefri couldn’t hear what she and Tycoon might say—but the rest?
Thunder crashed, and the sound of rain intensified. Okay. If Tycoon
focused his voice properly, the others might not be able to hear his
words.
On the other hand, maybe it didn’t matter: “You know,” he said, “You
could do very well working for me.”
“I’m honored, sir, but I’m not sure I—”
“Oh, I think you understand; I’m really very good at taking the measure of
potential employees. You’ve pointed out weakness in my operation, and
quite frankly, I agree with you.” He paused, as if to let his high praise sink
in. Then: “You know that I’m at the point of an alliance with Nevil
Storherte and the Domain?”
“You 
mentioned 
something 
about 
that, 
yes. 
But 
what 
about
Woodcarver?”
He waved dismissively. “A detail. I’m flying to the Domain in the next day
or two, to make it official. My landing is timed to match the arrival of a
shipment of 1024 radios, a gift demonstrating the power of my operation.
Vendacious assures me that Woodcarver will be impressed by the
implications. Cooperating with Nevil and with me will benefit her
enormously. And for myself—well, finally coming out of the shadows will
be as important as my original entente with Nevil. Now he can provide
me with full and direct access to the archives that came with the starship

Oobii.”
“Ah.” Tycoon mispronounced “entente” but his point was all too clear.
“Yes. And you could benefit immensely from this, as my employee. You
would have protection from Nevil. You would have access to the Oobii
archives. You would have access to Choir production for your own
religious projects—though that would require separate trades with the
Choir. There are two main things that I would ask in return. First, you
would persuade your faction among the two-legs to stop opposing Nevil.
And second, you would, um, hm, you would use Oobii to help me with my
various production problems. As you’ve remarked, I need significant
assistance in translating my inventive genius into deliverable products.
Nevil has been of some help with that, but I’ve come to believe that you
are the master when it comes to the Oobii archives.” He paused, perhaps
to let the flattery sink in. “So, what do you say?”
I could repeat the little speech I made to Jefri—but you’ve probably
already heard that. Outside the factory, the thunder and lightning was
building up to a real storm. Above that, the air would be cold and dry and
thinning into the vacuum of interplanetary space. Somewhere thirty
lightyears beyond that … the Blight was coming their way, the end for this
world and everyone on it, perhaps the end of much more. And today, at
this moment, I am closer to stopping it than ever before.
She brought her attention back to the here and now, to the eightsome
who waited on her reply. “What of Nevil?”
“Nevil stays in overall charge of the two-legs. I will not betray a current
ally to get a new one.” Tycoon bobbed a grin. “Be happy. Vendacious
tells me that Nevil will be as unhappy about this deal as you are.”
Hmm. She looked across the terrace to where Jef stood by Timor. They
were in the shadows, but then the lightning shone stark blue-white across
them all. Both were looking in her direction. Just in front of them, Aritarmo
had spread out, no doubt straining to hear.
She turned back, looked at Tycoon, every one. “I want the Children you
stole.”

“Timor and Geri. Certainly. I’m … I’m sorry about the third human, even
though its death was an accident.” He seemed about say something
more, to offer some excuse perhaps. One thing she was learning about
Tycoon: he could not abide being in the wrong.
“And no more killing,” she said.
“Of course.” But then a startle rippled through the pack. “No more killing
—except to serve justice. Johanna Olsndot murdered my brother. There
must be justice for that, no excuses, no compromise.”
Again, lightning flashed. Ravna waited for the thunder to pass and then
replied in a quiet, hard voice. “Then deal with Vendacious. He is the one
who killed your brother.”
Tycoon hooted softly, but all his eyes were on her now. “You lie, or you
repeat lies. I have years of evidence, and not just from Vendacious. Nevil
Storherte—was he not like a pack lover to Johanna?—he himself reports
Johanna’s confession. I’ve sometimes wondered if that was what turned
him against her. Maybe he does have some respect for pack life.… I
notice your mouth is open, but you aren’t saying anything. Are you
surprised?”
“N-no.” For a moment she thought she was going to throw up all over
Tycoon. Instead, she swallowed hard and said, “What Nevil said is a lie.
What Vendacious says are lies.”
“Ah, so I’m surrounded by liars?” Tycoon gave a shrug. Two of him were
looking back at Jefri and the others. “Do you know where Johanna
Olsndot is now?”
“No,” Ravna replied shortly, which was not a lie since she had only
guesses.
“Well, neither do I. Neither does Vendacious. Neither she nor her friend
Pilgrim—nor their flier—has been seen since the night we abducted you.
I suspect she’s in hiding back in the Domain, protected by Woodcarver.
Vendacious thinks she may be dead, finally crashing that crazy flying
machine. If she is never found, I will never be done with this!” He gave a
little shriek that might have meant despair. “But Vendacious has offered a

solution. He tells me that the Johanna-brother may well know what has
become of the brother-murderer—and that if he does know, a few days of
professional interrogation will retrieve the facts.”
“Don’t you—”
“Vendacious tells me the Johanna-brother would likely survive the
questioning, but he makes no guarantees.” All his eyes swiveled back to
Ravna.
Ravna stepped into the middle of the pack, all but treading on claws to do
so. Now most of Tycoon had to look straight up to see her face. “No more
killing!”
Tycoon swarmed up, forming a packish pyramid that put two of his heads
above Ravna’s eye-level. He leaned forward, all teeth and bad breath,
and rapped a glancing blow to her face. “Make no mistake, human. I will
find Johanna Olsndot. If her brother dies in the process, it would be a
form of justice. A brother for a brother.”

Chapter   35
Two days later, Tycoon’s much-bragged-about expedition to the
Domain was ready to depart. Nothing had changed in the standoff
between Ravna and the eightsome. The good news was that Jefri was
still unharmed and still out of Vendacious’ claws. The bad news … wasn’t
entirely clear yet, and probably depended on what Tycoon planned for
this trip.
Just after sunrise, a rickshaw took them out onto the airfield. The usual
gunpack trotted along behind them. Puddles left by recent rain covered
wide stretches of the concrete, but the top of the sky was clear, the air
wet and still and almost cool. At the north end of the field, two hangars
had opened, and their airships were being dragged out.
They stopped near a rain pool in the middle of nowhere. The gunpack
made no objection when Jefri scrambled down from the rickshaw. After a
moment, Ravna followed, even though the view standing on the ground
must surely be worse than the one from the rickshaw. Jef walked around
the wagon.
Ravna shaded her eyes and stared at the airships for a moment. At this
distance, details were lost, but “This really looks like takeoff
preparations,” she said. “And we’re standing nowhere close.”
Jefri came to stand beside her. “I figure this is just more psychological
warfare. Tycoon won’t leave you behind. He really needs you.”
Ravna didn’t say anything for a moment. Jef could be right. The last four
days had given her some feeling for Tycoon’s bragging and bluffing—and
occasional murderous tantrums. She guessed there would be one more
confrontation before Tycoon flew off, and even success could come in
dark degrees. Which airship would they put Jefri on? And where are—

“Where are Timor and Geri and Amdi and Screwfloss?” said Jefri, as if
reading her mind. “We haven’t seen Timor since you told Tycoon to go to
hell.” Jef had ragged on her mercilessly about that recent confrontation.
At the same time, he had seemed to admire her “lack of restraint” more
than anything she had done in a long time.
They stood for some moments observing the activity around the hangars,
watching for more wagons to appear from the palace and Vendacious’
almost-as-grand annex. The expanse of damp concrete had an eerie,
open silence to it, a kind of vast obeisance to the pyramids beyond.
Pillars of sunlight punched through the eastern clouds, glittering from the
gilded surface of the great pyramid. As the sun rose above the
thunderheads, an avalanche of light spilled across the field, bright and
cheering … and searingly hot once it arrived.
“Tycoon is trying to melt us down,” said Jefri. “We should get back in the
wagon.” There was shade there. Their driver had retreated under some
of it.
“Yes—” Ravna took one more look around. The sunlight had put
everything into sharp contrast. The shallow rain pool she had noticed
earlier was further away than she’d thought. And it wasn’t shallow. “Hei,
Jefri. We’re only about forty meters from one of the cuttlefish ponds.”
She started walking toward it, and after a moment Jefri followed. The
gunpack made a spiky sound of surprise. He trotted around and ahead of
them as if to turn them back—but he kept his gun muzzles down and
seemed more irritated than imperative.
As they reached the pool, Jefri commented, “A wagon just left the palace.
Want to bet that’s Tycoon?”
She looked up. The wagon hardly seemed to be moving at all. Ah, it was
headed here, not across to the hangars. Yes, one last confrontation. She
wasn’t afraid to argue with Tycoon, but she was very afraid of the
consequences of losing the argument. This time, things could not end in
a draw.
She knelt by the pool, hoping she looked unconcerned to whomever

might be watching. Despite the open water, the swarms of bloodsucking
insects were no thicker here than anywhere else. Maybe they didn’t have
a water larval stage. Or maybe … Here and there across the water, there
were flickers of motion, tentacles snapping up through the water’s
surface. So in addition to their other virtues, the cuttlefish liked to eat
insects.
She leaned over the edge of the pool, looking straight down. The
concrete wall was steep; even here, the bottom looked to be a meter or
two under water. There was one of the squidlike critters. And another.
After a few seconds they seemed to swarming below her.
“We seem to be attracting them,” said Jefri.
“Yeah.” She reached her hand into the warm water.
“Hei, careful!” Jef grabbed her arm, holding her back.
“It’s okay. They get along well enough with the Tines.” Besides, she had
a theory she wanted to test.
“But you don’t know what else is in the pond.”
The tiny bodies tumbled around her hand, the huge glossy eyes peering
curiously up through the water at her. She felt tendrils tugging gently on
her fingers. She waggled her hand, lifting the creature up for a better
view. It was a small thing to be intelligent, but—
“Hei, hei, hei!” piped a small voice. All around it other voices chimed. “Hei
human. Hei humans!” The one who had touched her let go. The crowd
darted off, then a moment later was back in even greater numbers.
Dozens of little voices were shouting simple Samnorsk greetings.
Jefri’s grip on her arm loosened and he dropped to his knees beside her.
“So they really do talk! I wonder how they compare to singletons.”
“Oh, I think they’re considerably smarter.” It was still a theory, but—she
glanced across the airfield. The approaching wagon was much nearer,
trailed by another gunpack. She recognized the elaborate ornamentation
on the wagon; this was Tycoon. Maybe it was time to try to use her little
theory.

She and Jefri stood, but remained near the pool. Tycoon’s wagon slowed
and came to a stop by the other wagon. When Ravna and Jefri did not
move, there was some irritated gobbling. After a moment, Tycoon’s driver
brought him over to the cuttlefish pool.
The eightsome came streaming out of the wagon, followed by a radio
singleton—hei, it looked like Zek! Behind him was a more expected
companion, Ritl. She was in her usual fine form, bitching loudly about
something or everything. When Tycoon sent a be quiet in her direction,
Ritl shifted to sporadic muttering. She walked along with Zek for a few
paces—and then seemed to notice the pond. She ran off around it, and
for a time the air was free of her complaints.
Tycoon ambled over to them with the air of a great leader slumming
around without his entourage. Well, I’m just as glad not to see
Vendacious or even Aritarmo, thought Ravna.
“It’s g-going to be a very warm day,” said Tycoon, his Geri voice as
incongruous as ever.
“I’m sure it will be, sir,” replied Ravna.
The eight bobbed a smile. “Not that it matters. This afternoon I will be
flying away. You know, the air is quite cool even a few hundred meters
up. It’s nature’s own air conditioning. I expect I will be quite comfortable.”
“You’re not taking us then?” said Ravna, still trying make it sound like
casual chitchat.
“The passenger list and ship assignment isn’t entirely decided,” he said.
Two of him were staring pointedly at Jefri.
Ravna continued to play along. “Vendacious is going?”
“Of course. In the second airship.” He waved a snout in the direction of
the hangars. “No room for Aritarmo, but we’ll still have the network. I’ll
continue to supervise my worldwide operations.”
“And Ritl?” said Jefri, as if just passing the time of day.
Tycoon made an irritated noise. “Not Ritl. In close quarters, that little
monster—I mean, that remnant of a loyal employee—is too difficult to

deal with.” All his heads turned toward Ravna. “But that’s not the
important question as far as you two are concerned.”
Ravna returned the look as best she could, having only one head. “Of
course. There’s myself and Jefri, but also the Children you stole, Geri
and Timor and—”
“No.” It was flat negation, even if spoken in his high-pitched, little girl
voice. “They will stay here.”
“But—”
“I don’t want them getting in the way. I—” There was a subtle shifting
around within the pack. Ravna could almost imagine that some faction
was embarrassed and desired a bit of frankness. “Timor is a good
worker, as honorable as a pack. He will be safe here. Geri will be safe as
well. Protecting both of them is important to me, even if they are human.
You should know, Vendacious dislikes humans even more than I, and
sometimes I wonder if he realizes how fragile you are. Even I find it hard
to understand what it means to be a truly new mind; it is not a natural
state. Eventually, I promise to return them. In the meantime, they will be
kept far from Vendacious.” He jabbed a snout at Ravna. “My inclination is
to take you with me. The packs we captured with you will go north with
Vendacious. They will provide a good cross check on assertions that you
make.”
“And Jefri?” Ravna asked.
“That depends on you and him. I want to locate Johanna Olsndot. You
two are hiding something; we could hear you all yesterday conspiring in
your dungeon. Confess the truth, and you can both travel on my airship.”
“We have told the truth,” said Jef, “and we weren’t conspiring!” But they
had spent hours trying to decide what to say if it all came to this. Much of
that conversation had been silent spelling and cloaked allusions.
Tycoon’s words rolled on right over Jef’s: “Otherwise—it will be as I told
you two days ago. Jefri will go north with Vendacious.”
“I’m sure I can make the Johanna-brother talk, my lord.” That was

Vendacious’ voice, via Zek.
Ravna glanced at Jefri, saw his impatient look. The result of all their
“conspiring” had been simple: You can’t win if you have nothing to
confess and that fact is not accepted. Okay, you might postpone the
nightmare simply by making a faux confession. Jef would have already
started lying, except that she’d persuaded him to let her make the first
move. There must be some other way. I just need a little more time. As if
all of yesterday hadn’t been enough to find a way out, if one existed. She
turned away from Tycoon and Jefri and Zek, and stared across the pond.
There was something near the middle that she hadn’t noticed before.
Here and there tentacles poked into the air, slowly moving. They weren’t
jabbing at insects. They were larger and more frondlike than the cuttlefish
limbs she had seen. They were hard proof for her theory about the
cuttlefish. She felt a smile come to her lips; in other circumstances it
would have been a joyous shout.
She looked back at Tycoon. She had nothing but the lies she and Jefri
had agreed on, but damned if she was going to say them while she could
still stall. “Out of the whole airfield, you had us brought here. You wanted
us to see this pond, didn’t you? Why?”
An indignant chord came from Zek. That must be Vendacious, impatient
with the change of topic. Tycoon, bless his various parts, was more easily
distracted. He sidled around, some of him tilting a glance at the water.
When he finally spoke, his geekiness seemed ascendant. “I noticed that
you never asked hard questions about the cuttlefish, never said much
about them even when you were alone with the Johanna-brother. I
wondered if you would ever figure out how important they are to my
program.”
Ravna nodded. “I had a theory. Now I think I know much more about the
cuttlefish than you do.”
“Oh really?” Tycoon stepped closer, challenging. He didn’t seem angry,
but she had the feeling that the pack’s enormous ego, both as
businesscritter and inventor, was engaged. “And what is it that you think
you know?”

“The cuttlefish are more than mindless repeaters. They’ve learned your
language and more recently mine. They can speak both sensibly.”
“Yes. So?”
“The cuttlefish were how you originally made contact with the Choir, how
you were able to communicate with the Choir when all packs before had
failed.”
Tycoon emitted a string of clicks, mild applause. “Very good. You are
absolutely right.” He settled down, continued almost chummily. “See Ritl
playing with them?” On the other side of the pond, Ritl was racing back
and forth, gobbling fiercely at the water. Tiny voices answered her. “It
was Remasritlfeer who brought the creatures from the South Seas. It was
my idea to use them here with the Choir. Remasritlfeer tried and failed,
tried and failed. I don’t know how many of the creatures were eaten—
though they don’t really seem to care about their own lives. Finally
Remasritlfeer gave up—but I demanded he go back and try again. And
as usual, my diligence and initiative paid off.” He looked up smugly. “It
was a small start, but we found a few things to trade and were able to
negotiate the first, tiny reservation here.” He waved expansively at the
airfield, the palaces, the factories. “The rest is history.”
“It never puzzled you that something so strange could talk, that it could
have a mind?”
“Um, yes of course. I’m always thinking on deeper meanings. Early on, I
had the theory that perhaps these were a baby form of whales. It’s well
known that whales are smarter than weasels, almost as smart as
singletons—and they swim in pods that may be even more intelligent.”
Over the last ten years, an occasional “whale” carcass had washed
ashore in the Domain. Ravna had overseen the dissection of two of them.
They were like seamals. She’d run simple phylogenetic programs on the
results and concluded that the animals were a distant cousin of the Tines,
one that had never returned to a life on the land. “No way are the
cuttlefish young whales,” she said.
“Grmp. I know that. After a time it became evident that the creatures

eventually lose their intelligence. The few who survive more than a year
root themselves like plants and become mindless egg generators—
making a new generation of cuttlefish. We almost lost the whole
operation here before we figured that out. I sent an expedition back to the
South Seas, found that single atoll where they spawn, uprooted all the
mature egg-layers we could find. You can see the tops of them sticking
out of the water.”
“I saw them.” Now the fronds were a little higher out of the water, and
more of them were turned broadside towards the humans and packs at
the edge of the pool. The sight was so familiar, so welcome … okay,
Pham, so unnerving, too. In the bright sunlight, she could even see the
eyespots on the fronds. Mindless they were, more or less—but evidence
that children of a friend had survived. She walked slowly along the edge
of the pond toward the side that was closest to the forest of fronds. “You
uprooted them? Brought them here? You’re lucky they survived. They
much prefer the surf by the open sea, not this silty, brackish water.”
“What? How would you know?” There was both anger and curiosity in
Tycoon’s words. His sitting members scrambled up and he followed
along behind her.
Jefri’s were wide with unbelieving surprise. “It can’t be, Ravna! The
cuttlefish look completely different. The eyes, the—”
“They’re Rider larvae, Jef. I’d never seen riderlets before, so I wasn’t
sure, but look what they grow up to be.” She waved at the fronds.
Tycoon came out around her. “What can you know? You guess that
because they come from mid-ocean, that’s their ideal. I’ll have you know,
since I brought them to the Fell estuary, their breeding has increased a
hundredfold.”
Vendacious (via Zek, who was following along uncertainly): “My lord,
what is going on?” His speech morphed into plaintive gobbling. Poor
Vendacious, thought Ravna. He had his next round of torture all set up,
and now it’s been delayed. The question was how to turn the diversion
into something more lasting. She was still clueless about that.

All she could do was let the geekiness in her speak to the geekiness in
Tycoon. She looked down at the eight around her and said, “Tell me,
Tycoon, do you have any idea how rare it is that two intelligent races
arise naturally on one world, and coexist there?”
“Of course I do! Vendacious’ spies have told us much about the other
worlds. Multiple intelligent races are common everywhere.”
Ravna shook her head. “That’s on worlds of the Beyond, sir, where there
is fast interstellar travel and decent technology. Down Here—where
evolution runs at biological speeds, in its old bloody way—Down Here
new intelligence does not tolerate competition. If two intelligent races
arise naturally, one competes the other into extinction, usually before
either begins its recorded history.”
“Nonsense!” But he brought himself together, thinking hard with all his
heads close to one another. “So then this is a marvelous bit of good luck,
or—”
“Or your cuttlefish are like us humans, recent arrivals from space. In fact,
these are the children and grandchildren of two of my own shipmates.”
Tycoon dithered. “Implausible, but I don’t see how you would gain from
lying. In any case, what difference does it make? The creatures have no
technology. The adults—the egg-layers—have never spoken. They are
vegetables.” He hooted. “What grand shipmates they must have been.
Did you keep them as ornamental plants? Did you—” He paused, then
gobbled something in Interpack, a question. The two gunpacks
responded in the negative, but then they spread out … watching?
listening?
Ravna wasn’t paying much attention. She looked out at the sessile-stage
Riders, planted forever where the fate named Tycoon had stuck them.
These would be the generation after Greenstalk. Without skrode devices,
not even the do-it-yourself model that served Greenstalk, they would
have almost no ability to form new memories. They’d be innocent, as
nearly mindless as before their race was ever uplifted. But I’m glad your
children survived, Greenstalk.

“What is that sound?”
“Huh?” Ravna looked back from the water, noticed that Tycoon was
spread out along the edge of the pool, an alert listening posture. “I don’t
hear anything,” she said.
Tycoon made an irritated noise “Some of this is pitched where even you
can hear. And it’s getting louder.”
“I hear something,” said Jefri.
“What’s going on?” That was Vendacious, more confused than anyone.
Now Ravna could hear the … buzzing. Such a familiar sound. Such an
impossible sound. She looked across the pond, at the fronds that marked
the immobile adults. Several of those slender blades had risen higher,
just in the last few seconds. Impossible, impossible. But testable. She
gave a little wave and took several quick steps along the edge, almost
bumping into one of Tycoon. The tall fronds turned to follow her motion.
They made a rattling noise against one another, a kind of language of its
own, one that Ravna did not know. That didn’t matter; the buzzing
became recognizable voder speech, though muffled by the water:
“Ravna, oh Ravna!”
“Greenstalk?”
“What’s this? The egg-layers don’t talk!” Tycoon scrambled up all around
her. Some of his paws were on her shoulders, giving him a view down
into the water from as high as possible. On either side of her, the
gunpacks were closing on the edge of the pool. Ravna was only vaguely
aware of Tycoon waving them back.
Maybe there are limits to miracles. Greenstalk said Ravna’s name again,
but now the voder was scaling up and down, the syllables almost
unintelligible. Was that disuse or disrepair? If Tycoon had not noticed the
skrode perhaps it had been cut apart in the transplanting. Ravna reached
out her arms, waving back to her friend.
“The egg-layers can’t move, either!” shrieked Tycoon. The part of him
that was teetering on Ravna’s shoulders lost its balance and tumbled into

the pond. The rest of the pack collapsed around her and dragged the
fallen member out of the water—but all of him and all of Ravna had their
eyes on the tall, blade-like fronds in the pool. Those were moving, a
lurching progress, a meter forward then a half-meter back. As the Rider
rolled closer, Ravna could see its body below the waterline. There was
the swelling of Greenstalk’s stem, the lower fronds. The flat platform of
the skrode was … not gone, but hidden. No wonder Tycoon’s employees
had not seen the machinery. Now Ravna saw smooth composite
surfaces where Greenstalk’s current efforts were cracking away the coral
that had grown upon her during years of sitting alone by her little atoll.
Even before Greenstalk got to the edge of the pool, her fronds had
slipped across Ravna’s arms, seeing and touching all in one motion. “I
have been dreaming long,” buzzing obliterated a word or two as the
voder glitched, “and now I’m not where I started. I always wondered what
became of you.” More buzzing. “I’ve had so many children, and now
children’s children. I’m sorry, Ravna. One thing I do remember is your
kindness and my promise about limiting myself. I’m sorry.”
Ravna smiled. “I remember the promise too. But here you’ve been
invited. By friends.” She waved at Tycoon standing all around her. “And
your children have been protected and lived in greater numbers than you
might ever expect.” Ravna looked at Tycoon. “Isn’t that so, sir?”
Tycoon was all crouched down, every eye on this magical, mobile
apparition. It was the first time he’d seemed intimidated. Two of him
looked up at her. “I’m sorry, what’s the question again?”
“I said that you are a friend, that you’ve invited Greenstalk and her
children to live here in their numbers. Isn’t that correct?”
“I, hmm, never thought of it that way. But then I never thought that this,
hmm…”
“Greenstalk,” Ravna supplied.
“—that Greenstalk was a person to talk to.” His gaze was equally split
between Ravna and Greenstalk. Finally he boomed out with, “Of course!
You state the obvious. I am Greenstalk’s friend. I’m delighted she is here,

doing as she is doing.”
Greenstalk wisped a frond across Tycoon’s nearest head. “Thank you,
sir. I think slowly and dream a lot. My skrode doesn’t make memories
easily, but I and mine will be good servants? citizens?”
“Employees,” Tycoon said firmly.
“I am so glad to see Ravna again. It has been—?”
“Years,” said Ravna. “I couldn’t find you.”
“That time doesn’t matter so much to me. These are friends you are
among now?”
Ravna looked at Tycoon, at Zek who was surely relaying this
conversation back to Vendacious. The truth, right now, could not be
spoken and would not be understood. It would have taken tendays for
Ravna to explain the situation to Greenstalk, repeating and repeating
until the memories sat firm. She turned back to Greenstalk and said,
“Tycoon here is my friend.” She gestured around to the eight.
The voder buzzed. It might have been cheerful laughter if the device
weren’t so old and under water. “Good. Good. I am glad. Sit and repeat it
to me some times.”
Ravna looked to the north, far past Greenstalk’s pond. While they had
been talking, Tycoon’s great airship had been dragged clear of the
hangar. It floated just clear of the ground, tethered by its landing pylon
and dozens of tie-down cables. She glanced at Tycoon. “This will take a
little time,” she said.
Tycoon look around at himself and then back at Greenstalk. Finally he
said, “So Greenstalk, this Ravna Bergsndot is your friend?”
“She is my dearest friend in all the world.”
•  •  •

The Great Tycoon’s expedition to the Domain was delayed by one day.
During much of that time, Ravna and Jefri and Tycoon sat around the
cuttlefish pool—the riderlet pool—and explained that they were going
away for a brief time, but that they would be back, with interesting news
and projects. One day of repetition was probably enough. Greenstalk
would remember, and would cooperate in ways that already seemed to
have Tycoon—both as inventor and businesscritter—vastly intrigued.
At no time did Tycoon state any concessions, even when Ravna spoke to
him alone. But when the two airships finally departed, Jefri and Ravna
were both aboard Tycoon’s airship.

Chapter   36
As a child in the Beyond, Ravna Bergsndot had lumped everything
before spaceflight and automatic computation into an amorphous
romantic haze of “pre-technology.” Ravna’s years among the Tines were
a never-ending discovery of how much the simplest advances could
change one’s life. Tycoon’s airship was such a primitive machine, but
Ravna had walked much of the ground they were now overflying. Land
that had taken tendays of painful effort to traverse now passed below her
in just a few hours. It would have been glorious, except that they spent
the first day and night locked up in that familiar tiny cabin.
On the morning of the second day, their progress slowed. The air was
bumpy, and the shadows in the clouds below were pointing in the wrong
direction. Sometime in the night, Tycoon had changed the ship’s bearing.
In the distance, they could see Vendacious’ craft. It had been behind
them, out of sight for most of yesterday.
The steward foursome came tapping at their door, but not with breakfast.
“This way, this way,” it said. Ravna crawled through the hatch. To her
right, the steward was already a meter or two forward, walking along with
only an occasional look back in her direction. Their gunpack was to
Ravna’s left. Aboard the airship, it carried short-barreled weapons, all the
barrels tucked downwards.
“Beware the guns,” she said back to Jefri.
“Hei, guy,” Jef gave the gunpack a little wave as he came into the
corridor.
Sandwiched between the steward ahead and the gunpack behind, the
humans’ progress was slow. There were hatches at regular intervals
along the corridor: more staterooms. The mantle lamp by each turnout

was lit. Not for the first time, she gave a little prayer: I really hope these
guys also stole the tech to stabilize hydrogen.
The corridor extended the length of the carriage, gently curving along the
belly of the ship. They were heading for the bow. Where else would
Tycoon hold court?
The ship’s passenger carriage did finally come to an end. The
passageway opened onto a cross-corridor that ran the width of the
carriage. There were the usual fifteen-centimeter portholes on either side,
the sunlight trumping the light from the mantle lamps. In the middle of the
open space was a Tinish version of spiral stairs, a fan-like helix of rungs,
quite suitable for Tines ascending single file. The steward pack sent a
member up the steps. Ravna heard it gobbling, announcing the humans’
arrival. After a moment it came scooting back down. “Go up now, please
to go.”
Ravna started up, winding herself around like some comedian in a cross-
habitat comedy, but she didn’t quite get stuck. Finally she climbed out
onto the carpet of the upper level and looked into bright daylight.
Powers. With the most primitive technology, Tycoon had achieved a
visual effect that would have done credit to a designer in the Low
Beyond. This guy is a megalomaniac, but he has an imagination to
match.
Tycoon’s bowpoint audience chamber extended almost ten meters from
port to starboard. Its ceiling followed the dirigible’s hull, curving upward
so that parts of it were high enough for a human to stand upright. No
portholes of dirty glass here. Tycoon hadn’t yet plagiarized the making of
large sheets of clean glass, but he’d used the very best of his tiny
portholes. Hundreds of them. The glass was fitted in a fine metallic mesh
that surrounded the bow side of the room. Not surprisingly, Tycoon was
perched on thrones, giving him the best view. Two of him might be
looking in her direction. The rest were looking outward, into daylight so
bright that they were just stark silhouettes.
She was distracted from awe by Jefri’s unhappy swearing. Jef was

halfway up the stairs, fully wound around the first turn, and just a little too
big to get through.
She reached down, grabbed both Jefri’s hands, and braced her feet on
the far side of the stairwell. She pulled and Jefri pushed, rocking him
upwards a centimeter at a time. With the sound of snapping metal, Jefri
was freed. He sprawled onto the upper deck’s carpet and rolled into a
sitting position.
Someone spoke, with Vendacious’ voice. “Is that the big human tearing
up your stairs? When I told you these humans would wreck whatever
they touch, I didn’t expect such literal proof.”
Someone else gobbled something dismissive. Ravna looked around. Ah,
there was Zek, on a separate perch, draped in his radio cloak. So there
were others listening in, offering advice. Was there anyone else
physically present? Behind her, she noticed a head or two of the
gunpack, sticking up from the stairwell. Wait. There was one more, not a
pack or a Radio Cloak member: It was Ritl. The singleton was sitting in
the sunlight, on the bow side of Tycoon’s thrones. There was something
self-satisfied about her; she had gotten away with something.
Ravna gestured at the singleton. “I thought you were leaving Ritl back in
the Tropics?” she said to Tycoon.
Tycoon made an irritated noise. “Yes. The creature popped out of a
storage cabinet last night. Remasritlfeer was an excellent employee, but
perhaps I’m honoring his memory too much.” He gave his employee’s
remnant a speculative glare. Ritl wriggled insouciantly on her velvet
perch and let loose with chords that sounded sassy even to Ravna.
Tycoon ignored the comments. He waved grandly ahead. “We’re
approaching the Domain.”
From where she was sitting, all Ravna could see was sky. She came to
her knees, and looked down over the edge of the bow windows. She saw
painfully bright snow, patches of shade and dark stone. The glaciers and
peaks of the Icefang Mountains spread out before them. She
remembered the maps, Amdi planning their final run over these

mountains. The valley below led to one of the Domain’s southern border
posts.
“I see you still have some hills to climb,” said Jefri.
Vendacious said via Zek: “Enjoy the delay, humans. Nevil will take you
soon enough.”
Tycoon said something peremptory, and then in Samnorsk: “I will decide
that, not Nevil.”
“Sorry, sir,” said Vendacious. “Of course, Nevil has no authority in this.”
Some of the eight were looking at Jefri. Even against the glare of the day,
you could see that it was not a friendly stare. “We’ll get over these
mountains by tomorrow at latest. The winds can change much faster than
the tides.”
The great Tycoon was silent for a moment. All eight of him resumed their
contemplation of the gleaming snowfields and jagged black rock.
Knowing Tycoon, this was an heroic pose, mainly for their benefit. Maybe
Ritl thought so, too: She emitted some belittling remark. Tycoon laughed
and shrugged it off.
From way aft, the muffled buzz of the engines came slightly louder.
Tycoon’s flight crew—presumably in the airship’s control gondola—was
changing direction again. Ravna wondered what starting a day late would
do to Tycoon’s plans and Nevil’s. And I wonder how often his crews have
been over these mountains? It hadn’t happened before she was
kidnapped; Oobii would have spotted the intruders instantly.
Partway through the long, slow turn, the deck dropped from beneath
Ravna, then bounced back, knocking her across the deck. Jefri grabbed
her under the shoulders, and they managed to ride out about thirty
seconds of turbulence.
The Tines had it easier. They didn’t use tiedowns here, but those perches
had rows of wooden bars, and every paw she could see had its claws
securely wrapped around a grab hold.
Tycoon gobbled something at Zek.

Jefri translated: “He’s talking to Vendacious about the turbulence.”
Zek squawked something back. His radio cloak had slipped sideways,
off-center from his tympana. The poor guy shrugged this way and that,
finally got the cloak on properly. He slowly spoke seven separate sounds;
they sounded like member names. Checking connectivity with the rest of
himself?
Then Vendacious was back on line: “We’re fine, but the air is still bumpy.
Tell the humans that their pack of puppies is feeling a bit under the
weather…” Okay, a threat. Maybe Vendacious thought there were things
she might say that could turn Tycoon.
Tycoon nodded soberly—missing the meaning that Ravna heard. “We
must track back and forth across the front of these mountains. I am sure
there are passes in the air, just like there are mountain passes for
travellers on the ground. The difference is that the air passageways must
be guessed at and they change from hour to hour. I say again, we’ll be
over these mountains in the morning.” He spoke with the assurance of
someone who is never contradicted.
They reversed course twice more, a long slow scan across the Icefangs.
Except for fast and contrary windflows, they found nothing, certainly no
airway over the mountains. Tycoon passed the time by unleashing his
geeky side to pick Ravna’s brains about the “high spaces.”
“I used to wonder about the spaces beyond the sky,” he said, “but it
never brought an ounce of profit and then I expelled that unproductive
part of my imagination. Now I wish I had been more understanding. You
humans give us new insights at the same time you do monstrous things.
Someday we will visit the highest spaces, and not just scrabble over
mountains.”
“Yes, sir,” said Ravna, “the stars are not too high.”
Talking about what that meant got them through another turn. He
regarded her claims about the Zones and speed-of-light limitations as
naive negativism—and he had even less interest when she tried to
explain the Blight.

“No more religious nuttery!” he said. “I want humans of a practical mind,
who are open to new concepts. We could do so much with my ideas, and
your machine skills, and Nevil’s whatever—”
“And without Woodcarver’s interference,” put in Vendacious.
“Yes, of course,” said Tycoon. A head or two looked out at the
mountains. The afternoon shadows were stretching deep across rock and
glaciers. “This is insufferable!” he said. “There will be moonlight tonight,
but I can’t risk as close flying as during the day.”
Ritl gobbled something.
“You be quiet!” Tycoon replied. The eight were not nearly so tolerant of
Ritl as earlier in the day. He jabbed a snout in Zek’s direction. “What are
the consequences of another day’s delay?”
Vendacious replied, but sounding more tentative than usual. “I’m afraid
that Nevil Storherte is rather, um, insistent. He says that he’s set up a
public meeting, and used various intrigues and coercion to persuade
Woodcarver to attend. If we don’t arrive by tomorrow afternoon he’s
afraid there’ll be catastrophe.”
“Damn that two-legs. I should talk to him directly!”
“That might not help, my lord. I think Nevil is being truthful in this. I know
that Woodcarver can be very difficult to get the advantage of.”
“Is it just Woodcarver? Has Johanna surfaced? Or Pilgrim?”
“No, my lord.”
“Keep watch for surprises,” said Tycoon. He was silent for a moment.
“Nevil aside, we need to arrive by afternoon. There’s our sea fleet to
consider. That’s some tonnes of cargo, including 1024 radios, a gift that
will surely impress both the humans and Woodcarver’s supporters. Heh,
after all, it could just as well have been a thousand guns on the backs of
gunpacks. You’re sure the fleet is to arrive by midday?”
“Yes, my lord. Its progress has been very steady. Nevil has been tracking
it, and my own agents have now spotted it too.”

“Right,” Tycoon was nodding emphatically. “One thing I’ve learned about
marketing. You have to have the pitch and the move and product all
coordinated. I—”
Zek interrupted him, but the voice did not belong to Vendacious: “What I
don’t understand, is why we haven’t heard directly from the fleet? They
have radios; we should simply request that they delay landing till it fits the
overall schedule.”
Vendacious replied to the unknown speaker: “It’s true, we haven’t had
direct word. After all, the Choir is more a thing than an ally, and these
rafts are only a small fragment of that. The fleet should never have left as
early as it did, but it had the full merchant cargo on board.”
“Who is Vendacious replying to?” asked Ravna, the words just popping
out. Whoever this was, it spoke pretty good Samnorsk, and sounded
strangely familiar.
Tycoon said, “That’s partly the godsgift you knew in the Domain, relayed
from the south via Zek/Ut/Ta/Fur/Ri. I asked him to replace the usual
Tropical counselor. Even now, he understands the North better than most
of us.”
“Oh!” Jefri looked as surprised as Ravna felt. “I’m glad, I’m glad he made
it home.”
Zek shook himself and gobbled briefly. Then in Samnorsk: “I mostly
survive, not the best talkers. No thanks to you murderous humans. If it
had been Johanna—”
Zek was interrupting himself even before he finished, Tinish chords
overlaying the Samnorsk. Poor Zek twisted this way and that. It seemed
to Ravna as though he was shrinking from invisible blows. After a
moment, Zek recovered and spoke with Vendacious’ voice. “Sorry, we hit
a spot of turbulence here. My lord, I have various suggestions about how
we might accommodate late arrival—but if you intend your two humans to
be present at the landing, I suggest we carry on this conversation in
private.”
There was a back-and-forth between Tycoon and the remote advisors,

entirely in Interpack. At least four of Tycoon was looking out at the sunset
colors that were deepening across the icefields. He gobbled something at
the gunpack and Ravna and Jefri were led down the twisty stairs.
As they crawled along the main corridor toward their cell, Jefri said, “I
wish we were even half as clever as Vendacious says.”
•  •  •
By now, Johanna had been at sea for six tendays. Since the crates of
radios had revealed themselves, it had been a never-ending struggle to
keep the mob away from the devices. Thank goodness, only this primary
raft carried radios. (But why so many? She still hadn’t figured that out.)
She’d persuaded her people to repair the crack in the crate that had split
open, so the only loose radio was the one that had fallen out of it, the one
she still “protected.”
You’d think that fooling a choir would either be impossible or trivial. In
fact, Cheepers’ various associations truly did believe her every word.
They had defended her again and again from the complaints and the little
nips, and in one case from a screeching crowd of the incredulous.
For a time, Johanna had been tempted to throw her own radio overboard:
just wait for a stormy night and hope that no Tines heard her commit the
act. But then she noticed the occasional Tines sniffing around the radio
crates. Such random contrarians were a major source of choir creativity.
When their foolishness didn’t kill them, these fragments discovered things
no one else had imagined. Even if the mob stayed generally loyal,
eventually someone would break into those crates—and the fleet’s radio
silence would fail in a big way.
So she might as well hold on to her own radio. It took some nights of
work, messing around under the blankets, but she’d managed to get the
gadget open and remove the spring on the send switch. She was a little

unclear about mechanical springs, what would make them push or pull
when you pushed and pulled on them—so she took out all the little
moving parts. She bet herself that even the mob’s distributed intellect
couldn’t make that button work.
After that, she put the radio out in the sun. The mob immediately swirled
around her, amazingly quiet. They were listening intently as only Tines
can. After a time, they relaxed a bit. Cheepers reported to her, “It sounds
like this.” He played back his amplified interpretation, a clicking and
stuttering that sounded like random impulsive noise to Johanna. Maybe
Nevil had given up on his robot query—but then loud noises came from
the box, interrupting Cheepers’ rendition. It was that Tinish voice, asking
for a reply again and again. The mob went wild trying to answer—with no
success, of course.
The transmission ceased after about five minutes. An hour later, the
voice loop ran again, and again an hour after that. Vendacious and Nevil
were just poking them desultorily on the off chance that comms could be
established. Johanna smiled to herself. That wasn’t going to happen, but
she would find some use for this gadget.
•  •  •
They were past Woodcarver’s old downcoast capital. To the east,
Johanna recognized the cliffs and glacier-reamed valleys of the Domain,
of … of home. The west was no longer open sea. The islands of the
North began as little mounds. Gradually, she saw more and more of
them, half-drowned mountains that turned this part of the sea into a
network of straits. Very soon they would run into Hidden Island or
Cliffside and things would get really exciting. One way or another she
wouldn’t have to drink fetid water and choose between smoked meat and
raw fish anymore.
One afternoon, multiboats flying Domain colors came into view. The

vessels cruised along on the mainland side of her path, but at a distance,
never coming close. When Johanna first saw them, she almost raced to
the top of her raft to wave and shout. Surely Nevil and Vendacious hadn’t
taken over Woodcarver’s Domain? Surely?
In fact, she didn’t know, so she hunkered down, out of sight.
The next day, her radio was still receiving hourly pokes from Nevil or
Vendacious, but now there were more interesting sounds. Many of these
were lost in noise, but Cheepers and his friends repeated them to her
clearly. They were human voices; they belonged to Nevil’s special pals.
The conversations were fragmented and one-sided. Nevil was using
Oobii or the orbiter to reach individual radios—as well as sense their
weak emissions. Johanna couldn’t hear Nevil except when he aimed his
silly automatic message at her, but as the rafts got closer to the heart of
the Domain, she was in range of the nearest of the other senders:
“Yeah, Nevil, there’s ten barges, just where you said. What?… How
should I know? They look like junk to me.” That was Tami Ansndot, as
argumentative as ever. “One is only halfsize, like it got split down the
middle.… So why don’t you have Scrupilo fly over in that gasbag of his,
and take a look?”
Scrupilo lives! Consequences, consequences …
There was a pause, probably for Nevil’s explanation of why Scrupilo
couldn’t help. Johanna bit her lip, trying to imagine just what lie was being
peddled, and what it covered up. If I hadn’t busted my send button, I’d
give Tami a piece of my mind! It was bad enough that Tam was a Denier,
but worse that she believed the rest of Nevil’s lies.
She recognized all the voices, Deniers with some forest experience. Nevil
must think these rafts were important. So where was her brother’s voice?
Throughout the afternoon, Johanna continued to listen. Here and there,
she picked up useful information. Her flotilla was indeed important;
somehow it would reveal Woodcarver as the “obstructionist fool we’ve
always suspected”—that tidbit from some idiot obviously parroting Nevil’s
current propaganda. A great treaty was about to be consummated; these

ten rafts would seal the bargain and show the way to the new future.
Yeah, but only if they can get control of my mobs!
At one point Tami said something like, “Too bad about Jo and Ravna. If
only they could be here, to see how wrong they were about everything.”
Johanna was just as glad she couldn’t hear the choked up, false grief
coming back from Nevil.
“The last raft just passed my position.” This was a new voice. It sounded
like Bili Yngva. No, it was his little brother. Merto probably knew all about
the murders and betrayal, but he wasn’t quite as smooth as Bili or Nevil.
Right now, he sounded furtive. “No. Like I told you, there’s no sign of a
human on any of the boats. Why don’t you just send someone out to
check on them before they land?… Yeah, yeah. Well after today, that’s
all gonna change.”

Chapter   37
For the next twenty hours, Tycoon’s airship buzzed back and forth,
knocking at the door of the mountain airs, hoping to finally find the winds
asleep or at least flowing in the proper direction. Somewhere before
dawn, Tycoon’s strategy paid off—or maybe Nevil figured out how to
coordinate the orbiter’s observations with Oobii’s programs, and guided
the airships to the right mountain pass at the right time.
In any case, by late the next morning both airships had made it over the
top of the Icefangs and were descending. On this side of the mountains,
the day was a gloom of towering clouds, clouds above and below. The
chop and the buffeting was not clear air turbulence, but the violence of
thundering squalls.
When the ship’s steward came for Ravna and Jefri, the light was still as
dim as dawn—except for an occasional flash of lightning. The three of
them, with gunpack trailing behind, made their way along the main
corridor, which was swaying far more than usual.
Ravna wriggled up the spiral stairs into Tycoon’s bow chamber. Behind
her, Jefri climbed up almost as easily. Apparently, Tycoon had removed
some of the railings, widening the stairway just enough for him.
As usual, the view from the bow was spectacular, but there were no sun-
dazzled glaciers this morning. Tycoon’s airship was scudding through the
bottoms of clouds. From moment to moment there was zero visibility—
then they would see forested valleys, and meadows that were impossibly
green beneath deep clouds and rain.
Most of Tycoon was gazing out at the sky, as usual pretending to ignore
such trivia as the arrival of his prisoners. Stretching off to port and
starboard were ranked kilometer after kilometer of clouds. Lightning

played between them and the ground below. Every few seconds, the bow
was lit by a blinding flash, and thunder shook the grid of the windshield.
Tycoon flinched, then turned a head or two back in the direction of Ravna
and Jefri. “There is nothing to be alarmed about. Vendacious tells me that
we’ll come out of the storm area in less than half an hour.”
Fifteen minutes of very bumpy ride followed this assurance. Tycoon and
his various remote advisors exchanged occasional remarks, but it was all
Interpack gobble. There were at least four packs talking through Zek.
One of them was clearly Vendacious; another seemed to be the godsgift
who had been on the network the day before. She heard Nevil’s name
popping up now and then.
“Tycoon is sounding less and less pleased with Nevil’s advice,” Jefri
whispered to her. Two of Tycoon looked up at Jef’s words, but otherwise
the pack continued to ignore them.
Twenty minutes passed. They had lost sight of the ground. Who knew
what mountain height lurked just ahead? Then, in the space of ten
seconds, the ship broke through the edge of the squall line, emerging
from bright cliffs of cloud. They were well within the Domain, past the
hardscrabble farms of cotters and peasants, approaching the highest of
the rich steadings. The land was splotched with snow and muddy
waterfalls.
Spring in Woodcarver’s Domain was tendays of mud and rain. The land
was not yet to the middle of that season, but this was one of those
miracle days, when the storms briefly called truce and endless blue skies
appeared, a tantalizing promise of summer. Mixed with the mud and
avalanches and melting snow, the first flowers had turned meadows all
the colors a human could see (including tints to which the poor Tines
were blind). They could see all the way to the horizon through air swept
clean by wind and rain. The horizon was a glistening line of silver, broken
here and there by dark serrations.
The conversation between Tycoon and his various advisors had become
mutually congratulatory. Tycoon gave a hoot of triumph and spoke to
Ravna: “You’re surprised? Vendacious has radio contact with Nevil, so

we have all the power of the starship in our support. No more do we have
to skulk around, afraid that you would see us.”
“Indeed,” said Vendacious. “Your decision to abduct Ravna Bergsndot
was a brilliant move, my lord. It has revolutionized our operations.”
“Ah, but it was truly your suggestion, Vendacious.” He made a noses-up
gesture that was probably lost in Zek’s relaying. “I commend you.”
Jefri rolled his eyes, but remained blessedly silent as Vendacious
continued with his analysis: “Things are sunny and clear in all ways now.
We’re on schedule for the alliance show we’ve planned with Nevil. The
raft fleet is even now at Hidden Island.”
“There’s still the Ravna faction to deal with,” said Tycoon.
“Trust me, sir. You recall our discussions about that. We and Nevil must
simply make the proper show of our landing. And frankly, Ravna never
had any powerful support, bar the absent Johanna and Pilgrim.
Woodcarver has discovered her own reasons for disliking Ravna. If we
play things aright, Woodcarver will have to accommodate the new order
of things.”
“There will still be Flenser,” said Tycoon. “He may be our ally, and I have
always admired him, but I fear he plays his own game.”
“Yes,” Vendacious’ voice trailed off in a thoughtful hiss. “Flenser will
always be a problem…” For once, sincerity?
Through this, Jefri had been staring intently at the horizon. “There! I can
see Whale Island!” Ravna followed his gesture. They were just two tiny
blips on the edge the world, but she recognized the Notch and the Arch.
“Just follow right half a degree,” Jef continued, “and that should be
Starship Hill.” The directions were clear, but all she could see were
blotches of green and gray and white.
“Finally, a proper use for humans!” said Tycoon. “As lookouts … if only
they could be believed.” Tycoon dragged up two long brass cylinders and
set them in pintle mounts beside his outermost members. Four other
members, still facing Ravna, were gazing down at a map set before their

thrones. The two on the ends swept the telescopes back and forth in
concert. “Vendacious! I see the starship! It’s exactly the magical glassy
green you’ve always said.” He admired his telescopic view a few seconds
more, then seemed to worry about further dangers: “Here’s where we bet
we’ve found a human we can trust.” One of Tycoon was still looking at
Ravna. “It’s true, is it not, that your ship could destroy us in an instant,
even from this range?”
“… Yes,” said Ravna. If Nevil had installed the amplifier stage, the beam
gun could burn anything in its line of sight. And in Ravna’s absence,
Nevil’s sysadmin authority was probably sufficient to use it as a weapon.
Vendacious had his own ideas about the matter: “That’s still another
reason to keep Ravna captive. Yes, Nevil is another two-legs, but he
really needs us.”
•  •  •
Johanna’s flotilla was strung out along the direction of their course. As
usual, her raft had ended up at the front. She looked back along the line
of rafts. They stretched in a slight arc across two thousand meters. Hah.
Blur your vision enough and they might be great sea battleships of the
sort that Ravna had shown them back when she still thought Nyjoran
history might mean something to Straumers. (Johanna, of course, had
cherished the Princess tales since she was five.)
Altogether, there were over two thousand Tines aboard the flotilla. Once
ashore, they would be the kind of trouble Tropical shipwrecks always
were—times ten. Or maybe not. These Tines were her allies.
Now they were past the south tip of Whale Island. Ahead was Hidden
Island to the west and the inland cliffs to the east. Her sailors had
become quite the experts. Right now, all that skill seemed to be
dedicated to a perfect “threading of the needle,” heading right up the

middle of the Straits.
The radio abruptly came to life. This was not the barely audible mumbling
of overheard conversations. This was Tinish sent directly from Oobii or
the orbiter: “Come land. Come land east. East.” Even Johanna could
understood the chords.
“There there there!” Cheepers’ association shouted in Samnorsk, pointing
toward the inland cliffs, but north of the piers at Cliffside. She saw a
narrow beach, backed by rugged talus. Humans were standing there,
waving colored squares of cloth.
Around Johanna, heads perked up. Tines shifted about on the various
masts. Members on the deck were pulling at the multiple tillers. The
whole craft began drifting toward the makeshift semaphores.
Merto again: “Hei, that worked! They’re turning toward Rock Harbor.”
To the south of Johanna’s raft, the rest of the formation was drifting right,
all toward the narrow strip of Rock Harbor. She squinted for a better view.
She hadn’t been down to Rock Harbor since the year two shipwreck,
before the Tropical Embassy. The place was not so deadly anymore. The
worst of the jaggedness had silted over and Woodcarver’s packs had
used gunpowder to break the most dangerous rocks—but despite the
name, it was not a proper harbor.
Ah! Of course. That was the reason Nevil wanted the Tropicals to land
there. Innocent observers could be kept at a distance. The Tropicals and
their freight would be completely in the control of whoever Nevil and
Vendacious had positioned there.
And I will be caught before anyone knows I’m alive.
The rocky shore was less than a thousand meters away. Johanna froze
for a second or two. Then she grabbed the radio and raced up the
familiar path to the top of the cargo jumble, the base of the tallest mast.
After all these tendays, she had that worked out so the move was safe
and fast—and every step was shielded from the orbiter’s lookdown.
She would not be shielded from observers on the shore.

“Hei, hei, listen up!” Johanna’s human voice was such a frail thing, but it
was all she had. The Tines were looking toward Rock Harbor, or pulling
on the sails to guide them eastwards. Johanna jumped up and down,
waving. Cheepers and scattered heads turned in her direction; attention
spread across the choir.
“Go west. Go west!” She pointed first at Rock Harbor and then swept her
arm around the horizon, jabbing at Hidden Island. It was her best
imitation of the sort of gesturing that a singleton might do with its snout
and neck. “Go west!”, and she repeated the gesture.
The radio at her feet remained silent. Her luck was holding; she hadn’t
been noticed by Nevil’s observers.
The mob milled around for a moment. They’d gotten clear directions from
the radio. This was the sort of situation where they might not play ball
with her. By now she could even recognize their rippling dance as
factions of mind dithered. But the radio remained silent, and more and
more little clots of awareness were appearing in the mob, amplifying
Johanna’s point.
Then she saw coordinated unanimity. All around the raft, jaws tightened
on ropes and tillers, pulling just so, responding to the result to correct and
maintain the maneuver. The raft turned again, ponderously drifting
westward across the straits.
That got noticed. The radio came alive with two or three human voices:
“Holy shit, the lead raft has lost control!” At Rock Harbor the hand-waved
semaphores bounced frantically. Johanna could hear faint shouting
coming from the shore, human voices all. Nevil might be consorting with
Vendacious, but he remained a racist.
“What’s gone wrong?” That was Tami’s voice. “Powers! Nevil, there’s
something strange on that lead barge. There’s a bundle of rags flapping
around by the main mast.” Thanks for the fashion comment, Tam.
Johanna couldn’t resist: she stopped cheerleading the Choir long enough
to face the cliffs. She could only guess where Tami was watching from,
but she gave the rocks a cheery wave.

Tami’s voice came immediately. “Uk! It’s alive, Nevil! There’s a human on
that barge. It’s Johanna!… What do you mean? I know what I see. We
can finally learn why she did all those terrible things.” Then the radio went
silent. Jo waved again, but that didn’t provoke anything more from Tami.
Johanna looked to the south. The raft behind them was copying her
maneuver—and the one behind that! Maybe all ten would elude the cozy
rendezvous Nevil had planned.
Johanna’s raft was less than fifteen hundred meters from the piers of the
South End of Hidden Island. She could see packs and humans there, a
crowd forming.
The radio at her feet came to life, gobbling Tinish. Here and there, Tinish
heads came up. The chords sounded like the same demand as before.
Hah! It was exactly the same, just a recording of the demand that the raft
head for Rock Harbor. That was dumb, Nevil. The exact repeat would be
recognized as unmindful. Sure enough, not more than a dozen of her
mob paid any attention. And when the message repeated again, there
was no visible response whatsoever.
There were more people on the South End piers than a minute before. It
was still too far away for her to recognize anyone, but there were lots of
Children and lots of Tines. She stood tall and waved. Even if they didn’t
have binoculars, they would know that some human was out here among
the Tropicals.
Johanna watched the perspective change as the raft slid toward Hidden
Island. The tide was with them, and as the channel narrowed, the winds
had picked up. The raft must be making three meters per second. All the
rafts were following her. To the east, the semaphores by Rock Harbor
waved desperately, ignored by all. Ahead of her on the mainland side,
she could see the funicular’s steep path up the cliffs. Springtime
waterfalls made little rainbows all along the sheer drop and at the top she
could see the tiny silhouettes of houses against the sky. Starship Hill and
Newcastle town were out of sight, but in another few seconds she would
see Oobii.
And vice versa!

Even as she crouched low, Johanna caught a glimpse of iridescent
green, one of Oobii’s ultradrive spines. She grabbed the radio and slid
down the west side of the cargo pile, out of sight of the cliffs and the
starship. She and Jef were the only Children who had seen the beam gun
used for much more than warming residential hot-water tanks. Johanna
remembered what it could do with its amplifier stage, the slagged metal,
the exploded bodies. Surely, Nevil wouldn’t dare commit murder in front
of so many witnesses? Maybe not. But how much had those on the
South End really seen? He might chance it. He would make some slick,
crazy explanation. After all, didn’t Tami say that the “something on the
barge” looked like a rag mannikin?
So play it safe, stay out of sight till she was ashore and everyone could
see the undeniable truth. She tossed her radio into the water, just
another red herring for Nevil.
Johanna crawled around to the west side of the raft, taking little detours
to keep out of the way of Tines who were busily managing the sheets and
rudders. The mob’s attention was fixed on making a safe landing; the fact
that she was no longer cheerleading had become irrelevant. She crawled
onto one of the forward containers that she’d torn open in the search for
heavy cloaks. From here, she had a clear view of the approaching piers.
There was Ben Larsndot! He was part of the mixed crowd, humans
providing just enough buffering that the packs didn’t get in each other’s
space. They were armed with all manner of ad hoc weapons: timbers,
cargo hooks, staves. Johanna waved as broadly as she could. “Hei, Ben!
All of you. These Tines are friendly. Don’t hurt them.”
Her voice was lost in the sea breeze. She felt a snout poking at her
shoulder. It was Cheepers. Johanna swept her hand across his
shoulders. “Say what I just said, okay?”
A second later, her voice boomed across the water, the same words she
had shouted the moment before. Other Tines on the raft picked up on it.
The chant grew louder. She stuck her fingers in her ears to blunt the pain
of it. The chant was mercifully brief, but as they swept closer, the echo of
her voice came back from the inland cliffs. Denying her arrival had just

gotten a lot harder!
She didn’t say anything more. Her ears couldn’t take the reshouting.
Instead she crawled forward along the “deck” of freight containers.
They were thirty meters from the pier. This close to shore normal packs
would bring down the sails and use ground lines and mooring poles to
ease the raft to a soft stop. The mob wasn’t into that. They were used to
the crushable middens along the River Fell. The sails stayed up, but her
crew was doing miracles with the breeze, slowing the craft as they slid
closer and closer. Ashore, packs and humans were backing away,
shouting at the mob to drop their sails.
Johanna looked up and down the pier. She’d have no trouble getting off,
and there were plenty of humans around. Once ashore, Nevil would have
to kill lots of others to get at her. But he just might do even that.
Somehow she had to get off the pier and hidden in town.
How about going under the pier just ahead of the oncoming crash? This
was getting crazier and crazier, but.… She looked into the shaded
spaces below the pier. Maybe.
“Cheepers!”
Cheepers and several others moved closer. “You stay here. You all stay
on the raft, okay? Everyone is friends here.”
Then Johanna slipped down from the level of the top freight boxes, down
below the line of sight of those on the pier. No one was going to see
exactly where she was headed. Surely no one would think she was crazy
enough to … she dove headfirst from under the overhang of cargo,
aiming for a gap in the timber strutwork of the pier.
Numbing agony. She floated back to the surface, all but paralyzed by the
cold. This was springtime in the arctic. As she sank back down, scarcely
able to wiggle, Johanna had a very clear recollection of when all the
Children had been young and Ravna and Pilgrim had lectured them on
how quickly humans could die swimming in this water.
She forced her arms out, bumped into something solid. A diagonal

timber. She hit another one with her foot, pushed herself up, grabbing at
a horizontal beam. For a moment she just hung there, out of the water
from her thighs up. Her legs were numb, and she was too weak to climb
anywhere hand over hand. She bent her head against her arm, wiping
hair out of her eyes. The barnacled strutwork was a zigzag pattern all
around her. She had no place to stand and no way to move down the pier
toward solid ground. Her grip slipped a centimeter or two. Where were
the walkways!
Yeah, there were walkways, and just now the nearest one was a meter to
her left—flooded by the rising tide. She swung herself from side to side.
Her good fortune was to lose her grip at just the right instant. She
splashed down on hands and knees—onto something solid and flat. The
walkway was under only ten centimeters of water.
As Johanna struggled to her feet, her raft slid into the pier. The mob had
slowed it down to under a meter per second, but the raft was so massive
that that didn’t matter. Wood against wood, the front edge of the
strutwork creaked and then snapped apart.
She staggered along the walkway, holding onto the struts for balance.
The raft had finally come to rest. The pier was still shaking, but the twist
and tilt had stopped short of collapsing the entire structure. She heard
shouts and even a few cheers from the Children. She picked up her
pace. Shore was somewhere in the shadowed timbers ahead. Jefri and
Amdi used to play on these piers; she’d had to come down here and
apprehend them. There would be stairs at the far end of the pier, a
covered passageway into the warehouses. What then? Maybe she
should stay hidden for a few days until she could figure out what was
going on, contact Woodcarver, Scrupilo, Jefri—if Jef had come to his
senses.
As she stumbled along, she heard human and packs running the length
of the pier. There were shouts, some in Samnorsk, but too loud to be
human. “Johanna! Where are you?” … “You say she dove into the
water?”

“So where is she now?”
She reached the stairs and discovered an unexpected challenge.
Normally, you took Tinish stairs three at time, but now Johanna had to lift
her numbed legs with her hands, and carefully watch that she set her
nerveless feet down. It was like climbing on stilts. Fortunately, the stairs
were only member-wide, so she could lean against the walls as she lifted
first one foot and then the other.
She shrugged off the last of her icy cloaks. Sometime really really soon
she needed to get dry and warm. For a few moments she forgot
everything else as she negotiated the last few steps.
Then she was at the top, in a covered passage. She saw a dirty glass
window mounted in an external door. She got close and looked back—
just to see how everybody was doing, she told herself. Never mind that
she was too weak to do much else.
Nowadays Scrupilo’s glassworks could turn out clear glass by the square
meter. This little window was from the early years; for Johanna’s
purposes, it was good enough. She could see humans and packs
clustered around the raft. The second and third rafts were pulling in
behind it. When the entire fleet arrived, the South End harbor would look
like that jumble on the River Fell.
She could step outside and wave to the kids on the pier. She’d still be out
of Oobii’s sight. The hell with further paranoia. As she reached for the
door handle, she noticed several Tropicals climbing onto the pier,
approaching the Children. They had recovered the radio!
No!
The side blast from the beam gun sent shards of glass ripping past her
face. The shuddering wall bounced her off her feet. She rolled to her
knees, her ears ringing with the thunder. No need for a door or a window
now. In places the wood panels had been blown away from the wall
studs. Thirty meters down the pier a cloud of steam was rising from a
hole punched through the pier itself.
As Johanna struggled to her feet she tried to wipe the blood from her

face, but the stuff kept dribbling. There were survivors, lots of wounded.
She tottered a step or two toward the open pier. I should help! Yeah, and
give crazy Nevil reason to shoot again.
She turned the other way and staggered up the passage, into the
warehouse.

Chapter   38
Vendacious’ airship was slightly smaller than Tycoon’s. Tycoon could
believe that he was the star of this operation. Inside, of course … that
was a different story. Tycoon did not come here; Vendacious could do as
he pleased. Tycoon had staterooms and crew quarters. Vendacious had
room for cargo and cages and weapons. Crew could sleep at their posts.
Tycoon had his command deck high in the bow, unbalancing his ship and
isolating him from his servants. Vendacious ruled from his ship’s control
gondola with just enough quilting so the crew didn’t interfere with his
thinking. Instant discipline could be exercised. None of those silly
speaking tubes for Vendacious. He often thought that Tycoon’s command
deck was what the eight imagined of human automation. Though Tycoon
would have fiercely denied it, he was a slavish admirer of almost all
things human. That was just one more reason to keep humans and
Tycoon from getting friendly.
“M’lord, the Pack of Packs is pulling away from us.” This news came from
Vendacious’ ship’s captain, the sound focused so that only the nearest
member of Vendacious could hear.
“Very good,” Vendacious replied. As he’d directed, his airship was
lagging behind, keeping relatively close to the ground. Vendacious was
watching with binocular telescopes, following as Tycoon flew blissfully on
into the jaws of the mantises. Vendacious really didn’t want to follow, but
soon he would have to expose himself to those same jaws.
He suppressed his trembling fear and concentrated on the audio from Ut.
The singleton had its own perch, well away from the crew. Ut’s purpose
in life had been very simple for some years now. He wore his prison
around his shoulders, the radio cloak glistening black with hints of gold.
Ut should be happy, though. He was treated better than most crew.

Tycoon bragged endlessly about the Radio Cloaks network. In fact, it was
Vendacious who had persuaded Nevil to supply the cloaks. It was
Vendacious who had winnowed hundreds of singletons to find the few
who could wear the cloaks and still survive. It was Vendacious who
controlled the network. All eight lived in proper fear of him. Vendacious
had trained them to speak only along the paths he directed, when he
directed. And he was just as careful to keep them from ever getting all
their heads together. Now they were his ears across the empire: Earlier
this day, he had spoken via the Ut/Ta/Fur/Il relay to Aritarmo down on the
Tropical Reservation. An hour later he talked via Ut/For/Fyr to
Dekutomon, on the mainland south of Hidden Island. Now he was simply
listening via Ut/Zek as Tycoon used the network to make final
preparations for the landing on Starship Hill.
Tycoon’s various pronouncements and directions were mainly directed at
his crew. Vendacious paid a small amount of attention to that; mainly he
was interested in any trouble the Ravna maggot might stir up. Abruptly,
he realized that Tycoon was talking to him: “Where in hell are you,
Vendacious? My lookouts have lost sight of you.”
Damn you, I’m not being a perfect target in the sky. But aloud,
Vendacious said, “Sorry, my lord, sorry. We’ve had a bit of mechanical
trouble, unable to make much altitude.” In fact, mountain walls loomed on
either side of their path, thousands of feet of rock between his precious
members and the maggots’ beam gun.
“Are you going to crash then?” said Tycoon. “I’ve told you to be more
careful about repairs. It’s stupid to have your own maintenance crews.”
“Not to worry, sir. My people have a solution. You’ll be seeing us soon.”
Vendacious glanced at the dataset display in front of him. The position
map showed that he was running out of mountains to hide behind. He
must soon decide between trusting Nevil Storherte and dropping out of
the game.
“Very good then!” Their conversation was in Interpack and thus free of
maggoty smart remarks. “Another thing,” continued Tycoon. “I need to
talk to Nevil directly. There’s final planning—”

“I believe I’ve covered everything, my lord.” Vendacious did his best to be
the middlepack in all contacts between Tycoon and humans, even—and
especially—Nevil Storherte. Fortunately, Storherte really didn’t like to talk
to packs. Keeping Tycoon from chatting with Nevil had been much easier
than keeping the eightsome from talking to the various surviving
prisoners.
Not today: “I’m sure you’ve done your best, Vendacious, but now you’re
lagging and I’m less than an hour from landing. I want to ask Nevil some
questions about just who is present, and the current status of the likes of
Woodcarver and Flenser and—” Tycoon’s voice scaled up a couple of
octaves as he spoke.
“Yes, my lord! Have you used your ordinary radio? Nevil is listening all
the time via the orbiter. Now—”
“I’ve tried that! The two-legs is not replying.”
“I’ll look into it, my lord. I have agents on the ground.” And other means of
communication.
“I need results on this quickly, Vendacious. As you know, the Ravna two-
legs has been saying many harsh things about Nevil. Now is not the time
to have her proven right.”
“I agree, sir. I’ll get back to you directly.” In this, he was utterly sincere.
“I’ll be out of communication with you for a few minutes.”
“I understand. Use the cloaks network and whatever else is needed.”
Vendacious waved at Ut to stop relaying with Tycoon’s ship. Damnation.
Too many problems were suddenly piling up. He should prepare for one
of those problems immediately. Vendacious glanced down from his
platforms, “Cargomaster!”
“Sir!”
“Bring up our special prisoners. The four goes in its usual cage, but I
want Amdiranifani shackled around the bow hatch.”
The Cargomaster cowered slightly, then it hustled immediately off for the
prison cells. The pack had been through this procedure before.

As for the more difficult problems: How to get in touch with Nevil? Was
that maggot playing some new game? He thought he had Nevil figured
out, but the prospect of facing the beam gun made him want to rethink
everything. Dekutomon is close to Oobii. I could have him take Fyr and
visit the maggot. If there’d been more time, that would’ve been the best
approach; let Nevil know that Vendacious’ agents were everywhere, even
on Nevil’s doorstep.
Or, he could use an ordinary radio to try to reach Nevil through his
heavenly high orbiter. No, that was grovelling, and it hadn’t worked for
Tycoon. Besides, ordinary radio might be overheard by the radio sets
Tycoon had aboard Pack of Packs.
Vendacious glanced at his dataset. Right now it was displaying a map of
his ground track, the ridges on either side of his ship marked with
altitudes and proximity. In the early years of his exile, this dataset—
Oliphaunt, Johanna had called it—had been his most precious
possession, the true reason why he was so esteemed by Tycoon. Since
his alliance with Nevil, the dataset had not been nearly so important an
informational tool, and at the same time he had come to worry about the
possibility that Nevil might be able to corrupt the device. Nevertheless,
like his commset, the dataset was galactic technology, putting him on a
par with the maggots. And now that Nevil controlled the starship, it was
by far the most secret communication path between them.
Vendacious reached out a couple of noses and tapped the sequence of
instructions that should change Oliphaunt from an atlas to a commset.
Johanna had always been more adept at this than he, but then she had
used it all her human life; Vendacious took considerable pride in how
adept he had become with the device. There, he was in commset mode
and … He noticed the red light blinking at the bottom of the display. That
was the special signal he had installed; Nevil was trying to call him!
Vendacious startled into action. The parts of him nearest Ut pulled on
cords that dropped heavy quilts on every side of the singleton’s perch. He
checked it above and below. Now, properly pitched sounds would not be
heard by Ut. Not that the Radio pack would dare to deliberately betray

Vendacious, but stretched out as it was across the continent, the
individual parts were scarcely more than relays. Vendacious had used
that fact to snoop across hundreds of leagues—but he lived in horror that
his innermost secrets might inadvertently be revealed to others.
He tapped a snout at the dataset, initiating a call, but with the sounds
shifted way up into frequencies so high that they came close to interfering
with thought. Such squeaking would never penetrate the quilts that
surrounded Ut; no chance that dear Tycoon would be bothered by
inadvertent relays.
“Vendacious here,” he said, squeaking soft and super-high himself.
Oliphaunt dataset had Tinishly good hearing. Somewhere inside, it
transformed Vendacious’ voice into digital (whatever that was) and
boosted it out to Nevil. Vendacious’ heads hurt when he tried to imagine
all the things the dataset did automatically. Somewhere out among the
stars, there were things worth fearing.
Some seconds passed. Was he going to have to leave a message?
Then Nevil’s upshifted voice came from the dataset: “Why in hell are you
flying so low, man?”
Vendacious suppressed a snarl. Aloud, he made a noncommittal human
noise.
“Never mind,” the maggot continued. “We’ve got a problem. You told me
Johanna was out of the picture.”
“Of course. Torn to pieces.” But suddenly Vendacious had a very bad
feeling.
“She was on your frigging fleet!”
“But I saw her die. You were listening yourself.”
“Well, I just saw her alive through trusted video. Now we know why we
haven’t had contact with the rafts. Powers on High, Vendacious! How
could you?”
Vendacious’ jaws snapped. If the maggot had been physically present,
he would have lost his one and only throat. “You think I arranged this

complication?” he said.
“I, no.” Nevil’s voice was choppy, as if he were trotting or climbing stairs;
humans were such simple animals that they couldn’t disguise that sort of
thing. “Look, things are a bit dicey here. If we bring this off, Woodcarver
will be so discredited that she won’t dare grab power. My sisters and
brothers will be safe. We can make something of this miserable exile—
with your help of course. You can have all this damn world when we are
done with it, but—”
Vendacious’ spies often reported that Nevil was wonderfully persuasive
with his fellow larvae. That was very difficult to believe. The maggot had
never sounded like anything but a crude manipulator to Vendacious.
In a way, that was comforting. Vendacious let Nevil rattle on for a
moment more. When the maggot came to a natural pause, Vendacious
had something reasonable and constructive to say: “All agreed, of
course. The question is, what should we do about this unpleasant
surprise?”
“Well, I’ve already done what was necessary. That’s one reason I’m so
pissed.” Nevil explained how he had blasted Johanna and a crowd of
maggots into superheated steam. “The beam killed six of my brothers
and sisters. We Children count, Vendacious! I need every one of them to
work with me.” He was silent for a moment.
Was he inviting a reply? Vendacious couldn’t think of anything non-
sarcastic; finally, he responded, “So this has damaged your credibility.”
Nevil gave a sour laugh. “I’m not an idiot. Used this way, beam gun
targets just explode. You know, like a bomb. I’ve made a big deal of the
terrorist factions within the Tropicals—it’s what today’s ‘peace treaty’
meeting is all about. So the story is, Tinish dissidents on the barge fleet
tried to sabotage Tycoon’s generous gift. There are rough edges, but I
can make it work. If anything, this will strengthen our current position—
but that’s not the point!”
“Indeed not,” said Vendacious. “So you actually saw Johanna die?”
“Ah…” the human had the grace to acknowledge the irony. “Okay, not

exactly. It looked like the guys on the pier were walking someone toward
shore. And the instant I fired, Oobii lost contact with that broken radio
we’d been tracking.”
“That sounds even less certain than what I managed in the Tropics.”
Vendacious had hated Johanna Olsndot for so long. In a very real sense,
she was responsible for the debacle of ten years ago. Tycoon might be
surprised to learn that Vendacious hated Johanna even more than
Tycoon did—and for much better reason. “Nevil, I think our problem may
be more serious than explaining a little gunfire. At least we should plan
for the possibility that Johanna is still out there, actively seeking allies.”
Nevil was silent for a moment. It sounded like he had just moved out of
doors or turned up one of his mechanical sound-dampers. Then:
“Yeah … Bili made pretty much the same point. He thinks we should
switch over to my backup plan.”
Vendacious shrugged angrily and put a certain bluff irritation into his
voice: “Nonsense. That’s defeatism.” Without Ravna’s technical support,
and now with Woodcarver’s active opposition, Nevil’s position in the
Domain had become steadily more difficult. In some ways that was good;
it made the maggot easier to manipulate. Unfortunately, it also meant he
had increasing interest in his “backup plan.” That scheme might make
sense in the long run—for Nevil—but it would render him almost useless
to Vendacious.
“Nevil, I, um, beg you to stick with our grand plan. Let’s think on other
options we can exercise if problems arise.”
“Okay, suppose Tycoon lands and behaves even more the fool than
usual. Suppose he insists that Bergsndot and Jo’s little brother
accompany him on stage, in front of all the Children. And then—”
“Yes, that would be bad, but—”
Nevil’s voice rode over his words: “—and then suppose Johanna has
miraculously survived and teamed up with Woodcarver? She could
upstage us all—and I can’t kill everybody!”
Vendacious gave a derisive hoot. “Johanna couldn’t speak a single

syllable before Tycoon would rip her throat out.” Nevil simply didn’t
understand Tycoon’s hatred for that particular two-legs.
“Worst case, Vendacious, I’m talking worst case. I know the Ravna bitch
is an idiot; she couldn’t convince a friendly audience that the sun is going
to rise tomorrow. And Jefri Olsndot is just a follower. But they’ve had
several days to chat up your idiot, right?”
Vendacious ground his teeth as he replied, “I’ve been following that; I’m
in control of the situation.”
“You’re betting a lot on that assessment, my friend. What are we going to
do if Tycoon gets turned?”
Vendacious didn’t have to think too hard on that. “Ultimately, Tycoon is
simply a tool, a very very valuable tool. If he ever figures out the full truth
of things, then he must be immediately destroyed.… Um.” And what
would that mean in the present situation? “If you and I coordinate on
this … we could cover all the possibilities. If I determine that Tycoon has
gone bad, I will immediately tell you. So if your ‘worst case’ materializes
—”
“Then I would fry them both?… Okay. I could say I was trying to protect
Johanna but that Oobii glitched. The weapons Down Here are so crude I
might be able to make that story work.”
“Fine. But remember, killing Tycoon is truly a last resort. We need him
more than I think you know. Even if Johanna pops out in front of him,
don’t just kill Tycoon. I’m confident he will quickly destroy her, but I’ll
signal you otherwise.”
“Ah. So you’re going to come out of hiding then?”
Sigh. “Indeed. I’ll circle overhead in honor of this historic meeting of our
races.”
They briefly chatted about details, and Vendacious mentioned Tycoon’s
demand to speak with Nevil.
“Yeah, I noticed he was pinging me.” Nevil was silent for a moment.
There were human-sounding voices in the background. Nevil continued:

“I don’t want to talk to that shithead now. I’ve got to get on stage myself.
What does he want to talk about anyway?”
“I think he wants some kind of last-minute reassurance about the
situation with Woodcarver and Flenser.”
“The idiot! There is no last-minute reassurance; that’s why getting this
meeting right is so important. Okay. I’ll talk to him when I get to the stage
area.” And then Nevil signed off. At least that was what the symbol on the
dataset’s display indicated. As far as Vendacious could tell, the dataset
did not covertly transmit to the two-legs. Given that Oliphaunt was
Johanna’s toy and it had never been in Nevil’s hands, Vendacious was
inclined to think it was not corrupted by him. With the two-legs’ gadgets,
you never knew for sure. When Vendacious did things Nevil must not
know, he locked the dataset away and used the Radio Cloak network. He
had ten years of evidence that the starship could not snoop on
mindsounds.
Speaking of which, he should talk to Tycoon to claim credit for Nevil’s
upcoming call—
The thought was interrupted by whistling cries of anticipated pain. The
Cargomaster dragged Amdiranifani into the space below Vendacious,
then fastened the pack’s neck collars to the garrote stands that ringed the
bow hatch. As the Cargomaster left the area to bring in the other
prisoner, Vendacious leaned down a head to inspect Amdiranifani. The
eight heard him and shrank back.
Vendacious smiled. Intelligent victims were always entertaining. They
thought they could outwit their torturer—and after you broke them, their
own imagination became your best ally. Without a doubt, Amdiranifani
was the most brilliant victim Vendacious had ever had. This eightsome
had come a long way down. In the first day or two, it had actually tried to
suborn crew and radio with covert speech, echoing threads of sound that
evaded Vendacious’ hearing. The arrogance of the eight, to think it could
bring off such a scheme. Vendacious had let Amdiranifani hope for three
full days. Apprehension had been sweet, the punishment tuned to the
victim: Vendacious had gouged out two of Amdiranifani’s eyes. Just two,

just eyes—and then he had called on his victim to imagine how much
worse the punishment could be. For this pack, with its imagination, the
effect was as devastating as cracking half its tympana, or killing a
member outright. And the mild punishment left so much more for
Vendacious to work with.…
Amdiranifani was making little squeaking noises, fighting within himself
for the courage to speak.
Vendacious raised the tip of one nose, a gesture that normally preceded
harsh punishment during interrogation. Amdiranifani froze into terrified
silence.
“Ah, my dear Amdiranifani. So sorry for the poor view you have down
there. Don’t worry, you may yet hear some interesting things. Here’s
something very important: Think quietly. Remain speech silent, except
where I give you leave to speak.” He raised a second nose, also a signal
he had used during interrogations, when an absolute order was given.
There was nothing this creature could say that would make any
difference, but Vendacious wanted any screams of pain that leaked
across the radio net to be under his own control. “If you disobey—well, I
think you know where you’re standing.” Vendacious gestured at the bow
hatch in the middle of Amdiranifani. “Take that as your suspended
sentence. I would just as soon have you be seven or six or even five. It
would be a pleasure to throw some of you to the winds, and I could tell
Tycoon you were trying to escape and overreached yourself. You have
no doubt of me, do you?”
Here 
and 
there, 
Amdiranifani’s 
heads 
dipped 
in 
trembling
acknowledgment. Just last night, Vendacious had thrown one of his own
crew’s members out that hatch—and made sure that Amdiranifani had
witnessed the discipline. Whether dealing with a single member or a
whole pack, Vendacious always enjoyed such punishment. Usually the
victim was a prisoner, but killing an occasional malingering bit of crew did
wonders to encourage good performance from the rest.
Cargomaster was bringing in the foursome, all that was left of my lord
Steel. This prisoner was not so manageable. It was enraged beyond fear,

and not very intelligent—ordinarily not an entertaining combination. This
remnant of Steel had become steadily more killing crazy as the days
passed, perhaps recalling its old hatreds. Its insanity exploded whenever
it came within ear-or eyeshot of Amdiranifani. The four bounced off the
walls of its cage, searching for some way out, shrieking murder at the
eightsome. Remnant Steel and Amdiranifani’s own imagination kept
Amdiranifani forever at the edge of collapse.
If only I had this strong a hold on the humans with Tycoon. Vendacious
eyed Amdiranifani speculatively. Avoiding Nevil’s “worst case” might
come down to whether maggots Jefri and Ravna would keep silent if the
alternative was to see pieces of their dear friend raining from the sky.
•  •  •
Now Ravna could see Newcastle town and Oobii. Both Tycoon (with
his telescopes) and Jefri claimed there were crowds on the heather
southeast of town.
“I have them in sight, too,” came Vendacious’ voice. His airship was
rapidly catching up. “That’s where the great meeting is to be, my lord.
Nevil has constructed a stage there and cleared a landing field, just as
we agreed.”
“And he’ll call the moment he arrives?” said Tycoon.
“Yes, my lord, direct to your ordinary radio. Do you have—”
“Hello? Hello?” That was Nevil’s voice, coming from an analog radio by
Tycoon’s thrones. In the background there were human voices, and the
sound of whipping wind.
Tycoon leaned toward the radio box and said, “Greetings, Lord Nevil.”
The portentous words sounded incongruous in his frightened little girl
voice.

“Yes. Well … Greetings to you, too.” Nevil’s voice clipped in and out. She
heard snippets of confident-sounding advice he was giving to someone
near him. Ah. Nevil must be wearing the single remaining HUD, using it
to maintain two conversation streams. “Okay, I’m back. Everybody can
see your airships now. They’re waving. I’m about to go up on stage, give
everybody a pep talk. Woodcarver is already up there, but she’s
cooperating. Too many other people really want this alliance. Everything
is under control and per our previous discussions.” Ravna almost smiled.
She had never heard Nevil Storherte sound, well, frazzled. “So, um, are
you ready for our meeting, sir?”
“We are on schedule as well,” said Tycoon, “but I have several
questions.”
“Yes, sir?”
“First, are you hiding Johanna Olsndot?” The whole pack was watching
Ravna and Jefri.
“What? No!” Nevil’s voice clipped out for a second. “Why in heaven’s
name would you ask me that? Haven’t I—”
“You’ve been very helpful on this issue in the past. I thank you for that.”
Tycoon was still watching Ravna and Jef. “But at the same time I know
you were—mutually promised? sex-involved?—with Johanna. Even
humans must have some forms of loyalty, so I wanted to ask.”
“Mister, I assure you that after what Johanna did, I have no loyalty
towards her!”
“Very well then. I just wanted to ask.”
“Are your other questions as interesting?”
“You can be the judge of that,” said Tycoon, and proceeded into the fine
points of who would be seated where onstage, and where Woodcarver
might have security packs, and how they were armed. Vendacious would
circle overhead while Lord Tycoon was on the ground. Finally, Tycoon
said, “This all sounds very good, my lord Nevil. Thank you. I will see you
on the ground in a few minutes.”

“Yes, sir,” said Nevil, “I look forward to making our alliance official.” He
was sounding something like his normal diplomatic self. “Ah, one other
thing, my lord Tycoon. For best effect, I recommend that you not speak
with your human voice. Use Tinish. More dignified, don’t you think?”
Tycoon cocked his heads. “My use of your language is poor?”
“Not at all!” protested Nevil. In fact, Tycoon spoke better Samnorsk than
most Starship Hill packs. Nevil must be worried about the Geri voice; that
by itself would betray Nevil’s lies. “It’s just that … um … speaking Tinish
will seem so much more dignified. More powerful, too.”
Vendacious put in, “I’ll be happy to translate, anonymously of course.”
Tycoon admired himself for a moment. “Yes … I see your point. Very
well.”
“Excellent. I must go onstage now. Talk to you in person soon.”
After a moment, the little analog radio emitted background static; no one
was transmitting to it. Two of Tycoon picked up the device and a third
head punched a button in the side; even the static ceased.
Tycoon set down the device and looked around the command deck. “Of
course, he’s lying about Johanna.”
“Huh?” said Jefri. Vendacious gobbled similar surprise, and some kind of
question.
“Yes, Vendacious. Well you might ask.” Tycoon’s stare returned to Ravna
and Jefri. “You see, since we’ve had specimens, I have become a great
student of human nature. In fact, understanding them is not that difficult;
they are such simple creatures, with such simple motivations. While I was
talking to Nevil, I was watching these two here. Both realized that Nevil is
lying.” He spoke with the confidence of a real expert—or a revenge-
obsessed nutcase.
“See?” He waved at Jefri. “The Johanna-brother is speechless. I have
found him out yet again. And you, Ravna. Can you honestly say that
Nevil was telling the truth?”
How would I know? I’m not sure I’ve ever heard Nevil telling the truth.

Hope and fear chased around in her head, and she was as silent as Jefri.
Vendacious was not so shy. “My lord, I would never have guessed, but
it … it could be so. These next few hours, I will watch for signs of other
lies.”
•  •  •
They were about ten kilometers from Starship Hill. Ravna had flown
over this area often enough—both with Pilgrim, and in recent times on
Scrupilo’s little airboat. Below were the merged farms of the Margrum
River Valley. To the west, the edge of the sea cliffs was obvious now.
Just on this side of the edge, the town houses stood along the Queen’s
Road. Newcastle town sprawled to the north, climbing right up to the
marble dome of the castle itself.
Tycoon’s attention was spread across several tasks, talking on the
speaking tubes with his pilots, watching ahead, occasionally chatting with
his advisors. Vendacious claimed to have Amdi on his ship’s command
deck, and had persuaded him to cooperate in providing information. “I’ll
trust the pack for nothing critical of course,” said Vendacious, “but he’s
lived near Starship Hill all his life. And he knows that lying will be strictly
punished.”
“I don’t know,” Tycoon replied, even as he continued to talk to his own
crew via speaking tubes. “I wouldn’t trust a prisoner’s word at a moment
like this.”
“Ah, but I also have agents on the ground.”
“Dekutomon?”
“He’s the most important, my lord. He’s near the landing spot and he is
with the radio cloak Fyr.”
“Good! I had wondered what you did with Fyr! So Nevil can’t hear what

Dekutomon is telling us?”
“Indeed, my lord.”
Tycoon gobbled something that meant oops, and made some hasty
correction to what he was saying to his crew of pilots. In Samnorsk he
said, “Very good, Vendacious. Now I should concentrate on this landing.”
Tycoon looked mainly forward, with two of himself on the binoculars.
Apparently he intended to manage the landing directly, using the
speaking tubes to specify every smallest detail to the real crew. It was
typical Tycoon foolishness.
Mercifully, Vendacious and the other various advisors were silent for a
time. There was just Zek, every fifteen seconds or so, calling out range
information in precise Samnorsk units:
“Altitude 750 meters, range to touchdown 3300 meters.”
“Altitude 735 meters, range to touchdown 3150 meters.”
“Altitude 720 meters, range to touchdown 3005 meters.”
None of Tycoon looked around, but he made an approving sound. “Very
good, Vendacious! Your ranging information is making this much easier.”
Ravna had seen no evidence that Tycoon’s operation had any location
technology beyond the natural sonar Tines were born with. Where were
those numbers coming from?
Jefri gave her a little nudge and nodded in the direction of Zek. The
singleton was looking back at them. It turned, stared for a moment at the
landscape ahead—
“Altitude 705 meters, range to touchdown 2850 meters.”
Then its eyes were back on Ravna and Jefri. The creature was all but
quivering with tension, as if to will them to understand something more
than the numbers. What was behind those eyes? The two airships must
be less than a kilometer apart, so Zek and Ut were essentially together.
Dekutomon’s Fyr was probably closer than it had ever been before. That
meant that Mr. Radio was at least a threesome. There were likely two
others fairly close, one that had been used for long-range relay to Fyr

and one at the head of the chain to the Tropics. Right now the radio pack
could easily be a fully-connected fivesome, perhaps even smarter than
the night it had linked them with Amdi.
Maybe such a pack couldn’t run a full Man-in-the-Middle, but all it had to
do was not relay all it heard from here. If it was willing to risk its life.…
She glanced at Jefri. He was as pale as he could be, stricken. He gave
her a nod, understanding.
Meantime, Zek still looked at them, intent. The creature had made a
brave offer. Okay. Ravna nodded at him, and quietly asked something
that might be innocuous even if it were relayed to listeners up and down
Mr. Radio’s network: “How many are you?”
“I’m between five and eight,” Radio replied. “depending on sky bounce
reception. We must be quick.”
Tycoon was preoccupied with his speaking tubes and binoculars, but now
one of him glanced up, curious at the strange conversation. He gobbled a
query wrapped around the Tinish for “Vendacious.”
Zek shrank back on his perch, but his reply was Samnorsk: “Not
Vendacious at the moment, sir. This is myself, Radio.”
Another head came up. “So you’re really all of one mind? Remarkable.
What does Vendacious think of this?”
Zek cringed a bit lower. “Vendacious doesn’t know, sir. I’m not relaying
this conversation.”
Tycoon made a surprised noise. He angled some heads at the speaking
tubes and emitted a single chord that meant “carry on.” Then all his
attention returned to Zek: “Why not?”
“I … I’m his victim, sir. I beg you to keep this conversation secret.”
Tycoon shrugged. “Perhaps. So you must be passing lies on to
Vendacious then?”
“No! I used your voice, but only to elaborate on what you said, that you
need to concentrate on your landing.”

“And the numbers you were saying to me? They are lies too?”
“No, they come from combining the view from my Ut and Zek and Fyr.
Just as I began the deception, I lost part of myself, and was afraid to say
anything to you at all. Amdiranifani thought—”
“Ah. Amdiranifani.” Tycoon nodded. “So he’s been operating right under
Vendacious’ snouts. Amazing.”
Zek’s voiced gained a little confidence. “Yes, sir. I couldn’t do this without
him and the crazy soundpaths he dances around the control gondola.
When my radio mind weakens, he makes suggestions.”
Half of Tycoon was looking at Jef and Ravna now. The pack’s whole
aspect was a ferocious smile. “I understand. Amdiranifani is even more
remarkable than Vendacious claims. He has made a puppet out of my
radio network.”
“No, please! I am not a puppet—”
Tycoon voice rolled over the protest: “Just listen to this, Amdiranifani!” He
grabbed up his voice-band radio and waved it at Zek. The two airships
were so close that this device would surely work.
“No, no, no. Please don’t betray me—” Zek’s Samnorsk dissolved into
Tinish, and then not even that. A bubbling noise emerged from the
singleton’s mouth, a sound that Ravna had never heard from Tines
before.
Jefri was on his feet, shouting. Behind him, the gunpack had surged out
of the stairwell.
And they were both trumped by the squall of outrage that came from the
other side of the chamber: Ritl bounced off her perch, blathering as loud
as she had when Ravna first met her. She ran across the deck to
Tycoon’s thrones, shrieking at him one and all. Then she danced
sideways till she was standing in front of Zek. She turned, snapping
belligerently.
Tycoon waved the gunpack back. Then he shifted position slightly and
focused a roar down upon Ritl. This level of sound was a weapon. The

singleton was knocked off her feet. Even outside of the focus, the noise
was a spike of pain in Ravna’s ears.
Ritl lay on her back, twitching. Finally she rolled over and belly-crawled
back toward her perch, Tycoon’s gaze following her centimeter by
centimeter. When she was under the partial cover of the perch, she
emitted a defiant little squawk.
Tycoon stared at Ritt for a long moment. Then he put down the analog
radio and said to Zek, “Have your say.”
Zek didn’t reply immediately. He looked dazed, maybe by the splash of
Tycoon’s roar, maybe by the terror of the moment before. “Thank you,
sir,” The creature hesitated. “There will be interruptions. I wasn’t able to
entirely disguise—” Abruptly he was gobbling Interpack, some kind of
question.
Tycoon answered in Samnorsk, “Give me a moment, Vendacious! This
landing is tricky.” He gestured for Zek to relay his words.
And Vendacious replied, “Indeed, my lord! Sorry for interrupting!”
In fact, it looked to Ravna as though the Pack of Packs crew was doing
just fine without any micro-managing from Tycoon. The ship wasn’t more
than a thousand meters from touchdown. Ahead was familiar ground,
Murder Meadows. It was the nearest open ground to the city. Today the
heather was festive with crowds and banners.
But Tycoon continued, “In fact, we may still be too high. I’m going to
circle the landing area and try again. It will give me more time to be sure
of the ground.”
“As you say, my lord.” Then Vendacious’ voice brightened. “I imagine the
maneuver will impress Woodcarver’s subjects.”
“Follow me, then.” Tycoon didn’t say anything for a moment, but he was
watching Zek.
“I’ve resumed faking the relay, sir,” Mr. Radio Cloaks said.
“Good. We’ll have few minutes to chat then.” Tycoon looked almost
gleeful; the geeky side of him must find this deception fascinating. He

said something into a speaking tube. Almost immediately the engines
buzzed louder. The airship turned and they could see Newcastle town
spread out below them.
Tycoon sobered and he gave Zek a sharp look. “Well? You have your
time. Speak!”
Zek sat a little straighter: “Thank you sir. I’ve rarely been a person, and
never for very long. But at this moment, I am eight. Vendacious can’t
keep his secrets from me, not all of them. He is the king of lies, sir, and
the king of death. He kills and kills—his own people!”
“So? Overthrow him.”
“You don’t know much about killing, do you, sir? If you kill often enough,
and cleverly enough, you can build a palace of terror. Someday it may
fall, but just the thought of that is enough to be murdered for.”
“Until Amdiranifani came along?”
Zek gave a one-headed nod. “Until Amdiranifani and the good radio
conditions that my parts have been wishing for the last tenday. A word
from you, sir, just a word of hope. It could make the difference. It could
bring Vendacious down.”
Tycoon made a disbelieving sound. “I know Vendacious treats his
prisoners harshly, sometimes his employees too. I’ve curbed the worst
excesses. And his spies gets results. He gets results. Can you gainsay
that?”
“Yes!” But now Zek seemed to lose track of the conversation. His eyes
became unfocused. “Sorry. I’m down to three. A moment—”
Murder Meadows slid beneath the airship. Now they could see
downslope to Hidden Island and beyond, but the real spectacle was
Oobii. They would be flying along the starship’s length. Oobii’s drive
spines drooped around her and the ones underneath were crushed, but
the ship still gleamed greenfly bright. Even packs who didn’t know what
that ship had been were overcome by its beauty. Ravna noticed that
Tycoon’s members were all staring at the ship, almost as distracted as

Zek, but for different reasons.
Mr. Radio resumed, “Vendacious murdered gobble and gobble”—these
were names Ravna didn’t recognize—“when they gained too much favor
with you. He murdered the human, Edvi Verring, ran him into the Choir
land, then told you that he died of the bloat.”
Tycoon turned a head back to Zek and commented, “Vendacious offered
to let us see the remains.”
“A ploy, sir. Recall, he made the offer to Ravna and Timor. He’s
convinced Timor that Edvi might still live. Vendacious uses hostages for
everything. Even when the hostages are dead, he still uses them.”
“That’s far-fetched. I could have asked to see the remains.”
Mr. Radio replied abruptly: “You could have, but you didn’t. Even if you
had, Vendacious would have had some explanation you would accept. In
the year that I can remember, your gullibility has shown no bounds.” He
hesitated and Zek shrank back from his standing posture. “I’m sorry, I’m
sorry.”
Tycoon didn’t react except to raise one snout ironically, “You plead a little
radio interference, do you?”
“No, sir,” the words came softly, “that was from all of me.” Maybe, but Zek
looked confused now. “In the time I have, I don’t know quite what more to
say…” He glanced across at Jefri and then continued, “There is the
murder and the lie that made all the rest possible. Vendacious killed
Scriber Jaqueramaphan. Then he lied to say that Johanna—”
“Yes, yes, you don’t have to repeat that claim.” Tycoon nodded at Jefri. “I
hear your friend Amdiranifani behind these pleadings.” But Tycoon did
not really sound enraged. Most of him was still staring outwards. Oobii
filled the view, its stately curves sweeping past, its drive spines arching
so close you might think to reach out and touch them. There was a kind
of awed distraction in Tycoon’s posture. “Scriber would have loved you
humans,” he said. “He was such an innocent and impractical person.
Before we seperated, I—we—were more creative than any sane
businesspack. We were so successful we couldn’t keep up with all our

ventures. So we decided to become two, one pack to specialize in
practice and the other in farthest imagination. One was to be the steady
businesspack, one the flying imagination. Scriber kept notebooks of his
inventions. I worked to expand our businesses while he created.
“In his notebooks, he had flying machines and tunnelers and submersible
boats. There’s only one problem with going from a notebook idea to a
salable product. Well, no. There are ten thousand thousand problems.
Most of his inventions depended on materials that didn’t exist, on engines
more powerful than any we could make, on precision of manufacture that
he barely had words for. He diverted our company into debacle after
debacle. We had been so beautiful before…” All Tycoon’s heads were
drooping. “In the end, I—the creature of business and common sense—
couldn’t tolerate Scriber’s endless, brilliant failures. I forced him out of the
business. He was agreeable enough. I … think … he understood why we
had come to an end. He cashed out and left for the West.” Tycoon jabbed
a snout at Jef and Ravna. “I know Scriber befriended you people. I know
he was both too clever and too naive to survive the meeting. What did he
discover about you two-legs? Why would this Johanna murder him in
pieces, till all of him was dead?”
Poor Jefri was beyond indignation, perhaps beyond rage. He sat back,
his mouth opening and closing in silent shock. Ravna put her arm across
his shoulders. Let me try, one more time. She looked at Tycoon. “I never
met Scriber Jaqueramaphan,” Ravna said. “But I know him through
Johanna. She loved him. Her greatest shame is that she didn’t respect
him enough. He died because he was trying to protect her, but it was
Vendacious who murdered him. Won’t you even consider that possibility?
Even after an, an employee has risked his life to tell you?”
Tycoon hesitated. “If that really is my employee and not just
Amdiranifani’s speaking tube.… You and I have talked about this before.
I have always taken these matters seriously. I have interviewed
witnesses. Nevil himself—”
Zek interrupted with a long gobble, complaining about something or
other.

Tycoon visibly pulled himself together. Then two of him leaned out from
their thrones, looking almost straight down from the vertex of the bow.
“Yes, Vendacious. I see it.”
There was more gobbling from Zek.
“Oh?” said Tycoon. “Woodcarver thinks that, does she? Well you tell
Nevil to tell her that—” and then he was speaking Interpack, too.
Ravna glanced at Jefri. He gave his head a little shake, but kept silent. A
moment later, she saw what was under discussion. There was a third
aircraft, below and ahead of them. It was Scrupilo’s little airboat, the
original Eyes Above. The boat was flying in its own circle over the field.
As the Pack of Packs continued on its course, the two craft came closer,
but now the airboat was turning away, heading over the Inland Straits,
perhaps to Scrupilo’s labs on Hidden Island. She glimpsed a pack in the
gondola; it flipped a member impudently at them. I’ll bet that’s Scrupilo
himself. She could imagine him and Woodcarver desperately trying to put
the brakes on Nevil’s “Alliance for Peace.”
Zek was making genial laughing noises. Then he spoke in Samnorsk,
with Vendacious’ voice. “Woodcarver’s balloon has run away, my lord.
One little threat from Nevil was all it took.”
“Indeed,” said Tycoon, though he watched the departing airboat with only
a single pair of eyes. The rest of him was looking ahead. “In less than
half a turn we’ll be back in landing position, Vendacious.”
“We are still tracking directly behind you, my lord. We’ll continue on our
course as you land. Please keep in touch via the network.”
Tycoon turned a couple of heads to look at Zek. The poor creature had
collapsed on his perch. He looked very tired, past coherent fear. Ravna
guessed that relaying was all he could manage now. More of Tycoon
looked around, glancing at Jefri and Ravna. He cocked his heads as if
indecisive. Would he betray Zek and his peers? But then all he said was,
“Very good. I’ll keep Zek close.”

•  •  •
Airships might look like some flyers of the Beyond, but the only real
similarity was that both could float in the air. Airships were fragile
balloons, slaves to the atmosphere. Landing an airship was an
enormously awkward exercise, at least if you didn’t have reasonable
automation, or trained ground crews.
As they descended upon the meadow, Tycoon had six heads forward,
staring down and forward. This time, he wasn’t bothering his pilot. Every
meter of descent was a balance of ballast and fine maneuver. They were
now so low that most of Newcastle town was above them. Nevil’s open-
air stage was at far end of the field, but dozens of humans and even
more packs were running along below the airship. Ahead were clusters of
younger Children let out of their Academy classes. The colors were
festival cheerful, as if the crowds were welcoming back far explorers.
Suddenly the ship’s engines buzzed louder, and the deck shivered
beneath her. She could see the tiny heather flowers just beyond the bow
window. Still under power, the ship was motionless. Depending on how
much lift gas the pilot had vented, they might be floating like thistledown.
Then the engines died. She heard crunching noises as the airship was
drawn down to the vegetation.
Humans and Tines rolled tie-down weights across the ground just in front
of the bow. She recognized faces. These were people from Scrupilo’s
ground crew. Tycoon watched with nervous twitches.
Zek was relaying assurances in Tinish, presumably from Vendacious
circling above, but Tycoon seemed more interested in what he could see
and what he was hearing via the speaking tubes from his own crew. Now
he hopped down from his thrones and padded past Ravna and Jefri to
the spiral stairs. He was giving orders in all directions, though Ravna
could understand only a little.
Jefri looked surprised by something the pack was saying. “Hei, I think

Tycoon wants us to accompany him.”
Zek got down from his perch and almost tripped on his cloak. Ritl ran to
him and made encouraging noises. Zek didn’t seem especially
frightened; he rearranged his cloak and walked over to Ravna and Jefri.
When he spoke, it was Vendacious: “Ah, the humans. What to do with
you? M’lord Tycoon says it’s safe to take you outside, that your presence
will disarm the likes of Woodcarver.”
The gunpack had two heads stuck up from the stairwell. It waggled a
snout in Zek’s direction, evidently telling him to get a move on. Zek
started toward the stairs, but he seemed to be getting conflicting orders.
He stopped to relay one more piece of advice from Vendacious: “I hope
my lord Tycoon is right in this—but keep in mind that I am watching from
above. I will use Amdiranifani to assure that you do not make trouble.”
Then he followed the gunpack down the stairs.

Chapter   39
That afternoon, Johanna Olsndot discovered some true friends. The
surprise and the life-saving miracle was that they were exactly everyone
she met. Within ten minutes of Nevil’s attack on the pier, she was in the
Larsndots’ apartment above the tailor shop on Wee Alley. Ben Larsndot
had found her tottering down back alleys.
“I was just at the front of the crowd. I saw you peeping out of the
stormwalk and then the world blew up.” He was half-carrying her. “Did
those Tropicals bring a bomb ashore?”
“No. It was … beam gun.” She could barely gasp the words that should
have been screamed.
Even so, Ben stopped in surprise. “But—even Nevil wouldn’t do
something like that!”
“But it’s the truth,” she said. This conversation was the story of Nevil’s
life.
Ben didn’t say too much after that, but she sensed his rage. When they
got to the apartment, he stayed just long enough to tell his wife what had
happened, and then he departed to go back to the pier. Wenda went
tight-lipped when she heard the story, but she let him go. She looked at
Johanna, “Ben has to help out. On the other hand, I’m the one with
political savvy in the family.”
Johanna was lying limply on a sofa, under a nice warm cloak. She was
vaguely aware of Wenda, Jr., and Sika hovering about. They didn’t seem
frightened, just generally awed by all the sudden activity. “Political savvy
is what I need. I want to get the word out about what’s really happened—
without any more innocents getting killed.”

•  •  •
Wenda gave her clean clothes, warm and good for hiking. Over the
next two hours, Johanna learned what the tailor family could really do.
Indeed, the Larsndots had spent these years going native. Wenda and
her kids knew the backstreets of the South End. They were merely being
properly paranoid, not using the telephone system, but not worrying
about automatic surveillance. The kids, especially Wenda, Jr., seemed to
know just where Deniers might be looking, and more than once took
Johanna on little detours to avoid revealing encounters. “We play these
games every day now,” said Wenda, Sr. “We don’t like Deniers down
here on the South End. Since you disappeared and Ravna was
kidnapped, things have been…”
Johanna was still limping, but she had no trouble keeping up with the
three. “Jefri. What about him and Amdi?”
Wenda, Sr., looked away. “Both gone. The same night Ravna was
grabbed. We … we don’t know about them, Jo. You know those two had
dealings with Nevil and Gannon Jorkenrud. Gannon’s gone too.”
They were walking in deep shadow now, down a narrow alley between
Tinish-style half-frame buildings. These had been built since the Children
landed—most of the South End dated from then, but the style was
medieval. Out of the shadows, ahead and behind, a couple of packs
materialized. Johanna recognized Benky ahead and Wretchly behind.
Jo faltered. Benky was Woodcarver’s most reliable lieutenant, but—“Hei,
Wretchly is—”
Wenda nodded, waved at her to keep walking.
From behind, Wretchly’s voice wafted forward. “Heh, yup. Now that
Screwfloss is gone, I’m Flenser’s number-one flunky and hatchetman.”
There was quiet giggling from Junior and Sika. Junior slipped forward to
be with Benky. Sika dropped back and walked among the Wretchly
foursome. They took several sharp turns, skirting the Ferryside market

and heading downslope. Around them was the faint scent of garbage.
Now Sika wanted her mother to carry her. The timber-frame dwellings
gave way to stone slab buildings, two and three stories tall. Here and
there, packs crossed their path, but Jo didn’t see any humans. In fact, the
market sounds were sparse. Maybe that was no surprise.
After one last turn, the alley opened out onto a view of the ferry docks.
They were just a meter or two above the water. The Straits was a flat
silver line across their view. Ordinarily, there would be a ferry or two in
the moorage. Another ferry might be out in the Straits, and a couple more
would be parked on the mainland side. Today, not a single ferry was
pulled up on the Hidden Island side. Jo looked across the water at
Cliffside, just a couple thousand meters away. She counted five ferries
there.
Benky settled one of himself beside her. “That’s where everybody went.
Most all are up on Starship Hill where Nevil’s gonna bring us all peace.”
Benky was a fluent Samnorsk speaker. He did sarcasm very well.
“But if we can get you up there, maybe we’ll have a chance against his
lies.” That was Wretchly, crouched around the Larsndots on Johanna’s
left.
Jo looked back and forth at the two. “Woodcarver and Flenser are allies
now?”
Benky nodded, but the gesture was also a ripple of suspicion. “That’s the
theory.”
Wretchly was more emphatic: “Of course we’re allies! Always have been,
even if your Queen Woodcarver never trusted us.”
Benky emitted a sniffing noise. “You’re also allied with Tycoon and
Vendacious.”
“Falsely so, but yes. And where would you be now, Benky, without all the
inside information we’ve supplied?”
It was Flenser’s justly famous slippery nature. Johanna gave Benky a
look: “Has Woodcarver decided to trust Flenser?”

Benky rolled his heads in a kind of embarrassed shrug. “Yeah.
Woodcarver has always been too soft with her misbegotten offspring; it
may be her fatal flaw. I’d oppose this alliance, except that”—he sent a
glance in Wretchly’s direction—“we’re really desperate.” He gave
Johanna all of his gaze. “In any case, there’s no way I can get you safely
across the Straits.”
“Ah.” If Johanna couldn’t get across to the mainland and up the cliffs to
Starship Hill, her great confrontation would have to wait for some other
day. Like after the bad guys had won. She looked back at the Ferryside
docks. There were utility twinhulls tied up there. She could use one of
those to get to the mainland—all out of sight of the beam gun. The ferry
crossing was one of the few blind spots in its coverage; that had always
bothered Ravna Bergsndot.
Wretchly followed her gaze. “Don’t think for a minute that makes you
safe, Johanna.”
“What?” but she guessed what he meant.
Wretchly elaborated anyway: “There are other ways of killing folks
besides beam guns. And they don’t need Oobii’s super telescopes to
spot you. If Nevil knows you’re here on Hidden Island, he’ll expect you to
try to get across. That’s more than a kilometer of open water. Even if we
take you across in a box, he’ll see the boat and we’ll be stopped the
moment we land.”
Johanna glared at the pack. Even Flenser’s flunkies had their boss’s
talent for causing irritation. There were lots of little moorages along the
eastern side of Hidden Island, but none were any less exposed than this.
The alternative was to hike across town to the west side, then island hop
around the north—maybe thirty kilometers of skulking. A two-day trip.
“Okay then, do you have a better way?” She saw the gloating smile
hiding in Wretchly’s aspect. “Oh, of course you do.”
The smile bloomed. “Oh yes. My lord Flenser has not been idle these ten
years. Woodcarver penned him in with her various unjustified attempts at
house arrest. What was he to do with such restrictions? Well, in fact, he

dug some tunnels.” Wretchly pointed a snout in the direction of the ferry
crossing. “I can get you right across, under the Straits.”
Wenda Larsndot gave a little squeak of surprise. “So that’s where all the
cheap fill dirt came from,” she said.
Johanna looked at Benky. “Woodcarver knew about this?”
“Not … until very recently. Flenser fessed up after Ravna was kidnapped
and you and Pilgrim disappeared.”
Wretchly nodded. “He did it to finally win Woodcarver’s trust.”
“That and save his own necks,” said Benky. He pointed across the
Straits, zigzagging a path upwards. “See, it’s not just the understraits
tunnel, though I’ll bet that was the hardest piece of work. Flenser also
dug a stairway inside the cliffs, up to a warehouse in Newcastle.… We
should have guessed. Flenser was out of sight much too often.”
“Yeah.” So those mainland tunnels had been just part of Flenser’s
construction. The guy was as sneaky as Woodcarver always claimed.
“But now we’re all trusting buddies,” said Wretchly. “I can get you up to
Newcastle. In fact, if you want, I can probably sneak you right on stage
with Nevil himself.”
“You have Flenser’s okay to do all that?”
“Um, well, this morning he’d only heard a rumor you were down here.
I’m … interpolating a bit, but we’ll know more once we’re up there, won’t
we?”
Benky looked mostly glowerful, but he didn’t speak. Johanna glanced at
Wenda. The woman shrugged. “This is Hidden Island, Jo. Flenser has
been a decent landlord. The last of his monsters died several years ago.”
Jo had never been sure of Flenser, but: “Okay, take me up to Newcastle
town.” There, at least, she might be able to figure out the right thing to do.
•  •  •

Jo left the Larsndots at Ferryside. Junior had been outraged, but
fortunately Wenda Senior was around to rein her in. It was Benky who
was the biggest problem. “I’m coming too.”
But what could Benky do if things went bad, in particular if Wretchly went
bad? “Stay here, and be around to tell the truth,” said Johanna.
“I’m coming. If—once we get atop Starship Hill, I’ll get Woodcarver.” He
glared at Wretchly.
The neo-Flenserist just smiled. “That’s okay with me.”
Wenda, Sr., took her two youngsters back along the alley. When they
were out of sight, Wretchly led Johanna and Benky along a winding path
behind garbage bins and down passages that were barely more than
cracks between buildings. They passed through a well-concealed door
and down steep stairs. The darkness was total.
“Keep bent down, Johanna. This isn’t made for two-legs.”
“I guessed that,” said Johanna. Her fingers traced along the stone just
ahead. In Tinish structures, you never trusted for headroom. “How come
no lights?”
Wretchly said, “Oh, you want a light? I brought one.” A glow appeared
ahead, silhouetting a couple of members. Wretchly didn’t try to turn
around. He just set the lamp on the ground and continued on.
“Thanks.” Johanna picked it up. The glow made it a little easier to avoid
the irregular ceiling, though now her main view was the hindmost of
Wretchly’s rear member.
They walked for some minutes, long enough that the inconvenience of
being bent over grew toward intolerable soreness. Wretchly merrily
chatted away, claiming that he could hear the water shushing by
overhead. He seemed totally confident that no intruders were lurking
ahead. “Hei, I can hear all the way to the other side.” By the time they
reached the mainland stairway, Benky was talking too, curious as to how
Flenser and company managed to keep the tunnel from getting flooded.

Johanna ached too much to pay much attention.
“Ta da!” Wretchly’s voice came back to her. “The front of me has reached
the mainland. Another few steps and: “See? You can stand up straight
now.”
Glory! Johanna stretched tall, reaching as far as she could into the empty
air.
“Now we just have a little climb up the nice stairs.” That would be more
than five hundred meters.
The stairs zigzagged irregularly, following natural drainage faults. Some
flights were thirty or forty meters, with the spring runoff almost a waterfall
down the side gutters. She did better on the stairs than either of the
packs. Both Benky and Wretchly had to accommodate ageing members.
Very soon, those were huffing and puffing.
It took almost an hour to reach the top. In that time, Johanna got a rather
complete summary of all the crap that had happened in her absence. And
she had the information from what were probably the top lieutenants of
Woodcarver and Flenser.
“Woodcarver and Nevil have been teetering on the edge of a civil war for
more than a tenday,” said Benky, speaking over the wheezing of his
members. “There have been rumors of your fleet, sightings when you
passed the old capital.”
“The Tropicals are just bringing trade goods.”
“That’s what Nevil claims … officially. Unofficially, the Deniers are saying,
‘what if it’s all guns?’ They’re claiming that Tycoon has boosted our world
into the bottom end of technology, that if we don’t make peace with him,
we’ll be swept away.”
“It’s Vendacious, not Tycoon! I saw Vendacious down South. Pilgrim and
I searched for years for Tycoon and never found him. I’m thinking he’s
just another Vendacious lie.”
“Yeah,” said Benky.
“Someone has made a miracle out of the Tropics,” said Wretchly. “You

really think that’s Vendacious? My boss doesn’t.”
“So has Flenser ever met Tycoon?”
“Well, um, no.” Wretchly seemed a little embarrassed that his boss, the
great Traitor-to-All, might not be totally in the know. “He should be waiting
for us at the top, though. You can ask him yourself.”
•  •  •
There was a four-kherhog carriage parked in the warehouse at the top
of the climb. Flenser-Tyrathect was inside, dressed for a party. The
crippled one’s wheelbarrow was gilded.
Johanna climbed in among him. Outside, Wretchly latched the door and
ran forward to look after the kherhogs. Jo leaned close to the open
window and gave Benky a wave. He was mostly still lying on his bellies
and panting from the climb. He gave her a little wave back and then
staggered to his feet.
“I’ll tell Woodcarver you’re here,” he said, and stiffly walked out of
Johanna’s view.
Flenser stuck a head out the window to watch Benky’s departure. The
pack spoke musingly: “I can’t tell you how nervous it makes me that
outsiders—Woodcarver’s top agent, for heaven’s sake—have been
inside my secret tunnels. I worked so long to make those passages, and
keep them out of her view. Ah, well.”
Flenser latched a quilted shutter across the window. All of him settled
back as the carriage lurched into motion. Johanna heard various gobbling
outside and then the sound of heavy doors being slid aside. As they
rolled out of the warehouse, the interior of the carriage was lit via baffles
mounted in the roof and sides. Flenser’s voice continued, but soft, “We
can talk for now, but be very quiet. Vendacious trusts me about as much
as Woodcarver used to. If he or Nevil finds you, there’s nothing I can do

to save you. Hm. I might not even be able to save myself. Perhaps I
could say you have kidnapped me.”
Johanna felt a laugh burbling up. She stifled it. “I doubt that even you
could make that lie stick. Look, I got quite a briefing from Benky and
Wretchly. I know about the big meeting this afternoon. You look so pretty,
I figure you’re an honored guest. All I need is for you to get me to where I
can jump onstage. Outside of Nevil’s inner circle, the Deniers are good
kids. Most of them are my friends. In front of everyone, Nevil won’t dare
kill me. I can finally say the truth.”
Flenser’s heads were bobbing in a smile. “Say your truth and not be
Denied, eh?”
“Yes.”
The carriage bumped across badly-kept cobblestones. They must be
near the edge of town, maybe at the edge of Murder Meadows. This
might be a short trip.
“I could do what you suggest, Johanna, but there is a problem. Tycoon
himself will be on that stage.”
“So he exists? Okay, but why should that be a problem?”
Flenser waved for Johanna to keep her voice down.
“You see, even if Nevil doesn’t dare act, Tycoon … well I very much fear
he will tear you apart the moment he understands who you are.”
“What? Sorry.” She brought her voice down to a whisper. “Even
Vendacious wouldn’t be that stupid.”
There were many voices all around them now, both the gobbling of packs
and the speech of humans. Flenser raised a head the way a human
might lift his hand, meaning to wait a moment on the answer. Outside,
Johanna could hear somebody up above—Wretchly in the driver seats?
—arguing. Something about whether kherhogs were allowed to proceed
under the something-or-other. Under the stage?
The wagon turned and edged slowly up a slope. All of Flenser turned
toward Johanna and his voice came soft and focused: “You’re right.

Vendacious wouldn’t be that stupid.…” He paused again, listening to
muttering from the top of the carriage. “You see, there’s something we
didn’t know about Tycoon. He’s Scriber Jaqueramaphan’s brother.”
For a moment, Johanna couldn’t make sense of the statement; it
connected such unrelated parts of her life. Scriber?… She knew he had a
fission brother. Estranged. Scriber had told her the story the last night
she saw him all alive. When she beat the crap out of that poor, innocent
pack. She opened her mouth a couple of times. No need to worry about
making sound, she couldn’t find her voice. She was just mouthing the
words, “But, but…”
Flenser continued, his voice the tiniest butterfly touch on her ears, the
sense of it pounding like hammers: “Honestly, I didn’t know until Tycoon
was on his way here. Vendacious has worked very hard to keep me away
from Tycoon. I do know that Tycoon is exactly the genius at organization
we thought. He’s turned the Tropics into a magical surprise and given
Vendacious the lever to overturn the world.”
Johanna remembered. Scriber had said his fission sibling was a dour
business type. What had changed? And why did Tycoon want to kill her?
“Why—?” she spoke the word too softly to hear her own voice.
Of course Flenser heard her—and more—he understood her real
question. “Why do you think? Vendacious told him that you killed Scriber.
Vendacious is at center of all this, and he’s sneakier than I was, even at
my best. He has to be, because sneakiness is all he has going for him.
He’s based his plan on Tycoon, and on making Tycoon hate humans,
you in particular.” He sounded almost admiring.
Yeah, that was perfect Vendacious. Flenser might admire such
perfection.
The carriage stopped, jerked forward a few centimeters, stopped again.
She heard the scrabble of Wretchly bouncing down from the driver’s
seats. There was an irregular tapping on the door, and when Flenser slid
it open, one of Wretchly was looking in. “Here we are, Boss, right under
the platform. Heh! Inside all Nevil’s fabulous security.”

Flenser was already streaming out the door. “You can be sure that if
Vendacious was in charge, things would not be so easy. Nevil is so new
to our primitive villainy.” Now all of him struggled to help his crippled
member exit. White Tips was watching Johanna alertly, but as usual
made no detectable contribution to the speech sounds.
“I’m supposed to be up onstage,” said Flenser. “This parking spot is to
give me easier access. My handicapped condition, you see. I’m leaving
Wretchly with you. If you don’t scream or shout, you should be safe.”
Flenser wiggled a snout, gesturing Johanna to come to the opening.
Sunlight splattered down through cracks in the construction. She smelled
fresh-cut lumber. They were parked somewhere on the heather of Murder
Meadows. Crisscrossed timber reinforcement beams were all around the
wagon. Flenser was on the ground below her, turning White Tips’ little
cart toward a path that led off into the dimness. “Hear the racket,
Johanna?” he said.
In fact, she could. Tinish trumpeting. Flenser continued, “Somebody just
landed their airship. They’ll be up top on the platform in another minute—
and I’m late to greet them.” The slower parts of Flenser were already
heading off. “If that’s Tycoon, it’s your death to go up there. You should
stay down here where you’re safe.”
“If I decide to risk it, how can I get directly on stage?”
“Ah,” Flenser’s heads twisted around, searching for something in the
cracks of light above. “Wretchly?”
Part of the henchpack looked up, studying the strutwork. “Okay. We had
the contract on putting this thing together. It was all very hastily done,
with lots of screwups. See over there,” Wretchly pointed to where
reinforcement struts tilted together. “It may not look it, but that’s the start
of an easy climb”—he gestured back and forth, upwards—“to a knockout
panel that’s at the center of the main stage.”
Flenser was grinning, that joy-in-shadows posture that annoyed
Woodcarver so much. “You could make a very dramatic entrance, very
very short-lived, at least if Tycoon is nearby. Part of me would truly like to

see…” He brought himself up short. Literally: The parts of him that were
furthest along the path stopped, began pulling the wheelbarrow back.
“Ahem. Seriously, Johanna. Don’t go up there unless you—and Wretchly
—can hear that it’s safe. Even if it’s just Nevil, you should think twice. I
took a chance once, going public in the Long Lakes—and look what
became of me.”
Johanna brought her gaze down from the ceiling. “Yes. I understand.” In
fact, Flenser’s advice was completely sensible—at least if you edited out
the maniacal asides.
“Okay, then! I’d best be on my way.” He caught up with himself and soon
all five were lost in the gloom.
The rest of Wretchly came over to the carriage steps. “No one’s near.
You can come down from the carriage if you want. Be ready to hop back
in if I say.”
Johanna descended the little steps, stood in the moist, ankle-deep sod. It
was all very stamped down and shaded, but here and there the sunlight
caught the color of a wilted flower. Murder Meadows. She seemed to end
up here every time things got really really tough.
•  •  •
“So that’s Tycoon up there. Pack of Packs, it sounds like there’s eight
of him, and they’re all big bruisers!” Wretchly was circled widely around
their carriage, watching and listening in all directions. One of him stayed
close to Johanna even now, as she walked over to the jumble of
strutwork he had pointed out earlier.
Johanna looked up into the shadows and bright cracks above. “So what
is he saying, Wretchly?”
“It’s still Nevil talking. What a noisemaker that guy is. ‘Peace, prosperity,
our new friends, no more terrible attacks,… blah blah.’”

“You know he can talk for hours, Wretchly.”
“Yeah. Well, that would be stupid today. The audience doesn’t sound as
patient as usual.” He waved a snout at the unseen fields. “And one
particular guy is not patient at all.”
“Me,” said Johanna.
“Somebody else. The eight that I think are Tycoon is shifting around like
he has bugs up his rears.” Wretchly paused. Looking around, Johanna
could see several of Wretchly shifting, angling their shoulders and heads,
building up a sonic image of what was going on above. “That’s strange,”
said Wretchly. “I think Tycoon has humans with him. Ravna and Jefri it
sounds like.”
Johanna restrained her desire to shout. “What? Then it must be safe!”
“… Not if they’re prisoners.”
“But Woodcarver and Flenser are up there.”
“Yes,” Wretchly pointed into the shadows in the direction that Flenser had
departed minutes before. That would be stage left, if she was visualizing
things properly. “They haven’t gone to meet Ravna. It sounds like Tycoon
has a pack or two with him. Flunkies with weapons, I bet.”
A minute later, it sounded like a human child had shouted something.
Wretchly pulled back in startlement. “Huh! That’s Tycoon. He wants to
talk.”
Various thumping-around noises came from above. Johanna might have
laughed in other circumstances. She didn’t think Nevil had ever been
upstaged at a public event.
The little girl voice from above was loud, but Johanna still couldn’t make
out the words. The tones sounded frightened and lost and … angry?
Wretchly had grabbed her sleeve, was pulling her back to the carriage.
“What?” said Johanna. “What is Tycoon saying?”
“He’s talking about peace, but he doesn’t sound happy about it. That’s
not the point, Johanna. I hear packs coming back under the stands, some

humans too.”
“Woodcarver’s?”
“No, they’re Deniers and the lowlife Tines that Nevil hires. We got a
couple of minutes. I can get you out of here.”
As he spoke, the rest of Wretchly had come rushing in from their listening
posts. Now they were clustered around her, silently pushing and pulling
her toward the carriage. When she still resisted, Wretchly stepped back,
his heads cocking indecisively. “Cripes. My boss knew this would
happen. Can’t you see? He set you up.”
Maybe, and so what? Jo looked up one more time. From here she could
see the top of the path Wretchly had pointed to. It ended at a panel, quite
thin and weak-looking compared to the walls around it. Scriber’s brother
is up there. In the early years, she had wondered about that nameless
brother, wondered if he ever knew what became of Scriber, or if that
estranged pack would even care to know. If Flenser was right, Tycoon
had really really cared. The lie Vendacious had told him had propelled a
decade of history. Vendacious had murdered Scriber and turned that into
a monstrous coup. The old rage rose up in Johanna, what she had felt
ever since Vendacious had escaped execution and then escaped
imprisonment. This must not stand.
“Get to someplace safe, Wretchly.”
“Good. C’mon!” said Wretchly. Then as she started up the ladder: “Aw,
cripes.”
She glanced down, saw him clustered around the base of the ladder, one
of him starting up toward her, the rest all looking at something out of sight
behind her. Three looked up, waving their heads, but not daring to call
aloud. Then the one on the ladder tumbled back to the heather, and she
heard all of him rushing away.
From above, the little-girl voice continued on, wailing with words Jo
couldn’t quite make out. Surely the distress was an illusion. And yet,
Tycoon deserved to learn how close his brother had come to greatness,
how his special crazy goodness had gotten him killed.

She was at the top of the ladder. She swung to the side, reached out to
touch the wood panel. It was tacked on with temporary pegs. She could
smash right through. She hesitated, let the rage give her strength.
Somewhere there was a voice in her head, but it wasn’t the voice of
caution; that was still tied and gagged. The Mad Bad Girl of Starship Hill
was in charge.

Chapter   40
Ravna climbed down the stairs and stood in the soaking heather. The
airship’s carriage was seated thirty centimeters into the heath. The main
hull was only a few centimeters above their heads. They were in the
ship’s shadow, mostly out of sight of the welcoming crowds. Even here
the daylight was awesomely bright and cheerful and familiar.
The gunpack urged them to follow Zek and Tycoon. Ravna took a step or
two, unsteady after all the low ceilings. As she stepped out into direct
sunlight she stumbled and would have been crawling again if Jef hadn’t
had an arm around her. Together they staggered a few steps more, then
stood straight for a moment, reveling in having the space to do so.
Cheers came on the wind. Ravna turned. The ground crew had retreated.
Except for Tycoon’s entourage, the nearest people were thirty meters
away. The cheering was coming from the Children and Best Friends. And
Ravna suddenly realized they were cheering Jefri and herself.
She gave them a wave back and then gunpack pushed at their legs,
urging her and Jefri to catch up with Tycoon. Their progress across the
field was slow, partly because of Ravna’s unsteadiness, partly because
the hummocky heath was an ankle-twisting obstacle course.
None of the Children came running out to meet them. They were staying
behind low barricades. Several older Children—Nevil’s people—were
keeping the more enthusiastic from rushing onto the field. All for the
safety of the public, no doubt. A lot had changed since she was
kidnapped.
Tycoon’s party turned across the bow of his airship and walked in stately
splendor toward the midpoint of the stage. Ravna and Jefri hobbled along
behind. Nevil’s voice was audible even from here. Of course, he was

using his power with Oobii to advantage: “… and the attack this morning
must not get in the way of our meeting here. Peace is finally within our
reach.…” she heard him say. But his voice was mainly focused on the
crowd, and she lost the rest of the words.
Nevil was standing behind a high lectern at one end of the stage. Three
humans were with him, and two packs, one wearing crowns. Downhill,
beyond the stage, Ravna had a view of Out of Band II in all its iridescent
splendor. Nevil had positioned his stage so that all the participants were
within the field of fire of the ship’s beam gun. With his admin authority,
Nevil figured he could kill anyone here, pack or human. He could burn the
meadow clean if he wished. Was Nevil really capable of such
monstering? I better assume so. In any case, it was his top threat against
anyone who truly knew him.
Except perhaps for me, thought Ravna. Oobii was smart enough to
recognize a human face. And Nevil, by putting this scene in its line of
sight, had guaranteed that Oobii could see her. If it recognized her …
She leaned against Jefri, letting him steady her. She looked at the ship
and said softly, “Ship! Give me a milliwatt of red if you hear me.” Her
voice was whipped away in the breeze. Jefri himself didn’t seem to hear
her.
As they walked on, Ravna stole an occasional glance at the ship. There
was no sign, no red glint. Okay, that had been a long shot.
Tycoon had reached the edge of the crowd. Nevil’s guards made way for
them, keeping humans and packs away from Tycoon and Zek and Ritl.
Ritl? The singleton trotted along like an official part of the delegation.
Now that Tycoon was past the barricades, some of the younger Children
pushed forward, eluding both Nevil’s guards and other older kids who
tried to stop them. Tycoon shied back slightly, then walked forward, not
showing the loathing he must feel. He actually acknowledged the
greetings with something like cordiality. He was doing better than most of
the first-timers she’d encountered in the circus.
Zek lagged back from Tycoon and spoke to Ravna and Jefri with

Vendacious’ voice. “Remember remember, up in the sky.” Yes,
Vendacious and Amdi up in the sky. The other airship drove along,
heading into another turn.
Then she and Jef were in the crowds. The kids closed in, arms
outstretched to both of them. Some shied back when they saw her face,
others kept coming. She hugged one or two, even as the gunpack’s
snouts were pushing at her knees.
Closer to the stage, she noticed something new. On one side, she saw
people like Wilm and Poul Linden, who had never approved of Nevil and
company. On the other, were those who had avoided her after the vote.
The human world had split into camps, a civil war waiting to happen.
They all looked uneasy, shying away from Tycoon. Some flinched when
they saw Ravna’s face.
“What did they do to her?” she heard one of the Children say.
Ravna continued forward, trying to smile, biting back the things she
wanted to shout to everyone. Today she wore an invisible muzzle.
Timbered steps led to the top of the stage. The risers were high, more for
humans than Tines. That would be Nevil making a statement about
human superiority, obliging Tycoon and his Tinish company to scramble
up the steps.
The stairs reached a platform, still twelve steps short of the main stage.
Three older Children stood at the top of the stairs, all Nevil’s pals.
Strange, none of them was Bili Yngva; had there been a falling out? The
three stepped back a little nervously as Tycoon clambered heavily toward
them. Ravna heard a little of the indignant hiss that Tycoon cast their
way. Zek and Ritl climbed up after him, followed by Ravna and Jefri.
She gave Nevil a hard glance, then noticed that he was wearing the
remaining head-up display—a link to Oobii. For a moment her gaze
caught on the device’s crystal facets. Then she forced herself to look
away.
Flenser was sitting nearby, looking indolent and relaxed. He gave Ravna
a friendly, ambiguous nod. To the right of Flenser, past a sound baffle,

was Woodcarver. All her heads were turned to look at Jefri and Ravna.
The pack was a picture of tense alertness. And anger. There was the
Puppy from Hell, perched on one member’s shoulders. But wait … a
second puppy was shyly looking up from between the legs of another
member. The Queen had become eight!
Ravna stepped out onto the platform, moved a little way around Tycoon.
Woodcarver shifted slightly apart, and Ravna heard her whisper: “What of
Pilgrim?”
Ravna gave her head a little shake.
Nevil’s voice boomed over the crowd. “Let us welcome Tycoon, come all
the way from the East Coast. Unwise policies of the past set us against
people who would be our friends. Today we unite against those who
bring violence upon both our peoples. Today—”
The words were misleading nonsense, but his frank openness was
almost what Ravna remembered. Almost. Even though Nevil hadn’t been
kidnapped and chased through wilds, the guy had lost some weight. The
time since he had grabbed power had not been kind to him. That had
been true even before Ravna’s kidnapping. Apparently things had not
improved since. And what was this about an attack earlier today?
Nevil carried on for a while longer. In the crowd below the stands, there
was some milling around, especially among the opposition, but no one
walked away and no one shouted objections. Nevil had control such as
Ravna had never dreamed. “So the agreements Tycoon and I sign today
will return those who have been taken from us”—he waved graciously at
Jefri and Ravna—“and begin a technological alliance for prosperity.”
As he spoke these last few words, Nevil edged back from the lectern.
Tycoon was eight, and each of him was a heavy critter. He could project
implacable purpose better than anyone Ravna had met on this world—
and now he was gliding toward the lectern. The only thing that saved
Nevil’s dignity was that Tycoon’s approach was out of sight of most of the
audience below.
Nevil cut his loud voice and leaned down as if to speak courteously to the

pack. He jerked a hand at Ravna and Jefri. “Why was it necessary for
you to bring them here?”
“As proof of my goodwill,” said Tycoon.
“Then you should have brought the young ones.” Another quick glance at
Ravna. “This—this Ravna, is just trouble.”
Tycoon’s heads bobbed in a grim smile. “She can be useful.”
Nevil’s mouth turned down. He stared blankly for a moment. He might be
speaking to someone, but the words were inaudible to Ravna.
Zek had followed close behind Tycoon. Now he pushed awkwardly
through the eight and spoke softly to Nevil. It was Vendacious’ voice. The
tone was placating: “It’s okay. Deal as before. My colleague here is too
forward.”
Tycoon gave Zek a hard bump. “I am not forward and you do not speak
for me.” Then he advanced, forcing Nevil away from the lectern. He
hopped up on himself, leaning against the lectern. Now the pack was in
pyramid posture, visible to all. And even without mechanical aid, his
words boomed: “I am Tycoon!”
So much for Tycoon’s promise to avoid human speechifying. The voice
that sounded across the meadows belonged to a frightened little girl. It
was Geri Latterby’s voice, but transformed by the force and arrogance of
Tycoon’s personality. “Nevil Storherte says we all want peace. He wants
peace. I want peace. We will have war if you do not make things right!”
People reacted very differently than they had to Nevil’s smiling nonsense.
There was shouting. A woman—it was Elspa Latterby—screamed: “Geri?
Geri! Give her back…”
Tycoon had their attention. “We can’t make up for all the bad things, but
you and I will make up for what we can. Or we will have war.” He gobbled
something at Zek. A moment later, Vendacious’ airship spun up its
engines and coasted across the sky to hang just west of the stage. Nevil
watched the ship’s progress with an unbelieving expression. He was
talking to someone again. Oobii? Vendacious? But the starship held its

fire.
Tycoon waited for the shouting to die away. Then he said, “I will give you
back what can be returned. We bring you wealth, now, and in future
trade. In exchange, you will give me access to Oobii. And most important,
you give me the human who murdered half of me! I want Johanna
Olsndot. I want her here. I want her now!” As he spoke, Tycoon’s heads
turned this way and that, jaws snapping.
Everyone on the platform seemed frozen in horror. Well, everyone except
Flenser. He had hunkered down, but his heads were weaving and
bobbing. He was enjoying this with the sort of shameful joy that mayhem
brought out in him.
Nevil eased around Tycoon, back to the lectern. He must be truly rattled,
because for the first time Ravna could actually see him figuring up the
odds, deciding what to do to stay on top. When he spoke, his voice was
somber and tense. “My friends, we’ve known of this demand for several
days. Tycoon has cause for making the demand.”
“Tycoon kidnapped our children!” came a voice from the crowd, but wind-
whipped and faint. Nevil didn’t quite have the audio control he had
aboard ship, but the wind and the open air was almost as effective.
“Tycoon is reasonable to ask for a human wrongdoer no matter how
much she was beloved by me, by us.” Nevil seemed to choke up. Beside
her, Ravna could feel Jefri trembling, his gaze alternating between Nevil
and the airship above. There were limits, and Jef was being pushed well
beyond his.
After a moment, Nevil found his voice again and continued, as if
struggling against tears. “I was very close to Johanna all my life.
Infatuated, I see now. But I loved her, and as much as she was capable
of it, I think she loved me. Now … well, the proof that Tycoon has
provided and her own unguarded words to me … It means I was wrong in
my love and my trust. I’m sorry.” He paused, turned toward Tycoon,
whose pyramid still topped his own height. When Nevil continued, his
voice was firm and statesmanlike. “Sir, however just your demands, they

stand moot. Johanna Olsndot has been missing for some tendays.”
“You lie! Give her over!” roared the eightsome.
Nevil damped his audio so low that Ravna could barely hear it: “Are you
crazy?” he hissed. “Look, she’s dead. I can get you the body. Just—”
Jefri lunged at Nevil. “You murdering—” Nevil’s friends tackled him before
he could do Storherte harm. Tycoon dropped down and lumbered around
the fray, gobbling at the gunpack. That pack backed off, shifting its
firearms so they weren’t pointing at Jefri.
As Jefri was bundled off down the stairs, there was a momentary clear
area around Ravna, and an unrecognizable voice whispered in her ear:
“Watch the wall beside me.” Ravna’s head jerked up. Woodcarver?
Maybe. Flenser!
Tycoon’s heads came up too. He walked across the stage, heads
questing toward Flenser and Woodcarver. Had he heard Flenser?
Now what Ravna heard was the sound of splintering wood. Part of the
wall popped a centimeter out. There was a crash and another and
another.
Tycoon flinched back. The wooden panel fell to the stage and …
Johanna stepped into the sunlight, carrying a sturdy timber. She was out
of breath, her violet eyes wild—and she was very much alive. She
dropped the timber and spoke to the eightsome, who stood jaws agape
before her. “Hei, sir. I am Johanna Olsndot.”
Now that he had his hate’s desire, Tycoon hesitated. He stepped back,
milled around almost like some of the newbies Ravna had met in the
circus. Or a killer savoring the moment.
Jo dropped to the deck before him and tilted her head back, imitating a
submissive singleton about as well as a human could.
Jaws snapped on either side of her throat. Tycoon jostled himself as
members at the rear tried to get at her. Two of him grabbed Johanna’s
arms and began dragging her toward the vacant right end of the stage.
“We talk before you die,” he said.

“But—” Nevil started after them, then stopped, apparently realizing that
unless he wanted to start shooting, things were totally beyond his control.
As Johanna was dragged across the stage, Woodcarver’s puppies
jumped down and pushed something across the deck to Flenser. Two of
Flenser slid it toward Tycoon.
Maybe it was reflex, maybe it was curiosity, but Tycoon grabbed the
object. It was some kind of book, the style that Tines had “hand” printed
before the Children landed. It was very old, or it had been through a fire.
The pages were black and curling, held together by metal hoops. Ravna
got just a glimpse before Tycoon surged around the book. He was
completely motionless for a moment, then resumed his march to the far
end of the stage.
Zek had watched all this silently, nervously moving out of the way when
necessary. Now he stood still for a second, as if listening. Then he
gobbled something desperate and negative and ran across the stage
toward Tycoon. Ritl followed a second later.
Tycoon was having none of it. He swiped claws at Ritl and hissed at Zek,
“Back! This is my vengeance.”
No matter how determined Vendacious might be to spy on Jo’s last
words, poor Zek was in no position to enforce that will. Both singletons
backed off.
The confrontation between Johanna and her would-be executioner might
be short, but it was not going to be private. The two were in full daylight
at the far end of the stage, visible to most of the audience and everyone
on the stage. Øvin Verring and the Linden boys rushed the front stairs,
backed by several others. Nevil’s friends had been drilling; they used
their staffs to knock the kids down the stairs. Wilm was helped up by his
brother; their group tried again. Now the crowd was mixing together,
fighting in places. Others just stood, watching in horror.
Nevil was watching in horrified fascination, too. But he was also
mumbling to … Oobii? Ravna edged closer to him. Nevil’s audio was not
fully damped. He glanced at Vendacious’ airship and his voice raised a

fraction, though still barely audible. “So is this worst case or not?”
His eyes flickered sideways, noticed Ravna’s approach.
Nevil’s goons were over by the stairs; there was something she could do!
“It’s coming apart, Nevil,” she said. “Tell Vendacious that—”
Nevil’s mouth twisted in contempt. “Shut up. I have ship’s admin
authority, remember? I can burn you down where you stand.”
Maybe. Ravna found the presence of mind not to correct him—at least,
not with the truth. Instead: “Burn me in front of all these people? I think
not.”
Nevil glared back, but after a moment gave an angry shrug. He looked
around, probably for some thug to drag her off. Alas for Nevil, they were
all still busy. If she could just get a little closer to him.… Concentrate on
Nevil. She turned away from the nightmare at the other end of the stage
and walked casually toward him.
“Stay back!” Nevil hissed at her. His gaze swiveled back and forth
between Tycoon and Ravna. He was waiting for some kind of signal; till
then—well, it was fortunate for him that the crowd couldn’t hear him now.
Nevil was rattled. “You bitch. You suppressed everything Straumer. Even
the fools who love you puke at what you believe.” He nodded in the
direction of Tycoon. “If you hadn’t kept dividing us kids, I wouldn’t be
allied with these barbarians. Because of you, even more people may
have to die. Now stay back or I will burn you down!”
Across the stage, Johanna had risen to her knees. Blood stained her
sleeves; four pairs of jaws hovered near her throat. The charred book lay
on the ground right ahead of her knees. Two of Tycoon had opened it
and a third was reading the text—a classic Tinish posture. A fourth snout
tapped at the text while the rest beat questions down upon her.
What is that book anyway? thought Ravna.
Johanna seemed to know. Her head came down and she pointed into the
manuscript, then gently raised a page and pointed at something beneath.
The ones holding the book looked up at her, and the rest of the creature’s

heads came together around Jo’s face.
Flenser and Woodcarver had crept off their perches, but Tycoon hissed
them into silence. Zek paced anxiously just outside that same threat
zone. Shrouded in his radio cloak, Zek must be hearing even less than
Woodcarver and Flenser. He turned away from Tycoon and ran—
staggered—back toward Nevil and Ravna. He cringed as if from invisible
blows and collapsed at Nevil’s feet. “I can’t hear what Tycoon is saying,”
he said. This was Vendacious talking, but the communication channel
was in such pain that the voice stretched across several octaves, almost
unintelligible. “You tell me what they are saying!”
“Huh? I can’t get near enough to hear.” Apparently Nevil didn’t know how
to use the HUD for such snooping.
Maybe Vendacious realized that; his voice became a fraction calmer, but
full of crazy surmise: “You. Ravna animal. You always were the smarter.
Show Nevil how. Tell me what they are saying. Stop this or I’ll kill Amdi,
first one piece then all the rest—where you can see.”
Zek writhed in pain on the deck before them, one small singleton relaying
terrible threats. Nevil stepped back from the creature, uncertain.
It was the best chance Ravna was going to get. She took three paces
toward Nevil and launched herself at him. As a physical attack, the
collision was pitiful, but she held on, shouting into his face: “Ship! Usurp,
usurp!”
Nevil’s fists punched into her, sending her flying back. The crash hurt as
much as the fists, and for a moment she couldn’t breathe. She looked up.
Nevil was pointing at her, mumbling to himself. Nothing happened. Nevil
jabbed his hand again.
And still Ravna lived. Oobii would be paying close attention now. She
struggled for breath, finally gasped out, “Ship! Delete all Nevil authority.
Delete—”
As she spoke, Nevil’s eyes went wide. Now he was ground zero. He
scrambled back, then turned and ran down a backstage stairway, out of
Ravna’s sight—and Oobii’s.

She crawled over to Zek. Ritl was nosing around him, licking his face.
Zek rolled onto his belly; he was trying to arrange his cloak properly.
Words popped into Ravna’s mouth, anything to satisfy the monster:
“Okay, Vendacious. Tell me what you want to hear—”
She heard a strange sound, a low, broad moan. From the crowd. Ravna
looked out, saw human and Tinish heads looking in a single direction.
Not at Ravna. Not at the jumble that was Johanna and Tycoon. They
were looking into the sky.
She swung around to stare at the airship. Something small and dark was
falling from it. A living thing, flailing. A pack member, perhaps slightly
overweight. The member fell and fell and fell, surely still alive. It
disappeared from view behind the top of the stage.
Ravna looked down at Zek. “Why?” she said. “You didn’t give me a
chance!”
Zek looked up, his head weaving almost blindly. His whole body was
twitching. He gobbled chords she could not understand.
“Hei!” Ravna cried. “I’m doing what you want. Don’t kill any more of
Amdi!”
She ran across the stage toward Tycoon. Amdi was eight—had been
eight. He could still be mostly the same person at seven.
There were scattered shouts. In the sky above, she saw a second body,
dressed like the first, drop away from the airship. Its legs pumped as it
fell, as if it was fighting for traction.
Johanna had risen above Tycoon to look at the sky. The pack surged
around her, dragging her down. He pulled Jo across the stage toward the
main stairway. The gunpack spread out in front of him, its rifles aiming at
Flenser and Woodcarver, and then at Ravna.
Tycoon stopped by Zek, gobbled a fierce interrogative. The singleton
made some reply, but he was still twitching. Tycoon seemed to think a
moment—he could still think in the middle of all this!—and then he
grabbed Zek by the collar of his cloak and continued toward the stairs. As

the eightsome passed her, Ravna reached out to Johanna. Jaws
snapped at her, driving her back. “Now you will see what I do to liars and
murderers,” said Tycoon. Then he was down the stairs with Zek and
Johanna, his gunpack clearing the way.
More screams, maybe for Johanna, maybe—Ravna turned back to the
west. Parts of Amdi were still falling from the sky. Three bodies, tumbling.
Or maybe it was four, since one of them might be two members holding
tight to each other. Then another … and another. Now that Amdi was
mostly dead, Vendacious was just flushing the rest.
Ravna slumped to the deck. But I am not injured. Not at all. Why not?
The bad guys had won and all the good intentions in the world had not
made a bit of difference.
“Ravna? Ravna?” snouts poked gently at her. Woodcarver. Ravna turned
and embraced the nearest of her. It was a gesture she had never dared
with the Queen before, but just now she had to hold on to someone. A
puppy—the Puppy from Hell?—crawled across another member’s back
and nuzzled Ravna’s cheek. Woodcarver’s voice was a purring vibration
from all her members: “Do your best now. Please, Ravna. There are still
so many things to do.”

Chapter   41
Vendacious’ airship was flying off into the east even as the last of
Tycoon’s gang loaded themselves onto the larger craft. Nevil’s people
were the only ones helping, but the great airship made it into the air
without problems. The craft was perhaps forty meters up as it passed
over the stage—heading westward toward the Straits. These ships
couldn’t turn in place; no doubt Tycoon would swing around to follow
Vendacious.
She ignored the airship and looked around. Nevil’s buddies looked back
uncertainly. They and the mass of the Denier children were drifting off the
field. Most were heading uphill, toward Newcastle town. No one was
stopping them, but Ravna noticed that suddenly there were lots of
Woodcarver’s troops in evidence. Nevil himself was nowhere to be seen.
She turned towards Oobii and shouted several commands into the air.
Nothing. “I need comm with Oobii,” she said to Woodcarver.
“I know. I have a runner bringing a radio.”
“You don’t have one with you?” asked Ravna.
“No.” Three of Woodcarver’s turned their gaze on Ravna. An angry hiss
was the background of her words: “Nevil demanded we come without
them. He used Oobii to destroy any radio that wasn’t used according to
his desire. I still had most of the people on my side. He thought to change
that with today’s meeting. You and Johanna made things come out a little
differently.”
They watched as Tycoon’s airship made a broad turn over the Inner
Straits. Children and packs swept around them, shouting and crying and
pointing, imagining another body falling, this one human. No. Tycoon was
a different kind of villain. Pray he was different.

Poul Linden came through the crowd, pushing even through Woodcarver.
“Ravna!” He was gasping, so out of breath that the words wouldn’t come
at once. “I’m sorry, I wasn’t able to stop him.”
“What? Who?”
“Nevil! I found him coming out backstage, but he was too much for me.”
“Show her what he dropped, Poul!” That was Wilm, flapping his arms
impatiently.
“Oh, yeah.” He held out the HUD. “This is yours.”
Nevil had been dumb not to destroy it, but smart to let it go.
As she took crystal tiara, the Children around her grew silent. Awed? I
hope not, thought Ravna. It was the sort of moment later times made
paintings and Princess myths about. And I’ve sworn off all that garbage.
She set the device on her head.
“Ship!” she said.
•  •  •
Having Oobii’s support was like stepping out of the dark. Tasks that
would have otherwise taken Ravna hours or days could be done in
minutes. Unfortunately, the most important things were still beyond her
power.
The two enemy airships were heading steadily eastwards, not responding
to the various radio methods that Nevil had been using. Both ships were
at Ravna’s mercy, a fact that was worth exactly nothing.
The orbiter was not responding either. Maybe no surprise there. That was
still Nevil’s special domain. Ravna did manage to talk with Scrupilo
aboard Eyes Above, persuading him not to go chasing off after Tycoon.
Here on the ground the Children and their Best Friends swirled around
her. They had shown remarkable patience with her these last few

minutes, but now they were calling a thousand questions, crying—and
crying for vengeance.
Ravna held her hands up. After a moment, the babble quieted. “Let the
Deniers go back to their homes in Newcastle. Those are still their homes.
They are almost half of the human race. We need them.”
Woodcarver boomed out: “I agree. No pack may harm them. But none of
us should have to put up with Nevil anymore. Where is he, anyway?”
The question was put to everyone, but the answers were scattered and
contradictory. Of course, this was one of the easier problems. Nevil might
lurk out of Oobii’s direct sight, but his people were using radios. Sooner
or later, Ravna would have a definite location for him. The current best
guesses showed as a bright dot in Ravna’s HUD. Strange. “It looks like
Nevil is heading out of town—” going northeast, toward the valley forest.
“Follow him!”
“We are.” Oobii is. Meantime—
•  •  •
They found Jefri behind the stage. Alive. Nevil’s people had left him
hogtied in the mud. It was probably not deliberate that they had provided
him with a forced view to the west. When Ravna showed up, Jef had
been untied. He sat on the ground with his back to the timbers, staring
into space. The front of his shirt was splattered with vomit. He didn’t
seem to notice.
Several Children were on their knees, talking softly at him.
Ravna walked around in front of Jef, blocking his view downslope. “Jefri?”
she said. “We think Johanna is still alive. We’ll get her back.”
Jef’s gaze came up to her face. She had never seen him so bleak, even
in his deepest shame. After a moment his voice came low and hoarse.

“We’ll do whatever we can? Yes, but…” but what good has that been so
far? He staggered to his feet, helped by the kids around him. “The best I
can do now is find what’s left of Amdi.” He would have stumbled away
across the meadow if the others had not held him back.
There was no way they could keep Jefri from this search. There’s no way
they can keep me away either. “We’ll all search,” she said.
•  •  •
It turned out that some Children and Best Friends had already taken
the funicular partway to the water, then climbed down pilings to reach the
cliff face. Now they were close to being stranded, their rescue operation
in need of rescuing. Ravna and Woodcarver sent some of the older kids
after them, with instructions not to get anybody killed.
There were safer ways down the cliff, and that was a proper reason for
Ravna to come along. Oobii did not have a line of sight on the cliff face,
but over the years, the area had been carefully surveyed. With her HUD,
Ravna was probably a better scout leader than anyone.
Now they were moving from ledge to ledge, back and forth across the
rock face. Before the funicular train, the trip from Hidden Island up to
Newcastle had taken a good part of a day. The cliffs were a deadly
attraction that over the years had maimed adventuresome packs and
killed two Children. Today, the leaves of spring rose all around them,
clothing the evergreens with extra softness, obscuring the teeth of stone.
“Here, take this,” said Woodcarver, passing a safety rope forward. The
pack was mainly behind Ravna, but staying close. Nowadays, the Queen
was young—maybe too young for this, with the two puppies—but she
seemed to be having no problems. As she walked along, she was calling
loudly to packs above her. In her own way, Woodcarver was coordinating
operations, too.

Ravna took the safety line, passing the remaining loops forward to Øvin,
the only human ahead of her in the party.
“Do you think there’s any chance that—” said Ravna, her voice low, for
Woodcarver. Thank the Powers she had persuaded Jefri to stay with
Magda and Elspa in the middle of the troop.
“—that any of Amdi survived?” Woodcarver finished the question. “I don’t
see how. These springtime leaves are gossamer, and the evergreens
beneath are like steel bars. But this … recovery is going to happen
anyway.”
Ravna nodded. “We can make it safer.” For the next few minutes, she
had no time for chitchat. Her head-up display was synched with her
position. She could see through the trees to Oobii’s topo map—and guide
Øvin Verring along the safest paths. At the same time, she had windows
opened on other problems. Nevil’s people were making no attempt to
mess with Oobii, but there was a plume of hot air rising from the Dome of
First Landing. Ravna even had video from inside the castle! Apparently
Nevil had diverted all the cameras into his spying—that was why she had
only low-resolution information on the bodies’ trajectories. But she could
snoop all around the castle. Bili or whoever had stuffed the Lander with
flammables and lit it off. Woodcarver’s firefighters had already doused
the fire, and she could see that the coldsleep caskets were unharmed.
Ravna pulled her attention back to the rocks ahead of her. “Øvin, don’t go
down that way.” The higher ledge was narrow, but it became a real path
a few meters further into the greenery.
“Okay.”
As Ravna sidled onto the ledge after him, a little red alert flag popped up
in her HUD. Behind her, Woodcarver was talking loudly with unseen
packs at the top of the cliffs. She translated for Ravna: “They say
something’s happening at Newcastle town.”
“Yeah.” That red alert flag. As she followed along after Øvin, she
accepted the alert: It was a view of the north road out of town. The Denier
Children had returned to their houses after the debacle on the Meadows.

Now they were on the move again—but not back to Murder Meadows or
to Oobii. The ship counted seventy Children, including Bili and Merto, but
not Nevil. The older ones had knapsacks or sling bags. There were a few
wagons, but most were walking—out of town, toward the northeast. “You
know, I think some of them are carrying guns,” exactly the human-style
weapons Ravna had pictured for Nevil.
“My troops have many more guns,” said Woodcarver. “I could stop them.
Does this look like a mass kidnapping?”
Ravna watched the scene for several seconds. “… No.”
“Then I suggest we let these people go. No civil war today.”
Ravna suddenly realized that while her attention had been on the other
side of Starship Hill, she had walked along a ledge that had narrowed to
thirty centimeters. Woodcarver was gently pulling her back from the
edge. She came to a full stop and leaned against the sheer wall of the
cliff face.
“You’re almost there, Ravna. Give me your hand.” She looked up and
saw Øvin. He had reached the wider path that the topo map had
promised. A second later she was standing beside him. She sat down for
a moment and waited until the rest of their party came up. Woodcarver
settled close around her. The new puppy was barely old enough to be a
constructive member. It peeped out of a puppy pannier, whereas little Sht
rode on an older member’s shoulders.
The Queen must have noticed her gaze. “The new puppy? It’s to balance
Sht’s paranoid nature, a very old-fashioned bit of broodkennery. It was
Pilgrim’s suggestion … and his last gift to me.” Woodcarver was silent for
a moment, and then she spoke publicly loud: “I hear Scrupilo’s airboat.”
Ravna nodded. She had been following his progress via Oobii. “What’s
become of his airship?” she asked.
“That’s a bit of history,” said Woodcarver, rolling her heads. “Nevil’s all-
human crew crashed EA2—on their very first solo flight. There were no
casualties, but that put an end to long-range searching for you. Opinion is
divided on whether the crash was a real accident or a Nevil accident.”

“Ah.”
Now the boat’s little electric motor was audible to human ears. It wasn’t
visible through the spring leaves until it flew directly overhead. Then she
had a naked-eye glimpse of it—and two of Scrupilo’s heads stuck over
the gunwales, peering down. A year ago I was up there with Scrup,
looking down, trying to track Nevil’s thieves—only we thought we were
chasing Tropicals.
She relayed through Oobii: “Scrupilo, we’re at—” she sent her map
position. “Poul Linden and the other team are on another path about fifty
meters below us.” The other path was a safer walk, but it didn’t extend as
far into the region where Oobii figured most of bodies had come down.
“I see Linden, but not you,” Scrupilo’s voice boomed down from the sky.
He wasn’t bothering with radio.
“Okay. Do you see any sign of, of the bodies?”
Scrupilo was as grumpy blunt as ever. “The birds know. They’ve found
three places to swarm. I’ve got a crappy little camera here; I’ll send Oobii
pictures of what I’m seeing.” The video was already showing in Ravna’s
windows.
Two of Woodcarver’s foresters came up from the ledge below, and then
—Jefri wobbled along the path, staring upward and ignoring all of them.
“Scrupilo!” Jef shouted. “How many bodies are we looking for?”
The pack responded: “Most people say eight, but some of the younger
Children say seven with one holding onto a member-sized object.”
Jefri stood silent for a moment, still staring up. Then he started up the
path, walking past Ravna. She came to her feet, reached out to stop him.
For an instant, she thought Jef would shrug away. Then he was trembling
in her arms.
“I can lead us there, Jefri. You’ll see all we see, but stay in the middle for
now. Please?”
Magda and Elspa caught up with Jefri and softly encouraged him to let
Ravna and Woodcarver go ahead.

As Ravna turned to follow Woodcarver, she heard a burst of angry Tinish.
A single member came scrambling up from the lower ledge. “Ritl! What
the devil…?”
The critter gave Ravna an imperious nod, emitting a chord that meant
something like “You again” as it swept past.
Heida Øysler was next up from the ledge. She seemed to take Ravna’s
question as directed at her. “Yeah, yeah. I’m sorry. We thought this was
part of Tycoon. Hei, it was member-close to the guy, and wearing the
same insignia. It even talks like a boss. So we grabbed it.” The kids
coming up behind her looked a little shamefaced, too; maybe this had
been a group effort. “Now it looks like we got someone’s ugly pet.”
Oh my, I don’t have time for this. “But why did you bring her here?”
Heida glared at the singleton. “Well, it wasn’t our choice.”
•  •  •
Scrupilo’s video was so low-resolution that it must have come from his
own locally-made camera. However much he might call it crappy, Ravna
bet the guy was vastly proud of the device. And when she had Oobii
mesh them with the survey imagery … they were everything the recovery
parties needed.
There were three towering swarms of birds. The pictures didn’t reveal
what was on the ground beneath them, but Ravna’s topo map showed
one of the sites was just ahead of Poul Linden’s group. Woodcarver
shouted guidance down to Poul as Ravna’s group closed in on the
highest projected impact point, one that the birds had not yet discovered.
This spot might take some hard climbing, but for now Ravna and Øvin
walked almost abreast of each other, with Woodcarver occasionally
extending herself out between them.
As they walked, Ravna cycled through her task list: Nevil’s radios were

motionless on the other side of Newcastle, under forest cover. Either he
had discarded the devices, or he was waiting for “his people” to catch up
with him. The Denier Children were visible on the north road, heading
toward the valley forest, shadowed by Woodcarver troops. More wagons
had joined the group. Several packs seemed to be guiding the caravan.
Dekutomon and company? There was no avoiding the conclusion that
this was a planned exodus. Nevil was either nuts or still playing a turn
ahead of Ravna and Woodcarver.
Whatever Nevil’s strategy, it didn’t look like he would be rendezvousing
with his main Tinish allies any time soon: Vendacious and Tycoon were
still driving into the eastern sky, rising steadily as they approached the
Icefangs. If they thought they were out of beam gun range, they were
dead wrong. They would be visible to Oobii for hours more, unless they
decided to play a risky game of hide-and-seek in the mountain valleys.
Even now, Ravna could count the fasteners on Tycoon’s steam engine
gondolas. A word from her and Oobii could flash-fry both airships.
Øvin interrupted her impotent daydreaming: “Hei! Where did this come
from?” He was kneeling at the side of the path. Now he held up
something bright and yellow.
Two of Woodcarver eeled forward for a close look. “A gold coin. Long
Lakes mintage.”
Øvin turned it over a couple of times, hefting it. Like a number of
Children, he had gone native to the extent of valuing heavy metals; gold
and silver could be exchanged for things the starfolk couldn’t yet make.
“When I was little, we used to hike around here a lot,” he said, glancing
up at Ravna.
“All forgiven,” she said. Rascal.
Øvin smiled fleetingly. “The point is, we never saw anything like this. And
if we had, we’d have snarfed it up.”
Woodcarver said, “Sigh. Maybe it’s not such a mystery. I’ll bet that after
we got you and your friends off the cliffs, Vendacious and Nevil turned
this into their private highway.”

Jefri walked past them, oblivious. Magda and Elspa tagged along behind
him, scarcely pausing to glance at Øvin’s coin. These three knew what
was important.
“C’mon,” Ravna said to the others.
“Hei up there! Are you seeing lots of gold coins?” The question came
from some pack on Linden’s team.
“Just one,” Woodcarver boomed in reply.
“We just found a dozen, some on open rock, some wedged into the
trees.”
The words set Jefri moving at a trot, barely slowed by Magda and Elspa’s
cautions.
“I see yellow, too!” Scrupilo chimed in. “Hei, you on the high path! It’s just
a little further on. The birds haven’t found it yet, but there are holes
punched in the spring leaves—”
Jefri and company had disappeared around a corner of naked rock.
When Ravna and the rest caught up, they found the three stopped,
staring: not at a handful of gold coins, but at hundreds of coins and gems,
a splash of gold and glitter that swept across the path. It lay in bright,
direct sunlight. Indeed the Spring forest canopy had two wide tears in it.
Where the light fell, greenish gloom was replaced by uncompromising
detail. But Amdi, where are you? Like in the fairy tales, where the dying
friend is turned to treasure?
Jefri scrambled up the rock, bracing his feet against tree trunks to lean
against the steepness. He swept wildly at the branches. Gold coins
scattered from around his hands, unheeded. “Where is he?” Jefri
shouted. “Where—” He paused, steadied himself, and pulled. Something
large and angular broke loose from where it had been jammed between
rocks.
The wreckage bounced and crashed down to the path. It was—had been
—a strongbox. Where it hadn’t splintered, the surface glistened with
polish.

Ravna felt a touch on her shoulder. She turned. It was Øvin, grim and
solemn. He jerked his head upwards. Ravna followed his gaze.
Something dark and member-sized was caught in the higher branches.
She noticed Ritl pacing beneath it, staring straight up. For once the critter
was not spewing commentary.
Ravna swallowed. Then she looked at Jefri, still braced precariously
between the cliff face and various tree trunks. “Please come down now,
Jef.” She kept her tone even and comforting.
“We have to find him, Rav.”
“We will. I promise.” It took a force of will not to look at the dark, still form
that hid in the shadows just beyond Jef’s reach. “But you shouldn’t be
way up there. It’s not safe. I want you to come down now.”
He stared back at her, his eyes wide. It was a look she hadn’t seen in
years, from long before he had grown and gotten mixed up with the
Deniers and betrayed her and rescued her. It was the little boy that Pham
had rescued on Murder Meadows.
Jefri gave a sigh. “Okay,” he said and carefully came down to safety. No
one spoke, but by the time Jefri reached the ground, almost everyone
else had noticed the body in the trees.
•  •  •
The hardest part of getting the body down was keeping Jefri out of the
way.
The body. Think of it as the body, the creature, the member—not as part
of Amdiranifani. The creature was dead beyond doubt. The poor fellow
had been impaled on one of the thornlike branches at the apex of the
tree, where the evergreen needles didn’t grow. The accidental spear had
passed through the length of the body, ending where the branch was
almost fifteen centimeters wide.

As they began cutting down the body, Woodcarver shouted news of the
discovery to Linden’s group.
“Okay!” came the reply. “We’re fighting off a mob of stubborn—yeowr!—
seabirds. They’re swarming around something just ahead of us.”
Magda and Elspa were sitting with Jefri on the ground. They finally had
him calmed down. Ravna leaned against a large boulder and sent all
sorts of surely unnecessary detail back to Oobii. From Scrupilo’s video,
the ship had already located seven bodies, all dead for a certainty,
though this one and the one by Poul Linden might be the only members
they could get to today. So I’ll be free to think on other things. But now
her attention was stuck on the impaled body, all the other windows
ignored.
One forester sawed at the tree as the other sailed restraining ropes
around the upper branches. Ritl circled underneath, acting more like a
real dog than Ravna had ever seen among Tines, even singletons. Ritl
wasn’t saying much. She just looked curious and mystified and—for once
—as stupid as she probably was. But the dogs Ravna remembered were
plenty smart enough to realize when their betters were upset—and surely
Ritl remembered Amdi. She had caused poor Amdiranifani enough
problems. Ravna hoped the little beast couldn’t be hurt as much as Jefri
and Amdi’s other friends.
As they lowered the body to the ground, Jefri shook himself free of
Magda and Elspa. Everyone but Ritl stepped back at his approach.
Fortunately, the corpse’s head was turned away from view; it looked like
the tree branch had burst through the face. The body was shrouded in a
long cloak. As Jefri knelt beside it, Ritl slid forward, peering suspiciously
at the body. Jefri waved the singleton away. He reached for the cloak—
Ritl emitted a piercing squawk and darted past him. She tore at the
corpse’s throat, screaming in rage.
Jefri didn’t seem to notice. He had fallen to his knees and was staring in
blank shock. Magda and Elspa rushed forward to grab Ritl, but the
singleton rolled off the corpse and scuttled into the underbrush on the

high side of the path. She was making a weird hooting noise. After a
moment, Ravna recognized the sound. It was a small part of laughter.
Jefri didn’t look up, but when he spoke, his voice was full of wonder. “This
isn’t any part of Amdi.”
And finally, Ravna took a close look at the torn, dead thing. One paw
extended beyond the cloak. The claws were painted; what might have
been a fetter was made of silver. All else aside, the creature’s grayed
muzzle made it older than any of Amdi.
Woodcarver was mingled with the humans around the corpse. She pulled
the cloak entirely aside and stared for a long moment at the corpse. Then
she stepped away.
“Is this anyone you know?” asked Ravna, but Woodcarver didn’t answer
and now the other packs were crowding as close as they could get.
“No one I’ve ever seen,” one said in Samnorsk.
“It could be a recent addition to someone we know.”
“Unlikely. It’s too old.”
Øvin Verring put in: “We’ll have to get to the other deaders before the
birds strip them down.” Now that this was simply a whopping mystery,
such things were easier to say.
In her hidey-hole at the side of the path, Ritl was still chortling. Now she
started gobbling loudly, more like the usual Ritl.
This time, no one ignored her. Heads came sharply around, then turned
to stare at one another in consternation. After a moment, even Ravna
understood the simple chords:
“Vendacious dead. Vendacious dead. Vendacious dead!”

Chapter   42
There was no word in Samnorsk for the quality of the next twenty-four
hours. Woodcarver said there were chords for it in Tinish: a yodel that
denoted wrenching change, a time filled with events that might lead to
total catastrophe, or survivable disaster, or maybe grand victory. For
Ravna it was a nonstop run of problems and decisions, punctuated by
short catnaps, food, and Lisl Armin’s help with Oobii’s sickbay equipment.
“You’re dehydrated, starved, with half-healed lacerations all over. Food
and rest and the sickbay can easily make those things right. Oobii sees
evidence of a concussion. That shouldn’t be a problem as long as you
don’t get too stressed out, but I’m afraid sickbay isn’t up to truly curing
the problem.” Lisl brightened: “On the other hand, I bet I can fix your
broken nose and facial bones! I’ll just need a few hours of your time, and
then you’ll have to be careful of yourself—”
Ravna shut her off there. There just wasn’t time for cosmetic frills—
The ship woke her from a nap in the mid-afternoon of the next day. She
actually felt pretty good! But the first full meeting with the remaining
Children was downstairs in just fifteen minutes. As she left the command
deck, she was reviewing her personal log and Oobii’s latest news. The
starship had tracked Tycoon’s airships to a landing at some outpost east
of the Icefangs. For resupply? In any case, the ships rose again and
headed south. Closer to home, Scrupilo had taken his little airboat—the
Domain’s only surviving aircraft—to overfly Nevil’s caravan.
One of the first things Ravna had done was to sweep Oobii for lossage
and vandalism. She had quietly removed the amplifier stage from Pham’s
beam gun; the thought of some software glitch slagging Newcastle town
was just too scary. On the other hand, she hadn’t wasted time on Nevil’s
interior decoration, so when she showed up in the “New Meeting Place,”

she found that a lot had changed. Gone was the friendly atmosphere that
Nevil had set up when he was peddling democracy. There were none of
the game environments, and only one or two computational access
points. Nevil had mercilessly stripped the ship to set up the surveillance
system that she had noticed the day before. The walls had a new theme,
a starscape. The view was in the galactic plane, but very far out, at the
edge of the abyss, perhaps in the Low Transcend. The view from the
Straumers’ High Lab.
There was a podium set against the intergalactic dark, with a seat for
Nevil that was almost as impressive as the throne he had once built for
Ravna. Ravna walked tentatively to the podium, but she did not sit down.
She saw smiles and greetings, but no joy.
Today, the room held twenty packs and only about seventy Children. It
was strange the way the kids would stare at her—and then look away.
Repulsed? She knew what a ruin her face was; surely they would get
used to it. The packs didn’t seem so affected. She noticed Flenser and
Woodcarver in the audience. Ah! And there was Jefri, too, sitting
impassively a little apart from everyone else.
Ravna said, “We all need to be talking more than ever now. Given the
state of the interfaces”—she waved around the room—”that may be a
problem. I wanted to make sure you know what I’ve been doing, what
Oobii is seeing. I—I also want to hear what you’ve been up to, what’s
worrying you most.”
She noticed that Wenda Larsndot, Sr., was already standing, her hand
raised. Giske Gisksndot bounced to her feet. “I want to talk about Nevil!
We lost half the human race yesterday.”
“They wanted to go. Good riddance.” That was from someone hidden
from Ravna’s view, but the remark was not intended to be anonymous.
Around the room, many of the Children were nodding agreement.
“Yes!” shouted Elspa Latterby. “Instead, we need to go after that Tycoon
fellow. He stole my little sister!” And Edvi and Timor and Amdi and Jo and
Pilgrim and Screwfloss and.… Agreement and argument swirled all

around. Suddenly Ravna felt as incompetent as ever with the Children.
She raised her hand, a tentative request for order, and—
Everyone fell silent.
How did I do that? For a moment Ravna was speechless herself. “Look,
everybody, I have various pieces of information about some of these
problems. But please, let’s take things a step at a time. Wenda, you
seemed to be first?”
“Yes, uh, thanks. This is a little off-topic, but I think it’s important. I talked
to Johanna yesterday, before she went up to Starship Hill.” Once more,
the silence was total. “She told me some things she said we need to
know and some other things we are honor-bound to do. First off, there
were no ‘Tropical terrorists’ on those rafts. There was no bomb; the killing
was done with the beam gun on Oobii.”
“We’ve guessed that,” said Øvin, his voice flat and deadly.
Wilm Linden waved at Ravna. “But you could prove it, right? Oobii must
have logs.”
“Yes.” Short of an underlying software failure, she could uncover any
attempt Nevil had made to hide his actions. “I’ll get the logs, but I’m afraid
Nevil will just say they’re faked.”
Wenda made a dismissive gesture. “Jo’s main point was that we owe
these Tropicals. They may not have minds like packs or humans, but she
says it was their decision to rescue her and their sacrifice that saved her
life. She asked—ah, actually the word she used was ‘demand’—that we
treat them well and help them return home if that’s what they seem to
want.”
Woodcarver raised several heads, all looking in Ravna’s direction. “If I
may?” she said.
“Yes. Please.”
“I’ve already moved most of this mob up to the old embassy. Ten raft
crews is more than in any past shipwreck. It’ll be very expensive to
adequately enlarge the place.… but I’m willing to do so. That’s partly

because they’re innocent parties”—a nod in Wenda’s direction—“and
partly because if we mistreat Tycoon’s creatures, we increase the risk to
my Pilgrim and all the other poor souls Tycoon is holding.”
Ravna nodded. “Thank you, Woodcarver. Was there anything else,
Wenda?”
“Oh! Yes. We have a little inventory problem down at the South End. One
thing Nevil wasn’t lying about was the rafts’ main cargo.”
“Oh yeah,” someone said, “the peace offering from Tycoon.”
“Well, whatever you call it, this cargo is not junk. There’s about fifteen
tonnes of fabric.” Wenda rolled her eyes in distress. “It’s as good as
anything we currently make. There are other things; we’re still going
through the containers. So far we count nine hundred and five voice-band
radios.”
Tycoon would have been pleased by the stupefied expressions that
Ravna saw around the room. Wenda shrugged. “Okay, that’s all my
news.” And she sat down.
One by one, everyone had their say. Most of the kids seemed to realize
that Tycoon was both out of reach and a new kind of problem. The
concern about the Denier exodus was different. Giske said, “There have
always been Deniers, but Nevil made the idiocy deadly. My Rolf was
such a good person. I’d never have married him otherwise. But he bought
into everything Nevil was peddling. We argued about it every night,
especially after Ravna disappeared. Now he has my kids, and I want
them back!”
There was a muttering of agreement, not just about Giske’s family, but
about everyone’s experience.
Ravna glanced at Jefri. Jef was also a good person. That wasn’t
sufficient to solve the problem.
“In the end, they’ll come crawling back,” said Wenda Larsndot, sounding
much less gentle-minded than usual. “Most Deniers never bothered to
learn how to live here. The idea of them living in the wild is a joke!”

“That’s not the point!” said Giske, her voice rising, “So far no one has
overestimated Nevil’s capacity for evil. Maybe he’s one of those nutso-
freakos who loses big time and then takes his followers into a corner and
murders them! I want my children back! Now!”
•  •  •
The meeting went on for another half hour and then there were
separate chats with Woodcarver and various Children. But not with Jefri;
he left right at the end of the meeting.
Scrupilo’s radio had failed, but Oobii could see that both the airboat and
Scrupilo were well enough. He would be back in an hour. Maybe he could
add something pro or con to Giske’s unpleasant theory. Ravna straggled
off for a short nap.
As she settled down in her old room by the command deck, she
wondered again at her success in the meeting. Not since the Children
were little—and rarely even then—had the kids deferred to her as they
had this afternoon. Maybe they saw her as a competent hero who had
been to hell and back. Ha. If they only knew how little of that was her
doing. It still bothered her the way the kids winced when they looked at
her crushed nose and cheek. But what if that wasn’t revulsion? What if
the kids saw the injury as proof of tremendous sacrifice? Then sympathy
and admiration all worked their magic in her favor. If it had been Nevil in
her shoes, he’d squeeze that advantage as hard as he could, as long as
he could. She thought about the notion for a moment, struggling to hold
back sleep. Maybe she was a fool but, “Ship!”
“Yes, Ravna?”
“Please call Lisl Armin and tell her I’m a go for the face repair.”
And then she slept.

•  •  •
Scrupilo’s overflights didn’t support Giske’s worst-case theory.
Ultimately, Nevil might be as crazy as Giske thought, but the Denier
caravan was well equipped, and well prepared. Considering all the gear
they had stolen, “well equipped” was no surprise. As for being well-
prepared—Bili Yngva had something to do with that. The logs showed
that Bili had spent a lot of time up here on the command deck, planning.
He had recognized some of the gear in the Lander—what Ravna had
mistaken for junk—and figured that it might still have limited functionality.
That accounted for the strange thefts from the Newcastle catacombs. As
for the fire they set in the Lander—Nevil and Bili really did believe in
Countermeasure. The details were lost in a chaos of corrupted log files—
what looked like a system failure, not encryption. Maybe she could
unscramble the mess eventually, but for the moment she concentrated
on trying to contact Tycoon and trying to break into the orbiter.
Meantime, Nevil was probing back at Oobii. The Chief Denier—that was
her most polite term for him—had most of the commsets, and access to
the orbiter. Ravna deliberately left the Denier user accounts in place, but
in virtual cages. Nevil was all over them, probing for security holes,
posting Nevilish propaganda. The incompetent hacking was very
informative—to Ravna.
Woodcarver sent scouts with truce flags after the Deniers. They were
peacefully received and allowed to talk to whomever they pleased. They
even persuaded six from the caravan to return.
But when Ravna walked the streets of Newcastle town, the empty houses
were everywhere, tears in the thin fabric of humanity. Denial had hijacked
almost half of the human race, and there was yet a trickle of Children still
departing, trying to catch up with the main group.
After five days, Nevil’s exodus reached its destination, a warm-springs
cave system more than one hundred kilometers to the northeast.
Woodcarver recognized the place. She told Ravna that she’d known

about it for about a century and always believed it too dangerous for
long-term settlement.
The place was beyond the range of Scrupilo’s little airboat. Three days
passed, where the only word was Nevil’s voice reporting and happy
messages from various of his followers. He was promising pictures any
day now. When it came down through the orbiter, Ravna put the video in
the Meeting Place.
Ravna and Woodcarver were present at the first showing, along with
almost all the remaining Children and their Friends.
Nevil’s “Best Hope” settlement was near the edge of a hanging valley set
in the wall of the Streamsdell river valley. It was in the Icefangs, just
beyond Woodcarver’s territorial claims in that direction. Those highlands
were not much favored by Tinish hunter-farmers, but Nevil was optimistic.
In fact, the first video showed him near the middle of the Streamsdell
Valley. “This land is ideal for humans, for independence and growth.
Come see this in a year. There will be the green buds of our new
hardicore grass, a chartreuse carpet stretching all the way to the edge of
the Nordhus glacier.”
“Good luck, asshole!” someone in the audience shouted. “You guys
never grew anything when you were here.”
The viewpoint bumpily slewed around, away from the glacier, past the
river and then up the north valley wall. Some of the Tines were making
wondering noises. Øvin said, “Hei, look! That must be why they picked
this place!”
From the camera’s position, they could see something that was probably
not visible to travelers taking the usual route along Streamsdell: a vertical
slit in the dark rock of the side valley.
“That’s what, twenty meters tall?” someone said.
Nevil’s friendly voice rambled on behind their local commentary: “—
apparently the Tines were never aware that the warm springs here
supported a cave system. It is a truly human discovery.” He walked back
into the field of view. “Fortunately, the team that found it were loyal to the

best human values. Jefri Olsndot reported this directly to me.”
The hall erupted. “That son of a bitch!” “All that time he was the ‘great
explorer,’ he was working for Nevil!”
Ravna had already checked: Jefri was not in the room.
On the display, Nevil had raised his hands, almost as if he knew the
racket his announcement would cause. “I know, I know. It could not have
been a purely human discovery. Jefri was accompanied by pack
Amdiranifani. Friendship with the Tines will always be our policy. We
seek friendship with Woodcarver. We have found friendship with Tycoon
of the Tropics.”
There was angry laughter. “Hei, don’t forget your late good friend
Vendacious!” and, “Ten days ago it was ‘Tycoon of the East Coast.’”
Nevil continued, “But my friends, a time has come for moral decisions.
For too long, we’ve accepted the advice of misguided humans and Tines.
Humans who truly want peace have a place with our settlement here at
Best Hope. There is no need for the endless preparation for apocalypse
that Ravna Bergsndot has forced upon you and the Tines of
Woodcarver’s Domain. There was a time when we were too young and
too desperate to know any better. Ravna and Woodcarver and Flenser
saved the lives of all us young refugees who survived their initial
massacre. We owe them so much. But at the same time, we owe our
parents. They died at the High Lab in a noble effort, the highest striving
that any humans have ever undertaken. We must not fall into the
destructive hatred that Ravna preaches.”
“Same old, same old!” Giske said. “We have records.”
Ravna heard Øvin reply, “I’m sure Nevil will soon have his own records.”
“Besides, no one knows what really happened at the High Lab,” said
someone else, that Ravna couldn’t see.
“We don’t even know what happened in near space, ten years ago!”
“Shut up!”
Nevil’s voice swept on, leaving a wake of tiny dissensions. “I hope that as

more of you take honest inventory of the facts, you’ll see beyond the
loyalties of the past, and that you and your friends—including any Tinish
Best Friends!—will come to join us here at our redoubt of Straum. All who
come with honest hearts will be welcome. But whether you agree with us
or not—please! Whatever the disagreements, peace between our two
human fragments is a desperate necessity. We may be all that is left of
our race. In fact, after the galactic genocide of ten years ago, we may be
all that is left from the High Beyond.”
Now Nevil was walking up the hillside, toward the entrance of his
“redoubt.” His people were coming out, walking down to meet him, all
smiles and laughter. Surrounded by familiar faces, Nevil turned and
looked into the camera. “So even if we remain apart, even if we have
profound disagreements … let us cooperate in surviving. You of the
Domain have immense resources. You have Oobii and the treasures in
Newcastle. These are the shared inheritance of our Beyonder origin. Let
us cooperate in using them.”
That first video left the kids arguing throughout the afternoon. The second
and third videos were so similar that by the time the fourth one came in,
Ravna just watched the kids’ reaction from the bridge. There was no
crowd in the Meeting Place; the message could be rewatched at any
time. The live audience consisted mainly of sad Children hoping to see a
few seconds of their lost loved ones.
•  •  •
But Nevil’s fourth message was different.
The video started with pictures of the Deniers’ new construction, inside
the caves. They were building without the aid of Oobii technology, but
now Ravna saw the use the Deniers had made of the gear stripped from
the Straumer Lander. Indeed, it was not junk—she’d simply never figured
out the user interface! Under sunny artificial lighting, the caves looked

warm and dry. Three “participation homes”—that’s what Nevil called them
—were already in place. Fresh timber was stacked everywhere, sawn
and measured, ready for the construction of more housing. The timber
and carpentering must be from Tycoon via Dekutomon. Somehow Nevil
had patched things up with his remaining ally.
The few Children down in Oobii’s Meeting Place were using their new
radios to tell others about the pictures. By the time a crowd started to
form in the Meeting Place, Nevil had finished his show-and-tell of Best
Hope marvels and was moving on to the platitudes. As usual he was
surrounded by smiling faces. But now, Ravna wasn’t paying much
attention; she could almost recite what the rest would be. Sure enough:
“So even though we have profound disagreements … let us cooperate in
surviving. You of the Domain have immense resources. We at Best Hope
have the goodwill of Tines from the Tropics all the way to the Long Lakes
and the East Coast. We have made peace with what was once a
fearsome Enemy: Tycoon. By winning his trust and goodwill, we have
secured the release of everyone he is holding. The release”—
Ravna’s eyes snapped up to the display. Downstairs, she heard gasps
and then babble.
—“is without conditions. It’s happening because we showed Tycoon that
—unlike Ravna and Woodcarver—we of Best Hope mean him no harm.”
Nevil paused. Around him, his Deniers were cheering. Downstairs on the
Oobii, the Children were cheering too, but more raggedly.
“We expect,” continued Nevil, “that most of the newly freed will prefer to
stay here at Best Hope.” He paused, letting them all think on the
consequences of that. “But we recognize that for the most extreme of
Ravna’s acolytes, that would destroy whatever goodwill our effort should
bring.” His expression darkened, one of the rare moments when the
public Nevil looked angry. “Make no mistake. We won’t trade the freedom
of any of these Children. We won’t force anyone to return to Ravna and
Woodcarver and Flenser. But we welcome a peace party from the
Domain. Any may come. Your party will have free access to all who are
released. You can determine for yourself the desires of the freed Children

and Tines.”
Ravna saw that Elspa Latterby had collapsed in tears. She wasn’t the
only one weeping. Ravna ran out of the bridge, heading for the Meeting
Place.

Chapter   43
Everyone wanted to go to the Great Prisoner Release. Woodcarver
exercised some of her old authority and asked Ravna to come up to the
New Castle for a private chat. They met in Woodcarver’s throne room.
Sht was big enough for its own little throne now. The other puppy nestled
on the shoulders of another member.
“Nevil has stolen half the human race and almost all the equipment that
wasn’t nailed down. I don’t want the rest of you in his claws.”
Ravna nodded; she had spent the afternoon talking to the kids, and
worrying about the same thing. “But you’ll provide a military escort,
right?”
“Of course! And unless Nevil has magic we don’t know about, my troops
totally outgun him. But consider. We have only Nevil’s word of this
agreement”—there was still no direct communication with Tycoon—“and
if there is a deal between those two, we have no idea what it is. For all I
know, Tycoon could field a force that would trump mine. There is no
treachery that I put beyond these two.”
That was something the remaining Children agreed on, too. “Okay. I think
I can persuade most of the Children to stay behind.” Ravna no longer
looked like the victim of a sadistic mugging, but the kids were still
amazingly solicitous of her. She had to be careful in making casual
statements lest they take them as imperatives. “I am going, however.”
Woodcarver emitted a sigh. “That’s what I was afraid of, and I fear it
undoes all our other caution.”
Ravna smiled. “I take it that you’re not going?”
“I’m not crazy.” Woodcarver’s tone was sour. “On top of everything else,
there’s the possibility that all this is a feint, and Tycoon is set to attack us

here.”
Ravna nodded. What Woodcarver said made sense, but—“You know, I
think there’s still a chance for Pilgrim. From Wenda, I gather that Jo and
Pilgrim crashed right in the middle of Tycoon’s operation. I know Tycoon
wasn’t aware of that! It’s possible that Pilgrim is still in hiding down there.
And Tycoon is not the monster Vendacious was. Even if Tycoon has
captured Pilgrim, I think he’d be safe.”
Woodcarver sat back. All her eyes were on Ravna, except for the
puppies, who were looking at each other. They did that just when the old
Woodcarver would have said something really nasty. When she finally
spoke, Woodcarver just sounded sad: “But Jo didn’t tell Wenda what had
become of Pilgrim. And when we were all on stage, we learned nothing
more; Tycoon was too busy ripping at her. Face it, Ravna. Both Jo and
Pilgrim are dead.”
This was a dark outlook Woodcarver was not showing in public. Maybe
the pessimism was entirely little Sht’s influence, or maybe it had more
history. “You also grieve for Vendacious, don’t you, Woodcarver?”
Woodcarver’s heads came up abruptly. “Yes. I grieve for a monstrous
pack, who after a century shared virtually none of my blood. Even my
own advisors call my sympathy ‘the Queen’s madness.’”
“Not … madness.” But Ravna remembered her horror when Gannon was
crushed; Woodcarver’s grief was a different thing. “You packs—you in
particular—have done something most civilizations can’t do until they’ve
externalized thought; you’ve taken biological selection by the throats and
put it in service to ideas. Your offspring packs are your great
experiments.”
“And two of them were the greatest Tinish monsters of all time.”
“True,” said Ravna. “But consider. Old Flenser changed the Northwest
almost as much as you have—and he created and recreated Steel, and
Steel designed and assembled and guided Amdiranifani.”
After a moment, Woodcarver replied, “Long ago, I imagined Vendacious
as a weapon against Flenser. That weapon ran amok. It has killed so

many. It probably killed the pack my members especially loved. And yet,
however much I hate Vendacious, I can’t share everyone’s joy at his total
death.”
Ravna nodded, trying unsuccessfully to imagine a reformed Vendacious.
“So now, listen more to your members. Hope for what still may be.”
•  •  •
Of course, their wagon trip up the Streamsdell Valley was nothing like
Ravna’s days with Chitiratifor. This expedition had decent food and good
tents to sleep in. Domain troops were spread out around them and
scouting ahead. The travelers who suffered were the Children who were
most desperate to come. Øvin refused to give up on Edvi. Elspa had
more hope for her sister Geri, even though she had heard Tycoon’s
terrible voice. Jefri said he was optimistic about Amdi, but he didn’t look
optimistic. Giske Gisksndot didn’t talk about her feelings at all, but anger
radiated from her. Right after Nevil’s big announcement, the Chief Denier
had “generously” allowed her to speak with her husband. Giske knew that
no hostages would come home with her, that Rolf was determined to
keep their two sons. “Powers be damned, I just want to see them!” she
had cried to Ravna, begging to be included in the expedition. In the end,
Ravna couldn’t refuse her, but she worried what Giske might do when
she finally confronted Rolf and Nevil.
The only traveler who seemed unconcerned was Ritl, though she
complained as much as ever, especially when she was around Ravna.
The singleton had not been given a choice about coming, but then she
hadn’t been left in the Domain by her own choice either. Fate had
bounced the animal from place to place, but within the limits of her
intelligence, she seemed to be searching for something. Ravna hoped
that Tycoon would be grateful for her return—or at least not hold that
return against Ravna and company.

After five days on the road, their expedition came in sight of Nevil’s
hanging valley. Benky’s troops set up a perimeter and the travelers made
camp by the river. While everyone waited impatiently for some sign from
above, Flenser-Tyrathect spread himself out on sun-warmed boulders by
the river. Flenser had brought several telescopes. He idled away the time
peering up at the lip of the hanging valley. He seemed to be enjoying
himself. “I wager that Nevil won’t invite us into his caves. I remember
when I was a co-conspirator.” His heads, except for the ones eyeballing
the heights, all bobbed in a grin. “He never trusted me with the exact
location, but it was clear that Vendacious and probably Tycoon knew
about it. I predict that Tycoon will support ‘Best Hope’ just enough to be a
problem.”
Ravna had come over to sit nearby, beside the member with the white-
tipped low-sound ears. Even at its best, this crippled creature couldn’t
have climbed the rocks, but the rest of Flenser still kept it close. Ravna
stroked White Tips along the neck, almost as she would a dog. It always
accepted such affection. That had been one of the things that had made
her want to trust Flenser-Tyrathect. White Tips emitted a rumbling purr;
all of Flenser might be less of a sarcastic twit for a few minutes now.
“So you think the prisoner release is going to be down here?” said
Ravna. “I don’t see signs of anyone but us here.”
Jefri and others were walking toward them from the tents. Despite Jef’s
ambiguous reputation—some of the loyalist Children thought he was
Ravna’s secret agent and others were convinced he was a traitor—Jef
had ended up being their chief human advisor on this outing. As long as
he was clearly working from Ravna’s game plan, everyone seemed
willing to accept his expertise. The camp wouldn’t have settled down so
quickly and comfortably without Jefri and Benky.
Elspa was just a few feet behind Jef. She gestured to Flenser. “Still no
sign of Deniers?”
“Nope, sorry.” Flenser waggled his telescopes authoritatively. Today he
had better eyesight than anyone.

Elspa plunked down near Ravna. “I pray … I pray they have my Geri.”
Jefri came around to Ravna’s right so he was standing by White Tips. He
muttered just loud enough for Ravna’s ears and the pack. “They better
have Amdi. There’s no excuse for not returning him.”
Flenser’s voice came even more softly, barely more than a hum that
Ravna felt where her fingertips touched White Tips. “And they better have
Screwfloss.”
Their party sat by the river for a time, speculating, sometimes arguing. A
meal broke up the discussion, but not the mood. Afterwards Jefri was
gone for a time, checking with Benky that the soldiers and lookouts were
in position. Ritl was occasionally visible, on some scouting mission of her
own.
Ravna checked in with their hidden expedition participant: Scrup had
parked his airboat on a mountain pass selected by Oobii. He was playing
relay; ionospheric bounce was not good enough today. Ravna wanted
reliable communication back to Woodcarver and Oobii. Scrupilo kibitzed
on the link but wasn’t supposed to mess with the main data stream.
“Amazing,” he said. “From this mountain top looking east, it’s like being
the Pack of Packs. I see glaciers and mountains going on forever, like a
stony sea. Pilgrim used to brag about this.”
“I still don’t have imagery, Scrupilo.” Ravna’s data tiara was giving her
audio, but she had no windows from Oobii.
“Sorry,” said Scrupilo. “Maybe your tiara is finally busted? We’re getting
good pictures from Wilm Linden’s camera.”
“Okay.” Audio plus Wilm’s camera should be enough for today. She
talked past Scrupilo: “Ship! What are you seeing?”
Oobii replied, “My radar shows mostly clear sky, a few bird swarms. I
can’t see all the way down into the valleys.”
“Yes,” interrupted Scrupilo. “Damn Nevil. If his idiots hadn’t crashed EA2,
we might have our own look-down radar.” He ranted about Denier
incompetence for some minutes; Scrupilo had his own geeky slant on

what was wrong with Nevil.
The sun was well past noon when the packs farthest from the noise of
the river sounded alarms. Their shouts were not quiet alerts. They were
booming chords that announced, “Airship sounds! Airship sounds!”
Flenser was instantly scanning the ridgeline. “I don’t see anything.” He
kept his scopes aimed at Nevil’s side valley, but there was a subtle
change in the rest of him. He was listening with most of his attention. “I’m
too close to the river. It’s not the best hearing … Yes! Airships, definitely.”
Now other packs began shouting. They were racing around, not looking
anywhere in particular. Give me a clue, guys! thought Ravna. Where
should I be looking?
Benky came racing down from the tree line, jabbing snouts at the
southeastern sky.
Ravna followed the gestures. Nothing. And she still couldn’t hear a shred
of engine sound … but now Oobii reported secondary radar echoes that
might be aircraft following the curve of the Streamsdell Valley.
A minute passed. There! Just above where the glacial valley turned
further south, she saw two dark spots floating against the snow glare.
Flenser was dancing around his telescope watchers. He had his own
news: “Hei, hei! There are two-legs coming down from Nevil’s little
valley.”
Eyes turned from the sky to the ridgeline. At least a dozen tiny figures
were descending the valley wall. The abrupt, simultaneous emergence
was as dramatic as Nevil and Tycoon had no doubt planned.
•  •  •
One of the airships might have been the one Ravna and Jefri had flown
on; it had the Pack of Packs twelvesome painted on its nose. But the

other airship was just as large. There was plenty of room for all the
prisoners.
The ships didn’t immediately land. They circled in a long elliptical path
above Ravna’s group, flying back and forth along the breeze that swept
the valley.
Øvin made a rude gesture at the airships. “The crapheads aren’t going to
land until the Great Nevil gives the command.”
Flenser’s had one telescope on the descending humans and the other
two on the airships. Øvin Verring’s comment got his attention though:
“Heh. That’s certainly the claim Dear Nevil would make. But I remember
EA2 landings. It’s tricky without a ground crew to help.”
Magda Norasndot said, “Yes. Be nice, Øvin. We can’t afford nastiness.”
She and Elspa Latterby were already talking about where the ships would
land. They wanted to be at the front of the welcomers.
Benky had run back into the forest. Now he and some of his troops came
into view, accompanying the Denier party. Ravna didn’t need a telescope
to spot Nevil Storherte. How did he keep his clothes so clean out here?
The villain strode confidently toward them. As he came nearer, Ravna
could see he was grinning as with general good nature.
“Greetings, greetings!” Nevil shouted as the loyalist Children ran out to
meet him. He stopped well short of Ravna to talk with those most
desperate for news.
There were fifteen Deniers in his party. Tami Ansndot and several others
were carrying cams and comms. They looked like a news crew from
some ancient time. It was interesting the added importance they seemed
to give whomever they were pointing at.
Nevil had picked Elspa out of the crowd. Ravna strained to hear him; the
tiara was no help today. “Yes,” Nevil was saying, “communications have
been awful. Getting better comms should be everyone’s highest priority.
But I know your Geri is one of those whom Tycoon found. I know for a
fact she is on the first airship—” He turned as Magda touched his arm.
He nodded, giving Magda a hug. “Yes, I hope the Norasndots will be here

too. We’ll know soon enough.” Some of the Children were openly crying.
Oops. Where is Giske? She wouldn’t be in the middle of all this unless
she was carrying a knife. Ravna glanced quickly around. There—Giske
was almost thirty meters away, arguing with Bili Yngva.
Now Nevil stepped back and his voice became more public: “Please.
Give us a few minutes. We have to get the airships safely landed.” He
looked into the sky at the farther airship, just now making a turn at the far
end of its circuit. “I’ll land the one with our friends first. The other is just a
backup flier.” He delivered this disappointment so casually that people
scarcely seemed to notice. Could you really get all the missing on one of
these airships?
Nevil touched his ear, like some player in an ancient drama. In addition to
what he had stolen, he must be getting radios from Tycoon. With the
orbiter for a relay, he had better comms than the Domain. Nevil looked
around, then gave a go-ahead wave. Most of the Denier Children ran out
into the marshy flats by the river’s outer curve. Ah, there was Del
Ronsndot in the lead, waving an arm in a wide circle. The other Children
spread out. One of the airships was coming toward them.
The ship’s buzzing rose to a whine. Its bow dipped till the long airform
hung foreshortened, descending to earth. All conversation stopped. This
was a little like what you might see in civilization—only there, the ship
would be a solid mass, perhaps one hundred thousand tonnes, a vehicle
that could navigate solar systems.
By the time the first craft had dropped lines and Del’s crew had pounded
down anchor spikes, the second airship was descending to land a
hundred meters behind. Ravna noticed that Benky was shifting his troops
around, inconspicuously setting up fields of fire.
At that point, almost everyone surged forward onto the marshy ground.
Benky looked outraged; some of his own troops had joined the crowd.
Here in the middle of nowhere, a couple of dozen humans and some
packs were doing a good job of imitating a mob. Jefri—who was already
at the first airship—got some of the troops into a circle around the ship’s

main hatch. Wilm Linden had made it to the front with his camera.
Flenser scrambled down from the river rocks. He let Ravna help with
White Tips and his wheelbarrow. They made slow progress across the
marsh. Ritl hung back with them. Maybe she realized that she was likely
to get trampled if she rushed into the crowd.
Everyone made way for Nevil. As he walked by Jefri, words passed
between the two, but Ravna was too far away to hear. She glanced at
Flenser, who was watching the exchange too. “Couldn’t hear it,” he said.
Maybe Nevil’s expression had darkened at Jefri’s words. But then he
grinned at Jef, and seemed to say something encouraging. He turned
back to crowd, all smiles. Powers, even improvising, he was doing as
well as back at the New Meeting Place.
“Friends,” he shouted, his voice thin in the breeze. “Friends. Please stay
a little back. I’m not sure of the order our loved ones will come out—” but
he was waving Elspa to come forward.
Ravna and Flenser had reached the back of the crowd. Ravna tried to
see around or over those ahead of her. Ritl wasn’t helping. She was
running around between Ravna’s legs, complaining, presumably because
she couldn’t see a thing. Except for the fact that she was making trouble,
this was very unlike Ritl. Why wasn’t she flanking the mob, or worming
her through the Children to get a front row view?
Wilm Linden held the Domain camera high over his head, scanning
across the crowd. Then he turned back to the sealed hatch. “You’re
getting Wilm’s video?” Ravna said to her relay link.
“Yup,” Scrup’s voice came back, and a second later Woodcarver
confirmed: “Ravna, I’m keeping your audio private to Scrupilo and myself.
We’ve got Wilm’s transmission showing in Oobii’s meeting place—as well
as the video the Deniers are sending through the orbiter. We’re hanging
on Nevil’s every word.” She gobbled a mild obscenity.
Ravna grinned but didn’t reply. Beside her, Flenser had made a Tinish
pyramid of himself and now had a pair of eyes with a clear view. Benky
stayed close to ground; she noticed he had three packs watching away

from the main event.
Both airships had shut down their engines. Nevil was into a pregnant
pause. The moment captured Ravna as much as anyone. Down by her
ankles, even Ritl had fallen silent. The loudest sound was the breeze
whistling up the valley.
Behind the port, there was a squeaking sound, the hatch wheel being
turned. Ravna stepped to one side, finally got a sliver of a good view. The
hull section swung out, dropping the main stairway down.
“So what’s inside?” Flenser hissed at her.
“It’s too dark for me to see,” said Ravna. The entrance was in the shadow
of the overhanging hull.
Woodcarver’s voice came over the link. “Oobii did something with the
image. There’s at least a singleton crouched at the top of the stairs.”
Somebody was pushing at Ravna’s side, licking her hand. Ritl! “What?
Are you crazy?” Ravna said to the animal. “Go run! See for yourself.”
Why was Ritl suddenly so shy? She was making desperate little whistling
noises. In a way, that was more distracting than her usual bitching.
“Okay,” said Ravna, “but you better not slash me.” She reached under
Ritl’s forelegs and hoisted the creature up the way the Children lifted their
Best Friend’s puppies. Of course there was a problem since Ritl was an
average-sized female adult. Ravna staggered back a step, then
recovered. At least the creature didn’t try to hold on with her claws, but
now Ravna was facing into lots of pointy teeth and the usual bad breath.
Then Ritl twisted her head around to look at the airship.
For a moment Ritl was as quiet as everyone else, watching the space at
the top of the stairs. Then the singleton that Woodcarver reported came
sauntering out. No wonder it had been hard to see. It wore a cloak of
midnight black. The radio cloak’s golden highlights were mostly lost in the
shade.
The singleton was Zek. He looked a lot better than the last time Ravna
had seen him. Zek glanced around with an alertness and self-possession
that must mean he had good connectivity. He nodded in Nevil’s direction

and boomed out the words, “I speak for Tycoon.” His voice was not
Tycoon’s frightened little girl’s voice. It actually sounded like one of
Amdi’s voices, the kind he used when he was pretending to be an adult
human, someone serious and important.
Nevil gave a little start of surprise, but his response seemed as confident
as ever: “As we agreed, sir, I have brought humans and packs from the
Domain. Today we can settle many of the issues that poisoned their
minds in the past. Have you brought those you rescued from the wild?”
“Indeed.” Zek’s head gave a jerky nod that might have been part of a
cynical smile. “My employer has sent me with all the humans and
Domainish Tines that we rescued on your behalf.”
Zek stepped to the side, giving way to whatever was behind him. Ravna
noticed that Nevil was urging Elspa forward so she would be at the foot of
the stairs and visible to all his cameras.
A small human figure appeared at the top of the stairs. Elspa gave a cry
and started forward. But this wasn’t Geri Latterby. It was Timor Ristling,
who even at fourteen was almost as short as Geri. He gave Elspa a little
wave and smiled, maybe not understanding the disappointment in
Elspa’s face. He turned back into the darkened hallway and made
coaxing gestures. After a moment, someone as small as he was took his
hand. The face that peered out at them was as pale as any Straumer’s
face could ever be.
“Geri!” Elspa ran up the steps, sweeping her little sister into her arms.
She teetered for an instant at the top, then came down a few steps to
lean against the top rungs with her knee. For a moment, she just rocked
the child in her arms and wept. Geri herself was much quieter. She
seemed to be reaching back toward Timor, and after a moment Elspa
brought the boy into her embrace.
As Elspa and the little ones came down the steps, the crowd jostled
close, Nevil’s camera crew at the fore. Ravna felt Ritl tense, buzzing. She
was still looking at the top of the stairs. The only thing there was Zek—
but now the creature was looking past the crowd, directly at Ravna. Or

Ritl. The singleton exploded out of Ravna’s arms and raced into the
crowd. Crazy animal! Or maybe Ritl had somehow concluded that Amdi
was here and about to be released.
Ravna had had enough of standing back here. She touched Flenser’s
White Tips and said, “I’m going to get closer.”
None of Flenser looked her way, but the pack replied, “That’s fine. Check
out Geri. I don’t think she qualifies as a propaganda coup for Nevil.”
•  •  •
Three packs came out of the ship. Two were city guards who had been
missing since before the first kidnappings. They were battered and
scarred, though their injuries were mostly healed. The third was a
fragment, all that remained of Edvi Verring’s Best Friend Dumpster.
There was angry muttering from Benky’s troops on seeing all this
evidence of mistreatment.
Some of Tycoon’s packs had descended from the other airship. They
looked like soldiers, but they kept their distance. Zek was the only
crewmember who appeared from the first craft. He kept to his place at
the top of the stairs; he wasn’t saying much, mainly just ushering each
prisoner out the door. Nevil did the talking. It took all his skill to spin this
to his advantage.
Ravna worked her way through the crowd toward the little hillock where
Elspa was sitting.
“Ravna!” Timor saw her and hobbled quickly in her direction. Ravna gave
him a hug. Timor was talking fast and enthusiastically. “I was so worried
about you, Ravna! We were mostly kept in our dungeons, but Tycoon
said that—” He stopped himself as if he shouldn’t be saying more, or
perhaps he thought Ravna wasn’t paying attention.
But I was paying attention. Ravna leaned away and brushed his hair into

place. His face lit up with the smile she remembered.
Timor drew her over to where Elspa sat with Geri on her lap. Magda and
Lisl were on their knees beside her, ignoring the continuing hubbub by
the airship’s stairs.
Elspa Latterby sat with her head bowed, almost curled around her baby
sister. Kneeling beside her on the soaking grass, Ravna looked at the
little girl. Geri Latterby had been such a happy kid, but ever since Ravna
had heard her frightened voice coming out of Tycoon, Ravna’s fears for
the girl had grown.
Geri was not crying. Her expression was distant. She scarcely reacted to
her sister’s touch. But even though Geri didn’t speak, Ravna could see.
Two fingers were missing from Geri’s right hand. Her left arm lay at a
strange angle. She was dressed in a clean, warm robe … that didn’t quite
cover the scars on her neck.
“She’s been tortured,” said Magda. She looked like she was chewing on
glass. “Tycoon must pay for this.”
“No!” said Timor. “The big guy only helped her—” but the Children didn’t
seem to be listening, and he shut up.
•  •  •
Nevil Storherte was circulating, mainly among the Deniers. His camera
gang was split between tracking him and watching the airship entrance.
Giske was nowhere in sight, but Ravna noticed that Jefri and Øvin were
closing in on the Chief Denier. If this was the end of the releases, there
was going to be trouble.
“S’cuse me, s’cuse me,” she said, working her way through the crowd
around Nevil. Meantime, she muttered to her remote link: “Is this all the
people we’re getting?” The airship’s hatch was still open, but Zek had
disappeared from his post on the stairs.

Woodcarver’s voice came back: “That could be … but hold off for now.
The smart thing is to see how Nevil tries to explain the missing prisoners,
then decide on the proper action.”
“I don’t think that’s an option. Both Jefri and Øvin are going to start
pounding on Nevil.”
In any case, Nevil had noticed her approach. He waved in her direction.
“Hei, folks, please let Ravna Bergsndot through.”
Okay, for sure she was being set up. So be it. She nodded as casually as
she could, and stepped into the open space in front of Nevil.
Nevil’s smile was as gracious as the day when he ambushed her at the
New Meeting Place—but this time Ravna was attacking: “Nevil, I’ve been
talking to Elspa Latterby. That’s her sister Geri who came down the ramp
first and—”
Storherte blinked, but she’d given him enough warning that he actually
managed to interrupt her: “Yes, I asked Tycoon to have Geri brought
down the very first.” His smile had morphed into sympathy and serious
concern. “I’m afraid some Tines are insanely hostile toward humans.
Some of them got to Geri before Tycoon could make a rescue.”
There was muttered gobbling among the Best Friends and Benky’s
troops. Woodcarver’s voice sounded privately in Ravna’s ear: “I had to
put up with a lot of this ‘insane hater’ talk while you were gone.” But the
Deniers were nodding sympathetically. Even some loyalist Children
seemed to accept Nevil’s point. And in fact, something like Nevil’s claim
was true, though apparently Nevil had decided never to mention
Vendacious.
“Okay,” said Ravna, “but we’re still missing at least three packs and five
humans. What about Pilgrim? What about Johanna? Remember her?
The woman who loved you enough to propose marriage. Are we going to
see any of these people today?”
Nevil’s head rocked back a fraction and a certain “honest” indignation
showed. “Whatever you may believe, I don’t control Tycoon. He’s my ally,
and at least as honorable as your Woodcarver. You all know what that

means.” He let the words hang, creating lies out of pregnant silence. Just
an instant before Ravna recovered from her own stunned indignation,
Nevil continued, “I think we were all at the meeting on the Meadows. That
did not turn out well. Sometimes a past wrong is so terrible that a person
can’t think straight. I think that’s what happened to Tycoon that day.
We’re not going to get Johanna back today. Tycoon claims she’s alive,
but I’m not sure we’ll ever get her back.” He looked around imploringly.
“And if we do get Jo back, then it would be up to us to judge her. I—I
don’t think I could do that.”
Mr. Radio—the Zek end of him—was back at the top of the stairs, no
doubt transmitting every syllable back to the Tropics. Zek’s gaze flickered
back and forth between Ravna and Nevil.
Ravna gave the singleton a glare, but her main attention stayed on Nevil:
“Your lies are piled so deep, I don’t know where to start shovelling.
Woodcarver is not like Tycoon. Understand this, both you and Tycoon:
Having peace with us means getting Johanna back. In the meantime,
what about the others? Or do you claim they’re criminals, too?”
“Yeah! What about Edvi?” That from Øvin Verring.
Magda Norasndot shouted, “And what about my sister’s family?”
Nevil raised his hands. “Look, we didn’t receive a good accounting till just
after today’s landing. Tycoon understands your point as well as anyone.
He wants justice, too—but not all our missing friends were ever held by
him. He knows nothing of Pilgrim. He has searched the wilderness and
the Tropics, used all his contacts. Tycoon found Øvin’s cousin, but too
late to rescue him. Edvi’s remains are aboard the airship. As for Jana and
Basl Norasndot and their baby Kim—no sign of them was found
anywhere. I’m so sorry, Magda.” There were no glib condolences for
Øvin. Maybe Nevil realized that any such might cause an explosion.
Magda had turned away as Nevil spoke. She was staring into the
distance, maybe believing. The Norasndots had been missing well before
the kidnappings. The two young parents had chosen to travel with a small
trading group all the way to Woodcarver’s old capital, through wilderness

that was known to contain weasel nests. Their party had never arrived.
Rescuers had found the remains of a weasel ambush, but no human
bodies.
“So then, what about the packs that we know Tycoon is holding?” That
was Jefri! Somehow he had slipped past the Deniers to stand next to
Nevil. Jef had his left arm draped across Nevil’s shoulders. It might have
been a gesture of bonhomie—Jef was smiling—but Ravna could see that
his hand was dug into Nevil’s shoulder, and Jefri’s other hand was
holding something under his jacket.
Merto Yngva and his friends started forward, their hands slipping into the
sling bags they carried. Every faction here was armed, but so far no one
had been waving around their guns. Nevil gave Merto and company a
strangled grin. “It’s okay, guys.” His smile stabilized as he looked at Jefri.
“Hei, Jef. I think you’ve had firsthand experience with Tycoon. He can be
obsessive, true?”
Jefri must have tightened his grip, because Nevil gave a little gasp. Now
that was the properly eloquent way to respond to Nevil! Storherte
continued, his voice strained. “Tycoon has been releasing folks in
approximately the reverse order of captivity, the most needy first. Okay?”
Jefri shrugged. “I’m still waiting for results,” he said.
“Well, this chitchat is just delaying the final releases.” Nevil turned his
head toward Zek. “Bring us the two remaining packs.”
Zek disappeared from sight. A moment later, a pack member poked its
snout into view. It came bouncing down the stairs, followed by three of its
fellows. The pack’s cloaks covered most its body, but she recognized
Remnant Screwfloss—even down to the bodypaint disguise.
Certainly Flenser-Tyrathect did too. From his place behind the crowd, he
bellowed something painfully loud. “COMING THROUGH!” was what the
sound meant, and even a naive human would get out of the way. With
two of him pulling White Tips’ wheelbarrow, the pack really couldn’t run. It
didn’t matter. Screwfloss came bouncing across the boggy grass,
meeting his creator more than halfway. The two packs stopped a couple

of meters apart, so close that coherent thought might be a problem. One
of the remnant snuffled closer. It twisted its cape to lie down on the grass.
Flenser came partway around it, almost reaching the others—and
grooming the one it could touch.
“Are you getting this?” Ravna said to her remote link.
Woodcarver’s voice came back: “Yes. I don’t know what to think. I’m still
pissed at Flenser for resurrecting Steel.” But Woodcarver sounded more
sad than annoyed.
Jefri had eased up on Nevil. Jef’s smile didn’t have quite the deadliness
of seconds before. “One more now,” he said.
Zek had disappeared again. So Amdi must be next. All eyes were on the
stairway, but something made Ravna looked back at the crowd,
especially around their ankles. The last six tendays had taught her to
watch for low-flying surprises. Yes. There was a single snout poking out
from between a couple of Children. Ritl was waiting in ambush.
Zek came back into view. He scanned the crowd, maybe pausing at the
sight of Ritl. Then he arched his neck and waved at whoever was behind
him.
The members that came to the top of the stairs were not as heavy as
Ravna remembered, and one of the heads was slightly misshapen.
“Amdi!” Jef shouted, turning away from Nevil. The rest of Amdi came out
in rush, almost knocking Zek off the platform. They were all looking at
Jefri. Amdi was saying something in Samnorsk, about Johanna, but it
was so focused on Jef that Ravna couldn’t make sense of it.
The stairs were wide but not eight-wide, and Amdi came down like an
avalanche.
Ritl streaked out of the crowd, babbling loud abuse. She swung around in
front of Jefri and turned toward Amdi. For a moment she had both Jefri
and Amdi balked. She was chastising Amdi, or perhaps mocking him.
Amdiranifani drew in on himself, not responding.
After a moment more, Ritl made a spiky, dismissive noise—and ran

directly through Amdi. The Amdi pack didn’t scatter, but milled around,
disconcerted by this foreign fragment of mind and fur and gender that
was pushing and shoving past its members. Jaws were snapping and
heads were turning, and when Ritl emerged on the other side, some of
Amdi started after her. But Ritl didn’t stop, and all of him were left behind,
watching her departure. Ritl continued on her way, but more slowly. She
was still emitting abusive noises, but now her head was stuck snootily in
the air. She climbed the airship’s steps, then turned to stand close to Zek.
All the packs were gobbling. Most of the Children looked puzzled, but
Ravna suddenly imagined a human analogy. Amdi was like the teenage
boy who long has been rejecting the advances of an aggressive girl.
Then one day, she gives him a big smile and brushes close by him,
running her hand through his hair as she walks—out of his life. And the
boy is left looking around, relieved and suddenly wistful for what he’s
missed.
Jefri must have noticed the same thing. He was laughing even as he ran
to Amdi, even as Amdi recovered and surrounded him.
•  •  •
So these were all the prisoners they were going to get.
Jefri came out of his huddle with Amdi and strode angrily back toward
Nevil. Ravna could guess the reason. Two of Amdi wore dark bandages
on their heads. More torture. Amdi ran along after Jef, pulling at his
trouser cuffs as if to restrain him.
“Hei, Nevil!” The shout came from uphill, at the edge of the forest. It was
Bili Yngva. Giske was right behind him. She had both her sons! The older
one was holding her hand, while she carried the other on her hip. Rolf
walked just behind the trio. As she came closer, everyone could see that
she and Rolf were smiling. Giske was clearly overjoyed; she couldn’t

keep her eyes off her two boys.
Giske and company walked to the edge of where the river grass turned
marshy. Nevil and most of the Children ran to greet her. “What’s this?”
asked Nevil, his voice full of surprise.
Bili grinned back. “Giske has made a decision.” He gave Giske an
encouraging nod.
“Ah, yes,” said Giske, looking back and forth across her audience. “Bili
showed me what you’ve done up there in the caves. It truly is as
comfortable as what we have on, on the coast. It was so good to see my
husband again.” Rolf gave her a pat on the shoulder. “And it’s so
wonderful to be with my sons!” She looked down at her kids and her
smile blossomed. “I think that Best Hope is truly humankind’s best hope.
Please let me join you.”
Ravna heard scattered gasps. Nevil looked as surprised as anyone.
“Giske, you are welcome to join us.” He stepped forward as if to embrace
her, then turned to face the crowd. “All persons of goodwill are welcome
to be a part of Best Hope!”
It might only have been Ravna’s imagination, but in that instant she saw
a flicker of revulsion cross Giske’s face. Giske had given up a lot to be
with her sons; she had not given up what she believed. But she
answered the crowd’s questions, still smiling, seeming to convince even
her closest friends that she was happy in her decision.
Afterwards, Nevil looked well-satisfied with himself. Giske’s apparent
change of heart gave him the ideal platform for his Best Hope sales pitch
and distracted from everything else. “We have a good relationship with
Tycoon, my friends. If we all—those living under Woodcarver and Ravna
and those of us here at Best Hope—if we all can cooperate, I think we
can convince Tycoon that villains are rare among the humans. Someday,
hopefully someday soon, even Johanna Olsndot can be returned to us.” It
was all a bit illogical, but he brought it off; some of the loyalist Children
were giving him a serious listen.
Pray Nevil shuts down soon, thought Ravna. She wasn’t up to listening to

the monster. She had get out of here, chat with Flenser and Woodcarver,
decide how to deal with Tycoon’s failure to release Johanna.
Then Nevil looked her way, and she realized she should have walked
away sooner. “So I’m pleading with you, Ravna. Will you and Woodcarver
cooperate with us here at Best Hope?”
Ravna opened her mouth. No peace! Not without Johanna. Not without
word about Pilgrim. For better or worse, she was preempted by words
that boomed from the airship’s hatch: “I think the question is, will Ravna
cooperate with the Tines of Tycoon?” It was Zek. At least, Zek was
making the sounds.
Nevil turned toward the airship, a stupefied expression flickering across
his face. “Um, yes. Of course, I meant—” Nevil was actually floundering!
It was heartwarming, even if it took a crazypack like Tycoon to make it
happen.
Zek’s voice rode over Nevil’s: “However much we are allies, we have
independent interests. I want to know Ravna and Woodcarver’s
intentions—”
“Yes, certainly—”
“—and I think a private meeting is in order.”
Nevil’s expression was fixed and blank. He turned and had a short,
emphatic conversation with Bili. When he turned back to the crowd he
was smiling again, literally putting the best face on the inevitable. “I
agree, sir.” He gestured in Ravna’s direction. “I can only hope that Ravna
has sufficient trust to meet with you.”
And now Ravna was the center of attention. “I’d be happy to chat with Mr.
Radio. As, as for privacy, he’s welcome in one of our tents.”
In her ear, Woodcarver said, “Good.”
“That’s not really private.” Zek’s voice was uncompromising. “Please
come aboard. My employer guarantees your safety. You may leave as
soon as you wish.”
“No!” hissed Woodcarver. “Tycoon already has Johanna, and he’s clearly

nuts.”
Across the field, Flenser was still visible, though beyond the range of
focused sound. He was looking back at Ravna, and now gave her a
surreptitious, encouraging wave. So this world’s deepest student of
treachery thought she should trust Tycoon—but wanted that advice kept
secret?
Ravna slowly walked to the base of the airship’s steps. Those seconds
gave her no insight, but Scrupilo and Woodcarver were full of anxious
objections. Benky and Øvin came running over. “You’re not going in
alone,” Øvin said. Where was Jefri?
From the top of the steps, Zek gazed down at her. “I said private, Ravna.
Leave these others behind you.”
Nevil was looking less puzzled and more satisfied. This was outside his
game plan, but he seemed to figure that no matter what, it would work to
his benefit.
Woodcarver: “Ssst! What does Amdi say?”
Jefri and Amdi were still with the other rescuees, also beyond the range
of focused sound. Like everyone else, they were just … watching. Jefri
was on his knees, close to Amdi, his gaze fixed on Ravna. So was
Amdi’s. They looked very much as they had that day by the arrow trees.
“It’ll be okay, Øvin,” she said softly. And then more loudly: “I’m going
aboard.”
•  •  •
The inside of the airship smelled of packs and humans all crammed
together. In fact, this was the ship she and Jefri had flown in; she
recognized the dings and scratches. Funny that she hadn’t noticed the
smell then. Behind her, somepack ominously slammed the hatch closed.

Ah. It was the innocuous steward, not a gunpack.
Zek turned left and led her along the main corridor, toward the bow. Ritl
stuck close to Zek. She was making a singsong racket that probably
didn’t amount to anything. Every so often, Zek emitted a chord that meant
roughly “please be quiet already.”
Zek’s new human voice said, “We’ll talk on the command deck. It’s been
properly muffled against eavesdropping.”
Woodcarver’s voice came faintly in her ear, maybe inaudible to Zek:
“Except for me and Scrupilo! Just pretend we’re not here.”
“That’s fine,” said Ravna. Her words might have been a reply to Zek’s
comment. She glanced down at the singleton. “So, Zek, who are you
speaking for right now?”
Zek emitted a very natural-sounding human chuckle. “This is really just
me, Mr. Radio. It’s good to see you, Ravna.”
Ah?
They had reached the end of the corridor. Zek scooted up the spiral stairs
with Ritl close behind. Ravna had the usual problems winding around the
spiral. Up top—
Up top, Johanna sat on one of Tycoon’s perches. She had a huge grin on
her face.
Ravna must have let out a shriek, for Johanna put a finger to her lips.
“We’re shielded, but there are limits—and we don’t want people to think
you’re being tortured.” She bounced to her feet and they had a big hug,
not saying anything for a moment.
Then Ravna stepped back, speechless. She’d had surprises this big in
the past—but rarely pleasant ones. Now she could only wave her hands
inarticulately. On her private link, Woodcarver and Scrupilo sounded
even more confused than Ravna.
“It’s Johanna,” Ravna finally said.
“Yup. It’s really me. I’m really alive, unharmed, and happy to see you.”

“And you’re not a prisoner?”
“No … I could walk off this ship right this minute. But I’m not going to.” Jo
wasn’t smiling anymore. She turned and looked through the gauzy
quilting that covered the bow windows. Outside, the sun was so bright
that you could see the landscape ahead of the ship. “I’m sorry to mislead
my friends, though I’m sure Jefri already knows the truth.” She waved at
Ravna’s tiara. “And I’ll bet Woodcarver does too.”
Ravna nodded and touched the tiara. Now Woodcarver’s voice was
audible in the room: “Yes, I’m here. Scrupilo, too. I think I’ve figured out
what’s going on. This is all to set up secret cooperation with Tycoon?”
“That’s pretty much it. And I’m here to convince you of Tycoon’s good
will.”
Ravna put in, “She looks fine to me, Woodcarver.”
Woodcarver: “And what of Pilgrim?”
Johanna brashness disappeared. Suddenly, she looked like she’d walked
into a wall. “I … I think Pilgrim is dead, at least dismembered.
Vendacious chased him into the Choir. Woodcarver, can we talk about
this, just you and me?”
Woodcarver’s voice came back after the briefest of pauses: “Certainly,
but later.”
“O-Okay.” Johanna turned back to the bow windows and didn’t say
anything more for a long moment. A couple of Benky’s troopers were
visible, patrolling back and forth. “I think this maneuver has fooled Nevil.”
Some of the sass crept back into her voice. “Tyco! Are you listening?”
Zek emitted a different voice now. It sounded like Timor, but grumpier.
“Of course I’m listening. You want me to explain my change of hearts,
right?”
“Yes. You spent years trying to find and kill me. What happened to
change that? Keep it short since we have people outside waiting for
Ravna.”
“Very well, but I don’t want anyone to think that I change my mind lightly.

My resolve is nearly infinite. I would never have succeeded in the Tropics
otherwise. And yet, part of me was always suspicious of Vendacious—
even as he was enormously helpful to me. I noticed that the humans I
met were not monsters. When Mr. Radio spoke up for the humans, that
made me just curious enough not to kill Johanna the instant I saw her.”
“Yes, thank you for that,” said Jo.
“But it put me in a difficult position,” Tycoon continued. “Fortunately, I’m a
very quick thinker. I had to get away from Nevil and his beam gun. That
weapon supposedly has a range of hundreds of kilometers and I needed
hours of safe passage. So I grabbed Johanna and took off, all the time
giving Nevil hope that I was still willing to deal with him.”
Jo nodded. “Tyco and I had a very … tense afternoon. It was like what
you saw on Nevil’s stage, but spread out over hours. I think Scriber’s
invention notebook made the difference.”
Tycoon: “Scriber used to bore me so much with his notebooks. Talking to
Johanna, I could see Scriber had irritated her the same way. She hadn’t
murdered him, she’d just wanted to. We both had rejected him … and we
both had spent years regretting the act. And I had been wrong about
Johanna. I don’t often make mistakes, but when I do, they can be of
awesome proportions. I’ve used the tendays since to revise my
strategies.”
Scrupilo sounded skeptical, but in a geeky, nitpicking way: “If it took you
hours to decide about Johanna, wasn’t it a bit impulsive to toss
Vendacious when you did? You hadn’t even taken off.”
“Well, um, as I said, I can be very quick thinking. In this case—”
Zek’s voice changed in mid-sentence as Mr. Radio interrupted his boss:
“In this case, it was Tycoon’s employees who anticipated his wishes. You
see, Vendacious died as the result of … a mutiny. Ravna, you know that
Amdiranifani had been helping Ut and those other parts of myself he
could contact. That wasn’t all. Vendacious’ operation was always on the
verge of mutiny. Vendacious reveled in that; he had years of experience
playing the game. Amdiranifani undertook to win through the crew. He

lost two eyes in his first attempt—and that just made him come back
smarter. Bits of me have seen Vendacious’ victims before. I don’t think he
was ever outsmarted by someone he tortured—until Amdiranifani.”
Amdi? Amdi the shy? Ravna almost said the words aloud.
Mr. Radio continued, “That day over Starship Hill, when we opened the
drop hatch, Vendacious was going to toss out pieces of somebody—
probably Amdiranifani. Amdiranifani was channeling sound all around the
control gondola, never quite detected by Vendacious. He had nearly
constant communication with Remnant St—Remnant Screwfloss, as
those four were always moving in their cage, never giving Vendacious a
chance to add up the sounds. Then Vendacious sent one of himself down
to the open hatch and had the Cargomaster unshackle part of
Amdiranifani. I—Ut—did just what Amdiranifani had planned for us. I
slipped off my perch, got the keys from Cargomaster, and opened
Screwfloss’ cage. Those four are a bloody killer pack, do you know that?
They turned the gondola into mayhem, hacking at Vendacious and
anyone who was still loyal to Vendacious. Cargomaster tossed one of
Vendacious out the hatch. Then Vendacious caught me from behind and
cut my throat. About all I remember after that was lying on the deck,
bleeding to death.”
Mr. Radio’s voice had remained steady throughout his story, but Zek’s
eyes were wide and he was trembling. Ravna reached out to him. “That’s
okay,” she said softly. “We know the rest.”
When Tycoon spoke again, he didn’t sound quite so full of brag. “They
did the right thing. I am grateful.”
“Yes,” said Johanna, grim and satisfied. “In the end, Vendacious got
something like what he gave poor Scriber.” She was silent for a moment.
“So that’s what happened. It’s best if we keep it from Nevil as long as
possible.”
Scrupilo said, “Oh? Much as I like to mess up Nevil, what’s the point? If
Tycoon is our ally now, it doesn’t really matter what Nevil thinks—at least
as soon as Ravna’s expedition gets back to Newcastle.”

Zek emitted a negative, and then Tycoon’s voice continued: “You
misunderstand. Johanna Olsndot is my advisor—and also she’s fun to
have around—but I am not your ally. If you must, you may consider
Johanna your ambassador to me. I regard the Domain as a business
competitor, and though I … dislike Nevil, I will trade with him too.”
Scrupilo was outraged. “That’s absurd! You have no business opposing
Woodcarver now. I say—” but then his voice faded off as he heard no
support from Woodcarver.
Ravna looked at Johanna searchingly. “Are you really free to leave, Jo?”
“Of course she is!” said Tycoon.
Johanna smiled. “I’ve scouted things out, Rav. I figure I could shoot my
way out of this ship, if I really wanted to.”
“You could?” Tycoon sound a little abashed.
“Yup.”
“Well then,” said Ravna. To hell with being diplomatically oblique. “Is it
really safe for you to go back to the Tropics, to live in this fellow’s
power?” Ravna had her own experience with that.
“Hmm,” Johanna sounded thoughtful … and happy. Sometimes she had
sounded this way when she was sitting with Pilgrim, petting him like a
pack of friendly dogs. “Do I feel safe going back to House of Tycoon? Not
entirely. Tycoon can be bastards if he’s convinced you’re a bastard. But
he rescued both Timor and Geri, and he learned from them. Facts can
eventually pound their way through his thick skulls. He hated me more
than is easily imagined. Now? Well, I feel safer with Tycoon than I do,
say, with Flenser. The reformed Flenser is a good guy. He probably
saved my life by getting Woodcarver to bring that notebook—but he’s
sneaky to the point of being unpredictable.” She hesitated. “Tycoon is the
most successful rebuild I have ever met. He’s spent ten years trying to
reconstitute what he lost. Talking to him is almost like I’ve found a lost
friend.”
Tycoon: “I’m only partway there.”

Johanna said softly, “Tyco, you’ll never get all the way there. But I think
Scriber would be proud if you make something even better from his
memories. That’s exactly the grand leap he would admire.”
“Heh.… You’re right!”
“Okay, then,” said Ravna. “We’re not allies, but trade partners and
competitors. But I still question Tycoon’s continued support for Nevil.”
This was really a point she’d expect Woodcarver to make, but there was
only silence from that quarter.
Both Johanna and Tycoon started talking at the same time. “Let me take
this one,” said Johanna after they got sorted out. “Nevil thinks he has an
alliance, but Nevil is lucky that Tycoon doesn’t hate him quite enough to
kill him. Of course, Nevil is no real friend of any Tines; I’m sure he figures
he’s using Tycoon. The longer he is fooled about the Domain’s
relationship with Tycoon, the better. In the end, Tycoon intends to build
Nevil’s operation into a credible human counterweight to the Domain, but
one that owes its existence to playing ball with Tycoon.”
“That’s even less diplomatic than I would have been,” grumbled Tycoon.
“Of course it was. As long as I’m your advisor, expect quite a bit of
frankness with my friends back in the Domain.”
Scrupilo made a spluttering noise. “If this scheme were a machine, it
would fall apart.” He gobbled a few more complaints, then returned to
speaking Samnorsk: “If we are to be secret friends, then I demand a
show of good faith. Tycoon must return what Vendacious stole, in
particular, the computer Oliphaunt.” That was Scrupilo’s favorite piece of
automation outside of Oobii.
“Sorry, Scrup,” Jo replied. “That ain’t going to happen. Tycoon is as much
in love with my old plush toy as you are.”
Scrupilo made more irritated noises. “We are giving up a lot, and being
asked to tolerate Nevil, even enrich him. In return we get the promise of
fearsome competition. And that’s only if we can believe this aggressive
crackpot from the Tropics. Can this possibly work?”

Ravna thought back on what she had seen down south, the factories that
stretched for kilometers, that could save this world. “Oh, it can work.” But
at what price? She looked at Johanna. “You’re also our friend to the
Choir, Jo.”
“I—of course.”
“You know about exploitation, right?”
“Like on Nyjora, in the Age of Princesses?” She smiled.
Ravna didn’t return the smile. “I don’t want that to happen here, Jo.”
The girl looked puzzled for a moment, but then she nodded very
seriously. “I promise, Ravna. The Choir will not be exploited.”
•  •  •
After Ravna left the Pack of Packs, Johanna remained on the bridge. It
was late afternoon. The sun would be setting soon, but there was still
enough light to see through the gauze quilting that she and the ship’s
steward had hung behind the bow ports. If she leaned forward and
looked to the side, she could see most of Ravna’s expedition. There was
Jefri and Amdi. By now Jef knew she was okay. But there was Giske and
Magda and Øvin. As long as Johanna continued this scam on Nevil, most
of her friends must think her lost. That was a price Johanna was willing to
pay, but she hadn’t counted the cost to others, the pain of waiting and
waiting to learn the terrible truth.… She could see Øvin sitting beside
Edvi’s little coffin. We should have risked sneaking word back to those
who were really hurting. Instead, she and Tyco had only thought how to
stick it to Nevil. That was a success, but now Johanna just wanted to flee
this place.
Her thoughts were interrupted by Tycoon’s new voice: “I say we take off
for home.” Johanna turned, saw Zek sitting on a throne right behind her.

Hooray! Aloud she said, “Ah. I thought you wanted to get a few more
hours of intimidation out of this trip.”
“I did, but I don’t hear anything happening. Better to return my flagship to
profit-making.”
“You’re leaving the troopship, right?” she said.
“Of course. Nevil can claim me as his ally, but never again is anybody
going to murder people and then claim they were doing me a favor.”
“Okay. Let’s go.” Please!
Zek departed for the ship’s main hatch. A moment later Ta came up the
spiral stairs, probably from the pilots’ gondola. There were two members
of Mr. Radio aboard Pack of Packs. Ta used the bridge’s speaking tubes
for some final directions to the crew; apparently he’d come up here in
case Tycoon had something to say to her.
She heard the faint buzz of the steam induction engines, and a moment
later—somewhat louder—Zek’s voice booming out from the main hatch.
The official spokescritter for Tycoon was announcing their departure and
asking for help from Nevil’s ground crews.
Ten minutes later, Johanna felt the last of the ties slip loose. Pack of
Packs bobbed free, rising slowly from the valley floor. She had a last
glimpse of Ravna’s expedition and Nevil’s group. The Deniers were
waving solemn farewell. Most of Ravna’s people were just staring.
Everyone was out of sight before she could spot Jefri and Amdi.
The ship turned after it was above the walls of the Streamsdell. They flew
back along the north side of the great river valley. Ravna pulled down the
quilting so Ta and Zek could get a good view.
“That slit in the side valley. Is that the entrance to Nevil’s cave system?”
The voice belonged to Mr. Radio.
“Yup. If Woodcarver already knows about it, we should be able to get
some maps.”
Tycoon’s voice grumbled: “I’m putting video senders at the top of my to-
make list.”

In less than a minute, Nevil’s rat hole had slid beneath their view. The
horizon ahead was an endless stretch of rock and snow and glaciers, lit
by the setting sun. Flying at altitude, they had enough fuel for a nonstop
return, but the trip would take all night and into the next day.
More than enough time to do one thing right. Johanna looked at Zek. “So
where did you stow the commset?” she said.
Ta and Zek jabbed snouts at one of the low cabinets that lined the walls.
It wasn’t locked. She pulled out the commset, one of just two that had
finally fallen into Tycoon’s claws.
“What’s that you’re doing?” said Tycoon.
“I’m going to have a chat with Woodcarver.”
Mr. Radio emitted spluttering noises, no doubt from Tycoon. “Nevil will
overhear!”
“Nope,” said Johanna. “Commset traffic is encrypted, and we’re so high
that I can send direct to the coast. Nevil will not even know we’re talking.”
Tycoon was silent for a moment. Then: “Very well. Sooner or later we do
need a detailed discussion with this Woodcarver.”
“That’s true.” Johanna put down the commset and looked at Ta and Zek.
“But Tycoon, that’s not what I’m looking for in this chat. Woodcarver and I
—we need to talk about personal things. If you refuse me, I won’t be
mad, but … will you leave me alone for this, not even eavesdrop?”
It was a test Johanna had never intended to set. Truly, she didn’t expect
Tycoon to trust her this much.
Tycoon was silent for a moment. “This is about the Pilgrim pack, isn’t it?”
“Yes.”
Another silence. “Very well.” Ta and Zek started toward the stairs. “But I
want a full report on everything else!”
In just a few seconds, they were gone from the stairwell and the
anteroom below. Johanna fiddled with the commset, trying to set up a
session. Since the device didn’t know where it was, and she didn’t want it

to ask the orbiter for a position, this was not entirely easy. But after a few
minutes, she had clear green, and shortly after that—
“Woodcarver here. Johanna?”
“Yes. I said we should talk. Is now—?”
“Yes, now is fine. I’m alone in the thrones room.”
“I’m alone as well. I—I wanted to tell you about Pilgrim.…”
Johanna described the agrav’s last flight, the crash. Then there were the
memories she tried not to think about. Maybe it was nuts to talk about
each death now, to say all the things she had seen, but she did and
Woodcarver listened. She wasn’t sure how anyone could make sense of
her voice by the time that she finished. Woodcarver did. She asked
questions, wanted to know everything.
When everything was said, and Johanna’s voice guttered to a stop,
Woodcarver said, “He was dismembered, without a doubt.” Her own
human voice sounded almost normal, maybe speaking a little slower than
usual: “And is he totally dead? Probably. But this is Pilgrim. When you
get back to Tycoon’s hideout in the Tropics—”
“I’ll keep watch, Woodcarver. I won’t give up.”
They talked of Pilgrim for some time more. They had other memories of
him. Johanna’s went back ten years. Woodcarver’s were a patchwork of
encounters that extended far longer.
They must have talked for two hours. Outside, the Icefangs had faded to
dark and stars ruled the horizon. The Pack of Packs continued to climb
as it approached the mountain passes. The air was steady and smooth,
quite unlike Jo’s earlier passages over these peaks.
Reminiscence had turned into imagining how Pilgrim would have handled
the present situation, and a general discussion of strategy. Johanna
would definitely have things to report to Tycoon.
But strategy included discussing Tycoon himself: “Are you sure Tycoon is
not snooping on this conversation?” said Woodcarver.

“I—” Johanna glanced at the speaking tubes. They were all capped.
Where she was sitting, she had a good view of the stairs and the empty
anteroom below. “Woodcarver, I truly believe he’s not eavesdropping, but
that’s more a matter of trust than anything else—”
Woodcarver said, “In this case, what you believe may be the important
thing. I’ve wondered for so long: what kind of creature is this crazypack?”
Oh! Johanna thought for a second. “He is weird. Numerous and weird.
Sometimes he reminds me of Scriber, but he can be just as grumpy as
Scrupilo. And then there’s the businesscritter side of him. Imagine what
Flenser would be like if his goal in life was to sell you trinkets and used
wagon parts.”
Woodcarver emitted a multi-hum that was surprised laughter. “Do you
suppose I might have a chat with him?”

Chapter   44
Seven tendays passed.
The scam against Nevil continued successfully, so Johanna remained
stuck here in the Tropics. It was the most fascinating time of her life.
Each time she went into the Choir, she found something new. She’d
returned to the River Fell, watched the rafts come and go. (Cheepers and
company returned just sixty days after she did!) She’d walked the floor of
a wild factory. Someday, she would pole a twinhull up the Fell to the
North One Reservation—but when she’d suggested that to Tycoon, the
Big Guy had completely lost his bluff brutality. He’d begged her not to be
so stupid. Okay, he might be right about that expedition … Ha, she’d
make the trip with Cheepers’ riverboat sailors! Meanwhile, there was
always the Great Pyramid of the Choir. Johanna loved to hike on the
Pyramid. She had lots of reasons, including the whiff of danger.
On this day, she sneaked out of the House of Tycoon near sunrise, the
coolest time of day. Heck, it wasn’t more than 38 degrees Celsius and
the rains had magically cleared away. Of course, the main reason for
getting out so early was that this was before Tycoon roused himself. Half
of him was much too nervous about the danger in her jaunts off the
reservation—and the other half was too envious of them. Better to simply
avoid the inevitable arguments that caused.
Zek and Ritl ambushed her just as she thought she’d made a clean
getaway. Mr. Radio was hard to fool when he had good connectivity …
and when the perverse Ritl was onboard.
“Going up on the hill again, aren’t you?” said the twosome, speaking
nearly perfect Samnorsk. Most of the pack must be participating.
“Yes. Don’t tell,” said Johanna. They walked through one of the myriad

staff entrances and stood in the almost-cool morning. She waved at the
sky, now mostly blue, but with cloud tops catching the first rays of the
sun. “I think it’s a perfect day for a walk in the Choir.”
“For you, maybe.”
The twosome strolled companionably along with Johanna toward the
edge of the reservation, for once not relaying complaints about her
possibly unhealthful hobbies. “Actually, I wanted to ask you a favor,” said
Mr. Radio. “We lost the video from the northern-looking camera last
night.”
“Yes, I know. It got knocked over. I’m pretty sure that was an accident. I’ll
reset it while I’m up there.”
“Thanks.” Mr. Radio seemed to realize better than Tycoon how important
Johanna’s hobbies might become. He also had his own ideas. This
morning, those were about what to do with the coming glut of analog
cameras, and how they might process the output without shipping it via
Nevil. She looked down at the twosome and tried to hide her smile. Mr.
Radio Cloaks was unique. Here, physically, it was just a twosome, what
should have been a mental cripple. But Mr. Radio’s real mind was spread
across hundreds of kilometers, managing an enterprise as complex as
major business ventures in early civilizations. She had no trouble dealing
with that; there would be several more such packs if Scrupilo could build
safer cloaks. There could be millions more once they had digital versions
with user multiplexing. But Ritl gave this creature a special strangeness;
Ritl was not wearing a radio cloak. To be part of this pack, she had to
keep her head very close to Zek’s, or better, Zek had to let her under his
cloak. The result was a kind of fragmented communication. It was a small
miracle that the pack could tolerate such a frail and sometime marriage.
No wonder Ritl was training so hard to use Ut’s cloak.
They were almost to the reservation’s main gate. Like the fence, the gate
was a flimsy thing, essentially a symbol. Sometimes the Choir would
swarm across the boundary in what looked like a mad attack, an animal
tsunami that would end all Tycoon’s grand plans—but the swarmings
weren’t really attacks; the Choir had simply forgotten itself, and a wave of

its excitement had brushed across the edge of the reservation.
Afterwards, Tycoon’s folks would repair the tattered cords and timbers,
and all was as before.
Today, the mob looked placid, with only a few Tines coming nearer than
five meters to the boundary. Beyond ten meters, the mob surged as thick
as ever, but there were no stampedes in sight.
“The Choir is watching us,” said Mr. Radio.
Johanna shrugged and waved to Tycoon’s guards to slide open the gate.
Mr. Radio continued, “This isn’t like when I come down here with Tycoon.
This morning, the mob is watching intentionally, almost like a pack.” The
twosome stood a little apart from itself; Ritl had slipped partway out from
under the cloak. Her tympana were free to listen to the mindsounds from
beyond the fence. Mr. Radio continued, “I—I can hear the Choir. It’s
making more sense than usual. It’s watching you.”
“It’s really okay,” said Johanna. The sounds she could hear were just a
cacophony of gobbling and hissing, sounds that animals might make—
but she could tell that Mr. Radio was right. This happened whenever she
approached the gate. Her gaze swept across the foothills of the fractal
pyramid. What looked to the inexperienced eye like disorganized jostle,
was repeated on different scales. She had learned to recognize mood
and sometimes even intention in those patterns. What she was seeing
here was a vast … anticipation.
She walked toward the opening gate, ignoring the way Tycoon’s guard
packs hunkered down on themselves. They were always nervous when
the gate was open, choosing to imagine that when closed it gave them
some protection.
Behind her, Mr. Radio Cloaks emitted an imperative squeak that meant
something like “You come back here!”
She turned to see that Ritl had broken free of Zek and was walking
purposefully toward Johanna and the gateway. Except in bloody
hospitals, Johanna had rarely seen such impudence in a singleton
aspiring to membership. Ritl was one tough customer. Normally that

endeared her to Johanna; just now, it made her fear for Ritl. Johanna
stopped in the middle of the gateway, ignoring the myriads watching her.
She jabbed her hand at the critter, doing her best to imitate a Tinish
warning wave. “Stop! You can’t go out there, Ritl. It’s safe for me, but not
for you.” At the very least Ritl would never return from the adventure.
The singleton kept coming, ignoring Radio’s gobbling and Johanna’s
Samnorsk. Jo would have never thought this particular singleton would
be susceptible to the Choir’s siren call. No, Ritl seemed to be forcing
herself forward. Mr. Radio hadn’t moved but he sounded very worried.
Ritl ignored them both. All her attention was forward, staring into the
Choir. She moved slower and slower, as if the mob’s mindsound were
physical opposition. Finally she stopped, standing right on the boundary
of the reservation. She’d lift a paw as if to take another step, then
hesitate, then try again. The creature was shivering with the effort.
Finally Ritl said in very loud, very clear Samnorsk, “Well, crap! Double
crap!” She lunged forward and tapped her snout on the ground beyond
the gate, very clearly in the territory of the Choir. It reminded Johanna of
a human child counting coup. And now that she had her claim to triumph,
she scuttled back into the reservation.
Johanna gave the duo a little wave. Then she turned and walked into the
open space beyond. Behind her, the guards quickly closed the gate.
•  •  •
Normally it took most of an hour to get to the top of the central peak.
The way was a zigzag across the west face, more of a walk than a climb.
The pyramid’s surface was everything from undressed granite to cut
quartz and jade. There was a hectare of copper and silver and gold
plating, but that was scattered across the greater and lesser mounds.
Tycoon had studied the pyramid for seven years now (from the air and
from his palace below). Except for the recursive nature of the thing, he

had not discovered much pattern to it—though it had grown steadily more
durable and huge. The original that Remasritlfeer surveyed had been a
muddy midden by comparison.
There was much to see as she walked back and forth and up and up.
The House of Tycoon and what had been the Vendacious Annex were
larger than any palaces of the North, but they were dwarfed by the
foothills of the Pyramid. The airfield stretched westward from the palaces.
She could see riderlet ponds there, though the full network of ponds did
not respect the reservation boundary. The modern Choir was very
tolerant of the “talking cuttlefish.” That was fair, considering that the
riderlets were the link that had made all this possible.
One of Tycoon’s airships had just taken off, heading north. That was the
personnel shuttle that touched down at every one of the far reservations.
At the same time, she could see the daily flight from the Wild Principates
coming in for landing. Most freight went by sea and river and caravan, but
it was radio communications and those airships that kept Tycoon’s
markets in synchrony.
Beyond the airstrip stood the long gray rows of Tycoon’s first Tropical
factories. Nowadays they covered practically every square meter of the
West Side. And beyond the western edge of the reservation she could
see the Choir’s wild factories. Those ramshackle structures were
continually being ruined and rebuilt. Tendays would go by with no output.
Then just when you concluded that the copycat effort had failed,
suddenly product would spew out, misshapen or miswoven and barely
recognizable. Mostly, such items were junk … but sometimes, as with
their mirrors and glasswork, there were real improvements.
Jo was on the third switchback now, more than one hundred meters
above the reservation. The crowds here were as thick as ever, Tines
swarming over the network of smaller paths that branched from the main
path she was on. They kept an open space around her, but it wasn’t a
well-respected boundary. Tines brushed against her, going this way and
that. The sounds of the Choir pounded her, gobbling and hissing and
honking, scraps of Interpack speech mixed with imitations of thunder and

rain. Behind all this noise, there was the feeling of something louder, a
buzzing in her chest and head—all a human could ever sense of
mindsound.
Most of the creatures ignored her, but some gave Jo a squeak or a honk.
There were little swirls of coherence, a godsgift that might last just for
seconds. “Hei, Johanna!” was all those might say, but sometimes there
was more, words that might have been relayed Tine to Tine from far
away, even reminiscence of their time on the fleet of rafts. Perhaps one
in five of these Tines was a full-pelted Northerner, but as often as not it
was a hairless Tropical who claimed to remember Woodcarver’s
Fragmentarium.
Sometimes she’d see an unusually large, full-pelted Tines, or a pattern of
black and white that reminded her of Pilgrim. Twice she had chased into
the mob, careless of whether she bumped those who stood in her way,
her only goal to get close to the familiar sight. And both times, when she
got close she found only a stranger. Still, parts of Pilgrim could be out
there, surviving in singleton form. She’d found little pieces of his attitudes
in some Tines of the Choir.
The last switchback was only twenty meters long, but by now the sun and
the clear sky had conspired to make the morning broiler hot. Sweat was
streaming off her and those last twenty meters felt like a real climb. When
she finally reached the summit, she was quite ready to stop and sip from
her canteen. She leaned against one of the gilded spikes that bordered
the tiny plaza at the top. If there was any logic to the pyramid, this open
space would be the most holy of holies. To Johanna it was just a small
muddy field—and the Tines on the summit usually avoided it.
The video camera was on the other side of the summit, and indeed it had
been knocked over. She crossed the field and retrieved the box. The
gadget was purely analog, Oobii’s design. It was so simple that Tycoon’s
factories could make it—by the millions, if the Choir was sufficiently
enchanted by the gadget, or if somebody else was enchanted by video
cameras and had something to trade for them.
She picked up the gadget, wiped the mud off the glass lens. Abruptly the

box was talking Samnorsk at her:
“You took long enough.” It was Tycoon’s new voice. He still liked Geri’s
voice—said it sounded “pretty”—but he accepted that it tended to give
human listeners the wrong impression. “Are you okay?” he continued.
“I’ve had to slow some of the harbor operations. Even the Tropicals don’t
like these really clear days.”
“I’ll bet those were Tines with too much pale skin. We humans are dark-
skinned all over, perfect for hot, sunny weather.”
“Oh. Right. You know, sometimes the Choir isn’t very careful of itself. I
wonder…” Tycoon hummed to himself, no doubt coming up with
something crazy. Then, slipping back into bossy mode, he said, “That’s
really neither here nor there. We need that camera you’re holding. And
this time, set it up so it doesn’t get knocked down!”
“Hei, Tyco, if you want it perched at the top of everything, the mob is
going to knock it down occasionally.” Johanna reseated the camera and
righted the tripod. Actually, the assembly was sturdy and bottom-heavy. It
would have taken a bump from a large Tine—or the concerted effort of a
group—to knock it over. Well this is the heart of the Choir. Plenty of
strange maybe-ceremonies happen here all the time.
She struggled to shift the tripod and camera closer to the edge of the
parapet, where it would have an unobstructed view. A dozen Tropicals
moved in close to her, but they weren’t objecting. Instead they bumped
around among themselves. It was quite unlike the coordination of a real
pack, but she could tell they were trying to help her move the equipment.
Johanna and the moblet tipped the tripod this way and that, in effect
walking the gear out onto the stony parapet.
She shooed them back and did the final placement herself, this time
making sure that the tripod was wedged between the golden spikes of
the parapet. Maybe Tycoon was watching her through his telescopes and
the camera: “Be careful. If they think you’re harming the pyramid—”
Johanna had been watching the Tines as she worked, with just that
concern. “Nobody’s complaining. You know I’m special to the Choir.” That

was probably true; in any case, she liked to tease Tycoon.
Tycoon made a grumbling response, but in Tinish. Then in Samnorsk: “I
don’t mind my employees risking their lives. I just want them to know
that’s what they’re doing! Now, since you’re up there, how about pointing
the camera so we can get some useful information. I want coverage of
the north road.”
“Hei, I’m your advisor, not your employee,” she replied, but she turned
the camera toward the northwest horizon. The “road” was really a system
of clearings that changed from tenday to tenday, but it extended nearly a
thousand kilometers into the deepest jungle of the Fell Basin. At first
glance, the Choir was the chaotic saturnalia that Northern packs always
claimed, but something more complicated than nonstop joy was going on.
The coast needed an enormous hinterland to support itself. With cameras
like this—and the remote reservations—Tycoon was beginning to figure it
out.
This pattern of Tropical life had existed in some form for centuries, but
Tycoon’s reservation had been a revolutionary upgrade—witness the
Great Pyramid. Now that revolution was accelerating. Raw materials
were flooding in and millions of manufactured items were streaming out.
Woodcarver and the Domain saw this as a tidal wave of products. Ravna
saw it as advancing her projects by decades in just a year or two.
Johanna knew that what Northerners saw was just a fraction of what
Tycoon’s factories were producing. Most of that output—and all of the
output from the new, far reservations—was being used within the Choir.
Just stand at the output end of the factories. Watch the wagonloads of
fabric and radios and solar cells being carted off along the North Road
and the River Fell. On a really clear day—like today—this camera could
follow the road traffic for many kilometers, see it split into tributaries,
apparently reaching every nook and cranny of the Choir’s domain.
Something had awakened here, the combination of the Choir and Tycoon
and the shortcuts from Oobii. Jo knew it; Tycoon knew it. He never tired
of bragging about the size of his “new markets”; sometimes the
businesscritter in him literally rubbed its snouts together in glee. This

camera and the reports that Mr. Radio made from the new reservations
were all part of Tyco’s ceaseless efforts to anticipate his customers.
“Okay,” came the voice from the camera. “Point a little to south. That’s
good! Nevil may have his eye in the sky, but I know what’s happening on
the ground. And when I get better telescopes mounted on the video…”
Tycoon’s voice drifted off, his technical imagination taking over. When he
resumed, he was back to worrying about her. “Now that you’ve got the
camera set up, you should get yourself back down here. I have a godsgift
on a dumb radio from North One. He says there’s been some kinky
moodshifting up there. If that propagates to us, there could be a sex riot
on the Pyramid.”
Johanna looked down at the House of Tycoon. Tycoon’s audience hall
was marked by a row of windows. The new ones were three meters high,
but still tiny-looking at this distance. She’d bet Tyco was watching her
from there. She gave a little wave. “Don’t worry. I’ve seen that before. No
big deal.” That was a little bit of an exaggeration. “Besides,” she
continued, “I didn’t come up here just to fix your silly camera. I want to sit
and take in the scenery.”
“Grump. Mumble.” The tiny speaker on the camera couldn’t do justice to
Tycoon’s response, the mix of indignation and concern and envy.
Jo gave the palace another cheery wave and sat herself down on the
parapet. In this swelter, her most extensive piece of clothing was her
sunhat, and now she plunked it on her head. Black hair and dark skin
were all very fine, but she still needed some protection against this sun.
Johanna looked out, but she wasn’t watching the physical scenery. She
liked to tell Tycoon that from here she had a clear view of the Choir’s
innermost thoughts. Tyco claimed she was spouting superstitious
nonsense—but then he tracked the moods that swept across the Tropics
like superfast weather fronts. That was marketing information.
Here at the City of the Choir, it all came together, a million times bigger
than what Johanna had seen on the rafts. She leaned her elbows onto
her knees, and stared off toward the northern horizon. This world was in

the Slow Zone, not the Beyond, not the Transcend. Most intelligent life in
the galaxy had originated in this primordial ooze. Nothing much smarter
than human could survive Down Here. So no way was the Choir a
superhuman intellect. Right? It was the sort of question that made
Johanna wish she knew more about Slow-Zone limitations. The subject
had never been big in the High Lab. The grownups were too busy
becoming God to waste their time on the problems of lesser minds.
Very soon the charade with Nevil must be abandoned; the cooperation
between Tycoon and Woodcarver was too blatant to disguise. My friends
will know I’m alive. I can visit them! Ravna would be able to come down
here and see Greenstalk, and see what the Choir was really like.
Commset chats were not enough. There were things Ravna didn’t
understand—like that promise she’d asked of Johanna, to save the Choir
from exploitation. In one sense that was an easy promise to keep. But at
the level of individual Tines, of Cheepers—the problem was just the
same as Johanna had argued with Harmony Redjackets and even with
Pilgrim.…
Johanna drew herself a little further under the shade of her broad hat. It
would be great when she could travel back to the Domain, but there were
so few humans in the world; she couldn’t imagine finding anyone now.
Even Ravna was better off, at least if my stupid little brother will get his
act together. From what Johanna could tell, Jef alternated between
thinking Rav was too good for him and regarding her as the agent of
ultimate evil.
Finally, the sun was too much. Johanna stood and started slowly down
from the summit. She often hit an emotional low just as she retreated
from the pyramid. Sometimes she thought the Choir’s mood changed too.
Maybe the Tines are unhappy to see me go! Hah, absurd of course. And
yet, after losing the High Lab, losing her parents, losing the promise of
Nevil … after losing it all, she had a fate that was kind of a marvelous
thing. She knew that Nevil’s gang had called her the “Dog Lady.” Well,
they were right. She had the fragments, the packs, and the Choir. It was
a weird trade she had made, and maybe she didn’t care about the rest.


Chapter   45
Today was the longest day of summer. For many Tinish nations, that
was a big holiday. Here in Woodcarver’s Domain, the holiday was
celebrated, but it came in the middle of almost seven tendays when the
sun never set. The dayaround tendays had always been a time for
unending, often joyous, activity. There was an unrelenting enthusiasm
about the sunlight, something that only total exhaustion could correct.
Both Children and Tines worked almost nonstop, slowing down just a
little when the sun got lowest, what would be the starry dark in any other
season. Even then, there were often parties at low sun, exhausted kids
dancing.
On this Longest Day, Ravna took a low-sun break of her own. Coming
out from her private entrance to Oobii, she skirted the western edge of
the Meadows. The path should have kept her out of sight of where the
kids partied. But this time she ended up walking past Children and Tines
playing with the gliders that Scrupilo had recently built. She stood in awe
for a moment, forgetting why she was outside so late. Øvin Verring was
running straight toward the cliff’s edge. He leaped over the dropoff and
popped his wings. Ravna felt an instant of stark fear. True, the glider rig
was an Oobii synthesis of a thousand civilizations’ history, optimized for
exactly these conditions—but there was not a bit of automation aboard
the contraption! It could tumble and fall, and she had already seen
enough bodies rain from the sky.… But the wings did not tumble. The
glider sank smoothly, flying straight. And then Øvin, the mind onboard,
took the glider into a shallow bank, searching for updrafts, climbing
across them until he was above his launch point, soaring almost as if he
had agrav.
A sigh went up from the Children on the ground, maybe remembering

heritage lost. Then everyone was cheering, and the packs among them
were complaining because there was no way they could participate in the
adventure. This is so dangerous, thought Ravna. Someone turned and
saw her standing there. A year ago, Ravna would have had to stop this,
and the kids would have known that and everybody would have been hurt
and embarrassed and irritated. More recently, after her return, it would
have been worse; they might have meekly obeyed her! Now when the
Children saw her, they waved. And Ravna waved back … and few
moments later, another glider sailed out over the abyss. Ravna stayed at
the fringes of the crowd, watching the launches. She counted five of the
craft in the air, circling back and forth along and above the cliff face.
These vehicles would never be of use in real applications. But the pilots
may be. It all depended on how fast other tech progressed.
Ravna watched for a few minutes more, then drifted back from the crowd
and continued on her walk. The shouts of excitement faded behind her.
Ahead, sunlight sparkled blindingly off the north end of the Hidden Island
straits. The island itself was set in a kind of silhouette by the brilliance of
the surrounding water. Her path led around the northwest face of
Starship Hill, toward a very special place.
•  •  •
The Cemetery for Children and Tines. She had been here only once
since her return, a memorial for Edvi Verring and the Norasndots. She
hadn’t been here by herself since that rainy, treacherous night with Nevil.
You’d think that that night would have cured me of my attraction to this
place. Okay, the important lesson was that if she ran into anyone up
here, she should question the coincidence very seriously.
And truly, this visit wasn’t one of desperation. Things were going well.
Come this winter, Scrupilo’s Cold Valley lab would fabricate its first
microprocessors. When those made it into Tycoon’s production stream,

tech would be everywhere. Something like civilization would be right
around the corner.
Even Jefri seemed to be doing okay. He and Amdi were working with the
reconstituted Screwfloss to build cargo highways. Both Woodcarver and
Flenser were sure that Jef wasn’t acting as Nevil’s agent. More and
more, it looked like he would stay with the Domain.
Ravna walked between rows of headstones set in a field of spongy moss.
At the memorial, she’d noticed a few new stones, not just those for Edvi
and the Norasndots. There’d been flowers on the graves of Belle
Ornrikak and Dumpster Peli. The Children, at least some of those who
remained with the Domain, were turning to older forms of remembrance.
It was something they argued about among themselves.
Today—tonight—she had one particular person she wished to remember.
Pham’s rock, the huge irregularly shaped boulder that crowned the
promontory, was at the far end of the field. She could sit on the north side
for a time, leaning against the sun-warmed rock.
She came around the rock—and was confronted by eight Tinish heads
looking back at her.
“Ah! Hello, Amdi.”
“Hei, Ravna! What a coincidence.”
The pack occupied almost every flattish niche on the north side of the
rock. Amdi had regained most of his weight, and nowadays he wore
rakish eyepatches on two of his heads. He didn’t really seem surprised to
see her. Of course, he probably had heard her coming from forty meters
away.
Amdi shifted aside to make room for her on a human-butt-sized flat
space.
As Ravna sat down, he said, “You up here to talk to Pham?” There was
no sarcasm in his question.
Ravna nodded. I was. She looked down at Amdi’s nearest heads. He was
already snuggling close. “What are you doing here, Amdi?”

“Oh, I come up here a lot now. You know, to sit and think.” Amdi was into
solitary contemplation? Could he be that changed?
He settled a head in her lap and looked up at her. “Really! Well, today I
had another reason. I was waiting for someone.”
She brushed her hand across the plush fur. “Am I that predictable?” So
not a coincidence at all.
Amdi shrugged. “You’re somebody to depend on.”
“And why were you waiting for me?”
“Well,” he said mischievously, “I didn’t say you were the person I was
waiting for.” But he didn’t deny it.
They sat there for a time, warming in the sun, watching its glare reflected
off the chop in the straits. There really was peace here, even if it didn’t
feel quite the same with Amdi above, below, and beside her. Amdi
reached another head up to her. Petting it, she could feel a deep scar
under the fur. It ran from the throat to just short of a fore-tympanum. So,
more of Vendacious’ work. “Don’t worry,” said Amdi. “It’s all healed, good
as new.”
“Okay.” But not his two eyes; those could not be fixed as easily as his
other wounds or Ravna’s broken face.
Just now there wasn’t a single boat visible, and the country further north
was lost in the glare. Ravna and Amdi might be the only human and pack
in the world.
Correction. One of the kids’ gliders had drifted into view from the south. It
had caught some marvelous air current and climbed halfway up the sky,
angling around the curve of Starship Hill. As it turned to loop back it
seemed to hang, motionless, in the sky.
Amdi poked a snout in the direction of the aircraft: “You know, that’s
another reason why we need radio cloaks. A single pack member is way
smaller than a human. It could fly fine, with all the rest on the ground—or
on other gliders!”
Contemplative mood broken, Ravna grinned. “I remember my promise,

Amdi; you’ll get your own radio cloaks. Scrupilo is working on that second
set, but you know the problems. Vendacious did some very brutal things
to create a pack that could use the cloaks.”
“But Flenser used the cloaks straight away,” said Amdi. That had been
eleven years ago, at the Battle on Starship Hill. Ever since Amdi had
been puppies—even before Ravna had met him—he had been wild
about radio cloaks. She remembered his endless whining to be allowed
to wear radio. Today he was more mellow: “We’ll figure it out. Just you
wait, Ravna. Radio cloaks will make us packs be like gods!”
“Hmm.” Amdi’s problem was his limited experience with real gods.
Amdi was chortling to himself. “And if we don’t do it, Tycoon will. You
know, Mr. Radio is now his closest advisor—not counting Johanna.”
“Hei, Johanna is on our side.”
“‘Advisor,’ ‘friend,’ whatever. My point is, it’s Radio who is his closest
Tinish advisor. He’s even more enthusiastic about cloaks than I am. He
thinks that with clever broodkenning a tensome—maybe even a
twelvesome—could have coherent intelligence.”
Twelve. Like Tycoon’s pack-of-packs logo. “Down Here there are other
limits on mind, Amdi. You’re not going to get much above the most
brilliant human genius, except in the Transcend.”
“Yes, okay, right. But the way radio packs can use their smarts will be
amazing. Mr. Radio is already pretty smart. He’s back to eight. You know
he found a replacement for Ut?”
This question was delivered with shy, almost embarrassed, sidewise
looks.
“Ritl?” said Ravna. “She’s able to use Ut’s cloak?”
Amdi gave a nod. He was smiling in a wobbly way.
“Well, good! I mean, I know she caused you problems, Amdi. But the
critter was desperate. She didn’t mean to do you harm.”
“Oh, she meant to do me harm all right! She tried to break me up. I was

terrified of her. But yes, she was in a desperate situation. Part of me
misses her, but all of me is relieved she’s gone. You know, she’s turned
out to be the keystone member of Mr. Radio. She makes him smarter
and a lot more articulate. I talk to Mr. Radio when he reaches up here.
Now that Ritl is not on the make … well, Mr. Radio is really a nice fellow.
The story of Ritl and Radio would make a nice Tinish romance novel … if
I were into writing romance fiction, I mean. Which of course I’m not.”
Ravna looked around at him. Maybe he really had come up here to make
peace with himself. “What about your own problems, Amdi?”
“I’ve … made progress. Being all puppies made me too human. I don’t
know how you two-legs can deal with death. The version that packs
suffer is bad enough.” Amdi was silent for a moment, mostly looking
down. “Ritl made me see that I can’t stay me forever.” He look back up at
her. “I learned from Vendacious, too. I learned that death can be the least
of your problems. Fooling him wasn’t that hard, but after he started
poking out my eyes … finding the courage to continue with my scheme,
that was harder than anything I had ever imagined.”
He spoke the words softly, solemnly. Ravna noticed that every one of him
was looking at her. It was as though a curtain had been drawn aside.
Amdi had been to hell and back. That could happen to anyone with
enough bad luck and then enough good luck—but Amdi had engineered
his return. During his terrible time with Vendacious, the child in him had
become something deep and quiet and strong.
Ravna nodded and gave him a pat. “So what’s next for you,
Amdiranifani?”
Amdi looked away, and she sensed that his moment of stark openness
had passed. He squirmed around for a moment, then said, “You and me
and Jef had some good times, didn’t we?”
Okay, Amdi, and she replied in a like tone: “You mean when we weren’t
running for our lives, and when Jefri and I weren’t playing at being
enemies?”
“Yes. I would never be your enemy, and Jefri … well, you know Jefri

loves you, don’t you?”
“You both loved me when you were little, Amdi.”
“I mean now, Ravna.”
That was what I was afraid you meant. Now it was her turn to look down
at the ground, embarrassed. “Oh, Amdi, I—”
Amdi tightened up all around her. The one of him closest to her face
tapped her cheek gently. “Shh,” Amdi’s voice whispered. “I hear someone
coming.”
Of course Ravna heard no such thing. No one was visible on the hillside
below them. Even the glider had flown out of sight, leaving the sky to the
birds and the low sun. She gave Amdi an acknowledging pat and leaned
back against the rock.
Yes, there was someone coming up the south path, out of sight behind
them. The squish-crunch of boots on moss sounded like a single human.
Ravna and Amdi sat silently for another thirty seconds. The footsteps
came along the west side of Pham’s rock—but the visitor wasn’t headed
here.
It was Jefri Olsndot; he took the path down to the two headstones that sat
nearest the end of the promontory. He and Johanna had picked that
place for their parents. As much as Pham Nuwen, Sjana and Arne
Olsndot had fought the Blight. So Jefri, what do you believe and what do
you deny?
Jefri knelt between the headstones. He put one hand on each, and stared
out over the glittering sea. After a long moment, he shook himself, like a
man waking or remembering an appointment. He stood and turned—and
saw Amdi and Ravna watching him from Pham’s rock.
“Hei there, Jefri!” said Amdi. He waggled some noses in a tentative wave.
Jefri approached with measured tread. He stopped three meters from the
rock and glared at both human and pack. “What is she doing here,
Amdi?” His words were flat and angry.

“Just a coincidence?” The pack looked at Ravna for confirmation.
“That’s what you told me, Amdi.” She glanced at heads that were looking
everywhere else. Just now, Amdi reminded her of a way-too-smart
teenager. Well, literally, he was a way-too-smart teenager.
There was no good humor in Jefri’s reaction. He closed in on those of
Amdi who were farthest from Ravna. “You suggested meeting here. You
picked the time. I show up half an hour early, and I find you—and, and
her—” a look in Ravna’s direction, “waiting for me.”
“I’m sorry, Jefri!” Amdi’s voice rose, childlike. “I just couldn’t stand the
idea that you, I mean that we—” He dithered a second, then his voice
took off on a new tangent. Now he sounded a little like the salesman he
had learned to be in the circus. “We should talk about this. We really
should.” The one on the ledge above Ravna moved aside, and the one
that had been resting its head on Ravna’s lap climbed up to fill the gap.
At the same time, another patted the space beside Ravna that had just
been vacated. “Here, why don’t you sit down and we can all explain this
to each other.”
This chatter lost some of its audio fidelity about at the word “explain,”
when Jefri grabbed the one who had been patting the open space and
shoved him against Ravna.
“Oops, sorry,” Amdi said in an aside to Ravna.
She had seen these two play this roughly, even since their return from
the Tropics, but there was no playfulness in Jefri right now. He’d have
been taking a chance with his life if he used this kind of force against a
stranger pack as big and heavyset as Amdiranifani had become.
“Okay, we’ll have our talk.” Jefri sat down.
Now one of Amdi was sandwiched between him and Ravna. The rest of
the pack surrounded them. Altogether, Amdi seemed a bit disconcerted.
He looked back and forth at himself for a moment, then patted Jefri
gingerly and crept in close to his old friend. When Jef didn’t respond,
Amdi continued in his showman voice, the volume turned down to an
intimate purr: “Okay, I confess. Though this was a coincidence, I gave it

some help. I was pretty sure Ravna would come up here at low sun. If
she hadn’t, I would have thought of something else to get us together.
We three have been through so much, don’t you know? I didn’t want it to
seem to Ravna that Jef and I were sneaking off—”
“What?” said Ravna.
“Amdi, I swear, you have no right—”
“You two are leaving, Jef? I thought, I thought you were staying with the
Domain.”
Jefri didn’t look her in the eye. Maybe he was too busy glaring at first one
of Amdi and then another. “We aren’t sneaking off. Amdi is just jerking
you around.”
“I am not!”
Jefri finally looked at Ravna. “This may seem like another betrayal, but
I’ve talked to Woodcarver and Flenser about it, ah, just this afternoon.
You and Johanna would have learned soon enough, but I really didn’t
want to argue about it with either of you.” And as an aside to Amdi he
said, “How could you do this to me?”
“You’re going to Best Hope?” she said. Powers, how I hate that name.
Jef nodded. “But it’s not what you think. I’m not doing any good around
here. No one really trusts me. You—”
“I trust you,” said Ravna. As long as you stayed, I could hope. “Why are
you going, Jefri?”
Jef hesitated, then: “Okay. You remember when we were on the road,
you suggested I look for testable evidence about the Blight. But what
could I find, Down Here, ten years later? Now … I think I have a chance.
Bili stole equipment from the Lander, equipment that idiot-me never
recognized. I know Bili. By now, I even know Nevil. Watching them,
watching what they do with this gear—one way or another, I’ll figure out
what I have to do.”
“That’s—” insane. “That’s not reasonable, Jefri. After you saved my life,
Nevil has less reason to trust you than almost anyone.”

“I’ve been working on that. Vendacious is gone. Chitiratifor and company
are gone. No one on the other side knows what went on with you and me
except Tycoon’s people. And Tycoon is perfectly happy to feed Nevil a
story that will suit me.”
“Huh?”
“I had Amdi work out all the details the last time Mr. Radio was up here.”
Amdi shrank down a fraction. Now he had Ravna glaring at him. “It’ll be
okay, Ravna,” he said.
Jefri nodded, deeply into his crazy spy plan. “Nevil won’t trust us, but
we’ll be good propaganda for his cause—I-I’ll speak out in his favor. He’ll
want to keep us around. And we’ve got a snoop-proof way to report.
Amdi has a set of Scrupilo’s new prototype radio cloaks; he’s been
practicing with them. Amdi will be Woodcarver’s ambassador to the
Deniers.”
Ha! She glanced around at Amdi. “What do you really think of Jefri’s
plan?”
Amdi’s gaze—all his gaze—was steady. “I think it’s the best we can do,
and it’s our plan,” he said.
“Oh.” She wasn’t going to be able to stop this. She sat back,
remembering their endless, futile arguments. Her suggestion had turned
into an incredibly dangerous long shot or—her gaze snapped up to Jef’s
face as she remembered the promises he’d made about Nevil and the
Disaster Study Group. “Oh, Jefri—”
Jefri shook his head. “You see why there was no point in this meeting?”
Amdi was watching them from all sides. The one between Ravna and
Jefri had its snout stuck up toward them, its gaze twitching back and
forth. Now it wriggled free and hopped to the ground. The ones behind
Ravna were nudging her like a gentle hand, toward Jefri. One of those
above gave Jef a sharp tap on the head. “Say what you never say!”
demanded Amdi, his voice adult and imperative. And then suddenly, the
pack was scarce.

Jef gave his head an angry shake; he looked as surprised as Ravna felt.
He was silent for almost ten seconds, his eyes averted. Finally he turned
back to Ravna. When he spoke, his voice was stiff: “You still think I’m
eight years old, don’t you?”
“Huh?”
“An incompetent little boy with deadly, false beliefs.”
“Jefri! I—”
He gave her a jagged smile. “Well, I’m not little anymore, and my beliefs
are under review, but”—The smile went away, and his gaze was direct
and angry.—“I was a terrible fool, and my shitheadedness almost got you
killed.”
Ravna was too shocked to speak. She gave him a vague shake of her
head.
Jefri rolled right on: “I watched you for seven tendays, up close, in terrible
circumstances. I’ve learned things about you I never knew, things you
don’t know either. See, whether you’re right or wrong about the Blight,
you’re every bit the kind of princess you used to talk about … and
compared to that, I am an incompetent child.”
Jefri paused and looked away. Somehow, Ravna didn’t think that he was
waiting to hear her response—which was good, because she couldn’t
think of a thing to say.
His gaze turned back upon her. “But you know, I am Sjana and Arne’s
son. And as Tycoon endlessly reminded us, I am Johanna’s brother.
There will come a time when you think more of me.”
And then Jefri ended their discussion in a new way. His arms swept
around her, drawing her into a thorough and uncompromising kiss.
•  •  •

Ravna remained on the rock after Jefri and Amdi departed. After all,
she had come up here to consider the most important things: The next
thousand years. And now, the last five minutes.
The sky gleamed too bright to see any star except the lowering sun. No
matter. When Ravna was on Oobii’s bridge, she kept one special spot
marked. Even here, even without her tiara, she could point toward that
spot, just thirty lightyears out, the best estimate of the Blighter fleet’s
location. So far, there had been only that one Zone temblor, back in year
two. Pray I have Jefri and the Tines and the time to prepare. Down Here,
we have the edge.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Vernor Vinge is the author of the Hugo Award–winning novels A Fire
Upon the Deep, A Deepness in the Sky, and Rainbows End. His other
novels include The Peace War and Marooned in Realtime. He also wrote
the seminal short novel True Names. He has won two Hugo Awards for
shorter works, and two Prometheus Awards for Best Libertarian Fiction. A
mathematician and computer scientist noted as a visionary proponent of
the Technological Singularity, he lives in San Diego, California.
«——THE END——»

