
The Practice of
Rational Emotive
Behavior Therapy

Albert Ellis, PhD, holds MA and PhD degrees in clinical psychology from
Columbia University, and is die founder and President of the Albeit Ellis Insti-
tute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in New York Qty. He sees many
clients for individual and group psychotherapy each week at the Institute's
clinic, supervises its therapy and counseling trainees, and each year gives scores
of talks, workshops, intensives, and training sessions in New York, and in many
cities and universities in the United States and throughout the world. He has
published more than 60 books and monographs, over 700 articles, and more
than 150 audio and video cassettes. His well-known books include Sex With-
out Guilt, Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy, A Guide to Rational Living, How
to Stubbornly Refuse to Make Yourself Miserable About Anything—Yes, Anything!,
Overcoming Resistance (Springer Publishing Company), and Better, Deeper and
More Enduring Brief Therapy. He has received many honors and awards, includ-
ing awards for the highest professional and clinical contributions of the Amer-
ican Psychological Association, the American Counseling Association, and the
Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy.
Windy Dryden, PhD, is Professor of Counseling at Goldsmiths' College,
University of London. He authored and edited more than 100 books, numer-
ous book chapters and articles, and he has edited 12 book series. Among those
books published by Springer is the first edition of this book The Practice of
Rational-Emotive Therapy, The Essential Albert Ellis: Seminal Writings on Psy-
chotherapy, Overcoming Resistance: Rational-Emotive Therapy With Difficult Clients,
and Doing RET: Albert Ellis in Action. He is a Fellow of the Albert Ellis Insti-
tute of Rational-Emotive Behavior Therapy, the British Psychological Society,
the British Associadon for Counseling, and is Consulting Editor of the Journal
of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly (Springer Publishing).

The Practice of
Rational Emotive
Behavior Therapy
SECOND EDITION
Albert Ellis, PhD
Windy Dryden, PhD
PUBLISHING COMPANY
New York
SPRINGER

Copyright © 1997 by Springer Publishing Company, Inc.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
permission of Springer Publishing Company, LLC.
Springer Publishing Company, LLC
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
www.springerpub.com
Production Editor: Pamela Ritzer
Cover design: Mimi Flow
Composition: International Graphic Services
07 08 09 10 / 5 4 3 2 1
13-digit ISBN: 978-0-8261-2216-2 © 2007 Springer Publishing
Company, LLC
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ellis, Albert.
The practice of rational emotive behavior therapy / Albert Ellis,
Windy Dryden.
p. 
cm.
Contains revised and updated articles previously published.
ISBN 0-8261-5471-9 (HB)
ISBN 0-8261-5472-7 (PB)
1. Rational-emotive psychotherapy. I. Dryden, Windy. II. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Psychotherapy, Rational-Emotive—collected works.
WM 420.5.P8 E47P 1997]
RC489.R3E457 1997
616.89'142-dc20
DNLM/DLC
for Library of Congress 
96-32061
CIP
Printed in the United States of America by Berryville Graphics.

Contents
Foreword 
vi
Preface 
viii
1 The General Theory of REST 
1
2 The Basic Practice of REBT 
27
3 A Case Illustration of the Basic Practice of REBT:
The Case of Jane 
72
4 Individual Therapy 
84
5 Couples Therapy 
112
6 Family Therapy 
134
7 Group Therapy 
162
8 Rational Emotive Behavioral Marathons and Intensives 
195
9 Teaching the Principles of Unconditional
Self-Acceptance in a Structured Group Setting 
201
10 The Rational Emotive Behavioral Approach to Sex Therapy 
217
11 The Use of Hypnosis with REBT 
231
Appendix How to Maintain and Enhance Your Rational
Emotive Behavior Therapy Gains 
241
References 
249
Index 
265
v

Foreword
Psychotherapy requires a great deal of intellectual knowledge. To become a
successful therapist requires that one reads many books and articles, and listens
to hundreds of hours of lectures and workshops. However, despite all this verbal
intellectual activity, when you close the door and are alone with the client, you
have to act. You have to decide quickly what to say, what to ask, or to remain
inactive. Was that a choice, or did I act passively because I did not know what
to do? After years of training psychotherapists, I have come to view the practice
of psychotherapy more like a motor sport or skill than like an intellectual
activity. However, psychotherapy is a motor skill that rests on a great deal of
knowledge. How do clinicians learn to go from theory to practice? The title
of this book by Ellis and Dryden reflects the action aspects of psychotherapy.
Systems of psychotherapy have a number of parts. First, they provide a
theory of psychopathology that explains how human disturbance develops.
Next, they have a theory of intervention that should follow from the theory of
psychopathology. The strategies proposed from the theory of intervention should
match the mechanisms that are thought to lead to the disturbance. The theory
of interventions usually has two components. The first I will call strategies
and the second techniques. Strategies are the verbal and logical statements that
the clinician hypothesizes to mediate the structure of the disturbed behavior
and emotion in the particular cases. On the basis of the theory and the individual
case, clinicians develop what we call a case conceptualization. A theory must
be fixable enough to explain many individual cases. Based on the case conceptu-
alization, the strategy suggests apian of intervention. It identifies what hypothet-
ical constructs proposed by the theory and case conceptualization require change
to achieve clinically significant improvement for the client. Many theories are
good up to this point. However, they are short on technique. What specific
things do the therapists do or say to implement the strategic plan? New trainees
often get the theory of psychopathology; they struggle to get the case conceptual-
ization and the strategic plan. Then they ask themselves: "What do I do now?"
Going from the abstractions to the actions is not always clear.
The Practice of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy represents a compilation
of years of theoretical and clinical insights distilled into a specific theory of
vi

Foreword
disturbance and therapy and deductions for specific clinical strategies and
techniques. Albert Ellis has an immense list of scholarly publications. He is
an impressive intellectual force who is well read in philosophy, anthropology,
and psychology. 
However, he is first a master clinician. He has focused all
of his incredible knowledge on how to help reduce human suffering one patient
at a time. He has always exemplified the pragmatic scholar. He is one of
those rare people with expansive knowledge who can use his knowledge with
surgical precisions.
The world's greatest Albert Ellis scholar, Windy Dryden from London, joins
Al in this volume. Not only has Windy spent several decades studying Al's
writings, he has spent hundreds, maybe thousands, of hours watching Al do
therapy. Like Al, Windy is most interested in the consistent implementation of
the theory into practice.
The resulting collaboration here is not just a smartly written, clear presentation
of one of the most philosophical theories of psychotherapy, but a very practical
volume as well. They titled this book The Practice of Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy because both authors are not satisfied for therapists to have only an
intellectual understanding of REBT. Will/can they do it with real clients?
The structure of this book focuses on an explication of the theory, a chapter
on basic practice, and a chapter on an in-depth case study. A detailed chapter
follows on the practice of individual psychotherapy. Although the book is not
broken into sections, the next four chapters represent a real treasure. The authors
focus on using REBT in couples, family, group, and marathons sessions. Doing
REBT with one person is difficult to learn. Once the clinician adds more people
to the room with different and sometimes competing agendas, things get more
complicated. These chapters will help not only the novice clinician but also
the experienced REBT therapists work better in these types of sessions.
So, consider yourself lucky for having picked up this book. Reading it will
help many people (and hopefully yourself) get better.
Raymond DiGiuseppe, PhD, ScD
Director of Professional Education, Albert Ellis Institute
Professor and Chair
Department of Psychology
St. John's University
vii

Preface
Many excellent books for professionals have been published on rational emo-
tive behavior therapy (REBT), including several of our own (Bernard, 1991;
Bernard & Wolfe, 1993; Dryden, 1994a, 1994b, 1995a, 1995b; Dryden &
DiGiuseppe, 1990; Dryden & Hill, 1993; Dryden & Neenan, 1995; Ellis,
1985c, 1994c, 1996a; Ellis & Grieger, 1986; Walen, DiGiuseppe, & Dryden,
1992; Yankura & Dryden, 1990, 1994). None of these books, however, sys-
tematically considers the major way in which REBT is used clinically, such as
its use in individual, group, couples, family, and intensives therapy. Conse-
quently, there is still no volume that systematically reviews the regular prac-
tice of REBT.
We have previously written books and articles covering important aspects
of the practice of REBT (Dryden, 1985b; Ellis, 1971a, 1985c, 1993b), but
some of these are outdated and/or out of print. Therefore, in this book we
have revised and updated this previous material, added several chapters on new
REBT formulations, and attempted to produce a volume that will present a
comprehensive picture of the practice of REBT that can be used effectively by
any therapist who wants to employ its important clinical modalities.
Not that this book covers all of REBT Some of the volumes mentioned
above include applications of REBT that are only briefly mentioned here. And
some of its psychoeducational practices—such as its use in workshops, courses,
and rational emotive behavioral training intensives—are barely discussed here.
But the professional who wants to use REBT in its most popular clinical modes
will find them described in detail in this book. While we do not expect it to
replace other REBT writings, we hope that it significantly and usefully sup-
plements them.
ALBERT ELLIS, PuD
WINDY DRYDEN, PHD
via

1
The Qenerol Theory
of REBT
In this first chapter we discuss the general theory underpinning the practice
of REBT. First, we put REBT in historical context and trace some of its major
influences. Second, we outline REBT's major theoretical concepts. Third, we
put forward an expanded version of REBT's well-known ABC framework.
Fourth, we consider REBT's perspective on the nature of psychological dis-
turbance and health. Fifth, we elaborate this theme by detailing REBTfc view-
point on how psychological disturbance is acquired and perpetuated. Finally,
we outline the REBT general theory of therapeutic change.
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF REBT
I (AE) founded rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) in 1955 when I was
a New York clinical psychologist, having begun my career in the helping pro-
fessions in the early 1940s. As a result of research I was doing at that time for
a massive work to be entitled The Case for Sexual Liberty, I gained a local rep-
utation for being an authority on sexual and marital relationships. I was con-
sulted by my friends on their sexual and relationship problems and discovered
that I could be successful in helping them with these problems in a short
period of time. I decided to pursue formal training in clinical psychology after
discovering that there were no formal training possibilities then offered in sex
and marital counseling. After getting a PhD degree in clinical psychology, I
chose to be trained in psychoanalysis, believing then that it was the deepest
and most effective form of psychotherapy available. I decided on this course
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Dryden and Ellis (1986) and W. Dryden and A. Ellis,
"Rational-Emotive Therapy," in K. S. Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies;
New York: Guilford, 1987 (used by permission) and have been previously published in The Nurse
Practitioner: The American Journal ofPrimary Health Care, /2(7)July 1987.
1

2 
The Practice ofREBT
of action because my experiences as an informal sex-marital counselor had
taught me that disturbed relationships were really a product of disturbed per-
sons "and that if people were truly to be helped to live happily with each other
they first had better be shown how they could live peacefully with themselves"
(Ellis, 1962, p. 3).
I initially enjoyed working as a psychoanalyst, partly because it allowed me
to express both my helping and problem-solving interests. However, I became
increasingly dissatisfied with psychoanalysis as an effective and efficient form
of treatment. In the early 1950s, I began to experiment with different forms
of therapy, including psychoanalytkally oriented psychotherapy and eclectic-
analytic therapy. But although I became more effective with my clients, I
remained dissatisfied about die efficiency of these methods. During this period
of experimentation I returned to my lifelong hobby of reading philosophy to
help me with my search for an effective and efficient form of therapy. One of
the major influences on my thought at that time was the work of the Greek
and Roman Stoic philosophers (e.g., Epicurus, Epictetus, and Marcus Aure-
lius). They emphasized the primacy of philosophic causation of psychological
disturbances—a viewpoint mat was not popular in America in the 1950s—and
deemphasized the part played by psychoanalytic psychodynamic factors. This
view was also largely promoted by several ancient Asian philosophers, espe-
cially Confucius, Lao-Tsu, and Gautama Buddha. In essence, these ancient
philosophies, which stated that people are disturbed not by things but by their
view of things, became the foundation ofREBT, and this perspective (follow-
ing my pioneering formulations) remains at the heart of present-day cogni-
tive-behavioral approaches to psychotherapy.
Major Philosophical Influences
Apart from ancient philosophy, present-day REBT owes a philosophical debt
to a number of other sources that have influenced its development. Immanuel
Kant's writings on the power (and limitations) of cognition and ideation
strongly impressed me, and the work of Spinoza and Schopenhauer was also
important in this respect. Philosophers of science, such as Popper (1959,
1963), Russell (1965), and Bartley (1984), were also influential in helping me
see that all humans develop hypotheses about the nature of the world. More-
over, these philosophers stressed the importance of testing the usefulness of
such hypotheses rather than assuming that they are necessarily helpful. The
practice ofREBT goes along in many respects with the logicoempirical meth-
ods of science (Ellis, 1962, I979d). REBT also stresses the flexibility and anti-
dogmatism of the scientific method and opposes all dogmas, just as science
does, and it holds that rigid absolutism is one of the main cores of human dis-
turbance (Ellis, 1983a). Also, REBT in some ways predated and in other ways
endorses some of the views of postmodernism (Ellis, 1994c, 1996a, 1996b).

The General Theory ofREBT 
3
Although the philosophy ofREBT is at variance with devout religiosity, in
one respect Christian philosophy has been most influential. REBT's theory of
human value (which will be discussed later) is similar to the Christian view-
point of condemning the sin but forgiving the sinner (Ellis, 1991b, 1991c,
1994c; Hauck, 1991; Mills, 1993; Powell, 1976). Due to its stand on self-accep-
tance and its bias against all forms of human rating, REBT allies itself with the
philosophy of ethical humanism (Russell, 1950,1965), which opposes the deifi-
cation and devil-ification of humans. Since REBT considers that humans are at
the center of their universe (but not of the universe) and have the power of
choice (but not of unlimited choice) with regard to their emotional realm, it
has its roots in the existential philosophies of Heidegger (1949) and Tillich
(1977). Indeed, REBT has a pronounced humanistic-existential outlook (Ellis,
1973,1991c, 1994c, 1996a).
I was also influenced, particularly in the 1960s, by the work of the general
semanticists (e.g., Korzybski, 1933). These theorists outlined the powerful
effect that language has on thought and the fact that our emotional processes
are heavily dependent on the way we, as humans, structure our thought by the
language we employ.
Major Psychological Influences
In developing REBT, I (AE) have similarly been influenced by the work of a
number of psychologists. I received a training analysis from an analyst of the
Karen Horney school, and Horney's (1950) concept of the "tyranny of the
shoulds" was certainly an early influence on my emphasis on the primacy of
absolute, dogmatic evaluative thought in the creation and maintenance of
much psychological disturbance.
The work of Adler was important to the development ofREBT in several
respects. Adler (1927) was the first great therapist to really emphasize inferior-
ity feelings—while REBT similarly stresses self-rating and the ego anxiety to
which it leads. Like Adler and his Individual Psychology, REBT also emphasizes
people's goals, purposes, values and meanings. REBT follows Adler in regard to
the use of active-directive teaching, the stress placed on social interest, the use
of a holistic and humanistic outlook, and the employment of a highly cognitive-
persuasive form of psychological treatment (Ellis, 1991b, 1991c, 1996a).
Although REBT was originally termed Rational Psychotherapy, it has always
advocated the use of behavioral methods as well as cognitive and emotive tech-
niques in the practice of therapy. Indeed, I (AE) utilized the methods advocated
by some of the earliest pioneers in behavior therapy (Dunlap, 1932; M. C. Jones,
1924; Watson & Rayner, 1920), first, in overcoming my own early fears of
speaking in public and approaching women, and second, in the active-direc-
tive form of sex therapy that I practiced in the 1940s and 1950s. This behav-
ioral active-directive emphasis remains prominent in present-day REBT.

* 
The Practice of REST
In its 40 years of existence, REBT has been practiced in various therapeu-
tic modalities (individual, group, marital, and family), by many kinds of help-
ing professionals (e.g., psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers), and with a
variety of client populations (e.g., adults, children, the elderly) suffering from
a wide range of psychological disorders. Apart from its use in counseling and
psychotherapy, rational emotive behavioral principles have been applied in
educational, industrial, and commercial settings. A recent development has
been the applicadon of REBT to public education in the form of 9-hour inten-
sive workshops. In this respect it is playing a significant role in the field of pre-
ventive psychology. REBT is practiced throughout the world, and there are
REBT institutes, or centers, in the United States, France, Italy, West Ger-
many, Holland, Australia, England, Mexico, Israel, and India. It is thus a well-
established form of cognitive-behavioral therapy.
MAJOR THEORETICAL CONCEPTS
REBT is based on a set of assumptions that stress the complexity and fluidity
of human beings. Given this fundamental view of human nature, REBT uses
the following theoretical concepts.
Goals, Purposes, and Rationality
According to REBT theory, humans are happiest when they establish impor-
tant life goals and purposes and actively strive to attain these. It is argued that,
in establishing and pursuing these goals and purposes, human beings had bet-
ter mind the fact that they live in a social world and that a philosophy of self-
interest, where a person places him or herself first, also implies putting others
a close second. This is in contrast to a philosophy of selfishness, where the
desires of others are neither respected nor regarded. Given that humans will
tend to be goal-directed, rational in REBT theory means "that which helps
people to achieve their basic goals and purposes, whereas 'irrational' means
that which prevents them from achieving these goals and purposes" (Dryden,
1984c, p. 238). Thus, rationality is not defined in any absolute sense but is rel-
ative in nature.
Humanistic Emphasis
REBT does not pretend to be "purely" objective, scientific, or technique-cen-
tered but takes a definite humanistic-existential approach to human problems
and their basic solutions. It primarily deals with disturbed human evaluations,
emotions, and behaviors. It is rational and scientific but uses rationality and
science to enable humans to live and be happy. It is hedonistic, but it espouses

Tbt General Theory ofREBT 
5
long-range instead of short-range hedonism so that people may achieve the
pleasure of the moment and of the future and may arrive at maximum free-
dom and discipline. It hypothesizes that probably nothing superhuman exists
and that devout belief in superhuman agencies tends to foster dependency
and increase emotional disturbance. It assumes that no humans, whatever
their antisocial or obnoxious behavior, are damnable nor subhuman. It par-
ticularly emphasizes the importance of will and choice in human affairs, even
though it accepts the likelihood that some human behavior is partially deter-
mined by biological, social, and other forces (Bandura, 1986; Ellis, 1973,
1988,1994c, 1996a).
The Interaction of Psychological Processes
and the Place of Cognition
REBT theory has, from its inception, stressed an interactive view of human
psychological processes. Cognitions, emotions, and behaviors are not experi-
enced in isolation and often, particularly in the realm of psychological distur-
bance, overlap to a significant degree. Recently, REBT has stressed the infer-
ential nature of activating events and has shown how events (or more correctly,
how we perceive events) again interact with our cognitive evaluations, emo-
tions, and behaviors (Ellis, 1994c, 1995a). This point will be amplified in the
section tided "The Revised ABCs ofREBT."
Given this interactional view, it is true, however, that REBT is most noted
for the special place it has accorded cognition in human psychological pro-
cesses, particularly the role that evaluative thought plays in psychological
health and disturbance. One of REBT's unique contributions to the field of
cognitive-behavior therapy lies in its distinction between rational, and irra-
tional Beliefs. Rational Beliefs are evaluative cognitions of personal signifi-
cance that are preferential (i.e., nonabsolute) in nature. They are expressed
in the form of "desires," "preferences," "wishes," "likes," and "dislikes." Peo-
ple experience positive feelings of pleasure and satisfaction when they get
what they desire and experience negative feelings of displeasure and dissatis-
faction (e.g., sadness, concern, regret, annoyance) when they do not get what
they desire. These negative feelings (the strength of which is closely related
to the importance of the desire) are regarded as healthy responses to negative
events and do not significantly interfere with the pursuit of established or new
goals and purposes. These Beliefs, then, are "rational" in two respects. First,
they are flexible, and second, they do not impede the attainment of basic goals
and purposes.
Irrational Beliefs, on the other hand, differ in two respects from Rational
Beliefs. First, they tend to be absolute (or dogmatic) and are expressed in the
form of rigid "mustV "should's," "ought's," "have-to's," etc. Second, they lead
to negative emotions that largely interfere with goal pursuit and attainment

6 
The Practice ofSEBT
(e.g., depression, anxiety, guilt, anger). Healthy Beliefs strongly tend to under-
lie functional behaviors, whereas unhealthy Beliefs underpin dysfunctional
behaviors such as withdrawal, procrastination, alcoholism, and substance abuse
(Ellis & Knaus, 1977; Ellis, Mclnerney, DiGiuseppe, & Yeager, 1988; Ellis &
Velten, 1992).
Two Basic Biological Tendencies
Unlike most other theories of therapy, which stress the impact of significant
life events on the development of psychological disturbance, REBT theory
hypothesizes that the biological tendency of humans to think irrationally and
dysfunctionally has a notable impact on such disturbance. Its view that irra-
tional and dysfunctional thinking is heavily determined by biological factors
(always interacting with influential environmental conditions) rests on the
seeming ease with which humans think crookedly and the prevalence of such
thinking even among people who have been "rationally" raised (Ellis, 1976a).
While I (AE) have acknowledged that there are social influences operating
here, I have also noted that even if everybody had had the most rational
upbringing, virtually all humans would often irrationally change their indi-
vidual and social preferences into absolutistic demands on (a) themselves, (b)
other people, and (c) the universe around them (Ellis, 1985a, 1988,1994c).
The following constitutes evidence in favor of REBT's hypothesis of the
biological basis of human irrationality:
1. Virtually all humans, including bright and competent people, show evi-
dence of major human irrationalities and self-defeatism.
2. Virtually all me disturbance-creating irrationalities (absolutistic shoulds and
musts) mat are found in our society are also found in just about all social and
cultural groups that have been studied historically and anthropologically.
3. Many of the self-destructive behaviors that we engage in, such as pro-
crastination and lack of self-discipline, go counter to the teachings of par-
ents, peers, and the mass media.
4. Humans—even bright and intelligent people—often adopt new irra-
tionalities after giving up previous ones.
5. People who vigorously oppose various irrational behaviors often fall prey
to these very irrationalities. Atheists and agnostics exhibit zealous and
absolutistic philosophies, and highly religious individuals act immorally.
6. Insight into irrational thoughts, feelings, and behaviors helps only partially
to change them. For example, people can acknowledge that drinking alco-
hol in large quantities is harmful, yet this knowledge does not necessarily
help them abstain from heavy drinking.
7. Humans often fall back to self-defeating habits and behavioral patterns
even though they have often worked hard to overcome them.

The General Theory of REST 
7
8. People often find it easier to learn self-defeating than self-enhancing
behaviors. Thus, they very easily overeat but have great trouble following
a sensible diet.
9. Psychotherapists who presumably should preferably be good role models
of rationality often act irrationally in their personal and professional lives.
10. People frequently delude themselves into believing that certain bad expe-
riences (e.g., divorce, stress, and other misfortunes) can never happen to
them (Ellis, 1976a, 1979e, 1994c).
However, REBT holds that humans have a second constructivist biological
tendency, namely, to exercise the power of human choice and to work toward
changing their dysfunctional thinking and acting. Thus, they have (1) the abil-
ity to see that they make themselves disturbed by the irrational views they
bring to situations, (2) the ability to see that they can change their thinking,
and, most important, (3) the ability to actively and continually work toward
changing this thinking and behaving by the application of cognitive, emotive,
and behavioral methods. While REBT theory asserts that humans have a
strong biological tendency to think dysfunctionally (as well as functionally), it
holds that they are by no means slaves to this tendency and can transcend
(although not fully) its effects. In the final analysis, then, the REBT image of
the person is quite an optimistic one (Dryden, 1994a, 199Sb, 1995c;.Ellis,
1973,1994c, 1996a; Ellis & Bernard, 1983,1985; Kelly, 1955;Mahoney, 1991).
Two Fundamental Human Disturbances
According to REBT, humans easily make absolute demands on themselves, other
people, and the world. However, if these demands are more closely investi-
gated, they can be seen to fall into two major categories of psychological dis-
turbance: ego disturbance and discomfort disturbance (Ellis, I979a, 1980a,
1994c, 1996a).
In ego disturbance a person makes demands on self, others, and the world;
and if these demands are not met in the past, present, or future, the person
becomes disturbed by damning "self." As I (WD) have shown, self-damnation
involves (1) the process of giving my "self" a global negative rating and (2)
"devil-ifying" my "self as being bad or less worthy (Dryden, 1984b). The
rational and healthy alternative to self-damnation is unconditional self-accep-
tance (USA), which involves refusing to give one's "self a single rating
(because it is an impossible task due to one's complexity and fluidity and
because it normally interferes with attaining one's basic goals and purposes)
and acknowledging one's fallibility.
In discomfort disturbance or low frustration tolerance (LFT), the person
again makes demands on self, others, and the world that are related to dog-
matic commands that comfort and comfortable life conditions must exist.

8 
The Practice of REBT
When these demands are not met in the past, present, or future, the person
feels disturbed and tends to mvfulize and create I-can't-stand-it-itis. Tolerating
discomfort in order to aid goal attainment and long-range happiness is the
healthy and rational alternative to demands for immediate gratification.
Thus, as will be shown later, self-acceptance and a high level of frustration
tolerance are two of the main cornerstones of the rational-emotive image of
the psychologically healthy human being (Ellis, 1979e, 1994c, 1996a).
THE REVISED ABCS OF REBT
When REBT was originally established, I (AE) employed a simple ABC assess-
ment framework to conceptualize clients' psychological problems (Ellis, 1962).
In this schema, "A" stood for the Activating event, "B" represented a person's
Belief about that event, and "C" denoted the person's emotional and behav-
ioral responses, or Consequences, to holding the particular Beliefs at "B." The
major advantage of the ABC framework lay in its simplicity. However, its sim-
plicity was also a disadvantage in that important distinctions between differ-
ent types of cognitive activity were glossed over (Wessler & Wessler, 1980). It
is important to note that different REBT therapists use different expanded
versions of the original ABC framework (cf. Ellis, 1985c; Wessler & Wessler,
1980). There is thus no absolutely correct way of conceptualizing clients' prob-
lems according to such an expanded schema. What is presented below is one
version of the revised ABC framework (Ellis, 198Sb, 1994c).
Activating Events or Activators (A's) of Cognitive,
Emotional, and Behavioral Consequences (C's)
The REBT theory of personality and personality disturbances begins with
people trying to fulfill their Goals (G's) in some kind of environment and
encountering a set of Activating events or Activators (A's) that tend to help
them achieve or block these Goals. The A's they encounter usually are pres-
ent or current events or their own thoughts, feelings, or behaviors about these
events, but they may be embedded in memories or thoughts (conscious or
unconscious) about past experiences. People are prone to seek out and
respond to these As because of (1) their biological or genetic predispositions,
(2) their constitutional history, (3) their prior interpersonal and social learn-
ing, and (4) their innately predisposed and acquired habit patterns (Ellis,
1976a, 1979e, 1983b, 1994c).
Afc (Activating events) virtually never exist in a pure or monolithic state; they
almost always interact with and partly include B's and C's. People bring them-
selves (their goals, thoughts, desires, and physiological propensities) to A!s.

The General Theory of REST 
9
Beliefs about Activating Events
According to REBT theory, people have almost innumerable Beliefs (B's)—
cognitions, thoughts, or ideas—about their Activating events (Afc); and these
B's importantly exert strong influences on their cognitive, emotional, and
behavioral Consequences (C's). Although A% often seem to directly "cause" or
contribute to C's, this is rarely true, because B's normally serve as important
mediators between A5s and C's and therefore more directly "cause" or "create"
C's (Bard, 1980; Ellis, 1962,1994c, Goldfried & Davison, 1994; Grieger &
Boyd, 1980; Wessler & Wessler, 1980). People largely bring their Beliefs to A;
and they prejudicially view or experience A's in the light of these biased Beliefs
(expectations, evaluations) and also in the light of their emotional Conse-
quences (C's). Therefore, humans virtually never experience A without B and
C, but they also rarely experience B and C without A.
B's take many different forms because people have many kinds of cognitions.
In REBT, however, we are mainly interested in their rational Beliefs (RBs),
which, we hypothesize, lead to their self-helping behaviors, and in their irra-
tional Beliefs (IBs), which, we theorize, lead to their self-defeating (and soci-
etal-defeating) behaviors. We can list some of the main (but not the only) lands
of B's as follows:
Nonevaluative Observations Example: "(I see)... the man is walking."
Such observations do not go beyond the available data. They are nonevalua-
tive because they are not relevant to our goals. When such observations are
relevant to our goals, they become evaluative; for example, when the man walk-
ing is my father, who has just recovered from a car accident. The evaluative
aspects of such "evaluative observations" are often implicit—for example, "(I
am pleased that)... the man is walking."
Nonevaluative Inferences Example: "The man who is walking is going to
the post office." Such cognitions are called "inferences" because they go beyond
the available data. All we are able to observe in this example is a man walking
in a certain direction. Although he is proceeding in the direction of the post
office, he may or may not be "going to the post office." As such, inferences may
be viewed as hypotheses about our observations that may or may not be cor-
rect. These inferences are nonevaluative when they are not relevant to our
goals. When such inferences are relevant to our goals, they become evaluative—
for example, when the man who may be going to the post office will bring us
back our birthday parcels (if indeed he does make such a visit). The evaluative
aspects of such "evaluative inferences" are again often implicit—for example,
"(it is good that)... the man who is walking is going to the post office."
It is helpful to realize, for assessment purposes, that inferences are fre-
quently chained together (Moore, 1983) and that it is often important to find

10 
The Practice ofREBT
the most relevant inference in the chain, that is, the one that overlaps with
the person's "musturbatory" evaluations (i.e., events that are dogmatic in
nature and couched in the form of must's, should's, ought's, and have-to's, etc.)
Thus, if a client reports experiencing anger at his wife for forgetting the shop-
ping, shopping may not actually be the "event" that triggers his anger-pro-
ducing evaluations. The inference chain may be revealed thus: wife forgets
shopping -» I will mention this to her -» she will nag me -»I won't be able
to watch the football game on TV in peace. Any of these inferences may trig-
ger anger-creating evaluations, and it is often important to involve clients as
fully as possible in the assessment process by asking questions to help them
provide reliable information concerning their most relevant inferences in par-
ticular chains.
Positive Preferential Evaluations Example: "I prefer people to approve of
me" or "I like people to approve of me ... (but they do not have to)." These
cognitions are termed "positive preferential evaluations" because (1) they are
flexible and nonabsolute (statements like "but they do not have to" are rarely
stated but are implicit in such cognitions), and (2) they refer to what the per-
son evaluates as positive—"people approving of me." They are often termed
"rational" in REBT theory because they tend to aid and abet a person's basic
goals and purposes.
Let us assume that a man who holds the Belief "I prefer people to approve
of me" observes a group of people laughing and infers that they are laughing
•with him. This person may conclude the following based on the positive pref-
erential evaluation that he likes approval and the inference that they are laugh-
ing with him:
"(I presume)... they think I am funny."
"(I presume)... they like me."
"(I presume)... their liking me has real advantages."
These cognitions are all positive, nonabsolute inferences because (1) they
go beyond the available data, (2) they are relevant to the person's goal (he is
getting what he values), and (3) they are not held with absolute conviction.
"My ability to make them laugh is good."
"It's pleasant to hear them enjoy themselves."
The latter are both positive, nonabsolute evaluations because this man is
appraising his ability to make them laugh and their pleasure at laughing in a
positive but relative manner.
Positive Musturbatory Evaluations Example: "I must have people approve
of me." Such cognitions are termed "positive musturbatory evaluations"

The General Tktory ofBEBT 
11
because they are absolute and dogmatic and they refer to what the person eval-
uates as positive in a devout manner. They are often termed "irrational" in
REBT theory in that they tend to impede and inhibit a person from achiev-
ing his or her other basic goals and purposes.
Let us again assume that a group of people are laughing with a man and pre-
sumably like him. He may conclude the following based on his positive mus-
turbatory evaluations. Thinking errors are categorized in parentheses:
"I am a great, noble person!" (overgeneralization)
"My life will be completely wonderful!" (overgeneralization)
"I deserve to have only fine and wonderful things happen to me!"
(demandingness and deification)
These are all positive, absolute evaluations. The evaluations of T and die
world are positive and grossly exaggerated.
"I am sure they will always like me." (delusions of certainty)
"I am convinced that I will always please them." (delusions of certainty)
The latter are both positive, absolute inferences because (1) they go beyond
the data at hand, (2) they are positively relevant to the person's goal, and (3)
they are held with absolute conviction.
Negative Preferential Evaluations Example: "I prefer people not to dis-
approve of me ..." or "I dislike people disapproving of me ... (but there's no
reason why they must not disapprove of me)." These cognitions are termed
"negative preferential evaluations" because, once again, (1) they are flexible
and nonabsolute (statements like "but therefc no reason why they must not..."
are also rarely stated but are again implicit in such Beliefs); and (2) they refer
to what the person evaluates as negative—"people disapproving of me." They
are also termed "rational" in REBT theory because they tend to aid and abet a
person's basic goals and purposes.
This time let us assume that a man who holds the Belief "I prefer people
not to disapprove of me" observes a group of people laughing but infers that
they are laughing at him. This man may conclude the following based on the
negative preferential evaluations:
"(I presume) ... they think I am stupid."
"(I presume)... they don't like me."
"(I presume) ... that their not liking me has real disadvantages."
These are all negative nonabsolute inferences because (1) they go beyond
the data at hand, (2) they are relevant to the person's goal (he is getting what
he dislikes), and (3) they are not held with absolute conviction.

12 
The Practice of REST
This man may further conclude:
"It's unfortunate that they are laughing at me."
"It would be bad if I have some unfortunate trait,"
These are both negative, nonabsolute evaluations. The evaluations of his
"situation" and of his "unfortunate trait" are negative and nondevout (i.e., not
absolutistic).
Negative Musturbatory Evaluations Example: "I must not have people dis-
approve of me." Such cognitions are termed "negative musturbatory evalua-
tions" because (1) they are absolute and dogmatic and (2) they refer to what
the person evaluates as negative in a devout manner. They are further exam-
ples of irrational Beliefs in that they tend to impede the achievement of a per-
son's basic goals and purposes.
If we assume again that a group of people are laughing at a man and pre-
sumably disapprove of him, he may conclude the following based on the above
negative musturbatory evaluations. Again, the categories of thinking errors are
listed in brackets.
"I am an incompetent, rotten person!" (overgeneralization, self-downing)
"My life will be completely miserable!" (overgeneralization, awfulizing)
"The world is a totally crummy place!" (overgeneralization, awfulizing)
"I deserve to have only bad or good things happen to me!" (demanding-
ness and damnation)
"This is awful, horrible, and terrible!" (awfulizing)
"I can't bear it!" (I-can't-stand-it-itis)
These are all examples of negative absolute evaluations. The people and
things appraised are all evaluated in a negative and grossly exaggerated manner.
"I will always act incompetently and have significant people disapprove
of me." (overgeneralization)
"They know that I am no good and will always be incompetent." (non
sequitur, jumping to conclusions, mind reading)
"They will keep laughing at me and will always despise me." (non
sequitur, jumping to conclusions, fortune-telling)
"They only despise me and see nothing good in me." (focusing on the
negative, overgeneraiization)
"When they laugh with me and see me favorably, that is only because they
are in a good mood and do not see that I am fooling them." (dis-
qualifying the positive, non sequitur, phonyism)
"Their laughing at me and disliking me will definitely make me lose my
job and lose all my friends." (catastrophizing, magnification)

The General Theory ofREBT 
H
"They could only be laughing because of some foolish thing I have done
and could not possible be laughing for any other reason." (personal-
izing, non sequitur, overgeneralizadon)
The above seven are all examples of negative absolute inferences because
(1) they go beyond the data at hand, (2) they tend to sabotage the person's goal,
and (3) they are held with absolute conviction.
Consequences (C's) of Activating Events (A's)
and Beliefs (B's) about A's
C's (cognitive, affective, and behavioral Consequences) follow from the inter-
action of A's and B's. We can say, mathematically, that A x B=C, but this for-
mula may actually be too simple, and we may require a more complex one
to express the relationship adequately. C is almost always significantly
affected or influenced but not exactly "caused" by A, because humans natu-
rally react to some degree to stimuli in their environments. Moreover, when
A is powerful (e.g., a set of starvation conditions or an earthquake), it tends
to affect C profoundly.
When C consists of emotional disturbance (e.g., severe feelings of anxiety,
depression, hostility, self-deprecation, and self-pity), B usually (but not always)
mainly or more directly creates or "causes" C. Emotional disturbance, how-
ever, may at times stem from powerful A!s—for example, from environmental
disasters such as floods or wars. Emotional disturbance may also follow from
factors in the organism—for example, hormonal, disease, or biochemical fac-
tors—that are somewhat independent of, yet may actually "cause" C's.
When strong or unusual A5s significantly contribute to or "cause" C's or
when physiological factors "create" C's, they are usually accompanied by con-
tributory B's too. Thus, if people are caught in an earthquake or if they expe-
rience powerful biological changes and they "therefore" become depressed,
their As and their physiological processes probably are strongly influencing
them to create irrational Beliefs (IB's), such as, "This earthquake shouldn't have
occurred! Isn't it awful! I can't stand it!" These IB's, in turn, add to or help cre-
ate their feelings of depression at C.
C's usually consist of feelings and behaviors but may also consist of thoughts
(e.g., obsessions). C's (Consequences) that follow from AJs and B's are virtually
never pure or monolithic but also partially include and inevitably interact with
A and B. Thus if A is an obnoxious event (e.g., a job refusal) and B is, first, a
rational Belief (e.g., "I hope I don't get rejected for this job!") as well as, sec-
ond, an irrational Belief (e.g., "I must have this job! I'm no good if I don't get
it"), C tends to be, first, healthy feelings of frustration and disappointment and,
second, unhealthy feelings of severe anxiety, inadequacy, and depression.
So A x B-C. But people also bring feelings (as well as hopes, goals, and
purposes) to A. They would not keep a job unless they desired or favorably

14 
The Practice ofREBT
evaluated it or unless they enjoyed some aspect of it. Their A therefore par-
tially includes their B and C. The three, from the beginning, are related
rather than completely disparate.
At the same time, people's Beliefs (B's) also partly or intrinsically relate to
and include their Afe and their C's. Thus, if they tell themselves, at B, "I want
to get a good job," diey partly create the Activating event at A (going for a job
interview), and they partly create their emotional and behavioral Consequences
at C (feeling disappointed when they encounter a job rejection). Without their
evaluating a job as good they would not try for it nor have any particular feel-
ing about being rejected.
A, B, and C, then, are all closely related, and none of them tends to exist
without the other.
THE NATURE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
DISTURBANCE AND HEALTH
Psychological Disturbance
Rational emotive behavioral theory, then, posits that at the heart of neurotic
disturbance lies the tendency of humans to make devout, absolutistic evalua-
tions of the perceived events in their lives. As has been shown, these evalua-
tions are couched in the form of dogmatic "must's," "should's," "have to's,"
"got to's," and "ought's." We hypothesize that these absolutistic cognitions are
at the core of a philosophy of devout Beliefs that is a central feature of much
human emotional and behavioral disturbance (cf. Ellis, 1991b, 1991c, 1995a).
These Beliefs are deemed to be irrational in REBT theory in that they usually
(but not invariably) impede and obstruct people in the pursuit of their basic
goals and purposes. Absolutist must's do not invariably lead to psychological
disturbance because it is possible for a person to devoutly believe "I must suc-
ceed at all important projects," have confidence that he or she will be success-
ful in these respects, and actually succeed in them and thereby not experience
psychological disturbance. However, the person remains vulnerable in this
respect because there is always the possibility that he or she may fail in the
future. So although on probabilistic grounds REBT theory argues that an
absolutistic philosophy will frequently lead to such disturbance, it does not
claim that this is absolutely so. Thus, even with respect to its view of die nature
of human disturbance REBT adopts an antiabsolutistic position
REBT theory goes on to posit that if humans adhere to a philosophy of
"musturbation" they will strongly tend to make a number of core irrational
conclusions that are deemed to be derivatives of these "must's." These major
derivatives are viewed as irrational because they too tend to sabotage a per-
son's basic goals and purposes.

The General Theory ofREBT 
15
The first major derivative is known as "awftilizing." This occurs when a per-
ceived event is rated as being more than 100% bad—a truly exaggerated and
magical conclusion that stems from the Belief: "This must not be as bad as it is."
The second major derivative is known as "I-can't-stand-it-itis." This
means believing that one cannot experience virtually any happiness at all,
under any conditions, if an event that "must" not happen actually occurs or
threatens to occur.
The third major derivative, known as "damnation," represents a tendency
for humans to rate themselves and other people as "subhuman" or "undeserv-
ing" if self or other does something that they "must" not do or fails to do some-
thing that they "must" do. "Damnation" can also be applied to world or life
conditions that are rated as being "rotten" for failing to give the person what
he or she "must" have.
Although REBT holds that "awfulizing," "I-can't-stand-it-itis," and "damna-
tion" are secondary irrational processes in that they tend to stem from the phi-
losophy of "must's," these processes can sometimes be primary (Ellis, 1983b,
1994c, 199Sa). Indeed, Wessler (1984) has argued that they are more likely to
be primary and that "must's" are derived from them. However, the philosophy
of "mustfs," on the one hand, and those of "awfulizing," "I-can't-stand-it-itis,"
and "damnation," on the other, are in all probability interdependent processes
and often seem to be different sides of the same "cognitive" coin (Ellis, 1994c).
REBT notes that humans also make numerous kinds of illogicalities'when
they are disturbed (Ellis, 198Sc, 1994c). In this respect, REBT agrees with
cognitive therapists (Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979; Burns, 1980) that such
cognitive distortions are a feature of psychological disturbance. However,
REBT theory holds that such distortions almost always stem from the "must's."
Some of the most frequent of them are
1. AU-or-none thinking: "If I fail at any important task, as I must not, I'm a
total failure and completely unlovable!"
2. Jumping to conclusions and negative non sequiturs: "Since they have seen me
dismally fail, as I absolutely should not have done, they will view me as an
incompetent worm."
3. Fortune-telling; "Because they are laughing at me for failing, as I absolutely
should not have done, they will despise me forever."
4. Focusing on the negative: "Because I can't stand things going wrong, as they
must not, I can't see any good that is happening in my life."
5. Disqualifying the positive: "When they compliment me on the good things
I have done, they are only being kind to me and forgetting the foolish
things that I absolutely should not have done."
6. Allness and neverness: "Because conditions of living ought to be good and
actually are so bad and so intolerable, they'll always be this way and I'll
never have any happiness."

16 
The Practice of REBT
7. Minimization: "My good shots in this game were lucky and unimportant.
But my bad shots, which I absolutely should never have made, were as bad
as could be and were totally unforgivable."
8. Emotional reasoning: "Because I have performed so poorly, as I absolutely
should not have done, I feel like a total nincompoop, and my strong feel-
ing proves that I am no damned good!"
9. Labeling and overgeneralization: "Because I must not fail at important work
and have done so, I am a complete loser and failure!"
10. Personalizing: "Since I am acting far worse than I absolutely should act and
they are laughing, I am sure they are only laughing at me, and that is
ffwfull"
11. Phonyism: "When I don't do as well as I ought to do and they still praise
and accept me, I am a real phony and will soon fall on my face and show
them how despicable I am!"
12. Perfectionism: "I realize that I did fairly well, but I absolutely should have done
perfectly well on a task like this and am therefore really an incompetent
person!"
Although REBT clinicians at times discover all the unrealistic and illogical
Beliefs just listed—and a number of others that are less frequently found with
clients—they particularly focus on the unconditional "should's," "ought's," and
"must's," that seem to constitute the philosophic core of irrational beliefs that
lead to emotional disturbance. They hold that if they do not get to and help
clients surrender these core Beliefs or underlying schemas, die clients will most
probably keep holding them and create new irrational derivatives from them.
REBT practitioners also particularly look for "awfulizing," "I-can't-stand-
it-itis," and "damnation," and they show clients how these almost invariably
stem from their "must's" and can be surrendered if they give up their abso-
lutistic demands on themselves, on other people, and on the universe. At the
same time, rational emotive behavior therapists usually encourage their clients
to have strong and persistent desires, wishes, and preferences, and to avoid
feelings of detachment, withdrawal, and lack of involvement (Ellis, 1972a,
1973, 1985c, 1991c, 1994c, 1996a).
More important, REBT holds that unrealistic and illogical beliefs do not
in themselves create emotional disturbance. Why? Because it is quite possi-
ble for people to unrealistically believe, "Because I frequently fail, I always
do"; and it is possible for them also to believe illogically, "Because I have fre-
quently failed, I always will." But they can, in both instances, rationally con-
clude, "Too bad! Even though I always fail, there is no reason why I must
succeed. I would prefer to, but I never have to do well. So I'll manage to be as
happy as I can be even with my constantly failing." They would then rarely
be emotionally disturbed.
To reiterate, the essence of human emotional disturbance, according to
REBT, consists of the absolutistic "must's" and ''must not's" that people think

The General Theory of REBT 
17
about their failure, about their rejections, about their poor treatment by others,
and about life's frustrations and losses. REBT therefore differs from other cog-
nitive-behavioral therapies—such as those of Bandura (1986), Beck (1976),
Goldfried & Davison (1994), Janis (1983), Lazarus (1989), Mahoney (1991),
Maultsby (1984), and Meichenbaum (1992)—in that it particularly stresses
therapists looking for clients' dogmatic, unconditional "must's," differentiat-
ing them from their preferences, and teaching them how to surrender the for-
mer and retain the latter (Bernard, 1991; Dryden, 1994a, 1995b, 1995c; Ellis,
1962,1985c, 1994; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis & Harper, 1975; Grieger &
Woods, 1993; Phadke, 1982; Walen, DiGiuseppe, & Dryden, 1992).
Psychological Health
If the philosophy of musturbation is at the core of much psychological distur-
bance, then what philosophy is characteristic of psychological health? REBT
theory argues that a philosophy of relativism or "desiring" is a central feature
of psychologically healthy humans. This philosophy acknowledges that humans
have a large variety of desires, wishes, wants, preferences, and so forth; but if
they refuse to escalate these nonabsolute values into grandiose dogmas and
demands, they will become less psychologically disturbed. They will, however,
experience healthy negative emotions (e.g., sadness, regret, disappointment,
annoyance) when their desires are not fulfilled. These emotions are consid-
ered to have constructive motivational properties in that they both help people
to remove obstacles to goal attainment and help them to make constructive
adjustments when their desires cannot be met.
Three major derivatives of the philosophy of desiring are postulated by
rational emotive behavioral theory. They are deemed to be rational in that they
tend to help people reach their goals or formulate new goals if their old ones
cannot be realized.
The first major derivative of desiring, rating or evaluating badness (or anti-
awfulizing), is the rational alternative to "awfulizing." Here, if a person does
not get what she wants, she acknowledges that this is bad. However, because
she does not believe "I have to get what I want," she contains her evaluation
along a 0%-100% continuum of badness and therefore does not rate this sit-
uation as "awful"—a rating that is placed on an exaggerated level. In general,
when the person adheres to the desiring philosophy, the stronger her desire,
the greater her rating of badness will be when she does not get what she wants.
The second major derivative of desiring is known as tolerance and is the
rational alternative to "I-can't-stand-it-itis." Here the person (1) acknowledges
that an undesirable event has happened (or may happen), (2) believes that the
event should empirically occur if it does, (3) rates the event along the badness
continuum, (4) attempts to change the undesired event or accepts the "grim"
reality if it cannot be modified, and (5) actively pursues other goals even
though the situation cannot be altered.

IS 
The Practice of REBT
The third major derivative, known as acceptance, is the rational alte ative
to "damnation." Here the person accepts herself and others as fallible humans
who do not have to act other than they do and as too complex and fluid to be
given any legitimate or global rating. In addition, life conditions are accepted
as they exist, People who have the philosophy of acceptance rally acknowledge
that the world is highly complex and exists according to laws that are often
outside their personal control. It is important to emphasize that acceptance
does not imply resignation. A rational philosophy of acceptance means that
the person acknowledges that whatever exists empirically should exist but does
not absolutely have to exist forever. This prompts the person to make active
attempts to change reality. The person who is resigned to a situation usually
does not attempt to modify it.
REBT theory also puts forward a number of criteria of psychological health.
These include the following:
1. Self-interest: Sensible and emotionally healthy people tend to be primar-
ily interested in themselves and to put their own interests at least a little above
the interests of others. They sacrifice themselves to some degree for those for
whom they care but not overwhelmingly or completely.
2. Social interest: Social interest is usually rational and self-helping because
most people choose to live and enjoy themselves in a social group or commu-
nity. If they do not act morally, protect the rights of others, and abet social sur-
vival, it is unlikely that they will create the kind of world in which they
themselves can live comfortably and happily.
3. Self-direction: Healthy people tend mainly to assume responsibility for
their own lives while simultaneously preferring to cooperate with others. They
do not need or demand considerable support or succoring from others, though
they may prefer and work for this.
4. High frustration tolerance: Rational individuals give both themselves and
others the right to be wrong. Even when they intensely dislike their own and
others' behavior, they refrain from damning themselves or others, as persons,
for unacceptable or obnoxious behavior. People who are not plagued with
debilitating emotional distress tend to go along with St. Francis and Reinhold
Niebuhr by changing obnoxious conditions they can change, accepting those
they cannot, and having the wisdom to know the difference between the two.
5. Flexibility: Healthy and mature individuals tend to be flexible in their
thinking, open to change, and unbigoted and pluralistic in their view of other
people. They do not make rigid, invariant rules for themselves and others.
6. Acceptance of uncertainty: Healthy men and women tend to acknowledge
and accept the idea that we seem to live in a world of probability and chance
where absolute certainties do not and probably never will exist. They realize
that it is often fascinating and exciting and definitely not horrible to live in this
kind of probabilistic and uncertain world. They enjoy a good degree of order

The General Theory of 'REBT 
19
but do not demand to know exactly what die future will bring or what will hap-
pen to them.
7. Commitment to creative pursuits: Most people tend to be healdiier and hap-
pier when they are vitally absorbed in something outside themselves and
preferably have at least one powerful creative interest, as well as some major
human involvement, that diey consider so important that they structure a good
part of their life around it.
8. Scientific thinking: Nondisturbed individuals tend to be more objective,
realistic, and scientific than more disturbed ones. They are able to feel deeply
and act concertedly, but they tend to regulate their emotions and actions by
reflecting on them and evaluating their consequences in terms of the extent to
which they lead to the attainment of short-term and long-term goals.
9. Self-acceptance: Healthy people are usually glad to be alive and accept
themselves just because they are alive and have some capacity to enjoy them-
selves. They refuse to measure their intrinsic worth by their extrinsic achieve-
ments or by what others think of them. They frankly choose to have
unconditional self-acceptance (USA), and they try to avoid rating themselves—
their totality or their being. They attempt to enjoy rather than to prove them-
selves (Ellis, 1973, 1995a; Ellis & Harper, 1975; Hauck, 1991; Mills, 1993).
10. Risk-taking: Emotionally healthy people tend to take a fair amount of
risk and to try to do what they want to do, even when there is a good chance
that they may fail. They tend to be adventurous but not foolhardy.
11. Long-range hedonism: Well-adjusted people tend to seek both the plea-
sures of the moment and those of the future and do not often court future pain
for present gain. They are hedonistic, that is, happiness-seeking and pain-
avoidant, but they assume that they will probably live for quite a few years and
that they had therefore better think of both today and tomorrow and not be
obsessed with immediate gratification.
12. Nonutopianism: Healthy people accept the fact that Utopias are probably
unachievable and that they are never likely to get everything they want and to
avoid all pain. They refuse to strive unrealistically for total joy, happiness, or
perfection or for total lack of anxiety, depression, self-downing, and hostility.
13. Self-responsibility for own emotional disturbance: Healthy individuals tend
to accept a great deal of responsibility for their own disturbance rather than
defensively blame others or social conditions for their self-defeating thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors.
Distinction between Healthy and
Unhealthy Negative Emotions
Rational emotive behavioral theory argues that people can hold rational and
irrational Beliefs at the same time. They can easily transmute their desires into

20 
The Practice of REBT
demands. Thus, I may rationally believe "I want you to love me" and simulta-
neously believe that "since I strongly want you to love me, you must do so."
Thus, it is important for therapists to discriminate between their clients' ratio-
nal and irrational Beliefs. When such distinctions are made, it is easier to dis-
tinguish between helpful and unhelpful negative emotions. Healthy negative
emotions are deemed to be associated with rational Beliefs and unhealthy neg-
ative "emotions with irrational Beliefs. In the following, the healthy negative
emotion is listed first.
1. Concern verms anxiety. Concern is an emotion that is associated with the
Belief, "I hope that this threat does not happen, but if it does, it would be
unfortunate," whereas anxiety occurs when the person believes, "This threat
absolutely must not happen, and it would be awful if it does."
2. Sadness versus depression. Sadness is deemed to occur when the person
believes, "It is very unfortunate that I have experienced this loss, but there is
no reason why it should not have happened." Depression, on the other hand,
is associated with the Belief "This loss should not have occurred and it is terri-
ble that it did." Here, when the person feels responsible for the loss, he will
tend to damn himself: "/ am no good," whereas if the loss is outside the per-
son's control, he or she will tend to damn the world/life conditions: "It is ter-
rible." As shown earlier, REBT theory holds that it is the philosophy of
masturbation implicit in such evaluations that leads the person to consider that
he will never get what he wants, an inference that leads to feelings of hope-
lessness. Example: "Because I must always get the things I really want and did
not get it this time, I'll never get it at all. It's hopeless!"
3. Regret versus guilt. Feelings of regret or remorse occur when a person
acknowledges that he has done something bad in public or private but accepts
himself as a fallible human being for doing so. The person feels badly about
the act or deed but not about himself because he holds the belief, "I prefer not
to act badly, but if I do, too bad!" Guilt occurs when the person damns him-
self as bad, wicked, or rotten for acting badly. Here, the person feels badly
about both the act and his "self because he holds the belief, "I must not act
badly, and if I do it's awful and I am a rotten person!"
4. Disappointment versus shame/embarrassment. Feelings of disappointment
occur when a person acts "stupidly" in public and acknowledges the stupid act
but accepts herself in the process. The person feels disappointed about her
action but not with herselfbecms& she prefers but does not demand that she act
well. Shame and embarrassment occur when the person recognizes that she
has acted "stupidly" in public and then condemns herself for acting in a way
that she absolutely should not have done. People who experience shame and
embarrassment often predict that the watching audience will think badly of
them, in which case they tend to agree with these perceived judgments. Thus,
they often believe that they absolutely need the approval of these others. Shame
can sometimes be distinguished from embarrassment in that the public "prat-

The General Theory ofREBT 
21
fall" is regarded by the person as more serious when she feels shame. How-
ever, both emotions involve self-denigration.
5, Annoyance versus anger. Annoyance occurs when another person disre-
gards an individual's rule of living. The annoyed person does not like what the
other has done but does not damn him or her for doing it. Such a person tends
to believe, "I wish the other person did not do that, and I don't like what
he/she did, but it does not follow that he/she must not break my rule." In
anger, however, the person does believe that the other absolutely must not
break the rule and thus damns the other for doing so. REBT holds that it is
healthy to be angry at another's acts but not at the person for acting badly.
It should be noted that rational emotive behavioral therapists do not gen-
erally target healthy negative emotions for change during therapy because they
are deemed to be Consequences of rational thinking (Crawford & Ellis, 1989;
Ellis, 1994c, 1996a).
ACQUISITION AND PERPETUATION OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTURBANCE
Rational emotive behavioral theory does not put forward an elaborate view
concerning the acquisition of psychological disturbance. This partly follows
from the hypothesis that humans have a distinct biological tendency to think
and act irrationally but it also reflects the REBT viewpoint that theories of
acquisition do not necessarily suggest therapeutic interventions. REBT holds
that humans' tendencies toward irrational thinking are biologically rooted, but
it also acknowledges that environmental variables do contribute to psycho-
logical disturbance and thus encourage people to make their biologically influ-
enced demands (Ellis, 1976a, 1979e, 1994c). Thus, parents and culture usually
teach children which superstitions, taboos, and prejudices to abide by, but they
do not originate their basic tendency toward superstitiousness, ritualism, and
bigotry (Ellis, 1991b, 1994c, 1995a).
Rational emotive behavioral theory also posits that humans vary in their dis-
turbability. Some people emerge relatively unscathed psychologically from
being raised by uncaring or overprotective parents; others emerge emotion-
ally damaged from "healthier" child-rearing regimens. In this respect, REBT
claims that individuals with serious aberrations are more innately predisposed
to have rigid and crooked thinking than are those with lesser aberrations and
that consequently they are likely to make lesser advances. Thus, the REBT
theory of acquisition can be summed up in the view that as humans we are not
disturbed simply by our experiences; rather, we bring our ability to disturb
ourselves to our experiences (Ellis, 1976a, 1994c, 1995a),
Although rational emotive behavioral theory does not posit an elaborate
view to explain the acquisition of psychological disturbance, it does deal more
extensively with how such disturbance is perpetuated. First, people tend to

22 
The Practice of REBT
maintain their psychological problems by their own naive theories concern-
ing the nature of these problems and to what they can be attributed. They lack
what REBT calls REBT Insight No. 1: that psychological disturbance is often
primarily determined by the absoJutistic Beliefs that people hold about nega-
tive life events (B determines C). Rather, they consider that their disturbances
are mainly caused by these situations (A causes C). Because people make incor-
rect hypotheses about some of the major determinants of their problems, they
consequently attempt to change A rather than B. Second, people may have
Insight No. 1 but lack REBT Insight No. 2: that people remain disturbed by
reindoctrinating themselves in the present with their absolutistic Beliefs.
Although they may see that their problems are largely determined by their
Beliefs, they may distract themselves and thus perpetuate their problems by
searching for the historical antecedents of these Beliefs instead of directing
themselves to change them as currently held. Third, people may have Insights
No. 1 and No. 2 but still sustain their disturbance because they lack REBT
Insight No. 3: that only if they diligently work and practice in the present as
well as in the future to think, feel, and act against their irrational beliefs are
they likely to change them and make themselves significantly less disturbed.
People who have all three insights clearly see that they had better persistently
and strongly challenge their destructive beliefs cognitively, emotively, and
behaviorally to break the perpetuation of the disturbance cycle. Merely
acknowledging that a Belief is irrational is usually insufficient to effect change
(Ellis, 1962,1979e, 1994c, 1996a).
REBT contends that a major reason that people perpetuate their psycholog-
ical problems is that they adhere to a philosophy of 'law frustration tolerance (LFT)
(Ellis, 1979a, 1980a). Such people believe that they must be comfortable and thus
do not work to effect change because such work involves experiencing discom-
fort. They are short-range hedonists in that they are motivated to avoid short-
term discomfort, even though accepting and working against their temporary
uncomfortable feelings would probably help them to reach their long-range
goals. Such people rate cognitive and behavioral therapeutic tasks as too painful,
even more painful than the psychological disturbance to which they have
achieved some measure of habituadon. They prefer to remain with their "com-
fortable11 discomfort rather than face the change-related discomfort that they
believe they must not experience. Maultsby (1984) has argued that people often
back away from change because they are afraid that they will not feel right about
it. He calls this the "neurotic fear of feeling a phony" and actively shows clients
that these feelings of "unnaturalness" are natural concomitants of relearning.
Another prevalent form of LFT is "anxiety about anxiety." Here, individuals
believe that they must not be anxious and thus do not expose themselves to anx-
iety-provoking situations because they might become anxious if they did so—an
experience they would rate as "awful." As such, they perpetuate their problems
and overly restrict their lives to avoid experiencing anxiety.

The General Theory of REST 
23
Anxiety about anxiety constitutes an example of the clinical fact that people
often make themselves disturbed about their disturbances. Having created sec-
ondary (and sometimes tertiary) disturbances about their original disturbance,
they become preoccupied with these "problems about problems" and thus find
it difficult to get back to solving the original problem. Humans are often very
inventive in this respect. They can make themselves depressed about their
depression, guilty about being angry (as well as anxious about their anxiety),
and so on. Consequently, people often had better tackle their disturbances
about their disturbances before they can successfully solve their original prob-
lems (Ellis, 1979a, 1980a, 1993,1994c, 1996).
REBT theory endorses the Freudian view of human defensiveness in
explaining how people perpetuate their psychological problems (A. Freud,
1937). Thus, people maintain their problems by employing various defense
mechanisms (e.g., rationalization, avoidance) that are designed to help deny
the existence of these problems or to minimize their severity. The REBT view
is that these defenses are often used to ward off self-damnation tendencies and
that under such circumstances, if these people were to honestly take responsi-
bility for their problems, they would tend to severely denigrate themselves for
having them. In addition, these defense mechanisms are also employed to ward
off discomfort anxiety, because if such people admitted their problems, they
would rate them as "too hard to bear" or "too difficult to overcome."
I (AE) have noted that people sometimes experience a form of perceived pay-
off for their psychological problems other than avoidance of discomfort (Ellis,
1979e). The existence of such payofis serves to perpetuate these problems. Thus,
a woman who claims to want to overcome her procrastination may avoid tack-
ling the problem because she is afraid that should she become successful she
might then be criticized by others as being "too masculine," a situation she would
evaluate as "awful." Her procrastination serves to protect her (in her mind) from
this "terrible" state of affairs. I (WD) have noted that "rational emotive behav-
ior therapists stress the phenomenological nature of these payoffs, i.e., it is the
person's view of the payoff that is important in determining its impact, not the
events delineated in the person's description" (Dryden, 1984c, p. 244).
Finally, the well-documented "self-fulfilling prophecy" phenomenon helps to
explain why people perpetuate their psychological problems. Here, people act
according to their evaluations and consequent predictions and thus often elicit
from themselves or from others responses that they then interpret in a manner
that confirms their initial hypotheses. Thus, a socially anxious man may believe
that other people would not want to get to know "a worthless individual such as
I truly am." He then attends a social function and acts as if he were worthless,
avoiding eye contact and keeping away from others. Unsurprisingly, such social
behavior does not invite approaches from others, a lack of response that he inter-
prets and evaluates thus: "You see, I was right. Other people don't want to know
me. I really am no good."

24 
The Practice of REBT
In conclusion, REBT theory holds that people "naturally tend to perpetuate
their problems and have a strong innate tendency to cling to self-defeating,
habitual patterns and thereby resist basic change. Helping clients change, then,
poses quite a challenge for REBT practitioners" (Dryden, 1984c, pp. 244-245).
THE THEORY OF THERAPEUTIC CHANGE
We have argued that the rational emotive behavioral view of the person is basi-
cally an optimistic one: although it posits that humans have a distinct biolog-
ical tendency to think irrationally, it also holds that they have the constructive
capacity to choose to work toward changing this irrational thinking and its self-
defeating effects.
There are various levels of change. REBT theory holds that the most ele-
gant and long-lasting changes that humans can effect are ones that involve
philosophic restructuring of irrational Beliefs. Change at this level can be spe-
cific or general. Specific philosophic change means that individuals change
their absolutistic demands ("must's," "should's") about given situations to ratio-
nal relative preferences. General philosophic change involves people adopting
a nondevout attitude toward life events in general.
To effect a philosophic change at either the specific or general level, people
are advised to
1. First, realize that they create, to a large degree, their own psychological
disturbances and that although environmental conditions can significantly
contribute to their problems they are usually of secondary consideration in
the change process.
2. Fully recognize that they do have the ability to significantly change their
own disturbances.
3. Understand that emotional and behavioral disturbances stem largely from
irrational, absolutistic, dogmatic Beliefs.
4. Detect their irrational beliefs and discriminate them from their rational
alternatives.
5. Dispute these irrational beliefs, using realistic, logical, and heuristic meth-
ods and by feeling and acting against them.
6. Work toward the internalization of their new, effective Beliefs by employ-
ing a number of cognitive, emotive, and behavioral methods of change.
7. Continue this process of challenging irrational Beliefs and using multi-
modal methods of change for the rest of their lives.
When people effect a philosophic change at B in the ABC model of REBT,
they often are able to spontaneously correct their distorted inferences of real-
ity (overgeneralizations, faulty attributions, etc.). However, they can often ben-

The General Theory of REBT 
25
efit from challenging these distorted inferences more directly, as REBT has
always emphasized (Ellis, 1962,1971a, 1973, 1994c, 1996a; Ellis & Harper,
1961a, 1961b) and as Beck (Beck et al., 1979) and other cognitive therapists
have also stressed (Maultsby, 1984; Meichenbaum, 1992).
Although rational emotive behavioral theory argues that irrational beliefs
are the breeding ground for the development and maintenance of inferential
distortions, it is possible for people to effect inferentially based changes with-
out making a profound philosophic change. Thus, they may regard their infer-
ences or "automatic thoughts" as hunches about reality rather than facts, may
generate alternative hypotheses, and may seek evidence and/or carry out exper-
iments that test each hypothesis, They may then accept the hypothesis that
represents the "best bet" of those available.
Consider a man who thinks that his co-workers view him as a fool. To test
this hypothesis he might first specify their negative reactions to him. These
constitute the data from which he too quickly draws the conclusion, "They
think I'm a fool." He might then realize that what he has interpreted to be
negative responses to him might not be negative. If they seem to be negative,
he might then carry out an experiment to test the meaning he attributes to his
co-workers' responses. Thus, he might enlist the help of a colleague whom he
trusts to carry out a "secret ballot" of odiers' opinions of him. Or he could test
his hunch more explicitly by directly asking them for their view of him.
As a result of these strategies this person may conclude that his co-work-
ers find some of his actions foolish rather than considering him to be a com-
plete fool. His mood may lift because his inference about the situation has
changed, but he may still believe, "If others think I'm a fool, they're right, I
am a fool and that would be awful." Thus, he has made an inferential change
but not a philosophic one. If this person were to attempt to make a philo-
sophic change, he would first assume that his inference was true, then address
himself to his evaluations about this inference and hence challenge these if
they were discovered to be irrational (i.e., musturbatory evaluations). Thus,
he might conclude, "Even if I act foolishly, that makes me & person with fool-
ish behavior, not a foolish person. And even if they deem me a total idiot, that
is simply their view, with which I can choose to disagree." REBT therapists
hypothesize that people are more likely to make a profound philosophic
change if they first assume that their inferences are true and then challenge
their irrational Beliefs, rather than if they first correct their inferential dis-
tortions and then challenge their underlying irrational Beliefs. However, this
hypothesis awaits full empirical inquiry.
People can also make direct changes of the situation at A (Activating event).
Thus, in the example quoted above, the man could leave his job or distract
himself from the reactions of his colleagues by taking on extra work and devot-
ing himself to that. Or he might carry out relaxation exercises whenever he
comes in contact widi his co-workers and thus distract himself once again from

26 
The Practice ofREBT
their perceived reactions. Additionally, the man might have a word with his
supervisor, who might then instruct the other workers to change their behav-
ior toward the man.
When we use the REBT model to consider behavioral change, it is appar-
ent that a person can change his or her behavior to effect inferential and/or
philosophic change. Thus, again using the above example, a man whose co-
workers view him as a fool might change his own behavior toward them and
thus elicit a different set of responses from them that would lead him to rein-
terpret his previous inference (behavior change to effect inferential change).
However, if it could be determined that they did indeed consider him to be a
fool, then the man could actively seek them out and show himself that he could
stand their disapproval and that just because they think him a fool does not
make him one. He would thus learn to accept himself in the face of people's
views while exposing himself to their negative reactions (behavior change to
help effect philosophic change).
While REBT therapists prefer to help their clients make profound philo-
sophic changes at B, they do not dogmatically insist that their clients make such
changes. If it becomes apparent that clients cannot or will not, at any given time,
change their irrational Beliefs, then REBT therapists endeavor to help them
either to change A direcdy (by avoiding the troublesome situation or by behav-
ing differently) or to change their distorted inferences about the situation.
In the next chapter we build upon these theoretical underpinnings and con-
sider the basic practice ofREBT.

2
The Basic Practice of REBT
In this chapter we outline the basic practice of REBT. First, we consider
aspects of the therapeutic relationship between clients and therapists in REBT.
Second, we deal with issues pertaining to inducting clients into REBT and
assessing their problems in REBT terms. Third, we specify basic treatment
strategies in REBT. Fourth, we specify the major treatment techniques that
are employed during REBT. Fifth, we note a number of obstacles that emerge
in the process of REBT and how they might be overcome. Finally, we distin-
guish between preferential and general REBT (or cognitive-behavior therapy
[CBT]) and specify their differences.
THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
REBT is an active-directive form of psychotherapy in that therapists are active
in directing their clients to identify the philosophical source of their psycho-
logical problems and in showing them they can challenge and change their
irrational musturbatory evaluations. As such, REBT is an educational form of
therapy. I (AE) have sometimes conceptualized the role of the effective REBT
therapist as that of an authoritative (but not authoritarian!) and encouraging
teacher who strives to teach his or her clients how to be their own therapists
once formal therapy sessions have ended (Ellis, 1979c, 1994d, 199Sa, 1996a).
Therapeutic Conditions
Given the above role, REBT therapists strive to unconditionally accept their
clients as fallible human beings who often act self-defeatingly but are never
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Dryden and Ellis (1986) and W. Dryden and A, Ellis,
"Rational-Emotive Therapy," in K, S. Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies;
New York: Guilford, 1987 (used by permission), and have been previously published in The Nurse
Practitioner. Tht American Journal of Primary Health Ctrt, 12(7), July 1987.
27

28 
The Practice of REBT
essentially bad (or good). No matter how badly clients behave in therapy, the
REBT therapist attempts to accept them as people but will frequently, if appro-
priate, let them know his or her reactions to the client's negative behavior
(Ellis, 1973,1994c, 1996a, I996b; Woods & Ellis, 1996).
In our role as therapists we strive to be as open as therapeutically feasible
and will not hesitate to give highly personal information about ourselves should
our clients ask for it, except when we judge that clients would use such infor-
mation against themselves. REBT therapists often disclose examples from their
own lives concerning how they experienced similar problems and, more impor-
tant, how they have gone about solving these problems. Thus, they strive to
be therapeutically genuine in conducting sessions.
REBT therapists tend to be appropriately humorous with most of their clients
because they think that much emotional disturbance stems from the fact that
clients take themselves and their problems, other people, and the world too
seriously. They thus strive to model for their clients the therapeutic advan-
tages of taking a serious but humorously ironic attitude to life. They endeavor,
however, not to poke fun at the clients themselves but at their self-defeating
thoughts, feelings, and actions (Ellis, I977b, 1977c, 1981,1987b). In the same
vein, and for similar purposes, REBT therapists tend to be informal and easy-
going with most of their clients. However, REBT opposes therapists unethi-
cally indulging themselves in order to enjoy therapy sessions at their clients'
expense (Ellis, 1985c, 1996a, I99<5b).
REBT therapists show their clients a special kind of empathy. They not only
offer them "affective" empathy (i.e., communicating that they understand how
their clients feel) but also offer them philosophic empathy (i.e., showing them
that they understand the philosophies that underlie these feelings).
Thus, with certain modifications, they agree with Rogers's (1961) views con-
cerning therapist empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard. How-
ever, REBT therapists are wary of showing the vast majority of their clients
undue warmth. If REBT practitioners get really close to their clients and give
them considerable warmth, attention, caring, and support, as well as uncondi-
tional acceptance, then these therapists run two major risks (Ellis, 1982a, 1985a),
The first major risk is that therapists may unwittingly reinforce their clients'
dire "needs" for love and approval—two irrational ideas that are at the core of
much human disturbance. When this happens, clients appear to improve because
their therapists are indeed giving them what they believe they must have. They
begin to "feel better" but do not necessarily "get better" (Ellis, 1972a, 1991a,
1994c, 1996a, 1996b). Their "improvement" is illusory because their irrational
philosophies are being reinforced. Because they seem to improve, their thera-
pists have restricted opportunities to identify these ideas, to show them how they
relate to their problems, and to help them challenge and change them. Conse-
quently, although such clients are helped by their therapists, they are now shown
how they can help themselves and are thus vulnerable to future upset.

The Basic Practice of REST 
29
The second major risk is that therapists may unwittingly reinforce their
clients' philosophy of low frustration tolerance (LFT) or discomfort disturbance.
Clients with LFT problems "almost always try to seek interminable help from
others instead of coping with life's difficulties themselves. Any kind of therapy
that does not specifically persuade them to stop their whining and to accept
responsibility for their own happiness tends to confirm their belief that others
must help them. Close relationship therapy is frequently the worst offender in
this respect and thereby may do considerable harm" (Ellis, 1982a, p. 206).
However, since REBT is flexible and is against the formulation of absolute,
dogmatic therapeutic rules, it does recognize that under certain conditions
(e.g., where a client is extremely depressed, accompanied by powerfiil suicidal
ideation), distinct therapist warmth may be positively indicated for a period of
time (Ellis, 198Sa).
Therapeutic Style
I (AE) recommend that REBT therapists adopt an active-directive style with
most clients and a particularly forceful version of that style with some very dis-
turbed and resistant clients (Ellis, 1979, 1985c, 1996a, 1996b). However, not
all REBT therapists concur with this view. Some recommend a more passive,
gentle approach under specific or most conditions with clients (e.g., Young,
1984). Eschenroeder (1979) notes that it is important to ask in REBT, "Which
therapeutic style is most effective with which kind of client?" (p. 5). In the same
vein, recent proponents of eclectic forms of therapy argue that style of thera-
peutic interaction had better be varied to meet the special situations of indi-
vidual clients (Beutler, 1983; Lazarus, 1989). This is a scantily researched area
in REBT, but it may be best for REBT therapists to avoid (1) an overly
friendly, emotionally charged style of interaction with "hysterical" clients, (2)
an overly intellectual style with "obsessive-compulsive" clients, (3) an overly
directive style with clients whose sense of autonomy is easily threatened, and
(4) an overly active style with clients who easily retreat into passivity. This line
of reasoning fits well with the notion of flexibility that REBT therapists advo-
cate as a desirable therapeutic quality. Varying one's therapeutic style in REBT
does not mean departing from the theoretical principles on which the content
of therapy is based. As Eschenroeder (1979) points out, in REBT, "there is no
one-to-one relationship between theory and practice" (p. 3).
Personal Qualities of Effective Rational
Emotive Behavioral Therapists
Unfortunately, no research studies have been carried out to determine the per-
sonal qualities of effective REBT therapists. REBT theory, however, does put
forward a number of hypotheses concerning this topic (Ellis, 1978a, 199Sc,

30 
The Practice of WET
1996a, 1996b), but it is important to regard these as both tentative and await-
ing empirical study.
1. Because REBT is a fairly structured form of therapy, its effective practi-
tioners are usually comfortable with structure but flexible enough to work in
a less structured manner when the need arises.
2. REBT practitioners tend to be intellectually, cognitively, or philosoph-
ically inclined and become attracted to REBT because the approach provides
them with opportunities to fully express this tendency.
3. Because REBT is often to be conducted in an active-directive manner,
effective REBT practitioners are usually comfortable operating in this mode.
Nevertheless, they have the flexibility to modify their interpersonal style with
clients so that they provide the optimum conditions to facilitate client change.
4. REBT emphasizes that it is important for clients to put their therapy-
derived insights into practice in their everyday lives. As a result, effective prac-
titioners of REBT are usually comfortable with behavioral instruction and
teaching and with providing the active prompting that clients often require if
they are to follow through on homework assignments.
5. Effective REBT therapists tend to have little fear of failure themselves.
Their personal worth is not invested in their clients' improvement. They do
not need their clients' love and/or approval and are thus not afraid of taking
calculated risks if therapeutic impasses occur. They tend to accept both them-
selves and their clients as fallible humans and are therefore tolerant of their
own mistakes and the irresponsible acts of their clients. They tend to have, or
persistently work toward acquiring, a philosophy of high frustration tolerance,
and they do not get discouraged when clients improve at a slower rate than
they desire. Thus, effective practitioners tend to score highly on most of the
criteria of positive mental health outlined in chapter 1, and they serve as
healthy role models for their clients.
6. REBT strives to be scientific, empirical, antiabsolutistic, and undevout
in its approach to people's selecting and achieving their own goals (Ellis, 1978a,
1994c, 199Sa, 1996a, 1996b). Thus, effective practitioners of REBT tend to
show similar traits and are definitely not mystical, antiintellectual, or magical
in their beliefs.
7. REBT advocates the use of techniques in a number of different modali-
ties (cognitive, imagery, emotive, behavioral, and interpersonal). Its effective
practitioners are thus comfortable with a multimodal approach to treatment
and tend not be people who like to stick rigidly to any one modality.
Finally, I (AE) note that some REBT therapists often modify the preferred
practice of REBT according to their own natural personality characteristics
(Ellis, 1978b). Thus, for example, some therapists practice REBT in a slow-
moving, passive manner, do little disputing, and focus therapy on the relation-

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
31
ship between them and their clients. Whether such modification of the pre-
ferred practice ofREBT is effective is a question awaiting empirical enquiry.
INDUCTING CLIENTS INTO REBT
When clients seek help from REBT therapists, they vary concerning how
much they already know about die type of therapeutic process they are likely
to encounter. Some may approach the therapist because they know he or she is
a practitioner of REBT; others may know nothing about this therapeutic
method. In any event it is often beneficial to explore clients' expectations for
therapy at the outset of the process. Duckro, Beal, and George (1979) have
argued that it is important to distinguish between preferences and anticipa-
tions when expectations are assessed. Clients' preferences for therapy concern
what kind of experience they want, whereas anticipations concern what ser-
vice they think they will receive. Clients who have realistic anticipations for
the REBT therapeutic process and have a preference for this process require,
in general, far less induction into this process than clients who have unrealis-
tic anticipations of the process and/or preferences for a different type of ther-
apeutic experience.
Induction procedures, in general, involve showing clients that REBT is an
active-directive structured therapy oriented to discussing clients' present and
future problems and one that asks clients to play an active role in the change
process. Induction can take a number of different forms. First, therapists may
develop and use a number of pretherapy role induction procedures, in which a
typical course ofREBT is outlined and productive client behaviors demon-
strated (Macaskill & Macaskill, 1983). Second, therapists may give a short lec-
ture at die outset of therapy concerning the nature and process ofREBT. Third,
therapists may employ induction-related explanations in die initial therapy ses-
sions, using client problem material to illustrate how these problems may be
tackled in REBT and to outline the respective roles of client and therapist.
ASSESSMENT OF CLIENTS' PROBLEMS
The next stage of therapy concerns assessment. Assessment of the kind and
degree of emotional disturbance of clients is held to be important in REBT
for several reasons:
• To determine how seriously disturbed clients are, so that therapists can
see how likely they are to benefit from any form of therapy, including
REBT and so that they can also decide which REBT techniques (of the
many possible ones that are available) may be most suitably employed

32 
The Practice ofREBT
(and which techniques avoided) with each particular client under the con-
ditions in which he or she may be expected to live.
• To determine—or at least guess with a fair degree of accuracy—how dif-
ficult clients are likely to be, how they will probably take to the main
REBT procedures, and how long psychotherapy with each of them is
likely to be required.
• To discover which type of therapist involvement (e.g., a more or less active
or a more or less passive and supportive kind) is likely to help the indi-
vidual client.
• To discover what types of skill deficiencies clients have and what kinds of
training (either in the course ofREBT or outside therapy) they might
best undertake to remedy some of their skill deficiencies. Thus, on the
basis of this assessment, certain kinds of skill training, such as assertive-
ness, social skills, communication, or vocational training, may be recom-
mended for specific clients.
REBT practitioners are at liberty to use all kinds of assessment procedures
but generally favor the type of cognitive-behavioral interventions described in
Kendall and Hollon (1980). They tend to take a dimmer view of diagnostic
procedures such as the Rorschach and other projective techniques than they
do of more objective personality questionnaires and behavioral tests, largely
because the former often have dubious validity, incorporate questionable psy-
choanalytic and psychodynamic interpretations, and usually are not particu-
larly applicable to effective treatment processes.
Together with many other REBT practitioners, we take the view that
although assessment interviews and some standard diagnostic tests may at
times be useful in exploring clients' disturbances, perhaps the best form of
assessment consists of having several REBT sessions with the client. Some of
the advantages of this kind of therapy-oriented assessment are as follows:
1. In the course of such an assessment procedure, clients can get to work
almost immediately on their problems, can gain therapeuticatly while being
assessed, and can be helped to suffer less pain, hardship, and expense while
undergoing treatment.
2. The preferable techniques to be used with different clients are often best
determined mainly through experimenting with some of these techniques in
the course of the therapeutic process. Although the use of standard personal-
ity tests, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI),
may help the therapist start off with some REBT methods rather than other
methods with a given client, only by actually experimenting with certain spe-
cific methods is the therapist likely to see how the client reacts to them and
consequently how they had better be continued or discontinued.

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
33
3. Assessment procedures divorced from ongoing psychotherapy (such as
giving a whole battery of tests prior to beginning therapy) may be iatrogenic
for a number of clients. During this testing process, especially if the assess-
ment procedures are long-winded and take some time to complete, clients may
imagine "horrors" about themselves that lead them astray and make it more
difficult for them to benefit from therapy.
4. Certain conventional assessment procedures—for example, the Ror-
schach and Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)—may wrongly predict prob-
lems, symptoms, and dynamics that many clients do not really have and may
help lead their therapists up the garden path and away from more scientifically
based evaluations.
5. Clients sometimes take diagnoses obtained from complicated assessment
procedures as the gospel truth, feel that they have thereby received a valid
"explanation" of what ails them, and wrongly conclude that they have been
helped by this "explanation." REBT assessment procedures, including using
therapy itself as an integral part of the assessment process, primarily focus on
what clients had better do to change rather than emphasize clever diagnostic
"explanations" of what ails them.
Because REBT is strongly cognitive, emotive, and behavioral, it assesses not
only clients' irrational Beliefs but also their inappropriate feelings and their
self-defeating behaviors. The usual REBT assessment process almost always
includes the following:
Clients are helped to acknowledge and describe their unhealthy negative
feelings (e.g., anxiety, depression, anger, and self-hatred), and these
are clearly differentiated from their healthy negative feelings (e.g.,
disappointment, sadness, frustration, and displeasure).
They are led to acknowledge and delineate their self-defeating behaviors
(e.g., compulsions, addictions, phobias, and procrastination) rather
than to overemphasize idiosyncratic but nondeleterious behaviors
(e.g., unusual devotion to socializing, sex, study, or work).
They are asked to point out specific Activating events in their lives that
tend to occur just prior to their experienced disturbed feelings and
behaviors.
Their Rational Beliefs that accompany their Activating events and that
lead to undisturbed Consequences are assessed and discussed.
Their Irrational Beliefs that accompany their Activating events and that
lead to disturbed Consequences are assessed and discussed.
Their Irrational Beliefs that involve absolutistic "must's" and grandiose
demands on themselves, others, and the universe are particularly
determined.

W 
The Practice ofREBT
Their second-level Irrational Beliefs that tend to be derived from their
absolutist^ "should's" and "must's"—that is, their "awralizing," their
"I-can't-stand-it-itis," their "damning" of themselves and others, and
their unrealistic overgeneralizations—are also revealed.
Their Irrational Beliefs that lead to their disturbance about their distur-
bances—that is, their anxiety about their anxiety and their depression
about being depressed—are particularly revealed and discussed.
As these specialized REBT assessment and diagnostic procedures are insti-
tuted, specific treatment plans are made, normally in close collaboration with
the clients, to work first on the most important and self-sabotaging emotional
and behavioral symptoms that they present and later on related and possibly
less important symptoms. REBT practitioners, however, always try to main-
tain an exceptionally open-minded, skeptical, and experimental attitude
toward the clients and their problems so that what at first seem to be their
crucial and most debilitating ideas, feelings, and actions may later be seen in
a different light and emphasis may be changed to working on other equally
or more pernicious disturbances that might not be evident during the clients'
early sessions.
REBT therapists may spend relatively little time gathering background
information on their clients, although they may ask them to fill out forms
designed to assess which irrational ideas they spontaneously endorse at the
outset of therapy (see Figure 2.1). Rather, they are likely to ask clients for a
description of their'major problems(s). As clients describe their problems,
REBT therapists intervene fairly early to break these down into their ABC
components. If clients begin by describing A (the Activating event), then their
therapists ask for C (their emotional and/or behavioral reactions). However,
if clients begin by outlining C, therapists ask for a brief description of A.
Background information on their own and their close relatives' lives may be
briefly obtained, especially if it is suspected that clients have endogenous or
biologically based disturbances—such as endogenous depression. This kind of
information may be particularly useful in assessing whether they are run-of-
the-mill neurotics or also suffer from severe personality disorders or organic
and neurological problems.
In REBT, A and C are normally assessed before B and are usually assessed
in the order that clients report them. C refers to both disturbed emotional and
behavioral consequences of the preferential or musturbatory evaluations made
at B. Careful assessment of emotional C's is advocated in REBT because they
serve as a major indicator of what type of evaluations are probably to be found
at B. In this regard, it is important to reiterate that healthy negative emotions
are different from "unhealthy" negative emotions. Emotions such as sadness,
regret, annoyance, and concern are termed "healthy" in REBT in that they
are deemed to accompany rational, preferential evaluations at B and encour-

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
35
age people to attempt to change, for the better, obnoxious situations at A. The
"unhealthy" versions of emotional states are depression, guilt, anger, and anx-
iety. These are deemed to stem largely from irrational, musturbatory evalua-
tions at B and tend to interfere with people's constructive attempts to change
undesirable situations. In some cases, however, disturbed C's may directly
result from innate biological defects, as when endogenous depression stems
from serotonic deficiency.
When emotional C's are being assessed, it is important to realize three
important points. First, clients do not necessarily use affective terminology in
the same way that REBT therapists do. It is often helpful to inform them about
the nature of the unique discriminations made between "healthy" and
"unhealthy" negative emotional states so that therapist and client can come to
use a shared emotional language. Second, disturbed emotional C's are often
chained together. For example, anger is frequently chained to anxiety in that
one can experience anger to cover up feelings of inadequacy. And one can feel
depressed after a threat to one's self-esteem emerges (Wessler, 1981). Finally,
REBT therapists had better realize that clients do not always want to change
every "unhealthy" negative emotion as defined by REBT theory; that is, they
may not see a particular unhealthy emotion (e.g., anger) as being truly
unhealthy or self-defeating. Thus, a good deal of flexibility and clinical acu-
men is called for in the assessment of disturbed emotional C's to be targeted
for change.
C is assessed mainly by the client's verbal report, but occasionally clients
experience difficulty in accurately reporting their emotional and behavioral
problems. When this occurs, REBT therapists may use a number of methods
to facilitate this part of the assessment process. Thus, a variety of emotive (e.g.,
Gestalt two-chair dialogue, psychodrama), imagery, and other techniques (e.g.,
keeping an emotion/behavior diary) can be used in this respect (Dryden, 1984b).
Although we have chosen to highlight the assessment of disturbed emotional
C's, similar points can be made about the assessment of dysfunctional behav-
ioral C's. As noted earlier, withdrawal, procrastination, alcoholism, and sub-
stance abuse are generally regarded as dysfunctional behaviors related to
irrational, musturbatory evaluations at B (Ellis, 1979a, 1980a; Ellis & Knaus,
1977; Ellis & Lange, 1994; Ellis et al., 1988; Ellis & Velten, 1992).
When B is assessed, some REBT therapists prefer to fully assess the client's
inferences in search of the most relevant inference that is linked to the client's
musturbatory evaluations, given that C is self-defeating. This is known as infer-
ence chaining (Moore, 1983). An example of this procedure is described below:
THERAPIST; So what was your major feeling here?
CLIENT: I guess I was angry.
THERAPIST: Angry about what? (Here the therapist has obtained C and is probing
for A.)

Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
45 East 65th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021
Personality Data Form—Part 1
Instructions: Please answer all the following items as honestly as you can, so that we will be able to help you most with your problems. Read each
of the items and circle after each one the word OFTEN, SOMETIMES, or SELDOM, to indicate how often you have the feeling that is described in the item.
Thus, if you frequently feel quite foolish or embarrassed when you make a mistake when other people are watching, circle die word OFTEN in item 1; and if
you seldom or rarely feel ashamed to do die things you really want to do if you think others will disapprove of you for doing diem, circle SELDOM in item 2.
Please make sure that you circle one, and only one, word in every item. DO NOT SKIP ANY ITEMS. And again, for your own good, be as honest as you can
possibly be.
Acceptance
1. I feel quite foolish or embarrassed when I make a mistake and other people are
watching
2. I feel ashamed to do die things I really want to do if I think others will disap-
prove of me for doing them
3. I feel humiliated when people discover undesirable dungs about my family or
my background
4. I feel put down if my house, car, finances, or other possessions are not as good
as are those of others
5. I feel quite uncomfortable when I am the center of people's attention
6. I feel quite hurt when a person I respect criticizes me negatively
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
Consultation Center
Name
(last)
FIGURE 2.1 Personality data form.
(first)
(middle)

7. I feel uneasy about my looks or about the way I am dressed when I am out in
public
8. I feel that if people get to know me well they will discover how rotten I
really am
9. I feel terribly lonely
10. I feel that I simply must have the approval or love of certain people who are
important to me
11. I feel dependent on others and am miserable if I cannot get their help
Frustration
12. I feel upset when things proceed slowly and can't be seeded quickly
13.1 feel like putting off things I know it would be better for me to dov
14. I feel upset about life's inconveniences or frustrations
15. I feel quite angry when someone keeps me waiting
16. I feel jealous of people who have better traits than I
17. I feel terriby resentful when other people do not do my bidding or give me
what I want
18. I feel I can't stand and must change people who act stupidly or nastily
19. I feel that I cant handle serious responsibility
20. I resent my having to make a real effort to get what I want
21.1 feel very sorry for myself when tilings are rough
22. I feel unable to persist at things I start, especially when the going gets hard
23. I feel unexcited and bored about most things
24. I feel that I cannot discipline myself
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
(continued)

FIGURE 2.1 (continued
Injustice
25. I feel revengeful toward others for die wrongs they have done
26. I strongly feel like telling off wrongdoers and immoral people
27. I get upset about the injustices of the world and feel that their perpetrators
should be severely punished
Achievement
28. I blame myself severely for my poor performances
29. I feel very ashamed when I fail at important dungs
30. I feel anxious when I have to make important decisions
31.1 feel afraid to take risks or to try new dungs
Worth
32. I feel guilty about my thoughts or actions
33. I feel that I am pretty worthless as a person
34. I feel suicidal
35.1 feel like crying
36. 1 feel that I give in too easily to others
37. I feel hopeless about my being able to change my personality for die better
38. I feel that I am quite stupid
39. I feel that my life is meaningless or without purpose
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.

Control
40. I feel I cannot enjoy myself today because of my poor early life
41. I feel that because I have failed at important things in the past I must
inevitably keep failing in the future
42. I resent my parents for treating me the way they did and for causing so many
of my present problems
43. I feel that I cannot control my strong emotions, such as anxiety or rage
Certainty
44. I feel lost without some higher being or purpose on which to rely
45. I feel that I should keep doing certain things over and over, even though I
don't want to do them, because something bad will happen if I stop
46. I feel quite uncomfortable when things are not well ordered
Catastrophizing
47. I worry about what's going to happen to me in the future
48. I worry about my having some accident or illness
49. I am terrified at the idea of going to new places or meeting a new group of
people
50. I am terrified at the thought of my dying
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
OFTEN
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
SELDOM.
Copyright © 1970 by Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy.

40 
The Practice ofREBT
CLIENT: I was angry that he did not send me a birthday card. (Client provides
inference about A.)
THERAPIST: And what was anger-provoking about that? (Probing to see whether this
is the most relevant inference in the chain)
CLIENT. Well... he promised me he would remember. (Inference 2)
THERAPIST; And because he broke his promise? (Probing for relevance of inference
2)
CLIENT: I felt that he didn't care enough about me. (Inference 3)
THERAPIST: But let's assume that for a moment. What would be distressing about
that? (Probing for relevance of inference 3)
CLIENT: Well, he might leave me. (Inference 4)
THERAPIST. And if he did? (Probing for relevance of inference 4)
CLIENT: I'd be left alone. (Inference 5)
THERAPIST-. And if you were alone? (Probing for relevance of inference 5)
CLIENT: I couldn't stand that, (disturbed, unhealthy Belief)
THERAPIST: OK, so let's back up a minute, what would be most distressing for you,
the birthday card incident, the broken promise, the fact that he doesn't
care, being left by your husband, or being alone? (Therapist checks to
see which inference is most relevant in the chain)
CLIENT: Definitely being alone.
This example shows that not only are inferences chained together but, as men-
tioned earlier, disturbed emotions are too. Here anger was chained with anxiety
about being alone. Although this therapist chose then to dispute the clients irra-
tional Belief underlying her anxiety, he still has to deal with her anger-creating
Belief. Other REBT therapists might have chosen to take the first element in
the chain (anger about the missing birthday card) and disputed the irrational
Belief related to anger. Skillful REBT therapists do succeed in discovering the
hidden issues underlying the "presenting problem" during the Disputing process.
It is often important for REBT therapists to assess correctly all relevant issues
related to a presenting problem. How they do this depends on personal style and
how particular clients react to different assessment procedures.
When irrational musturbatory Beliefs are assessed, clients are helped to see
the link between these irrational Beliefs and their unhealthy affective and
behavioral Consequences at C. Some REBT therapists like to give a short lec-
ture at this point on the role of the "must's" in emotional disturbance and how
they can be distinguished from preferences. I (AE), for example, often use the
following teaching dialogue:
ELLIS: Imagine that you prefer to have a minimum of $11 in your pocket at all
times and you discover you only have $10. How will you feel?
CLIENT: Frustrated.
ELLIS: Right. Or you'd feel concerned or sad, but you wouldn't kill yourself.
Right?
CLIENT. Right.

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
41
ELLIS: OK. Now this time imagine that you absolutely have to have a minimum
of $11 in your pocket at all rimes. You must have it, it is a necessity. You must,
you must, you must, have a minimum of $11, and again you look and you
find you only have $10. How will you feel?
CLIENT: Very anxious.
ELLIS: Right, or depressed. Right. Now remember it's the same $11 but a differ-
ent Belief. OK, now this time you still have the same belief. You have to
have a minimum of $11 at all times, you must. It's absolutely essential. But
this time you look in your pocket and find that you've got $15. How will
you feel?
CLIENT. Relieved, content.
ELLIS: Right. But with that same Belief, you have to have a minimum of $11 at all
times—something will soon occur to you to scare you shitless. What do
you think that would be?
CLIENT. What if I lose $5?
ELLIS-. Right. What if I lose $5, what if I spend $5, what if I get robbed? That's
right. Now the moral of this model—which applies to just about all
humans, rich or poor, black or white, male or female, young or old, in the
past or in the future, assuming that humans are still human—is, people
make themselves miserable if they don't get what they think they must, but
they are also panicked when they do—because of the must. For even if they
have what they think they must, they could always lose it.
CLIENT. So I have no chance to be happy when I don't have what I think I must—
and little chance of remaining unanxious when I do have it?
ELLIS: Right! Your masturbation will get you nowhere—except depressed or
panicked!
An important goal of the assessment stage ofREBT is to help clients dis-
tinguish between their primary problems (e.g., depression, anxiety, withdrawal,
addiction) and their secondary problems, that is, their problems about their
primary problems (e.g., depression about depression, anxiety about anxiety,
shame about withdrawal, and guilt about addiction). REBT therapists often
assess secondary problems before primary problems because these often
require prior therapeutic attention because, for example, clients frequently find
it difficult to focus on their original problem of anxiety when they are severely
blaming themselves for being anxious. Secondary problems are assessed in the
same manner as primary problems.
When particular problems have been adequately assessed according to the
ABC model and clients clearly see the link between their irrational Beliefs and
their dysfunctional emotional and behavioral Consequences, then therapists
can proceed to the disputing stage. One purpose of Disputing is to help clients
gain intellectual insight into the fact that there is no evidence in support of the
existence of their absolutistic demands or the irrational derivatives of these
demands ("awfulizing," "I-can't-stand-it-itis," and "damnation"). There exists
only evidence that, if they stay with their nonabsolutistic preferences and if

42 
The Practice of REBT
these are not fulfilled, they will get unfortunate or "bad" results; whereas if
they are fulfilled, they will get desirable or "good" results. Intellectual insight
in REBT is defined as an acknowledgment that an irrational Belief frequently
leads to emotional disturbance and dysfunctional behavior and that a rational
Belief almost always abets emotional health. But when people see and hold
rational Beliefs only weakly and occasionally, they have intellectual insight that
may not help them change (Ellis, 1963,1985c, 1994c, 1996a). So REBT does
not stop with intellectual insight but uses it as a springboard for the working-
through phase of therapy. In this phase clients are encouraged to use a large
variety of cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques designed to help them
achieve emotional and behavioral insight. Emotional insight in REBT is
defined as a very strong and frequently held belief that an irrational idea is dys-
functional and that a rational idea is helpful (Ellis, 1963). When a person has
achieved emotional insight, he or she will tend to think-feel-behave according
to the rational Belief.
Two other points relevant to the assessment stage of REBT bear mention.
First, therapists had better be alert to problems in both areas, ego and discom-
fort disturbance. In particular, ego and discomfort disturbance often interact,
and careful assessment is required to disentangle one from the other. Second,
REBT practitioners pay particular attention to other ways that humans perpet-
uate their psychological problems and attempt to assess these carefully in therapy.
Thus, humans often seek to defend themselves from threats to their ego and to
their sense of comfort. Therapists are often aware that much dysfunctional
behavior is defensive and help their clients to identify the irrational Beliefs that
underlie such defensive dysfunctional behavior. In addition, psychological prob-
lems are sometimes perpetuated because the person defines their consequences
as payoffs, and ignores their disadvantages. These payoffs also require careful
assessment if productive therapeutic strategies are to be implemented.
TREATMENT STRATEGIES IN REBT
There are two forms of REBT—preferential and general (Ellis, 1980b). General
REBT is synonymous with cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), whereas prefer-
ential REBT is unique in a number of important respects. Because a major aim
of this book is to present the distinctive features of REBT, the emphasis here
will be on preferential REBT (although it should be noted that REBT thera-
pists routinely use strategies derived from both forms of REBT). The major
goal of preferential REBT is an ambitious one: to encourage clients to make a
profound philosophic change in die two main areas of ego disturbance and dis-
comfort disturbance. This involves helping clients, as far as is humanly possi-
ble, to give up their irrational musturbatory thinking processes and to replace
them with rational nonabsolute thinking, as discussed in chapter 1.

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
43
In preferential REBT, the major goals are to help clients pursue their long-
range basic goals and purposes and to help them do so as effectively as possi-
ble by fully accepting themselves and tolerating unchangeable uncomfortable
life conditions. Practitioners of preferential REBT further strive to help clients
obtain the skills they can use to prevent the development of future disturbance.
In encouraging clients to achieve and maintain this profound philosophic
change, REBT therapists implement the following strategies. They help their
clients see that
1. Emotional and behavioral disturbances have cognitive accompaniments,
and these cognitions normally take the form of absolutistic devout evalua-
tions. REBT practitioners train their clients to observe their own psycho-
logical disturbances and trace these back to their ideological, emotional,
and behavioral roots.
2. People have a distinct measure of self-determination and can thus choose to
work at undisturbing themselves. Thus, clients are shown that they are not
slaves to their biologically based and learned dysfunctional thinking
processes.
3. People can implement their choices and maximize their freedom by actively
working at changing their destructive musturbatory beliefs. This is best
achieved by employing cognitive, emotive, and behavioral methods—often
in quite a forceful and vigorous manner (Ellis, 1979c, 1994c, 1996a).
With the majority of clients, from the first session onward REBT therapists
are likely to use strategies designed to effect profound philosophic change.
The therapist begins therapy with the hypothesis that this particular client may
be able to achieve such change and thus begins preferential REBT, which he
or she will abandon after collecting sufficient data to reject the initial hypoth-
esis. We regularly implement this viewpoint, which is based on the notion that
the client's response to therapy is the best indicator of his or her prognosis, It
is not known what proportion ofREBT therapists share and regularly imple-
ment this position.
When it is clear that the client is not able to achieve philosophic change,
whether on a particular issue or in general, the therapist often switches to gen-
eral REBT and uses methods to effect inferential and behaviorally based
change. A good example of this change in strategy is one reported by a thera-
pist of our acquaintance. He was working with a middle-aged married woman
who reported feeling furious every time her aging lather telephoned her and
inquired "Noo, what's doing?" She inferred that this was a gross invasion of
her privacy and absolutistically insisted that he had no right to do this. The
therapist initially intervened with a preferential REBT strategy by attempting
to Dispute this client's dogmatic Belief and tried to help her see that there was
no law in the universe that stated that her father must not act as he did.

44 
The Practice of REBT
Meeting initial resistance, the therapist persisted with different variations
of this theme, all to no avail. Changing tack, he began to implement a general
REBT strategy designed to help the client question her inference that her
father was actually invading her privacy. Given her father's age, the therapist
inquired, was it not more likely that his question represented his usual man-
ner of beginning telephone conversations rather than an intense desire to pry
into her affairs? This inquiry proved successful in that the client's rage sub-
sided because she began to reinterpret her father's motives. Interestingly
enough, although he returned to the specialized strategy later, the therapist
never succeeded in helping this client to give up her irrational musturbatory
Belief! However, some clients are more amenable to reevaluating their irra-
tional musturbatory Beliefs after they have been helped to correct distorted
inferences. We had better do research on this topic if we are to answer the
question "Which strategy is most appropriate for which clients at which stage
in therapy?" Meanwhile, it is important to note that REBT therapists, if they
follow our lead, are unique in that they are more likely to challenge mustur-
batory cognitions and to dispute these self-defeating Beliefs of their clients
much earlier in the therapeutic process than do other cognitive-behavioral
therapists. Further differences between preferential REBT and general REBT
(or cognitive-behavior therapy) will be discussed at the end of this chapter.
MAJOR TREATMENT TECHNIQUES IN REBT
REBT represents a major form of eclecticism known as "theoretically consis-
tent eclecticism" (Dryden, 1987) in that techniques are liberally borrowed from
other therapeutic systems but employed for purposes usually consistent with
REBT's underlying theory. In particular, REBT therapists are mindful of the
short-term and long-term effects of particular therapeutic techniques and will
rarely employ a technique that has beneficial immediate but harmful long-
range consequences. Although a large number of cognitive, emotive, and
behavioral techniques are employed, only the major ones will be discussed
here. It should be noted at the outset that probably all die following techniques
have cognitive, emotive, and behavioral elements to them and that "pure" tech-
niques (e.g., purely cognitive) probably do not exist. Techniques are grouped
below to show which psychological process predominates.
Cognitive Techniques
Probably die most common technique employed by REBT therapists with the
majority of dieir clients is the disputing of irrational beliefs. There are three sub-
categories of Disputing (Phadke, 1982). Detecting consists of looking for dys-
functional beliefs—particularly "must's," "should's," "ought's," and "have

The Bask Practice of KEPT 
45
to's"—that lead to self-defeating emotions and behaviors. Debating consists of die
therapist asking a number of questions diat are designed to help the client give
up irrational Beliefs. Questions such as "Where is die evidence...?" "In what
way is this Belief accurate or inaccurate?" and "What makes it so?" are frequendy
employed. The therapist proceeds widi such questioning until die client acknowl-
edges die inaccuracy of his or her irrational Belief and, in addition, acknowledges
die accuracy of its rational alternative. As will be shown in die next section when
examples of Albeit Ellis's use of disputing are analyzed, REBT therapists use diree
major arguments when debating or disputing their client's irrational beliefs. These
arguments are empirical, logical, and pragmatic. Discriminating involves die ther-
apist's helping die client to distinguish clearly between his nonabsolute values (his
wants, preferences, likes, and desires) and his absolutistic values (his needs,
demands, and imperatives). REBT dierapists are often very creative in dieir use of
Disputing sequences (e.g., Young, 1984) and sometimes employ such methods in
a highly dramatic fashion (Dryden, 1984b). A formal version of Disputing diat
includes some of its main components is known as DIBS (Disputing Irrational
Beliefs). I (AE) have outlined its form thus:
QUESTION 1: What unhealthy Belief do I want to dispute and surrender?
ANSWER: I must be as effective and sexually fulfilled as most other women.
QUESTION 2: Can I empirically, logically, and pragmatically support this Belief?
ANSWER: No. It is unrealistic because I don't have to be effective sexually. It is
illogical because it doesn't follow that if I strongly want to be fulfilled
sexually, I therefore must be. It is impractical because if I think I have
to be good sexually, I will probably interfere with ray good sex relations.
QUESTION 3: What evidence exists of the accuracy of diis Belief?
ANSWER: None, only evidence that it would be preferable for me to do well sex-
ually but not that it would be necessary.
QUESTION 4: What evidence exists of the inaccuracy of my Belief that I must be as
orgasmic as other women are?
ANSWER: The fact that I am and easily can remain less orgasmic than other
women are.
QUESTION S: What are the worst possible dungs dm could actually happen to me
if I never achieved the orgasm diat I diink I must achieve?
ANSWER: I will lose some degree of pleasure and may lose some partners who
demand that I be more effective sexually—and who obviously are not
for me!
QUESTION 6: What good tilings could happen or could I make happen if I never
achieved the heights of orgasm that I think I must achieve?
ANSWER: I could devote myself to other pleasurable things, could find a partner
who would accept me as I am, could unfrantically explore other sex
possibilities, and so on (Ellis, 1974a; Ellis & Harper, 197S).
DIBS is one example of cognitive homework diat is frequently given to clients
to do between sessions after the client has been trained to use them. Other

46 
The Practice cfREBT
examples appear in Figures 2.2 (page 48) and 2.3 (page 52). The purpose of these
forms is to provide a clear framework for clients to do Disputing for themselves.
Clients can also use audiocassettes as an aid to the Disputing process. They
can listen to audiotapes of therapy sessions and also Dispute their own irra-
tional Beliefs on tape (Disputing on tape). Here they initiate and sustain a dia-
logue between the rational and irrational parts of themselves (Ellis, 1988; Ellis
& Abrams, 1994; Ellis & Velten, 1992).
Clients who do not have the intellectual skills necessary to perform cognitive
disputing are usually helped to develop rational self-statements that they can mem-
orize or write out on 3" x 5" cards and repeat at various times between sessions.
An example developed by one of us (WD) with a client was "Just because my
being overweight is bad doesn't mean that I am bad. My overeating makes me
too heavy and is therefore wrong, but I can correct it and get better results."
Three cognitive methods that therapists often suggest to their clients to help
them reinforce that new rational philosophy are (\)bibliotherapy, where clients
are given self-help books and materials to read (e.g., Ellis, 1988; Ellis & Becker,
1982; Ellis & Harper, 1975; Young, 1974); (2) listening to au&ooKsettes ofREBT
lectures on various themes (e.g., Ellis, 1971b, 1976b, 1989,1990); and (fusing
REBT with others, where clients use REBT to help their friends and relatives
with their problems. In doing so they gain practice at using rational arguments
(Ellis &Abrahms, 1978).
A number of semantic methods are also employed in REBT. Defining tech-
niques are sometimes employed, the purpose of which is to help clients use
language in a less self-defeating manner. Thus, instead of "I can't..." clients
are urged to use "I haven't yet...." Referenting techniques are also employed
(Danysh, 1974). Here, clients are encouraged to list both the negative and pos-
itive referents of a particular concept such as "smoking." This method is
employed to counteract clients' tendencies to focus on the positive aspects of
a harmful habit and to neglect its negative aspects.
REBT therapists also employ a number of imagery techniques. Thus, ratio-
nal-emotive imagery (Ellis, 1993; Maultsby, 1971) is often employed. Clients
thereby gain practice at changing their "unhealthy" negative emotions to
"healthy" ones (C) while maintaining a vivid image of the negative event at A.
Here they are in fact learning to change their self-defeating emotions by
changing their underlying Beliefs at B. Time projection imagery methods are
also employed in REBT (Lazarus, 1989). Thus, a client may say that a partic-
ular event would be "awful" if it occurred. Rather than directly challenging
this dysfunctional belief at this stage, the therapist may temporarily go along
with this but help the client to picture what life might be like at regular inter-
vals after the "awful" event has occurred. In this way clients are indirectly
helped to change their irrational Belief because they come to "see" that life
goes on after the "awful" event, that they will usually recover from it, and that

The Baric Practice of REST 
41
they can continue to pursue their original goals or develop new ones. Such
realizations encourage the person to reevaluate his or her irrational Belief.
Finally, a number of therapists have successfully employed REBT in a hypnosis
paradigm (e.g., Ellis, 1993; Golden, Dowd, & Friedberg, 1987; Tosi & Mur-
phy, 1995); see also chapter 11.
Examples of Albert Ellis's Disputing Work
In this segment I (WD) will provide and comment on therapeutic work car-
ried out by Albert Ellis disputing the irrational beliefs of three of his clients.
Each sequence focuses on a particular argument.
Using Empirical Arguments In this sequence, Ellis, using primarily empir-
ical arguments, is disputing the irrational belief of a client who insists that she
absolutely must succeed in her career.
ELLIS-. Why MUST you have a great career?
CLIENT: Because I very much want to have it.
ELLIS: Where is the evidence that you must fulfill this strong desire?
CLIENTS I'll feel much better if I do.
ELLIS: Yes, you probably will. But how does your feeling better prove that you
must succeed?
[So far, Ellis has been using Socratic-type questions. Note how he takes the
client's answers that represent evidence in support of her rational belief (i.e.,
"I want to have a great career, but I don't have to have one") and asks whether
or not such evidence supports her irrational belief.]
CLIENT: But that's what I want more than anything else in the world.
ELLIS: I'm sure you do. But if we take 100 people like you, all of whom want a
great career, want it more than anything else in die world, and would feel
much better if they achieved it, do they all have to succeed at it?
[Here Ellis probably realizes that he has to use a different type of argument with
this client. So he asks whether or not it is empirically true that 100 people who
have the same strong preference as the client would all change this into a must]
CLIENT: If they are to have any joy in life, they have to do so.
[The client still does not get the point that Ellis is implying through his
Socratic-type questions.]
ELLIS: Really? Can't they have any pleasure if they fail to get a great career?
(continued on page 58)

FIGURE 22 REBT self-help form.
REBT SELF-HELP FORM
Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
45 East 65th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021
(212) 535-0822
(A) ACTIVATING EVENTS, dioughts, or feelings that happened just before I felt emotionally disturbed or acted self-defeatingly:
(C) CONSEQUENCE or CONDITION—disturbed feeling or self-defeating behavior—that I produced and would like to change:
(B) BELIEFS—Irrational BELIEFS (IBs)
leading to my CONSEQUENCE (emo-
tional disturbance or self-defeating behavior).
Circle all that apply to these ACTIVATING
EVENTS (A).
(D) DISPUTES for each circled
IRRATIONAL BELIEF.
Examples: "Why MUST I do very well?"
"Where is it written that I am a BAD
PERSON?" "Where is the evidence that I
MUST be approved or accepted?"
(E) EFFECTIVE RATIONAL BELIEFS
(RBs) to replace my IRRATIONAL
BELIEFS (IBs)
Examplef: Td PREFER to do very well but 1
don't HAVE TO." "lama PERSON WHO
acted badly, not a BAD PERSON" "There is no
evidence that I HAVE TO be approved, though
I would LIKE to be."
1. I MUST do well or very well!
2. I am a BAD OR WORTHLESS
PERSON when I act weakly or stupidly.

3. I MUST be approved or accepted by
people I find important!
4. I am a BAD, UNLOVABLE PERSON if
I get rejected.
5. People MUST treat me fairly and give
me what I NEED!
6. People who act immorally are
undeserving, ROTTEN PEOPLE!
7. People MUST live up to my expectations
or it is TERRIBLE!
8. My life MUST have few major hassles or
troubles.
9. I CANT STAND really bad things or
very difficult people!
10. It's AWFUL or HORRIBLE when major
things don't go my way!
(continued)

Figure 2.2 (continued)
I I . I CANT STAND IT when life is really
unfair!
12.1 NEED to be loved by someone who
matters to me a lot!
13. I NEED a good deal of immediate
gratification and HAVE TO feel
miserable when I don't get it!
Additional Irrational Beliefs:
14.
IS.

16.
17.
18.
(F) FEELINGS and BEHAVIORS I experienced after arriving at my EFFECTIVE RATIONAL BELIEFS:
I WELL WORK HARD TO REPEAT MY EFFECTIVE RATIONAL BELIEFS FORCEFULLY TO MYSELF ON MANY
OCCASIONS SO THAT I CAN MAKE MYSELF LESS DISTURBED NOW AND ACT LESS SELF-DEFEATINGLY IN THE
FUTURE.
Joyce Sichel, Ph.D. and Albert Ellis, Ph.D.
Copyright © 1984 by Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy.
100 forms $10.00
1000 forms $80.00

52
The Practice of REST
ABC
OF
EMOTIONAL AND BEHAVIOURAL PROBLEMS
A 
C
A = ACTIVATING EVENT
- Describe the aspect of the
situation you were most
disturbed about
- Assume temporarily that A is
true
- An A can be internal or
external
-MA can refer to an event in
the past, present or future
- An A can be an interpretation
Major unhealthy negative
emotion:
Major self-defeating
behaviour:
C = CONSEQUENCE
Unhealthy Negative Emotions:
- Anxiety
- Depression
- Anger
- Guilt
- Shame & Embarrassment
- Hurt
- Jealousy
FIGURE 2.3 ABC of emotional and behavioral problems.

53
AWFUUSING:
LOW FRUSTRATION TOLERANCE:
SELF/OTHER DOWNING:
IBS: : IRRATIONAL
BELIEFS
Look for:
- DOGMATIC DEMANDS
(musts, absolute shoukjs,
oughts)
•AWFUUSING
(It's awful, terrible, horrible)
- LOW FRUSTRATION
TOLERANCE
(I canl stand ft, I can't bear it)
-SELF/OTHER DOWNING
(bad, worthless, less worthy)
Is it true?
Is it logical?
Is it helpful ?
Is H true?
Is it logical ?
Is it helpful ?
Is it true?
Is it logical 7
Is ft helpful ?
Is it true ?
Is it logical ?
Is H helpful ?
D = DISPUTING
• Where is the evidence to
support the existence of my
irrational belief ? Is H
consistent with reality ?
• Is my belief logical ?Does K
logically follow from my
rational belief?
• Where Is holding this belief
getting me? Istthelptul?
(continued)
D
DOGMATIC DEMAND:
iBs
The Basic Practice ofREBT

54
The Practice ofREBT
rBs
NON-DOGMATIC PREFERENCE:
EVALUATING BADNESS:
HIGH FRUSTRATION TOLERANCE:
SELF/OTHER ACCEPTANCE:
rBs a RATIONAL BELIEFS
Strive for:
- NON-DOGMATIC PREFERENCES
(wishes, wants, desires)
- EVALUATING BADNESS
(It's bad, unfortunate)
- HIGH FRUSTRATION TOLERANCE
(I can stand it, I can bear it)
- SELF/OTHER ACCEPTANCE
("Fallible human being" concept)
New healthy negative
emotion:
New constructive
behaviour:
E = NEW EFFECT
Healthy Negative Emotions:
- Concern
- Sadness
- Annoyance
- Remorse
- Disappointment
- Regret
- Concern about my relationship
FIGURE 2.3, continued
E

The Basic Practice of REST 
K
HOMEWORK:
©Windy Dryden & Jane Walker, 1992
(continued)

56 
The Practice ofREBT
Sheet Explaining the Use of Dryden & Walker's
(1992) Written Self-Help Form
When using this form it is very important that you select a specific exam-
ple of your problem. The more specific you can be, the better. Then com-
plete the form in the following order.
First, Complete *C'
(i) Choose one unhealthy negative emotion from those listed (which
could be the main one) and write down the self-defeating behavior
associated with it.
(ii) Use one form for each emotion if you experienced more than one
unhealthy negative emotion in the episode under consideration,
(iii) If your problem is associated only with self-defeating behavior leave
the "emotion" section blank.
Second, Complete 'A'
(i) Here, it is very important that you focus on the aspect about which
you were most disturbed.
(ii) As it says on the form, it is most important that you assume tem-
porarily that 'A' is true. You will have an opportunity later to check
on its accuracy.
Third, Write Down your iBs and 'A*
(i) Work from the top of the form to the bottom and complete the rel-
evant sections,
(ii) Leave blank any section that does not apply.
FIGURE 2.3, continued

The Basic Practice of 'REBT 
51
Fourth, Complete the 'D' Section
(i) Answer each of the three questions.
(ii) Don't give a "parrot" answer. Think through each of your responses
and prove to yourself why the correct answer is "no."
Fifth, Complete the rBs Section
(i) Again, work from the top of the form to the bottom and complete
the relevant sections.
(ii) Make sure that you assert the rational belief and negate the irra-
tional belief in each completed section.
Sixth, Complete the '£' Section
(i) Provide a healthy negative emotion from those listed, making sure
that it is a constructive alternative to the unhealthy negative emo-
tion listed under 'C.'
(ii) Write down your constructive negative behavior associated with the
new emotion.
(iii) If your problem was associated only with self-defeating behavior,
just complete the "New constructive behavior" part of the form,
leaving die "emotion" section blank.
Seventh, Reconsider 'A'
(i) While holding the new rational beliefs, go back to 'A' and correct
any distorted inferences that you find there.
Finally, Homework
(i) Discuss a suitable homework assignment with your therapist to
strengthen your conviction in your rational beliefs.

tt 
The Practice of REET
[Taking the lead form the client's last response, Ellis changes the focus of his
argument again. If 100 people all must have a great career, none of them will
have any pleasure if they don't achieve it. Ellis then questions whether this is
empirically the case.]
CLIENT! Well, yes. I guess they can have some pleasure.
[This is the first time that the client shows any sign that she can think ratio-
nally about the issue at hand. Note how Ellis capitalizes on this.]
ELLIS: And could some of them have a great deal of pleasure?
CLIENT Urn. Probably, yes.
ELLIS: Probably?
CLIENT: Well, highly probably.
ELLIS: Right. So no matter how much people greatly want success and would feel
better about gaining it, they don't have to get it. Right?
[Here Ellis summarizes the rational point and asks for agreement. I might have
asked, "What do you think of this idea?" in order to encourage the client to
be more independent in her thinking.]
CLIENT: Well.yes.
ELLIS: Social reality is that way—isn't it?
CLIENT. It seems so.
ELLIS: Back to you. Does your great desire for a successful career mean chat you
absolutely must achieve it—that the world has to fulfill this desire?
[Having got the rational point over in an abstract way, Ellis then seeks to apply
it to the client's own specific set of personal circumstances.]
CLIENT. I see what you mean. Social reality is the way it is, no matter how
unpleasant I find it to be.
[The client shows signs of really understanding Ellis's point]
ELLIS: Exactly. Make a note of that Effective New Philosophy you just arrived at
and keep thinking that way until you thoroughly believe it!
Using Logical Arguments In this segment Ellis is disputing die irrational
beliefs of a client who insists that because he treated his friend very nicely and
fairly, this friend absolutely should treat him the same way. He does so using pri-
marily logical arguments.
ELLIS: Let's suppose that you're describing the situation with your friend accu-
rately and that he treats you shabbily and unfairly after you consistently

Tbe Basic Practice ofREBT 
59
treat him well. How does it follow that because of your good behavior he
has to respond in kind?
CLIENTS But he's unfair if he doesn't!
ELLIS: Yes, we're agreeing on that. He « unfair, and you are fair. Can you jump
from "Because I'm very fair to him, he has to be fair to me?"
CLIENT; But he's wrong if he isn't fair when I am.
[At this point Ellis and the client appear to be at cross-purposes. Ellis keeps
asking the client why his friend must be fair to him, and the client keeps reply-
ing that his friend is wrong and unfair, which Ellis is not questioning.]
ELLIS: Agreed. But because you are fair, and presumably right, and because he
takes advantage of your unfairness, does it still follow that he has to be right
and to treat you fairly?
CLIENT. It logically follows.
ELLIS: Does it? It looks like a complete nonsequitur to me.
CLIENT: HowSO?
[This is a typical Ellis change of emphasis. He asserts that the client's belief is
illogical and waits for the latter to ask why before expanding on his theme. He
wants to get his client into an inquiring, "Why do you say that?" mode.]
ELLIS: Well, it's logical or consistent that he preferably should treat you fairly
when you treat him well. But aren't you making an illogical—or "magi-
cal"—jump from "Because he preferably should treat me fairly he absolutely
has to do so?' What "logical" law of the universe leads to your "He
absolutely has to do so?"
CLIENT: No law, I guess.
ELLIS: No, in logic we get necessitous conclusions, such as "If all men are human
and John is a man, John must be human." But your "logic" says, 'People
who get treated fairly, often treat others fairly; I treat my friend fairly;
therefore it is absolutely necessary that he treat me similarly." Is that a log-
ical conclusion?
[This is another typical Ellis strategy. He begins by making a point in didac-
tic fashion. As occurs here, this point illustrates a rational idea (in this case a
logical idea). He then contrasts this with the client's irrational idea (in this case
an illogical idea) but does not tell the client that his idea is illogical. Rather he
encourages the client to think for himself by asking, "Is that a logical conclu-
sion?" It is worth studying this sequence in detail because it is so typical of
Ellis's effective disputing work.]
CLIENT: I guess not.
ELLIS: Moreover, you seem to be claiming that because you act fairly and your
friend behaves unfairly, his acts make him a rotten person. Is that logical
thinking?

60 
The Practice of REFT
{Ellis infers other-downing from his client's must. He is probably correct; how-
ever, my practice is to check my hunch with the client before proceeding.)
CLIENT: Why not?
[As you will see, Ellis immediately answers the client^ question. I would have
encouraged the client to make a stab at answering his own question before
going into didactic mode.}
ELLIS: Iti illogical because you're overgeneralizing. You're jumping from one of his
rotten behaviors—or even one of his traits—to categorizing A»w, his totality as
"rotten." How does that overgeneralization follow from a few of his behaviors?
[Here Ellis states the logical error that the client is making, shows him in what
way the error is present in his belief about his friend, and finally questions him
about the logicality of that belief.]
CLIENT I can see now that it doesn't.
ELLIS: So what could you more logically conclude instead?
[Here, Ellis encourages the client to be active in his thinking.]
CLIENT: Well, I could think that he isn't one of his main behaviors. He is a person
who often, but not always, acts rottenly.
ELLIS: Good! Alfred Korzybski and his followers in General Semantics would
approve of your new conclusion!
Using Pragmatic Argument! In the following piece of work, the client
insists that if she believes that she must do well, she will succeed better at
school and win others' approval. Ellis shows her that her irrational belief will
in all probability produce poor results.
CLIENT. If I am anxious about doing poorly at school because, as you say, I think
that I must do well, won't my must and my anxiety motivate me to do
better?
ELLIS: Yes, in part. But won't they also defeat you?
[Here Ellis gives a straight answer to the client's straight question. But he then
follows up by asking a question to encourage the client to think about the issue
for herself. This is another typical Ellis disputing strategy.)
CLIENT! How SO?
ELLIS: If you keep making yourself very anxious with "I must do well! I must per-
form perfectly!" won't you preoccupy yourself so much that you detract
from the time and energy you can give to studying?

The Basic Practice of REBT 
61
[Yet another typical Ellis intervention. Here Ellis is really making a statement
in the guise of a question. The question format is to encourage the client's
active participation, but the rational point that Ellis is making is clear.]
CLIENT: Maybe. But I'll still feel quite motivated.
ELLIS: Mainly motivated to obsess! You'll be driven to study, And while you drive
yourself, you'll keep thinking, "But suppose I fail! Wouldn't that be awful}"
You'll worry about what your texts will be like, how you will handle them,
how you will subsequently perform, and so on. How will keeping the future
so much in mind help you focus on the present studying?
[This intervention comprises a number of didactically made points with the
question twist at the end.}
CLIENT It may not help.
ELLIS: No, itV much more likely to sabotage. Moreover, even if you somehow suc-
ceed in your courses, do you want to be miserably anxious and depressed,
while you are succeeding?
CLIENT Frankly, no.
ELLIS: And do you want to be so absorbed in worrying about school that you have
little time for relationships, sports, music, and other enjoyments?
[Having succeeded in getting the point across to the client that her irrational
belief will do her more harm than good, Ellis spends time (cf. his last two inter-
ventions and much of his following responses) underscoring this important point]
CLIENT I don't think so. I passed my courses last term but was able to do little
else.
ELLIS: See! And what about the physical results of your constant worry and per-
fectionism?
CLIENT! My physician thinks they are making my digestive tract hyperactive.
ELLIS: I'm not surprised. And when you constantly worry, how do you feel about
you for being such a worrier?
CLIENT Pretty shitty.
ELLIS: Is that feeling worth it? But even if you felt bad about your anxiety and
didn't putjyoaw^f down for having it, you would still bring on endless frus-
tration and disappointment by indulging in it.
CLIENT You may be right.
ELLIS: Don't take my word for it. Look for yourself at the results you get from
your perfectionistic demands and figure out what you could say to your-
self to replace them.
[Ellis often urges his clients not to take his word for it. However, his didactic
style does encourage clients not used to thinking for themselves to do just that.
Greater extended use of Socratic disputing might achieve this result more
effectively.]

62 
The Practice ofREBT
CLIENT: Well, I could tell myself, "It's great to do well at school, but I don't have to
be perfect. Even if my anxiety sometimes helps me to get good marks, it,
too, has too many disadvantages and it isn't worth it."
ELLIS: Good! That's a much better way to think.
Emotive Techniques
REBT has often been falsely criticized for neglecting emotive aspects of psy-
chotherapy. However, this is far from the truth, and REBT therapists fre-
quently employ a number of emotive techniques. As has already been shown,
they offer their clients the emotional attitude of unconditional acceptance. No
matter how badly clients behave, their therapists strive to accept them as fal-
lible humans but do not go along with their bad behavior. REBT therapists
use a variety of emotive techniques that are designed to help clients challenge
their dysfunctional Beliefs. First, a number of humorous methods are employed
to encourage clients to think rationally by not taking themselves too seriously
(Ellis, 1977b, 1977d, 1987). Second, REBT therapists do not hesitate to model
a rational philosophy through self-disclosure. They honestly admit that they
have had similar problems and show that they overcame them by using REBT.
Thus, I (WD) frequently tell clients that I used to feel ashamed of my stam-
mer. I then relate how I accepted myself with my speech impediment and how
I forced myself to tolerate the discomfort of speaking in public whenever the
opportunity arose. Third, REBT therapists frequently use a number of stories,
mottoes, parables, witticisms, poems, and aphorisms as adjuncts to cognitive Dis-
puting techniques (Ellis & Abrams, 1994; Wessler & Wessler, 1980). Fourth,
we have written a number of humorous songs that are designed to present
rational philosophies in an amusing and memorable format (Ellis, 1977b,
1977d, 1981c, 1987). The following is a humorous song written by one of us
(WD) to the tune of "God Save the Queen":
God save my precious spleen
Send me a life serene
God save my spleen!
Protect me from things odious
Give me a life melodious
And if things get too onerous
I'll whine, bawl, and scream!
In an important paper, I (AE) first advocated the use offeree and energy
in the practice of psychotherapy (Ellis, 1979a). REBT is unique among the
cognitive-behavioral therapies in emphasizing the employment of such inter-
ventions that fully involve clients' emotions. Thus, REBT therapists suggest
that clients can help themselves go from intellectual to emotional insight by
vigorously Disputing their irrational Beliefs (Ellis, 1993g). Vigor is often

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
63
employed by clients in role reversal, where they forcefully and dramatically
adopt the role of their rational "self," whose goal is to successfully Dispute
self-defeating Beliefs as articulated by their irrational "self." Force and energy
also play a significant part in REBT's now famous shame-attacking exercises
(Ellis, 1969, 1971b; Ellis & Becker, 1982). Here clients deliberately seek to
act "shamefully" in public in order to accept themselves and to tolerate the
ensuing discomfort. Because clients should not harm themselves nor other
people, minor infractions of social rules often serve as appropriate shame-
attacking exercises (e.g., calling out the time in a crowded department store,
wearing bizarre clothes designed to attract public attention, and going into a
hardware store and asking if they sell tobacco). Risk-taking exercises come into
the same category. Here clients deliberately force themselves to take calcu-
lated risks in areas where they wish to make changes. While disputing rele-
vant irrational beliefs, I (AE) overcame my anxiety about approaching women
by deliberately forcing myself to speak to 100 women in the Bronx Botanical
Gardens. I (VVD) pushed myself to speak on national and local radio as part
of a campaign to overcome my public-speaking anxiety. Both of us took these
risks while showing ourselves that nothing "awful" would result from such
experiences. Repeating rational self-statements in a passionate and forceful man-
ner is often used in conjunction with such exercises (Ellis, 1985c, 1988; Ellis
& Abrams, 1994; Ellis & Velten, 1992).
Behavioral Techniques
REBT has advocated the use of behavioral techniques (particularly homework
assignments) from its inception in 1955 because it is realized that cognitive
change is very often facilitated by behavioral change (Emmelkamp, Kuipers, &
Eggeraat, 1978). Because REBT therapists are concerned to help clients raise
their level of frustration tolerance, they encourage them to carry out homework
assignments based on in vivo desensitization, and flooding paradigms rather than
those that are based on the gradual desensitization paradigm (Ellis, 1979d; Ellis
& Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis & Grieger, 1977). However, prag-
matic considerations do have to be considered, and some clients refuse to cany
out such assignments. When this occurs, REBT therapists would negotiate a
compromise encouraging such clients to undertake tasks that are sufficiently
challenging for them but that are not overwhelming, given their present status
(Dryden, 1985a).
Other behavioral methods frequently employed in REBT include (1) "stay
in there"activities (Grieger & Boyd, 1980), which present clients with oppor-
tunities to tolerate chronic discomfort while remaining in uncomfortable situa-
tions for a long period of time; (2) antiprocrastination exercises, where clients are
encouraged to push themselves to start tasks sooner rather than later while
again tolerating the discomfort of breaking the manana habit (Ellis & Knaus,

64 
The Practice ofREBT
1977); (3) the use of rewards and penalties, which are employed to encourage
clients to undertake uncomfortable assignments in the pursuit of their long-
range goals (Ellis, 1979d) (stiff penalties are found to be particularly helpful
with chronically resistant clients [Ellis, 1985c]); and (4) Kelly's fixed role therapy,
sometimes employed in REBT, where clients are encouraged to act "as if diey
already think rationally, to enable them to get the experience that change is
possible.
A number of other behavioral methods are employed in both preferential
and general REBT (e,g., various forms of skills training methods). When these
are used in preferential REBT, diey are done to encourage philosophic change,
whereas in general REBT they are employed to teach clients skills that are
absent from their repertory. When skill training is the goal in preferential
REBT, it is employed almg-witb Disputing of irrational Beliefs and while some
measure of philosophic change is being sought (Ellis, 1988; Ellis & Abrams,
1994; Ellis &Velten, 1992).
Techniques That Are Avoided in REBT
By now it will be clear that REBT is a multimodal form of therapy that advo-
cates the employment of techniques in the cognitive, emotive, and behavioral
modalities. However, because the choice of therapeutic techniques is inspired
by REBT theory, the following available therapeutic techniques are avoided
or used sparingly in the practice of REBT (Ellis, 1979d, 1983b, 1994c, 1995a,
1996a, 1996b).
• Techniques that help people become more dependent (e.g., undue thera-
pist warmth as a strong reinforcement and the creation and analysis of a
transference neurosis).
• Techniques that encourage people to become more gullible and sug-
gestible (e.g., pollyanna-ish positive thinking).
• Techniques that are long-winded and inefficient (e.g., psychoanalytic
methods in general and free association in particular; encouraging clients
to give lengthy descriptions of Activating experiences at A).
• Methods that help people feel better in the short term rather than get
better in the long term (Ellis, 1972a) (e.g., some experiential techniques
like fully expressing one's feelings in a dramatic, cathartic, and abreactive
manner (i.e., some Gestalt mediods and primal techniques). The danger
here is that such methods may encourage people to practice dysfunctional
philosophies underlying such emotions as anger).
• Techniques that distract clients from working on their dysfunctional
philosophies (e.g., relaxation methods, Yoga, and other cognitive distrac-

The Basic Practice of REST 
65
tion methods). These methods may be employed, however, along with
cognitive Disputing designed to yield some philosophic change.
• Methods that may unwittingly reinforce clients' philosophy of low frus-
tration tolerance (e.g., gradual desensitization).
• Techniques that include an antiscientific philosophy (e.g., faith healing
and mysticism).
• Techniques that attempt to change Activating events (A) before or with-
out showing clients how to change their irrational Beliefs (B) (e.g., some
strategic family systems techniques).
• Techniques that have little empirical support (e.g., neurolinguistic pro-
gramming), nondirective therapy, and rebirthing therapy.
Finally, to reiterate, REBT therapists do not absolutistically avoid using the
above methods. They may on certain occasions with certain clients utilize such
techniques, particularly for pragmatic purposes. For example, if faith healing
is the only method that will prevent some clients from harming themselves,
then REBT therapists might either employ it themselves or, more probably,
refer such clients to a faith healer (Ellis, 198Sc, 1994a, 1994c, 1996a).
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO CLIENT PROGRESS
When REBT is practiced efficiently and effectively and when clients under-
stand and are prepared to continually implement its basic concepts, then it
can achieve remarkable results. However, frequently (and perhaps more fre-
quently than most therapists are prepared to admit!), various obstacles to
client progress are encountered in the practice of REBT (and indeed all
other forms of therapy). Three major forms of obstacles may occur in REBT:
(1) relationship obstacles, (2) therapist obstacles, and (3) client obstacles
(Ellis, 198Sc).
Relationship Obstacles to Client Progress
These can be first attributed to poor therapist-client matching. Such mis-
matching may occur for many reasons. Thus, clients "may have a therapist who,
according to their diosyncratic tastes or preferences, is too young or too old,
too liberal or too conservative, too active or too passive" (Ellis, 1983c, p. 29).
If these "relationship match" obstacles persist, then it is preferable for that client
to be transferred to a therapist with more suitable traits. Other relationship
obstacles may occur because the therapist and client may get on "too well" and
get distracted form the more mundane tasks of therapy. In such cases, the para-
dox is that if the client improves, the "life" of the satisfactory relationship is

K 
The Practice ofREBT
:hreatened. As a result, collusion may occur between therapist and client to
»void making therapy as effective an endeavor as it might otherwise be. This
jroblem can be largely overcome if the therapist helps first himself or herself
md then the client to overcome the philosophy of low frustration tolerance
mplicit in this collusive short-range hedonism,
Therapist Obstacles to Client Progress
There are two major types of therapist obstacles: skill-oriented obstacles and
disturbance-oriented obstacles. When obstacles to client progress can be
mainly attributed to therapist skill deficits, these may appear in a variety of
forms, but most commonly therapists may impede client progress by
1. Improperly inducting clients into therapy and failing to correct unrealistic
expectations such as "my therapist will solve my problems for me."
2. Incorrectly assessing clients' problems and thus working on "problems"
that clients do not have.
3. Failing to show clients that their problems have ideological roots and that
C is largely (but not exclusively) determined by B and not by A. Inexpert
therapists often fail to persist with this strategy or persist with an ineffec-
tive strategy.
4. Failing to show clients that the ideological roots of their problems are most
frequently expressed in the form of devout, absolutistic "must's" or one of
the three main derivatives of musturbation. Instead, inexpert REBT ther-
apists frequently dwell too long on their clients' anriempirical or inferen-
tially distorted thinking.
5. Assuming that clients will automatically change their absolute thinking once
they have identified it. Inexpert REST therapists either fail to dispute such
thinking at all or use Disputing methods sparingly and/or with insufficient
vigor. In addition, inexpert therapists routinely fail to (1) give their clients
homework assignments, which provide them with opportunities to prac-
tice Disputing their irrational Beliefs; (2) check on their clients' progress
on these assignments; and (3) help their clients to identify and change their
philosophic obstacles to continually working at self-change.
6. Failing to realize that clients often have problems about their problems and
thus working only on a primary problem when the client is preoccupied
with a secondary problem.
7. Frequently switching from ego to discomfort disturbance issues within a
given session so that clients get confused and thus distracted from working
on either issue.
8. Working at a pace and a level inappropriate to the learning abilities of clients
so that these clients are insufficiently involved in the therapeutic process due
to confusion or boredom.

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
67
For these reasons it is highly desirable for REBT therapists to strive to con-
tinually improve their skills by involving themselves in ongoing supervision
and training activities (Dryden, 1983; Woods & Ellis, 1996).
Client progress can also be hindered because therapists may bring their own
disturbance to the therapeutic process. I (AE) have outlined five major irra-
tional beliefs that lead to therapeutic inefficiency (Ellis, 198Sc):
"I have to be successful with all my clients practically all of the time."
"I must be an outstanding therapist, clearly better than other therapists I
know or hear about."
"I have to be greatly respected and loved by all my clients."
"Since I am doing my best and working so hard as a therapist, my clients
should be equally hardworking and responsible, should listen to me
, carefully, and should always push themselves to change."
"Because I am a person in my own right, I must be able to enjoy myself
during therapy sessions and to use these sessions to solve my personal
problems as much as to help clients with their difficulties."
In such cases, it is recommended that REBT therapists apply REBT prin-
ciples and methods to search for and Dispute their own self- and client-defeat-
ing Beliefs, which may (1) impede them from confronting their clients, (2)
distract them and their clients from getting the therapeutic job done, (3) fos-
ter undue therapist anxiety and anger, and (4) encourage inappropriate behav-
ior that is anathema to the practice of effective and ethical therapy.
Client Obstacles to Client Progress
In order to really benefit from REBT, clients had better achieve the following
three forms of insight: (1) Psychological disturbance is mainly determined by
the absolutistic Beliefs that they hold about themselves, others, and the world;
(2) even when people acquired and created their irrational Beliefs in their early
lives, they perpetuate their disturbance by reindoctrinating themselves in the
present with these beliefs; (3) only if they constantly work and practice in the
present and future to think, feel, and act against these irrational Beliefs are
clients likely to surrender their irrationalities and make themselves significantly
less disturbed.
In a study by one of us (AE) of the characteristics of clients who "failed" in
REBT, the following findings emerged: (1) Clients who did poorly failed to
do consistent cognitive self-Disputation. They were characterized, among other
factors, by extreme disturbance, grandiosity, lack of organization, and plain
refusal to do these cognitive assignments; (2) "failure" clients, who refused to
accept responsibility for their unhealthy emotions and refused to forcefully
and emotively change their beliefs and actions, were more clingy, more severely

68 
The Practice of REBT
depressed and inactive, more often grandiose, and more frequently stubbornly
rebellious than clients who benefited from REBT; (3) "failure" clients who did
poorly in the behavioral aspects of REBT showed "abysmally low frustration
tolerance, had serious behavioral addictions, led disorganized lives, refrained
from doing their activity homework assignments, were more frequently psy-
chotic and generally refused to work at therapy" (Ellis, 1983a, p. 165).
Thus, clients' own extreme level of disturbance is a significant obstacle to
their own progress. Although a full discussion of what "special" therapeutic
methods and techniques to employ with such clients is outside the scope of
this chapter (see Ellis, 198Sc), therapists can adopt a number of strategies to
enhance therapeutic effectiveness with these DCs ("difficult customers").
Among other tactics, therapists, first, are advised to be consistently and force-
fully encouraging in their therapeutic interactions with these clients, showing
them that they can do better if they try. Second, therapists would be wise to
keep vigorously showing these resistant clients that they, the therapists, do, in
fact, unconditionally accept them with all their psychological difficulties and
that they can indeed accept themselves in the same way. Third, therapists can
often be successful with such clients by consistently showing them that their
refusal to work on their problems will generally lead to bad consequences and
needless suffering. Fourth, therapists are advised to be flexible in experiment-
ing with a wide range of therapeutic techniques (including some unusual ones!)
in their persistent efforts to help their "difficult" clients. Above all, REBT ther-
apists should preferably be good representatives of their therapeutic system
and accept themselves and tolerate the discomfort of working with difficult
clients while sticking to the therapeutic task!
Termination preferably takes place in REBT when clients have made some
significant progress and when they have become proficient in REBT's self-
change techniques. Thus, terminating clients should preferably be able to (1)
acknowledge that they experience "unhealthy" negative emotions and act dys-
functionally when they do, (2) detect the irrational and dysfunctional beliefs
that underpin these experiences, (3) discriminate their Irrational Beliefs from
their rational alternatives, (4) challenge these dysfunctional Beliefs, and (S)
counteract them by using cognitive, emotive, and behavioral self-change meth-
ods. In addition, it is often helpful for therapists to arrange for their clients to
attend a series of follow-up sessions after termination to monitor their progress
and deal with any remaining obstacles to sustained improvement.
PREFERENTIAL REBT VERSUS
GENERAL REBT (CEBT)
We have already alluded to the differences between preferential REBT and
general REBT which, I [AE] have argued, is synonymous with broad-based

The Basic Practice of 'REBT 
69
cognitive-behavior therapy [CBT] (Ellis, 1979c, 1980b). Let us close this chap-
ter by noting these differences in greater detail. Preferential REBT
1. Has a distinct philosophic emphasis that is one of its central features and
that other forms of CBT often omit. Thus, it stresses that humans appraise
themselves, others, and the world in terms of (1) rational, preferential, flexi-
ble, and tolerant philosophies and in terms of (2) irrational, musturbatory,
rigid, intolerant, and absolutistic philosophies.
2. Has an existential-humanistic outlook that is intrinsic to it and that is
omitted by most other CBT approaches. Thus, it sees people "as holistic, goal-
directed individuals who have importance in the world just because they are
human and alive; it unconditionally accepts them with their limitations, and it
particularly focuses upon their experiences and values, including their self-
actualizing potentialities" (Ellis, 1980b, p. 327). It also shares the views of eth-
ical humanism by encouraging people to emphasize human interest (self and
social) over the interests of deities and material objects.
3. Favors striving for pervasive and long-lasting (philosophically based)
rather than symptomatic change (Ellis, 1996a).
4. Attempts to help humans eliminate all self-ratings and views self-esteem
as a self-defeating concept that encourages them to make conditional evalua-
tions of self. Instead, it teaches people unconditional self-acceptance (EHis,
1972a, 1976c, 1985c, 1994c, 1996a, 1996b;Hauck, 1991; Mills, 1993).
5. Considers psychological disturbance to reflect an attitude to taking life
"too" seriously and thus advocates the appropriate use of various humorous
therapeutic methods (Ellis, 1977b, 1977c, 1981,1987a).
6. Stresses the use of antimusturbatory rather than antiempirical Disput-
ing methods. Because it considers that inferential distortions often stem from
dogmatic "must's," "should's," and the like, preferential REBT favors going to
the philosophic core of emotional disturbance and Disputing the irrational
beliefs at this core rather than merely disputing antiempirical inferences, which
are more peripheral. Also, preferential REBT favors the use of forceful logi-
coempirical and pragmatic Disputing of Irrational Beliefs whenever possible
rather than the employment of functionally oriented, coping self-statements.
When feasible, preferential REBT teaches clients how to become their own
scientists instead of parroting therapist-inculcated Rational Beliefs.
7. Employs but only mildly encourages the use of palliative cognitive meth-
ods that serve to distract people from their disturbed philosophies (e.g., relax-
ation methods). Preferential REBT holds that such techniques may help clients
better in the short term but do not encourage them to identify challenge and
change in the long term the devout philosophies that underpin their psycho-
logical problems. Indeed, these palliative methods may make it harder for peo-
ple to engage in philosophic Disputing because they may be less likely to do
this when they are calm and relaxed than when they are motivated by their

70 
The Practice of REBT
emotional distress. For these reasons, preferential REBT also employs prob-
lem-solving and skill training methods, along with, but not instead of, teaching
people to work at understanding and changing their dysfunctional Beliefs.
8. Gives a more central explanatory role to the concept of discomfort anx-
iety in psychological disturbance than do other cognitive-behavioral therapies.
Discomfort anxiety is defined as "emotional hypertension that arises when peo-
ple feel (1) that their life or comfort is threatened, (2) that they must not feel
uncomfortable and have to feel at ease, and (3) that it is awful (rather than
merely inconvenient or disadvantageous) when they don't get what they sup-
posedly must" (Ellis, 1980a, p. 331). Although other cognitive-behavioral ther-
apies recognize specific instances of discomfort anxieties (e.g., "fear of fear"
[Mackay, 1984]), they tend not to regard discomfort disturbance to be as cen-
trally implicated in psychological problems as does preferential REBT.
9. Emphasizes, more than some other approaches to CBT, that humans fre-
quently make themselves disturbed about their original disturbances. Thus, in
preferential REBT therapists actively look for secondary and tertiary symp-
toms of disturbances and encourage clients to work on overcoming these
before addressing themselves to the primary disturbance.
10. Has clear-cut theories of disturbance and its treatment but is eclectic
or multimodal in its techniques. However, it favors some techniques (e.g.,
active Disputing) over others (e.g., cognitive distraction) and strives for pro-
found or elegant philosophic change where feasible. If nothing else works with
certain clients, it is flexible enough to sometimes use "irrational" or "antisci-
entific" methods (Ellis, 1994c, 1996a).
11. Discriminates between "healthy" and "unhealthy" negative emotions.
Preferential REBT considers such negative emotions as sadness, annoyance,
concern, regret, and disappointment as "healthy" affective responses to
thwarted desires, based on a nondevout philosophy of desire, and views them
as healthy when they do not needlessly interfere with people's goals and pur-
poses. However, it sees depression, anger, anxiety, guilt, shame/embarrassment,
self-pity, and feelings of inadequacy usually as "unhealthy" emotions based on
absolutistic demands about thwarted desires. Preferential REBT considers
these latter feelings as symptoms of disturbance because they very frequently
(but not always) sabotage people and keep them from constructively pursuing
their goals and purposes. Other CBT approaches do not make such fine dis-
criminations between "healthy" and "unhealthy" negative emotions.
12. Advocates therapists giving unconditional acceptance rather than giv-
ing warmth or approval to clients. Other cognitive-behavioral therapies tend
not to make this distinction. Preferential REBT holds that therapist warmth
and approval have their distinct dangers in that they may unwittingly encour-
age clients to strengthen their dire needs for love and approval. When REBT
therapists unconditionally accept their clients they also serve as good role
models, in that they also help clients to to unconditionally accept themselves.

The Basic Practice ofREBT 
71
13. Stresses the importance of the use of vigor and force in counteracting
irrational philosophies and behaviors (Dryden, 1984b; Ellis, 1979c, 1993g,
1994c, 1995a, 1996a). Preferential REBT is one of the few cognitive-behav-
ioral therapies that stresses that humans are, for the most part, biologically
predisposed to originate and perpetuate their disturbances and often experi-
ence great difficulty in changing the ideological roots of these problems.
Because it holds this view, it urges both therapists and clients to use consider-
able force and vigor in interrupting clients' irrational beliefs.
14. Is more selective than most other cognitive-behavioral therapies in
choosing behavioral change methods. Thus, it favors the use of penalization
in encouraging resistant clients to change. Often these clients will not change
to obtain positive reinforcements but may be encouraged to change to avoid
stiff penalties. Furthermore, preferential REBT has reservations concerning
the use of social reinforcement in therapy. It considers that humans are too
reinforceable and that they often do the right thing for the wrong reason.
Thus, they may change to please their socially reinforcing therapists, but in
doing so they have not been encouraged to think and act for their own sake.
Preferential REBT therapists aim to help many clients become more self-
reliant and self-directed and therefore may use social reinforcement techniques
sparingly. Finally, preferential REBT often favors the use of in vivo desensiti-
zation and flooding methods instead of the use of gradual desensitization tech-
niques; it argues that the former procedures best help clients to raise their level
of frustration tolerance (Ellis, 1962,1983b, 1985c, 1994c, 199Sa, 1996a).
Although REBT therapists prefer to use preferential REBT wherever feasi-
ble, they do not dogmatically insist that it be employed. When, on pragmatic
grounds, they employ general REBT, their therapeutic practice is frequently
indistinguishable from that of other cognitive-behavioral therapists.
In the remaining chapters we show how REBT is practiced in its various
therapeutic and educational modalities, but first, in the next chapter we pre-
sent a case study of REBT.

3
A Cose Illustration of
the Basic Practice of REBT:
The Case of Jane
REBT, as shown in this book, is used in a variety of settings and ways. Often,
clients only have individual sessions of psychotherapy, or they have a few indi-
vidual sessions and then mainly participate in a regular, once-a-week therapy
group. Some clients have individual and group sessions at the same time, and
some have several months or more of individual therapy and then switch to
group therapy, which they then largely continue with few or no subsequent
individual sessions.
To give an illustration of the basic clinical practice of REBT, we include in
this chapter a case illustration of a 27-year-old woman afflicted with severe social
and work anxiety. I (AE) saw this client, Jane, once a week for 3 months and men
mainly in group therapy on a once-a-week basis. She decided to switch to group
therapy because she felt that she was beginning to understand the basic principles
of REBT and to use them fairly consistently, but that she found individual ther-
apy with me "too safe" and wanted to risk speaking up about her problems in
the group, trying to relate to the other group members, and learning to practice
REBT by helping to talk them out of their irrational beliefs and behaviors. If
she had not volunteered to join one of my groups, I would have probably urged
her to do so anyway, because I frequently encourage my shy and socially anxious
clients to join a group, to help them learn to cope more successfully with social
situations, and to get them to undertake more risk-taking experiences.
When she joined one of my regular therapy groups, Jane continued to learn
and practice REBT along the same lines that she had begun during her first
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Albert Ellis, "Rational-Emotive Therapy," in IL. Kutash
and A. Wolf (Eds.), Psychotherapist* Casebook (pp. 277-287); San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1986.
Used by permission.
72

Jane: A Case Illustration 
73
few months of individual sessions, so that her group participation added to and
went beyond some of the new kinds of thinking, feeling, and behaving on
which she had already embarked. She was at first hesitant to say very much to
the other group members about their problems, although she freely spoke up
about her own. But when I helped her to look at this hesitance and to see how
she was defining ineffective group behavior as "awful" and "self-deprecating,"
and when I persisted in drawing her out to talk about other members' prob-
lems, she soon overcame her shyness and developed into one of the most active
group participants.
When I initially saw Jane she was (as all the members of her therapy group
later agreed and kept pointing out to her) unusually attractive. Hardly a day
passed when some man (or some lesbian) did not try to pick her up at her
office, on the subway, on the street, or in the stores where she shopped. In
spite of all this attention, she was extremely shy with men, especially the ones
she found most desirable, and reported that her mind went absolutely blank
when she was about to talk to one. She was so self-conscious that she could
hardly face storekeepers and often had her mother do her shopping. When
men persisted in trying to date her—which they often did—she would first
avoid them because of her shyness. Then she would desperately latch onto
one who was most persistent and who jirerwoukhiotrtake no for *n answer.
When he proved (as he always did) to be an unsuitable mate, she would stay
with him much longer than she wanted to, being deathly afraid to return to
the mating "rat race."
Jane, who had quite a good sense of humor in spite of her conversational
ineptness, referred to herself as a "basket case" in her vocational as well as her
social life. She had been trained as a high school teacher but could not bear
facing a classroom of kids and therefore had taken a Civil Service job as an
administrative assistant—a job she easily got by scoring high on an examina-
tion. She would have liked to get any number of better jobs for which she was
qualified, but she was terrified of job interviews and therefore never applied.
She hated herself for sticking at her present low-level position, but this self-
hatred only made her more convinced that she was incapable of adequate inter-
personal relations.
Before my seeing her, Jane had had 1 year of Rogerian therapy with a col-
lege counselor when she was 19. She felt that it had helped her feel a little
better but had not made inroads against her shyness. She had had 2 years of
psychoanalytically oriented therapy by the time she was 23 but felt that it
had only made her very dependent on her analyst and more than ever afraid
to face the world on her own. She was disillusioned with therapy and was
prepared to give up all hope of ever changing when her twin sister, who had
very similar problems and who had had a year of REBT, which resulted in
considerable improvement, virtually insisted that she come to the Institute
for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy and even volunteered to pay for her

74 
The Practice of REBT
first 2 months of treatment. Still reluctant to go into therapy again but not
assertive enough to resist her sister's entreaties, Jane agreed to give REBT a
chance.
As is typical in my practice of REBT, I used a number of cognitive, emo-
tive, and behavioral methods with Jane, the most important of which I shall
now describe.
COGNITIVE METHODS OF REBT
The main cognitive techniques of REBT that I used with Jane were the fallowing:
Teaching the ABCs of REBT
Because of her previous therapy, Jane held the common psychoanalytical belief
that people become disturbed because of the traumatic events of their child-
hood. I used the first few sessions to modify this notion and to show her that
we all strongly tend to bring ourselves—and especially our innate and unique
proclivities to desire and to demand—to our parents and teachers in early life
and they impart to us preferences and standards that we tend to adopt. There-
after, as Pogo has aptly stated, we have met the enemy and it is us! Conse-
quently, we take many of our preferences and standards from our early
caretakers (and from TV!), but we add absolutistic "musts" to them and make
those preferences into dire "needs" (Ellis, 1957,1962,1994c; Ellis & Becker,
1982; Ellis & Harper, 1975). Moreover, I showed Jane that no matter how and
where she originally acquired her dysfunctional "shoulds," "oughts," and
"musts," she still had them today, and she had better acknowledge their power
to upset her and work at understanding and changing them.
Although Jane at first resisted taking responsibility for her Irrational Beliefs
(IBs) because she found it more acceptable to blame her "dominating" mother
for "making" her shy, she soon changed her tune when I showed her that her
younger sister, who was even more dominated by her mother (because she was
the baby of the family), had always refused to give into this domination and
turned out to be unusually outgoing and asserdve—as, indeed, the mother her-
self was. Jane and her twin sister, in contrast, seemed to take after their shy and
unassertive father, who was divorced from their mother when they were 5 years
old and who thereafter had little to do with any of his three daughters. When,
after our third session, Jane decided that she really had largely created her own
IBs (for example, "I must never be disapproved by people I find significant")
and that these Beliefs (and not her dominating mother) had made her patho-
logically shy, she "bought" much of the REBT theory and started to look
actively for her self-defeating philosophies.

Jane: A Case Illustration 
75
Detecting Irrational Beliefs
In rational emotive behavioral therapy, D stands for disputing irrational beliefs
(IBs) (Phadke, 1982). But D can be subdivided into there main processes:
detecting IBs, discriminating them from rational healthy beliefs (RBs), and debat-
ing them. I first showed Jane how to detect her IBs and particularly how to
look for her absolutist^ "should's," "ought's," and "must's." She soon came up
with some basic dysfunctional Beliefs: (1) "I must speak well to people I find
attractive," (2) "I must be interesting and clever," (3) "I must speak easily and
spontaneously without too much effort," (4) "When I don't speak well and
impress people as I should, I'm a stupid, inadequate person!"
These IBs, Jane was able to see, were the main and most direct contributors
to, or "causes" of, her gut feelings of anxiety. But as is commonly the case and
as REBT always investigates, she also had some IBs about her anxiety. When-
ever she experienced (or thought she might experience) anxiety, she almost
immediately thought, first, "I must not be anxious! It's terrible if I am!" and then
"I especially must not show others how anxious I am. If I do, they will surely
reject me—and that would be awful!" These IBs about her nervousness led Jane
to take her primary symptom (anxiety) and turn it into a deadly secondary symp-
tom (anxiety about anxiety); and once she developed this secondary anxiety, she
was so upset by it that her original nervousness escalated. She then went on to
a tertiary feeling of panic and hopelessness, motivated by her tertiary IB: "Now
that I'm so panicked and cant get myself out of feeling this way, I'll never be able
to overcome my anxiety. I cant stand this intense panic—and I cant change!"
Discriminating Irrational Beliefs from
Rational Beliefs
I showed Jane that she had not only IBs (musts) but a number of RBs (prefer-
ences) and that the latter were legitimate and self-helping. For example, on
the secondary and tertiary level, some of her RBs were "I don't like being anx-
ious and showing it to others, but I can accept these feelings and work at get-
ting rid of them" and "If people do reject me for showing them how anxious
I am, that will be most unfortunate, but I can stand it." With the help of
REBT, Jane was able to see that these rational Beliefs (preferences) were quite
different from her irrational beliefs (unrealistic demands) and that she had the
option of choosing to hold the former rather than the latter.
Debating Irrational Beliefs
I asked, and taught Jane how to ask herself, several logical and empirical ques-
tions to debate and Dispute (at point D) her secondary and tertiary IBs. For

7*5 
The Practice of 'REBT
example: (1) "Even though my panic (and panic about my panic) is so intense
and handicapping, where is the evidence that I can't stand it and that I can't
overcome it?" (2) "Granted that my anxiety will turn some people off, will
everyone boycott me for displaying it? And if some people do despise me for
showing panic, will that really be terrible, and do I truly need their approval?"
As she Disputed these secondary and tertiary IBs that led to her anxiety about
her anxiety, Jane also went back, under my guidance, to her primary IBs and
actively and persistently began to debate them in this vein: (1) " Why must I speak
well to people I find attractive?" (2) "Where is it written that I have to be inter-
esting and clever?" (3) "Do I really have to speak easily and spontaneously, with-
out too much effort?" (4) "When I don't speak weJl and impress people, how
does that make a a stupid, inadequate person?" (5) "What kind of results will I get
if I continue to strongly believe that I absolutely have to impress others or else am
a thorough loser?" She answered these Disputes as follows: (1) "There is no rea-
son I must speak well to people I find attractive, but it would be desirable if I do
so, so I shall make an effort—but not kill myself—to do so." (2) "It is written mfy
in my bead that I have to be interesting and clever, but it would be nice if I were!"
(3) "I can speak uneasily and unspontaneously and still get by with most people
with whom I converse." (4) "When I speak poorly and fail to impress people,
that only makes me a person who spoke unimpressively this time—not a totally
stupid or inadequate person." (5) "If I continue to believe strongly that I absolutely
have to impress others, I will make myself very panicked and shy."
As she did this Disputing and questioned her own irrational Beliefs, Jane began
to feel much better and was more willing to speak up with people she favored.
Coping Self-Statements
I used another of REBTfc favorite methods with Jane: having her figure out, write
down, and repeat to herself several times a day helpful coping statements (ratio-
nal beliefs) that she would eventually internalize (Ellis, 1962,1973; Ellis & Becker,
1982; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984; Meichenbaum, 1992). Some of those that she
found most helpful were the following: "I can speak up to others, even when I feel
uncomfortable doing so." "I would like to speak well, but I never have to." "No
one dies of social anxiety!" "When people I favor reject me, it often reveals more
about diem and their tastes than about me." "Even when I act stupidly and impress
people badly, I can still learn a lot and enjoy myself with them."
Referenting
An REBT technique adopted from general semantics is referenting (Danysh,
1974; Korzybski, 1933). Using this method widi Jane, I helped her to write down
and regularly review the advantages of making herself uncomfortable and over-
coming her low frustration tolerance when she forced herself to act unsuitably.

Jane; A Case Illustration 
77
Normally she referented to herself only the disadvantages (e.g., her feelings of
awkwardness) when she spoke up with desirable people. She now listed several
benefits of doing so, especially these: (1) she would get practice in speaking and
thereby become more fluent, (2) she would learn what it was best to say—and not
to say—to others, (3) she would meet a larger sample of people from whom to
choose friends or lovers, (4) she would see that many people were as shy and as
conversationally backward as she was, (5) she could accept the challenge of doing
badly and of then not putting herself down, (6) she would find her life more inter-
esting, (7) her anxiety would be more intense but less prolonged. She also listed
several of the disadvantages of her speaking up to people in spite of her discom-
fort in doing so. As she continued to do this kind of referenting, Jane found that
she was able to carry out her homework assignments of encountering others with
much more ease than she had ever had in doing similar things before.
Teaching REST to Others
1 used to warn my clients, when I practiced psychoanalysis, not to analyze their
friends and relatives because they almost always did so badly and thereby
harmed themselves and their clients. However, I now do the opposite and
strongly encourage many clients to teach REBT to their associates and to try
to talk these others out of their dysfunctional Beliefs, for as Bard (1980) has
experimentally shown, teaching REBT to others frequently helps the teach-
ers learn its Disputing and other methods and to use them themselves. Jane
particularly used REBT with her mother, her younger sister, and her close
women friends, and she reported that actively working with them to discover
and surrender some of their Irrational Beliefs significantly helped her to
observe and effectively debate several of her own.
Psychoeducational Methods
REBT has always promoted the use of books and audiotapes in teaching its
principles to clients and members of the public. For example, REBT encour-
ages clients to record their own therapy sessions and to listen to them several
times to remember better and to zero in more effectively on the points made
by both the therapist and the client during a session. Jane found recordings of
her own sessions to be extremely valuable teaching tools and regularly listened
to each one a few times between sessions.
Problem Solving
REBT sees people as having two kinds of problems: (1) practical problems,
such as Jane's not having an interesting job or her winding up with unsuit-
able male partners, and (2) emotional problems, or problems about having

IS 
The Practice of REST
practical problems. With Jane, as we usually do in REBT, I started with her
emotional problems and showed her how to minimize or eliminate them.
Then I worked with Jane on her practical problems. For example, I went
over her job-seeking problems with her, showed her how she could write a
good resume, and discussed the difficulties of how to get interviews, how to
handle these interviews, and how to turn down some jobs and wait for the
better one she was actually seeking. We also discussed the practical issues of
how she could look for a suitable male partner and how she could eliminate
the poor prospects and do better with the good ones.
Use of Humor
According to REBT theory, the irrational Beliefs (IBs) that people adopt and
create with which to upset themselves emotionally usually arise from their giv-
ing due meaning or consideration to their desires and preferences (which is
rational) and then going far beyond this to give exaggerated significance to
these wishes. They take things much too seriously. As one of its main tech-
niques to combat this kind of exaggerated, or "awfulizing," thinking, REBT
employs a good deal of humor. It reduces some clients' ideas to absurdity,
shows them how contradictory and ridiculous these views are, and gets them
to sing (and preferably internalize) some rational, humorous songs that they
can use to overcome their overserious cognitions (Ellis, 1977b, 1977c, 1987).
Since Jane had a good sense of humor, I used many humorous sallies with
her, and some of them proved quite effective. She particularly found benefit
in singing to herself some of my humorous songs when she had fits of anxiety
or depression. Two that she found especially useful were these:
Perfect Rationality
(to the tune FunicuK, Funicula by Luigi Denza)
Some think the world must have a right direction
And so do I! And so do I!
Some think that with the slightest imperfection
They can't get by—and so do I!
For I, I have to prove I'm superhuman,
And better far than people are!
To show I have miraculous acumen—
And always rate among the Great!
Perfect, perfect rationality
Is, of course, the only thing for me!
How can I ever think of being
Iflmust live fallibly?
Rationality must be a perfect thing for me!

Jane; A Case Illustration 
79
I'm Depressed, Depressed!
(to the tune The Band Played On by Charles B. Ward)
When anything slightly goes wrong with my life,
I'm depressed, depressed!
Whenever I'm stricken with chickenshit strife,
I feel most distressed!
When life isn't fated to be consecrated
I can't tolerate it at all!
When anything slightly goes wrong with my life,
I just bawl, bawl, bawl!*
EMOTIVE METHODS OF REBT
As I have emphasized for many years (and as some writers on psychotherapy have
nonetheless chosen to ignore), REBT is almost always a multimoda) school of
psychotherapy and rarely treats a client without using several emotive and behav-
ioral, as well as cognitive, methods (Bard, 1980; Bernard, 1991; Dryden, 1994a,
1994b, 1995b, 1995c; Ellis, 1962,1969,1973,1996a; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis
& Harper, 1975; Grieger & Boyd, 1980; Walen, DiGiuseppe, & Dryden, 1992;
Wessler & Wessler, 1980; Yankura & Dryden, 1990,1994). Some of the main
emotive-evocative methods that I used with Jane will now be discussed.
Rational-Emotive Imagery
Using rational-emotive imagery (Ellis, 1993d; Maultsby, 1971), I showed Jane
how to imagine some of the worst things she could think of, such as meeting a
man she found very attractive, having him speak to her, and then being struck
dumb and unable to talk intelligibly. Imagining this, she felt exceptionally
depressed and self-hating. She then worked on making herself only feel health-
ily disappointed and sorry rather than unhealthily depressed and self-downing.
She practiced this kind of rational-emotive imagery several times each day for
30 or more days in a row until the image of this kind of social failure (or actual
in vivo failure) quickly and automatically brought on the healthy feelings of dis-
appointment and regret—not unhealthy feelings of anxiety and inadequacy.
Shame-Attacking Exercises
Jane derived a good deal of benefit from the shame-attacking exercises I cre-
ated in the 1960s that have since been used by REBT and several other forms
of therapy (Ellis, 1969; Ellis & Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis &
*Lyrics by Albert Ellis. Copyright @ 1977 by the Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy.

80 
The Practice ofREBT
Grieger, 1977). She first picked several silly things—such as yelling aloud the
stops in the New York subway and singing at the top of her voice on the
street—and forced herself to do them, while working to make herself feel
unashamed. When she could succeed at this, she then spoke to a number of
strange (and attractive) men on buses, in elevators, in the supermarket, and in
other public places; tried to get into conversations with them; and asked
whether they would like to call her for lunch or a date. She was terrified to do
this at first, but after she had it done about 20 times, she lost almost all her
anxiety and shame and was able to meet several suitable men in this manner
and to begin dating one steadily.
Role Playing
I role-played several job-interview and social-encounter situations with Jane.
I discussed with her what she was telling herself to make herself anxious and
shy in these situations and what she could tell herself instead, and I brought
out same negative feelings of which she was not fully aware and helped her
change them. I also critiqued her skills in these situations and got her to
reconsider and revamp them. Even better, when the members of one of my
therapy groups, which she attended for 6 months, did role-playing routines
with her, they were able to get her to bring out more apprehensive feelings,
to show her what she was telling herself to create these feelings, and to give
her some excellent suggestions on how to deal with her feelings and how to
improve her social skills. I often find it valuable for shy and inhibited people
like Jane to join one of my REBT therapy groups for a while because they
have more social learning opportunities in the group than they usually have
in one-to-one therapy. In group she also learned to talk other members out
of their Irrational Beliefs, which helped her to dispute her own dysfunctional
beliefs (Ellis, 1982b, 1992c).
Group Socializing
In one of my groups, Jane also learned to relate better to several of the other
members, to call on diem for help in between therapy sessions, and to try social-
izing activities with some of them that she might not have done by herself.
Forceful Self-Statements
REBT theorizes that people disturb themselves not only by ideas, thoughts,
attitudes, and philosophies but also by holding onto their musturbatory beliefs
strongly, forcefully, and vehemently. It therefore encourages clients like Jane
to reindoctrinate themselves forcefully and vividly with dramatic impact (Dry-

Jant: A Case Illustration 
81
den, 1984c; Ellis, 1979c, 1994c, 199Sa, 1996a). Jane was shown how to devise
rational self-statements and to powerfully repeat them to herself (and to oth-
ers) many times until she solidly began to feel them and to be convinced of
their truth. Thus, she often vigorously told herself, "It's a pain in the ass to get
rejected socially or in a job interview, but it's not awfitR" "I want very much to
find a suitable mate, but I don't have to\" "If people see how anxious I am, they
will hardly run away screaming. And if they do, tough shit!" "1 can talk to
attractive men, no matter how uncomfortable I feel!"
Forceful Self-Dialogue
Another REBT emotive technique Jane used was to have a forceful dialogue
with herself and record it (Ellis & Becker, 1982). She would start with an Irra-
tional Belief—such as that she must speak easily and spontaneously, without
effort—and then rationally but with real vigor argue against this belief so that
her rational voice finally won out over her dysfunctional one and her feelings
changed appropriately. She would listen to these tapes herself or let friends or
therapy group members listen to them and check with them to see whether
her rational arguments were good and to see how powerfully she convinced
herself of them.
Sometimes, doing role reversal, I or a member of her group would pretend
to strongly hold Jane's self-defeating ideas. She would role-play her sensible
Beliefs and try vigorously to argue us out of our dysfunctional thinking.
Unconditional Self-Acceptance
I always unconditionally accepted Jane, as this is an integral part of REBT,
no matter how badly she behaved inside and outside therapy. Even when she
came late to sessions or got behind in paying her bill to the Institute, I firmly
showed her that her behavior was bad but that I never considered her a bad
person. Going further, I taught her how to fully accept herself under all con-
ditions and to rate only her acts and traits and never her totality, her being,
or herself (Ellis, 1962,1972b, 1973, 1976d, 1994c, 1996a, 1996b; Ellis &
Becker, 1982; Ellis & Harper, 1975; Hauck, 1991; Miller, 1983; Mills, 1993).
Of all the things she learned in REBT, unconditional self-acceptance, she
thought, was the most useful.
BEHAVIORAL METHODS OF REBT
As with virtually all my clients, I used several behavioral methods of REBT
with Jane, particularly the following.

82 
The Practice of REBT
Activity Homework
From the start of her therapy, Jane agreed to take activity homework assign-
ments: to talk to men she found attractive, to go on job interviews, to make
some public talks, and to tell her lovers she no longer wanted to see them once
she was fairly sure they were not for her (Ellis, 1962,1979d, 1994c, 1995a,
1996a). She did many of these assignments even though she felt uncomfort-
able doing them—and diereby learned the REBT maxim, "There's little gain
without pain." Whenever she did them, she soon got over her discomfort and
even started enjoying some of them, such as talking to and flirting with suit-
able males. By doing these assignments she also clearly observed how anxious
and ashamed she was at first, and she was able to zero in on the dysfunctional
Beliefs behind her anxiety.
Reinforcements and Penalties
Jane was shown how to reinforce herself—usually with reading or going to
a concert—after she did her homework and to refrain from this kind of rein-
forcement if she did not do it. She found reinforcements especially useful
for helping her do her REBT homework, because she would sometimes do
it for several days in a row and then slack off and forget about it if she had
no reinforcer.
REBT uses penalties as well as reinforcers for clients who do not do their
homework (Ellis & Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis & Grieger,
1977; Ellis & Velten, 1992; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979). When Jane did not carry
out her assignments, she chose to burn a $20 bill, and that quickly worked to
help her do them.
Skill Training
Jane was given, in individual sessions, in group therapy, and in several work-
shops for the public that are regularly held at the New York Institute for
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, instruction in assertion training, in social
encountering, in writing a resume, and in communication skills. Skill training
helped her in various areas—such as communicating better with her mother—
that she never directly brought up as serious psychological problems. And
partly because of it, she said, toward the close of her sessions, "I am very happy
that I started REBT for my social anxiety and other emotional difficulties. But
the great bonus of these sessions has been my being able to actualize and bet-
ter enjoy myself in several ways that I never even realized therapy could ben-
efit me. But I am delighted to say that it really has!"

Jane: A Case Illustration 
83
CONCLUSION
I saw Jane for 9 months, first once a week for individual sessions of REBT and
then mainly in group therapy. By the time therapy ended, she was able to talk
easily to the men she found attractive; she was preparing to take a teaching job,
which she had always previously avoided; she had no trouble confronting sales-
people when she shopped; she was able to change her unsuitable male part-
ners after she had gone with them for only a few weeks or months; and she was
in a public speaking group, Toastmasters, and did so well there that she was
made an assistant.
I no longer see Jane for therapy, but she frequently attends my Friday night
workshops on problems of daily living and often participates actively in them,
asking questions of and giving rational suggestions to the volunteers with
whom I have public demonstration session of REBT. She also stays for the cof-
fee sessions we arrange for the workshop participants and easily socializes with
people at these sessions. She is most grateful for her REBT experience and
refers a number of her friends and associates to me and our other therapists at
the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy.
Jane's case is not entirely typical of clients suffering from social anxiety
because she worked harder at REBT than many other clients do, and her
improvement was therefore faster and more profound than it sometimes is in
similar cases of overwhelming anxiety. But her progress does show that some of
the most severely anxious people can help themselves considerably in a rela-
tively short time if they accept and persistently use some of the main REBT
formulations and techniques.

4
Individual Therapy
CONTEXTUAL CONSIDERATIONS
Prochaska and Norcross (1983) carried out a survey of the practices of 410
psychologists who belonged to Division 29 (Psychotherapy) of the Ameri-
can Psychological Association and reported on a similar survey (Norcross &
Prochaska, 1982) on a representative sample of psychologists who were
members of APA Division 12 (Clinical Psychology). The findings of these
two surveys indicated that members of both divisions spent most of their
therapy time practicing individual therapy (65.3%, Division 29 members;
63.5%, Division 12 members). Although there are no available data on the
distribution of working time of therapists of different orientations, there is
little reason to suggest that a different pattern would be found among REBT
therapists. If this is so, the absence of data also makes it hard to explain the
reasons for this pattern.
Dryden (1984d) has argued that there are various sources of influence that
impinge upon the therapist and client as they seek to determine in which ther-
apeutic modality to work. First, therapists are influenced by the settings in
which they work. Such settings may impose practical limitations on the prac-
tice of therapy in modalities other than, for example, individual therapy and/or
have different norms of practice that favor the practice of one particular modal-
ity over others. Therapists who work in private practice usually find that the
exigencies of this mode of work means that individual therapy constitutes the
major part of their workload. Second, therapists are influenced by the ways in
which they account for their clients' disturbances. Because the REBT model
of disturbance emphasizes the role played by the individual's Belief system in
his or her psychological problems, this may influence its practitioners to work
more frequently in the modality of individual therapy than in other modali-
Parts of this chapter were adapted from W. Dryden, "Therapeutic Arenas," in Dryden (1984a).
Used by permission.
84

Individual Therapy 
^
ties. Third, clients' preferences are very salient here, and these often exert a
considerable influence on the choice of therapeutic modality.
In this regard, I (AE) have argued: "I am usually able to go along with the
basic desire of any clients who want individual, marital, family or group psy-
chotherapy. It is only in relatively few cases that I talk them into taking a form
of therapy they are at first loathe to try" (Dryden, 1984a, p. 15). Information is
needed concerning the impact of clients' pretherapy modality preferences on
the working practice of REBT therapists. Given that we do not have any data
concerning (1) how they distribute their working time among the various ther-
apeutic modalities, (2) what factors determine such decisions, and (3) who is
largely responsible for making these decisions, much of our thinking on the
issue of when (and when not) to work in individual therapy is determined by
our clinical experience.
Indications for Individual Therapy
1. Individual REBT, by its nature, provides clients with a situation of com-
plete confidentiality. It is indicated, therefore, when it is important for clients
to be able to disclose themselves in privacy without fear that others may use
such information to their detriment. Some clients are particularly anxious con-
cerning how others (e.g., in a group therapy context) would react to their dis-
closures, and such anxiety precludes their productive participation in that
modality. Similarly, clients who otherwise would not disclose "secret" material
are best suited to individual REBT. As in other situations, transfer to other
modalities may be indicated later when such clients are more able and/or will-
ing to disclose themselves to others.
2. Individual therapy, by its dyadic nature, provides an opportunity for a
closer relationship to develop between therapist and client than may exist when
other people (e.g., a co-therapist and other clients) are present. This factor
may be particularly important for some clients who have not developed close
relationships with significant people in their lives and for whom group ther-
apy, for example, may prove initially too threatening.
3. In individual therapy, REBT can be conducted to best match the client's
pace of learning. Thus, it is particularly suited for clients who, due to their
present state of mind or speed of learning, require their therapist's full and
undivided attention. This is especially important for clients who are quite con-
fused and who would only be distracted by the complexity of interactions that
can take place in other therapeutic modalities.
4. Individual REBT is particularly indicated when clients' major problems
involve their relationship with themselves rather than their relationships with
other people.
5. Individual therapy may be indicated for clients who wish to differentiate
themselves from others (e.g., those who have decided to leave a relationship

86 
The Practice of REBT
and wish to deal with individual problems that this may involve). Here, how-
ever, some conjoint sessions with the partner may also be helpful, particularly
in matters of conciliation.
6. In chapter 2 we argued that it can be helpful for therapists to vary their
therapeutic style with clients in order to minimize the risk of perpetuating the
client's problems by providing an inappropriate interactive style. Individual
REBT provides therapists with an opportunity to vary their interactive styles
with clients free from the concern that such variation may adversely affect
other clients present, as may occur in other therapeutic modalities.
7. Individual therapy is particularly indicated for clients who have profound
difficulties sharing therapeutic time with other clients.
8. Individual therapy may also be indicated for negative reasons. Thus,
clients may be seen in individual therapy who may not benefit from working
in other therapeutic modalities. Clients who may monopolize a therapy group,
who may be too withdrawn within it to benefit from the experience, or who
are thought too vulnerable to benefit from family therapy are often seen in
individual REBT.
Contraindications for Individual Therapy
1. Individual therapy is contraindicated for clients who are likely to become
overly dependent on the therapist, particularly when such dependency becomes
so intense as to lead to client deterioration. Such clients may be more appro-
priately helped in group therapy, where such intense dependency is less likely
to develop due to the fact that the therapist relates to other people.
2. Individual REBT, which does not in general advocate close interpersonal
relationships between therapists and clients, can still be a close interpersonal
encounter for the client and as such is less likely to be indicated for clients who
may find such degree of intimacy or the prospect of such intimacy unduly
threatening.
3. Individual therapy may be contraindicated for clients who find this
modality too comfortable. Based on the idea that personal change is often best
facilitated in situations where there is an optimal level of arousal, individual
therapy may not provide enough challenge for such clients. Ravid (1969) found
that it may be unproductive to offer individual therapy to clients who have had
much previous individual therapy but still require further therapeutic help.
4. Individual therapy may not be appropriate for clients for whom other
modalities are deemed to be more therapeutic. For example, clients who are
particularly shy, rearing, and afraid to take risks are more likely to benefit from
group dierapy (if they can be induced to join) than from the less risky situation
of individual therapy. Second, partners who can productively use the conjoint
situation of couple therapy often benefit more from this modality than from
working in individual REBT. This is particularly true when they have largely

Individual Therapy 
87
overcome their disturbed feelings about their unproductive relationship and are
dealing with issues devoted to enhancement of relationship satisfaction, a situ-
ation that particularly warrants their joint participation (see chapter 5).
Other Issues
Once therapists and clients have decided to work in a particular modality, it is
important to stress that this decision is not irrevocable. Clients may move from
modality to modality, and thus individual therapy, in this context, can be best
viewed as part of a comprehensive treatment strategy. This can occur for both
positive and negative reasons. Productive movement to and from individual
therapy occurs when clients have made therapeutic gain in one modality but
may benefit more from being transferred to a different one. Negative move-
ment in and out of individual therapy occurs when the clients do not improve
in a given therapeutic modality.
Although we have provided some indications and contraindications for the
practice of individual therapy, we conclude by stressing that the state of die art
concerning this issue is far from being well developed, and we would advise
REBT therapists thus: Work with clients in the modality that seems to be most
productive for them but regard such decisions as tentative and to a large degree
experimental. Perhaps the best way of determining whether a client will ben-
efit or not from individual therapy is in fact to work with him or her in that
modality and to monitor his or her response to it.
THE PROCESS OF INDIVIDUAL REBT
In this section we will outline the initial, middle, and end phases of individual
REBT.
The Initial Phase
When a client enters individual REBT, it is likely that that person will know
little or nothing about the nature of this therapeutic approach. Thus, the basic
task of the individual therapist is to induct the client into REBT, helping him
or her to understand the nature of the approach and what it involves concern-
ing die participation of client and therapist. As noted in chapter 2, some REBT
therapists attempt to induct clients into REBT by involving diem in predier-
apy induction activities. Even when these methods are employed, it is impor-
tant during die initial phase of REBT to check out the client's understanding
of REBT and to correct any misconceptions diat he or she may still have. Of
course, when such pretherapy induction activities are not employed, this
becomes a major task of die therapist in die initial phase of individual REBT.
(continued on page 96)

FIGURE 4.1 Biographical information form.
Consultation Center.
Albert Ellis Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
45 East 65th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021
Biographical Information Form
Instructions To assist us in helping you, please fill out this form as frankly as you can. You wilt save much time and effort by giving us full
information. You can be sure that, like everything you say at the Institute, die facts on this form will be held in the strictest confidence and
that no outsider will be permitted to see your case record without your written permission. PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT YOUR ANSWERS.
2. Address:
Date
mo. 
day 
yr
Name
1. Date of birth:
mo. 
day 
yr
Age
Sex:M 
F
city 
state 
zip
Business phone:
street
3. Home phone:
4. Permanent address (if different from above)
(last 
(first) 
(middle)

(continued)
If deceased, how old were you when she died
[f deceased, how old were you when he died?
9. Mother's age
10. Father's age:
very 
average 
atheist
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 more than 20
8. How religious are you? (circle number on scale that best approximates your degree of religiosity):
7. Years of formal education completed (circle number of years):
Number of years married to present spouse 
Ages of male children
(6) widowed and not remarried
Ages of female children
(5) divorced and not remarried
(2) married (living together) now for first time
Has this party been here? 
Yes 
No
6. Present marital status:
(9) other (explain)
(1) never married
(4) separated
.(3) married (living together) now for second (or more) time
5. Who referred you to die Institute? (check one)
(2) school or teacher 
(3) psychologist or psychiatrist
(7) friend
(6) family doctor
(5) hospital or clinic
(1) self
(8) relative
(4) social agency

Figure 4.1 (continued)
11. If your mother and father separated, how old were you at the time?
12. If your mother and father divorced, how old were you at the time?
20. Are you undergoing treatment anywhere else now? 
Ifes 
No
21. Number of times during past year you have taken antidepressants
22. Type of psychotherapy you have mainly had (briefly describe method of treatment—ex., dream analysis, free association, drugs,
hypnosis, etc.)
Number of times father divorced
Number of living sisters
Ages of living sisters
children.
in a family of
Yes 
No
13. Total number of times mother divorced
14. Number of living bromers
15. Ages of living brothers
16. I was child number
17. Were you adopted?
18. What kind of treatment have you previously had for emotional problems?
hours of individual therapy, spread over 
years, ending 
pears ago.
Months of psychiatric hospitalization
19. Hours of group therapy

23. Briefly list (PRINT) your present main complaints, symptoms, and problems:
24. Briefly list any additional past complaints, symptoms, and problems:
25. Under what conditions are your problems worse?
26. Under what conditions are they improved?
(continued)

Figure 4.1 (continued)
27. List the things you like to do most, the kinds of things and persons that give you pleasure:
28. List your main assets and good points:
29. List your main bad points:
30. List your main social difficulties:

31. List your main love and sex difficulties:
32. List your main school or work difficulties:
33. List your main life goals:
34. List die things about yourself you would most like to change:
35. List your chief physical ailments, diseases, complaints, or handicaps:
(continued)

Figure 4.1 (continued)
36. What occupation^) have you mainly been trained for?
42. Briefly describe the type of person your father (or stepfather or father substitute) was when you were a child and how you got along
with him:
Present occupation
37. Spouse's occupation
38. Mother's occupation
39. Mother's religion
40. If your mother and father did not raise you when you were young, who did?
41. Briefly describe the type of person your mother (or stepmother or person who substituted for your mother) was when you were a child
Fathers religion
Father's occupation.
Full time
Full time
Part time
Pan time
and how you got along with her:

43. If diere were unusually disturbing features in your relationship to any of your brothers, briefly describe:
44. If there were unusually disturbing features in your relationship to any of your sisters, briefly describe:
45. Number of close male relatives who have been seriously emotionally disturbed:
psychiatric treatment, or have attempted suicide:
Number of close relatives who have been seriously emotionally disturbed:
Number that have been hospitalized for
Number that have been hospitalized for psychiatric treatment, or have attempted suicide:
46. Additional information that you think might be helpful

96 
The Practice of REBT
Some REBT therapists like to have their clients fill in a form that provides
basic biographical information as well as information concerning the client's
presenting problems. In Figure 4.1 the biographical information form routinely
employed by therapists at the Institute for REBT in New York is presented.
In addition, therapists at the institute routinely ask clients to fill out the
personality data form presented in chapter 2 (see Figure 2.1). This form pro-
vides the therapist widi information concerning the Irrational Beliefs that are
likely to underpin the client's problems. However, the use of this form is
designed to supplement rather than to replace a thorough assessment of the
client's problems.
Most REBT therapists like to structure the therapeutic process at the out-
set in order to emphasize that therapy will be problem-focused. For example,
such questions as, "What are you bothered most about?" and "What is your
major problem at this time?" are employed to encourage clients to adopt a
problem-solving focus. Indeed, I (AE) routinely read aloud the information
provided by the client on item 23 of the biographical information form and
ask him or her to start talking about what is most bothersome among this list
of problems.
Before proceeding to the assessment stage of therapy the REBT therapist
often seeks an agreement widi the client concerning the first problem to tackle.
When this has been achieved, the therapist proceeds to help the client to
understand his or her problems according to the ABC framework outlined in
chapter 1. At this point the therapist both seeks to understand the client's prob-
lems according to the ABC framework and to teach the client the ABC model
of emotional disturbance. During this process the therapist is also concerned to
correct any misconceptions that the client may have about the therapeutic
enterprise. Thus, the therapist endeavors to show the client that REBT is a
form of therapy that is problem-focused and educational in nature and that
the therapist will often adopt an active and directive approach. The therapist
also encourages the client to see that his or her initial task is to learn to focus
on the cognitive determinants of his or her problems.
Other tasks that REBT therapists strive to accomplish in the initial phase
of individual REBT include the following: (1) helping the client to understand
that in REBT the therapist is basically concerned with helping clients to solve
their emotional and behavioral problems before encouraging them to solve their
career and environmental problems (Grieger & Boyd, 1980); (2) putting the
client at ease and helping the client to bring some order to and to achieve some
insight into his or her problems by use of questions and structuring statements;
and (3) seeking an understanding about what effects the client's symptoms have
on his or her own functioning and relationships. This last task is carried out
to determine whether or not the involvement of significant others at later
phases of therapy is warranted. If it is, transfer to a more appropriate thera-
peutic modality may be kept in mind for later discussion.

Individual Therapy 
W
Assessment We have already covered the issue of assessment in chapter 2.
However, further discussion on this topic is relevant to the practice of indi-
vidual REST. We have already commented that REBT therapists frequently
begin to discuss the client's most pressing problems. An alternative approach
would be to work on the client's problem that is easiest to solve. This may be
done to enhance the credibility of the therapist and to inspire hope. Whether
the therapist adopts the "most pressing problem" approach or the "easiest to
solve" approach will depend on which tactic best involves the client in the
process of therapy.
During the assessment process the therapist is careful to help the client to
understand die connections between A, B, and C and is particularly concerned to
help the client understand the role of B variables. Furthermore, the therapist
pays particular attention to the possible existence of "problems about problems"
(as discussed in chapter 1). If such second-order problems are identified, it is
important for the therapist to help the client to understand why such problems
often are assessed and targeted for change before the client's primary problems.
Thus, a client is shown that if she is, for example, guilty about her anger, she will
be less successful at working on and overcoming her anger problem while she is
feeling guilty about it. However, there are occasions when clients will not accept
this rationale despite the therapist's explanations. A guiding rule under these con-
ditions is for the therapist to work at a level that the client will accept.
Therapeutic Intervention After the therapist has successfully put die client's
problem into the ABC framework and the client understands and accepts this
formulation, the therapist can then move to the Disputing stage of therapy and
use some of the techniques that have already been discussed in chapter 2. The
initial goal of Disputing is to help the client to understand the poor results of
his or her irrational musturbatory evaluation and die better results of its ration-
al alternative. When this is done, the client is in a position to consider a home-
work assignment that is chosen to strengthen the client's rational Beliefs and
to weaken his or her irrational ones. As discussed in chapter 2, homework
assignments may be predominantly cognitive, emotive, and/or behavioral in
nature, and the selection of a relevant homework assignment will be dictated
by the nature of the client's problems and his or her present learning capabil-
ity. As a supplement to a homework assignment (or as a separate assignment)
most REBT therapists often suggest that clients read some REBT literature
that is designed to help them gain greater insight into the role of dysfunctional
musturbatory evaluations in their problems and the importance of replacing
these Irrational Beliefs with their more functional alternatives. In this regard
many therapists at the Institute for REBT in New York give their clients a
package of leaflets and suggest that they read the opening chapters in A Guide
to Rational Living (Ellis & Harper, 1997). However, this book may be too com-
plex for some clients, who might derive more benefit from reading A Rational

98 
The Practice of REBT
Counseling Primer (Young, 1974a), A Guide to Personal Happiness (Ellis & Becker,
1982), How to Stubbornly Refuse to Make Yourself Miserable About Any thing—Yes,
Anything (Ellis, 1988), or one of Paul Hauck's texts (e.g., Hold Your Head Up
High [Hauck, 1991]).
Toward the end of the initial phase of REBT the therapist should prefer-
ably have an understanding of die client's major emotional and behavioral
problems and have begun to start to prioritize these, with the client's cooper-
ation, so as to give some structure to the therapeutic practice of individual
REBT. Ideally, at this stage both therapist and client will know and agree to
the order in which the client's problems are to be tackled.
In chapter 2 we outlined some of the major sources that contribute to resis-
tance to therapeutic progress. In addition to this list, a number of additional
"roadblocks" to therapeutic progress can often occur. Grieger and Boyd (1980)
have noted a common therapist error at the initial stage of individual REBT
concerning failure to bring adequate conceptual clarity to the client's prob-
lems. This may occur when the therapist fails to spend sufficient time on each
of the client^ problems and moves from problem to problem in quick succes-
sion. A second roadblock can occur when the therapist either focuses too much
on the historical determinants of the client's problems or strives to gain a total
picture of the client's past, present, and future before beginning an interven-
tion program. In addition, the therapist may make the error of giving too much
focus to the therapeutic relationship in the initial stages of therapy. Although
we recognize that developing a cooperative relationship between therapist and
client is important in REBT, we argue that this can be best done through a
businesslike focus on the client's problems, the execution of a correct assess-
ment of these problems, and an early start on helping the client to overcome
these problems. We argue that focusing on developing the relationship per se
without these task activities is less efficient and effective.
We have already stated that REBT is an educational therapy, and as such it
is important for the therapist to help the client to learn at the client's own pace.
Failure to do this provides another reason why roadblocks may occur at the
initial phase of REBT. Here the therapist may become overly impatient and
demand the client's cooperation at a stage when the therapist would do better
to check out the client's level of understanding of what he or she is being
taught. Impatience leading to the adoption of any overly lecturing style can
often occur at this stage. We recommend that REBT therapists adopt a toler-
ant attitude toward their clients' learning rate and urge that they experiment
with different ways of communicating.
As we have underscored, it is important that clients be successfully inducted
into the REBT process, and the bulk of this work often occurs in the initial phase
of therapy. Clients may come to therapy anticipating a different kind of thera-
peutic process than that offered by REBT. Thus, they may believe, from prior
experience or previous knowledge, that therapy has a focus on past events or

Individual Therapy 
99
necessitates the dramatic expression of pent-up emotions or that it involves a close
existential relationship between client and therapist. Failure to identify, confront,
and deal with these incorrect anticipations often leads to premature client termi-
nation from REST or needless client resistance during die therapeutic process.
When such anticipations are discovered, it is often helpful to ask clients how they
think that such factors can help them solve their problems. This initial inquiry
can often lead to a productive discussion of the client's role in therapy.
During this discussion the therapist can use this opportunity to show clients
that they have more appropriate tasks to execute in the process of REBT.
When clients' anticipations and preferences for therapy are very different from
the experience that they are likely to encounter during individual REBT, the
therapist can continue to persuade them to relinquish these (thereby running
the risk of the client leaving therapy prematurely), try to tailor REBT as closely
to the client's preferences as possible without offering the client a type of ther-
apy deemed ineffective by the therapist, or refer the client to a therapist who
will more easily meet the client's anticipations and preferences.
Another roadblock to client progress that is encountered at this stage occurs
when clients only focus on either the Activating events or adversity (A) or their
feelings, or their behavioral problems or symptoms at C. Here the therapist
might fruitfully inquire how talking about either A or C will actually help them
to solve their problems at C. This approach can be used again to initiate a pro-
ductive discussion about the respective tasks of therapist and client in the
process of REBT. A final roadblock that sometimes occurs at this stage con-
cerns clients who believe that once they have understood and agree with the
fact that their dysfunctional beliefs cause their emotional and behavioral prob-
lems, such understanding is sufficient for them to effect lasting change in their
problems at C. As discussed in chapter 2, it is important that therapists help
clients see that such insight is rarely sufficient and that a thorough working
through of their Irrational Beliefs is very likely to be necessary if they are to
achieve a long-term solution to their problems at C.
The Middle Phase of Individual REBT
The middle phase of REBT is characterized by the therapist and client work-
ing toward strengthening the client's Rational Beliefs and weakening the dys-
functional Beliefs. In addition, the therapist works to identify obstacles to the
client's progress in this respect and helps the client to overcome such obsta-
cles. Particular attention is paid to what the client has learned from homework
assignments and can make use of in the future. Attention is also paid to what
the client has not learned from these assignments, and blocks to the learning
process are uncovered and overcome.
Aldiough it is possible to practice REBT by focusing at the beginning of each
session on what the client has been most bothered about in the preceding week,

100 
The Practice of REBT
we consider that this is not always an efficient way of practicing therapy. Rather,
we encourage therapists to bring some order to the therapeutic process. This
is achieved by the therapist's helping the client to work through a particular
problem before moving to a different problem. Thus, there should preferably
be some continuity from session to session with respect to the problems that
are being dealt with.
As therapist and client work together on a particular problem over time, the
therapist endeavors to help the client to internalize the following process. First,
the client identifies troublesome emotions and behaviors, links them to Acti-
vating events, and then identifies his or her major dysfunctional Beliefs. The
client then Disputes those Beliefs and puts the alternative rational Beliefs into
practice by executing relevant assignments. Thus, in the middle phase of
REBT the therapist is not only concerned with helping clients to solve their
emotional and behavioral problems but also with helping them to internalize
the scientific methods of REBT problem identification and problem solution.
As clients make progress on a particular problem, it often happens that the
degree of therapist directiveness fades as the therapist encourages them to
practice self-therapy. In addition, the therapist strives to help clients see that
they can tackle similar problems that may occur in different contexts. Thus,
therapists often plan and work to help clients achieve therapeutic generaliza-
tion across situations. This process should preferably not be seen as occurring
naturally. Thus, the client who believes, "I must be perfect at passing exami-
nations" and is successful in challenging this Belief and acting on alternative
rational Beliefs may not in fact be successful at challenging a similar belief with
relevance to love relationships.
Thus, in the middle phase of REBT the therapist encourages the client to
see the links between problems, particularly those that are characterized by
common dysfunctional Beliefs. When a client has made significant progress on
a particular problem, the REBT therapist then deals with a new problem and
may in fact become more directive in the process of helping the client to iden-
tify, challenge, and change the Irrational Beliefs that underpin this new prob-
lem. However, the therapist continually looks for opportunities to encourage
the client to use the skills that he or she has successfully demonstrated in help-
ing to solve problem No. 1, which can then be used to solve problem No. 2.
Whereas in the initial phase of REBT the therapist is usually responsible
for making suggestions concerning homework assignments, in the middle
phase of REBT the therapist encourages clients to set their own homework
assignments and also helps them to learn the effective ingredients that are
involved in the selection of effective homework assignments.
Another major concern of the REBT therapist in the middle phase of ther-
apy is to assess adequately the reasons for therapeutic change and to help the
client to understand and learn from these. As noted in chapter 2, clients can
make progress on their emotional and behavioral problems for a variety of rea-

Individual Therapy 
101
sons. Thus, a client may show therapeutic progress because he or she has suc-
cessfully changed A or has effected an inferentially based change, a behaviorally
based change, or, as is the ideal in REBT, a change in underlying philosophy
(i.e., clients have successfully challenged their dysfunctional musturbatory eval-
uations and replaced these with rational preferential evaluations). Assuming
that a client has shown therapeutic progress by effecting a philosophic change,
the therapist may profitably move to another problem. However, when
changes can be attributed to one or more of the other sources mentioned
above, the therapist uses this information to help the client see that the core
of emotional or behavioral problems has not been successfully tackled.
Grieger and Boyd (1980) consider that the middle phase of REBT is char-
acterized by the therapist's helping the client to -work through his or her emo-
tional and behavioral problems and to achieve an REBT reeducation. Forms
(such as the one printed in Appendix 1 of this book) are now given to clients
to help them maintain their gains and guard against relapse. We have already
mentioned some sources of resistance that occur on these two dimensions; the
following additional sources of resistance are often encountered in this phase.
We will focus initially on roadblocks that can be attributed to the therapist.
Apart from failing to identify and deal with the client's unsuccessful attempts to
carry out homework assignments (a common failing, particularly among novice
REBT therapists), the therapist should preferably refrain from adopting an
overly lecturing and philosophizing approach in this phase. Such a stance does
not, in general, help the client to begin to internalize the REBT methods of
problem identification and problem solution as outlined above.
Therapists can also impede client progress by failing to help clients to attain
closure on a particular problem. If the therapist continually asks a client,
"What has bothered you most this week?" at the beginning of a session, he or
she may end up by working on a myriad of different client problems from week
to week without successfully helping the client to work any of them through
to a satisfactory conclusion. The therapist can also fail by uncritically accept-
ing the client's report that progress has been made without determining that
the client's progress can in fact be attributed to philosophic change. In addi-
tion, some REBT therapists fail to be sufficiently repetitive and persistent at
this stage of therapy. Here the therapist assumes that reports of client progress
in a previous session necessarily mean that lasting change has taken place. In
response to their supervisors' inquiries about a given issue, novice therapists
often say, "I dealt with that in the last session." These therapists make the error
of thinking that once a topic has been dealt with the client has thoroughly
learned what needs to be learned.
As noted above, one of the client's major tasks in the middle phase of REBT
is to strengthen his or her rational Beliefs and weaken his or her irrational Beliefs.
This often involves hard work and repetitious challenging of dysfunctional beliefs
and instigating cognitive, emotive, and behavioral assignments to effect such

102 
The Practice of REST
change. Change itself can be an uncomfortable experience for clients, as
Maultsby (1984) has shown. He refers to a process called cognitive-emotional
dissonance, whereby clients feel "strange" as they work toward strengthening
their rational Beliefs. Grieger and Boyd (1980) note that this issue can take a
number of forms, for example, the "I won't be me" syndrome, and "I'll become
a robot." Clients who are not helped to accept uncomfortable feelings as a nat-
ural part of relearning will often not persist in changing their dysfunctional ideas.
The major reason, however, that clients do not persist in sustaining the
change process can be a philosophy of low frustration tolerance in which
clients believe that "it's too hard to persist in bringing about change" and that
"change must be easy." It is very important that therapists be alert for the exis-
tence of such a philosophy in their clients and appropriately help them to iden-
tify, challenge, and change it. Clients who internalize the theory of REBT as
a body of knowledge but not as a working method often demonstrate resis-
tance to change. Such clients are often quite knowledgeable about REBT the-
ory and can quote passages from the various books, in some cases almost
verbatim, but do not necessarily act upon this knowledge. Such clients often
have a philosophy of low frustration tolerance and/or believe that knowing the
theory is sufficient to effect a lasting emotional and behavioral change.
The End Phase of Individual REBT
The major purpose of the end phase of individual REBT is to prepare clients
to execute the task of becoming their own future therapists. In the end phase
of individual REBT the therapist strives to make himself or herself redun-
dant. Individual REBT is terminated not when clients have necessarily solved
all their problems but when they feel prepared to solve their remaining prob-
lems on their own and are confident in their ability to deal with any future
difficulties. The therapist may work toward termination either by decreas-
ing the frequency of sessions over time or by setting a definite termination
date. In both cases most REBT therapists do schedule follow-up sessions to
monitor client progress. In advance of termination the therapist can pro-
ductively use session time to help the client to anticipate future problems
and to imagine how he or she would productively handle those problems by
using the skills of REBT that have hopefully now been internalized to a con-
siderable degree.
Additionally, the therapist elicits and deals with any dependency needs that
the client may have about terminating therapy. Some clients who have made
considerable progress still believe that they need the continued help of a ther-
apist in order to maintain their progress. Such problems may become mani-
fest when clients who have made very good progress are reluctant to either set
a termination date or to decrease the frequency of sessions. However, there is
a minority of quite disturbed clients who do seem to find it hard to cope on

Individual Therapy 
t03
their own, and in these cases therapists can productively schedule infrequent
booster sessions of REBT for such people.
Some therapists may be reluctant to terminate therapy with clients who have
shown considerable progress. These therapists may believe that they need the
continued evidence of client progress to prove that they are competent ther-
apists and therefore worthwhile people. Needless to say, it would be highly
desJraWe for sudl therapists to identify and challenge such competency needs,
using the methods of REBT outlined in this book.
INDIVIDUALIZING REBT
It is in the nature of individual REBT that because the therapist is dealing with
only one client, he or she can strive to tailor the practice of REBT widi this client
free from the concern that such a style of interaction (and the use of an individ-
ually tailored treatment program) may have an adverse affect on the presence of
other clients (e.g., hi couples therapy, family therapy, or group therapy). Thus, as
we have shown in chapter 2, the therapist can modify his or her style of partici-
pation in individual therapy according to the personality structure of a given client
in order to maximize that client's learning and to minimize the possibility that the
client's problems are being unwittingly reinforced. This refers in particular to
individualizing REBT in the bond domain (i.e., the interpersonal relationship
between therapist and client) of die therapeutic alliance (Bordin, 1979). Thera-
peutic bonds in REBT change over time according to the amount of progress
that die client makes and according to which bonds the client best responds to.
In this latter regard, the therapist can at the outset attempt to assess what
might be a productive bond to form with a particular client. Thus, the thera-
pist might ask the client, either on a biographical form or in person, what con-
stitutes helpful and unhelpful therapist behavior in the client's mind. The
therapist might also ask the client about the latter's previous experiences of
being helped, whether formally or informally, and in such exploration focus
on what aspects of the other person's behavior the client found most helpful
and what aspects were least helpful. It is important, however, to view such
information critically because what a client has found helpful in the short term
may not have been helpful in the long term. Thus, for example, therapists can
help clients feel better in the short term without helping them to get better in
the long term (Ellis, 1972a, 1994c, 1996a). Although the information that can
be obtained from the client about possible helpful ways of intervening with
diat particular client may be useful, REBT therapists would be wise to answer
by experimentation the question concerning which bond is most productive
with this client at this particular time. Thus, the therapist might try particular
ways of interacting with different clients and observe how they respond to dif-
ferent forms of therapist interaction.

104 
The Practice of BEET
Another way that REBT therapists can individualize therapy for their clients
is to ensure that there is congruence between clients' goats and the goals of
therapy. Ineffective REBT can often occur when the client wishes to achieve
one goal and the therapist is working to help him or her achieve a different
goal. However, we advocate that therapists do not uncritically accept their
clients' goal statements as sacred. Indeed, a good REBT therapist sometimes
spends some therapeutic time trying to talk a client out of goals that the client
considers to be helpful but that the therapist considers to be harmful to the
long-term welfare of the client. Good REBT therefore involves a fair measure
of negotiation between therapist and client concerning the client's goals. It is
helpful if the therapist does not dogmatically insist that a client give up his or
her unrealistic or harmful goals because such insistence may add to the client's
problems!
Clients' goals can and often do change over time, and therapists had better
be sensitive to the changing nature of their clients' aims and attempt to track
changes in their goal statements. It is particularly helpful for REBT therapists
to understand (and to help their clients understand) what underlies such
changes in therapeutic goals. Remember that clients' initial goals are often col-
ored by the nature of their disturbances and that is advantageous for therapists
to encourage them to postpone fixing on certain goals until they have achieved
a fair measure of success in overcoming their emotional and/or behavioral dis-
turbances. When this is done, REBT therapists are noted for helping their
clients to pursue the latters' own individualized goals because they believe that
a particular client does'not have to achieve satisfaction in any given way. Thus,
clients are encouraged to actualize their potential in their own individualistic
way (preferably after having achieved a large measure of freedom from emo-
tional and behavioral disturbance). Thus, in general, REBT therapists encour-
age clients to first work on the goals of overcoming their emotional and/or
behavioral disturbances before working to pursue individualistic goals that will
bring them happiness.
In addition to bonds and goals, another aspect of the therapeutic alliance
where REBT can be practiced in an individualized way is in the task domain.
Bordin (1979) has stressed that every therapeutic system favors particular ther-
apists' tasks and clients' tasks, which then become embodied in the practice of
that approach to therapy. In chapter 2 we outlined what these tasks are in the
sections on therapeutic strategies and major treatment techniques. REBT can
be practiced in an individualized way if the therapist encourages the client to
carry out tasks that are best suited to that particular client and that are likely
to encourage that client to achieve his or her therapeutic goals. In this way the
practice of REBT can be seen as efficient as well as effective (Ellis, 1980d).
Some clients seem to progress better by carrying out techniques that are
more cognitive in nature, whereas other clients seem to benefit more from exe-
cuting tasks that are more emotive in nature (yet a further group of clients do

Individual Therapy 
105
best by carrying out behavioral tasks). We have already pointed out that a par-
ticular therapeutic technique draws upon all three modalities, yet it is also true
that a particular technique may emphasize one modality over others. There are
no firm guidelines for REBT therapists to use in determining, before the event,
which therapeutic techniques are most appropriate for given clients. However,
it may be helpful to explore with clients their past history of effecting produc-
tive changes while paying attention to their answers concerning which modal-
ities they spontaneously used or were encouraged to use. In other words, it may
be helpful for REBT therapists to pay attention to a client's prior learning style
and modify the practice of REBT accordingly. Once again, perhaps the best
indication concerning which techniques clients will benefit from most is exper-
imentation. Whatever tasks clients execute, it is important that REBT thera-
pists help them to (1) understand how the execution of such tasks is relevant to
the achievement of stated goals, (2) overcome any obstacles to the successful
execution of such tasks, and (3) specify when they might execute such tasks and
in which setting. Cognitive and behavioral rehearsal methods that can be car-
ried out within the course of a session can be of particular help in this regard.
When client resistance occurs it can often be attributed to problems in the
task dimension. Thus, I (WD) have argued that
client resistance can occur when (1) clients do not understand what their tasks 'are
and thus cannot be expected to carry them out; (2) clients understand what their
tasks are but do not understand how executing them will help them achieve their
goals; (3) clients understand what their tasks are but do not believe that they are
capable of executing them; (4) clients both understand their tasks and believe that
they are capable of carrying (hem out but believe that they should not have to
work to change...; (5) clients do not understand their therapists' tasks and/or
cannot see the link between their therapists' tasks and their own tasks and goals;
(6) clients may in fact be incapable of executing their tasks (e.g., some clients are
not intelligent enough to do socratic disputing); (7) therapists do not adequately
prepare their clients to understand and execute the tatter's tasks; (8) therapists
poorly execute their own tasks (i.e., they are poorly skilled in the techniques of
REBT); (9) therapists compulsively carry out a limited number of tasks (e.g., they
often use cognitive techniques but rarely employ behavioral methods); and (10)
some tasks are not potent enough to achieve the clients' goals (e.g., disputing irra-
tional beliefs without exposure is unlikely to help clients with agoraphobic prob-
lems (Emmelkamp, Kuipers, & Eggeraat, 1978). (Dryden, 198Sa, p. xi)
A Typical Individual REBT Session
As we have shown, the practice of individual REBT varies to some degree,
depending upon whether the client is in the initial, middle, or end phase of
therapy. We wish, however, to give the reader an idea of how a "typical" ses-
sion is conducted. In doing so we have chosen to provide an example from the

106 
The Practice of REST
initial phase of therapy. It is important to note that the following is meant to
be a flexible guide rather than a rigid framework.
First, if the clients agreed to carry out a homework assignment from the
previous session, it is important to spend some time discussing their experi-
ences in doing the task. If the assignment has been carried out successfully, it
is important to investigate whether the clients have achieved the success by
making changes in their irrational musturbatory evaluations or their distorted
inferences or whether they have changed their behavior or the activating event.
If clients have not changed by modifying their musturbatory evaluations, then
it is important for the therapist to help them to realize this and to understand
the importance of carrying out another assignment in order to bring about
such philosophically based change. If any problems with the homework
emerge, the therapist had better spend some time on troubleshooting these
problems. In particular, the therapist can help clients become aware of the exis-
tence of any irrational Beliefs that prevented them from executing the task. If
this is the case, then the therapist spends some time Disputing these Beliefs
and reassigning the task (if appropriate).
If sufficient closure has been achieved on the problem that the clients dis-
cussed the previous week, then die therapist can move on to discussing another
of their problems. If insufficient closure has been achieved, then the therapist
would do well to spend more time on the previous problem. Assuming that
sufficient closure has been achieved, then the therapist asks for the clients'
most pressing primary problem that has not already been discussed. The ther-
apist encourages the clients to briefly disclose the nature of this problem and
uses opportunities to help them assess the problem using the ABC framework
outline in chapter 1.
Using inference chaining, the therapist helps clients to identify the most
relevant inference that provided the context for their emotional and/or
behavioral problem. The therapist temporarily encourages clients to assume
that the inference is correct. Before progressing to the Disputing stage the
therapist checks out whether clients have a secondary problem about the pri-
mary problem (e.g., a depression about feeling depressed or anxiety about
feeling anxious). If a secondary problem does exist, the therapist gives a per-
suasive rationale concerning why it is important to devote therapeutic time
to this problem before moving to the primary problem. If no secondary
problem exists, the therapist can reiterate the problem in ABC form and pro-
ceed to help clients to see the connections between A factors, B factors, and
C factors, paying particular attention to helping them to see the connection
between B and C. This framework can also be used if the therapist is spend-
ing time on the clients' secondary problem. If so, the therapist can help
clients understand that in order to reduce their emotional or behavioral
problems they had better first devote their time to Disputing their irrational

Individual Therapy 
107
Beliefs. The therapist then Disputes the clients' major dysfunctional Belief
by asking for any evidence that supports it, for example, "Where is the evi-
dence that.,.?" The therapist helps clients to see that any "evidence" that
they provide is virtually always in support of their Rational Belief and not of
their Irrational Belief. For example, there is evidence that it is preferable for
clients to do well and be approved but not that therefore they "must" do well
or be approved.
The therapist then goes over this process until clients acknowledge that evi-
dence can be provided only for the existence of the Rational Belief but not for
that of the Irrational Belief. The therapist then helps them to see the rela-
tionship between the Rational Belief and the constructive and desired emo-
tional and behavioral changes. The therapist then underscores the importance
of clients continuing to dispute their dysfunctional Beliefs in the setting out-
lined in A and other relevant situations.
After this has been done, the therapist negotiates a homework assignment
with clients that will give them the opportunity to Dispute the Irrational Belief
and act on the new Rational Belief. As noted above, the therapist works care-
fully to ensure that clients can see the sense of doing their assignments and helps
them to overcome any doubts they may have concerning the practice of the
assignment. The therapist encourages clients to be specific in determining when
and where their assignments will be executed and generally troubleshoots pos-
sible obstacles to the successful completion of each task before it is done. If rel-
evant, the therapist conducts in-session practice in which clients can rehearse
the assignment using imagery or simulated exercises (e.g., role play).
If time allows and it is relevant, the therapist can help clients to identify and
correct any distorted inferences that were assumed to be true when the ABC
analysis was first conducted. In addition, and again if time allows, the thera-
pist can engage clients in constructive skills training if they are deficient in any
skills that are relevant to the problem outlined. The above framework indi-
cates clearly that the typical REBT session is sequentially structured. It is
important to reiterate that it is highly desirable that clients can make sense of
and agree to their active participation in this structure.
Whenever possible, the therapist attempts to individualize the therapy ses-
sion for clients, using the therapeutic strategies and techniques that are
assumed to be of particular benefit to this particular client at this particular
time. If any written homework assignment or tape material is to be suggested,
it is important that it meets the therapeutic requirements of the client. Thus,
for example, for clients who do not often read books or do not profit from
reading, the therapist may suggest that they listen to a tape. If a client often
reads but is not used to complex material, the therapist may suggest a book
such as Young's A Rational Counseling Primer (1974) instead of Ellis and
Harper's A Guide to Rational Living (1997).

108 
The Practice of REBT
CASE EXAMPLE
Mrs. Haynes (pseudonym), at the time that I (WD) saw her, was a 35-year-old
professional married woman who had recently discovered that her husband
had been having an affair and had decided to leave her for the other woman.
There were no children in this marriage. Mrs. Haynes's general practitioner
referred her to me for psychotherapy for depression and anxiety. In the initial
session she made it clear to me that she did not want to involve her husband
in therapy but rather wanted an opportunity to focus on her own problems.
She further did not think that joining a group would give her sufficient time
or privacy to discuss her problems in as much depth as she considered to be
most productive for her. We thus decided on a course of individual REBT.
In the initial session, Mrs. Haynes reported having had a previous spell of
individual counseling with a marriage counselor who, from her description,
appeared to practice a kind of nondirective, psychoanalytically oriented ther-
apy. She felt that she did not benefit from this kind of therapy, mainly because
she was confused and put off by the therapist's passivity and seeming lack of
active involvement. I gave her a thumbnail sketch of what she might realisti-
cally expect from REBT, and her initial reaction was favorable. We agreed to
meet initially for five sessions. I like to make an initial time-limited contract
to enable clients to later make a more informed decision about whether or not
they wish to continue with me as an REBT therapist.
Mrs. Haynes saw depression as more of a pressing problem for her than anx-
iety, and it was the one that she wanted to make a start on. She was particu-
larly depressed about her own failure to make her marriage work and blamed
herself for her husband's preference for another woman. I helped her to see
that it was not his preference for another woman that made her depressed but
her beliefs about the situation, which were, "I must make my marriage work
and I am a failure if I don't!" Before proceeding to help her to dispute this
belief in the initial session, I worked patiently with her to enable her to see the
connections between A, B, and C.
I started to Dispute her demanding belief only when she said that she saw
clearly that it was this Belief that caused her depression rather than her hus-
band leaving her and that in order to overcome her depression she needed to
change her Belief. While disputing her Belief, I helped her to develop a list of
self-Disputes that she could ask herself in the coming week whenever she felt
depressed about her presumed failure in marriage. I gave her a copy of A Guide
to Rational Living and suggested that in particular she read chapter 2 ("You Feel
the Way You Think") and chapter 11 ("Eradicating Dire Fears of Failure"). I
also offered her an opportunity to take away a tape of our session, which she
gratefully accepted.
At the beginning of the following session I asked her for her reactions to
both the tape and reading material. It transpired from this that she had a pos-

Individual Therapy 
109
itive response to both the tape and the reading material, and she commented
that she particularly liked the method of bibliotherapy. Her depression had
lifted considerably since our first session, and she was able to use her own
self-disputes to come up with plausible answers. In order to reinforce her
progress I asked her if she would find it helpful to use one of the written self-
help forms that exist for this purpose and showed her three. She decided to
start off with the one that I invented (see Figure 2.3). We first worked on an
episode of depression—even though she had progressed on that since our
initial session—after we decided that it was better to get closure on her
depression before we tackled her anxiety. We spent the rest of session 2 fill-
ing out this form, and at the end I gave her a number of these forms and
suggested that she read chapter 15 of A Guide for Rational Living ("Con-
quering Anxiety") and to use such insights to fill in a form whenever she
became anxious.
At the beginning of session 3 she reported that she benefited from reading
the chapter on anxiety but had experienced some difficulty in zeroing in on
the irrational Beliefs that underpinned her anxiety. Using the inference chain-
ing procedure, I helped her to see that she was anxious about ever finding
another man again and ending up an old spinster. As is typical in REBT, I
encouraged her to assume the worst and to imagine that she was an old spin-
ster and asked her for her feelings about that. Her reply was instructive: "Oh
God, I couldn't stand the thought of living like that." I Disputed her Belief
that she needed a man in her life in order to be happy and helped her to see
that she could in fact gain a fair measure of happiness in her life if single even
though she would prefer to be married and have a family. This led to a dis-
cussion of her immediate anxiety, that is, of her feeling that she could not go
out on her own because this would be shameful.
Often feelings of shame are related to feelings of anxiety, and assuming this
to be the case with Mrs. Haynes, I helped her to see that she was saying: "If I
go out on my own then other people will see that I am alone and that would
prove that I am worthless." The rest of the session was spent putting this into
A, B, C, D form using the self-help form. I then suggested that we try ratio-
nal emotive imagery as a bridge between changing her attitude in her mind's
eye and putting into practice her new Belief, "I have every right to go out on
my own, and if other people look down on me, then I refuse to look down on
myself." Mrs. Haynes had a great deal of difficulty in using rational emotive
imagery in the session and between sessions 3 and 4.
At the beginning of session 4,1 went over the rational emotive imagery and
suggested instead that she say her new rational Belief quite vigorously to her-
self. She was able to do this, first of all out loud and then internally, and felt a
mood shift that was much more profound than what she was able to achieve
by using rational emotive imagery. Let me add that her feelings of depression
were no longer considered by her to be a problem since session 1.

HO 
The Practice of REBT
At the end of session 4 we negotiated an assignment in which she would go
out socially on her own on two occasions (on one occasion to a local evening
class and second to a dance hall) while vigorously repeating the rational self-
coping statements we developed. This apparently was very helpful to Mrs.
Haynes, for she reported that she was able to go out on both occasions without
undue anxiety. This was our fifth session, the last of our therapeutic contract,
and I discussed her progress with her and how she wished to proceed in the
future. She said that she felt very pleased with her progress and wanted to con-
tinue to have sessions every 2 weeks rather than weekly.
From sessions 5 to session 10, Mrs. Haynes made great progress. She had a
number of dates with men and was able to resist the sexual advances of two of
them, which to her was a great stride because in the past she had had great dif-
ficulty saying no to men and had for a period prior to her marriage been quite
promiscuous, out of desperation rather than out of choice. Between sessions
5 and 10,1 gave her Why Do I Think I Am Nothing Without a Man by Penelope
Russianoff (1981) and Living Alone and Liking It by Lynn Shahan (1981) to
read. She also continued to listen to the tapes of her sessions, although I sug-
gested that she review them only once, rather than her accustomed three times,
because I wished to encourage her to rely on her own resources rather than to
rely on my direction, albeit secondhand, through the tapes. She also contin-
ued going out on her own and used vigorous self-Disputing to increasingly
good effect.
As I attempted to move the therapy from the middle phase to the end phase,
Mrs. Haynes became quite anxious. She said that she felt she had become quite
dependent upon my help and was anxious about whether or not she couid cope
on her own. First of all I Disputed her Belief that she needed my help, and sec-
ond, I encouraged her to view a break from therapy as an experiment and sug-
gested a 6-week gap between our lOdi and 11th sessions, stressing that she rely
more on self-Disputing than on bibliotherapy. I also suggested that she not lis-
ten to any of the past tapes so that we could conduct a fair experiment of her
inference that she could not cope on her own.
The experiment proved to be a success. When she came in, she wondered
why she even thought that she could not cope on her own, because she had
managed the 6-week gap very well. I commented that I was pleased with her
progress, to which she replied, "That's nice to know, but even if you weren't,
I am. I don't need your approval." Having been firmly put in my place in this
regard, we discussed whether she needed any future sessions and finally agreed
that we would have a 6-month follow-up. I did suggest that she could contact
me if she wanted to in the interim, on the condition that she use her own skills
for a 2-week period and if she could not cope with any emotional problems
that came up in that period, then she could contact me.
At the 6-month follow-up session, Mrs. Haynes had attained and enhanced
her therapeutic gains. She was productively involved in many social and vol-

Individual Therapy 
111
untary activities and had ongoing casual relationships with three men, one of
which included sex out of choice, not out of desperation. Her relationship with
her husband was reasonably cordial, and they were proceeding toward an ami-
cable divorce. In my keenness to encourage her to cope on her own, I made
the error of moving toward termination without helping her to anticipate
future problems and encourage her to see that she could use her new coping
methods to deal with these problems. Although this was an error at the time,
Mrs. Haynes was able to cope in the intervening period. In addition, I had to
do very little work in helping her set goals for increased satisfaction because
she was able to do this on her own.

5
Couples Therapy
I (AE) began my career in the helping professions as a sex, marital, and fam-
ily counselor in the early 1940s. As a result of my experiences as a marital
counselor, I concluded that in most instances disturbed marriages (or premar-
ital relationships) are a product of disturbed spouses and that if people are truly
to be helped to live happily with each other they first had better be shown how
they can live peacefully with themselves. This conclusion led me to embark on
intensive psychoanalytic training, believing then that psychoanalysis was the
preferred mode of treatment for such disturbances. As has been already men-
tioned, in the early 1950s I became increasingly disillusioned with both the
theoretical validity and the clinical effectiveness of psychoanalytic treatment
and began to see more clearly that human disturbance had profound ideolog-
ical roots. Drawing upon the work of early Asian and Stoic philosophers (e.g.,
Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus) who stressed that people are disturbed not by
events but by their views of these events, I began to develop a therapeutic
approach based upon a perspective of human disturbance that stressed philo-
sophic determinants and deemphasized psychoanalytic psychodynamics. I
applied this approach to a number of therapeutic modalities, including cou-
ples therapy.
Rational emotive behavior couples therapy (REBCT) has developed con-
siderably since those early days. A number of REBT therapists have main-
tained an active interest in couples therapy, and there are a number of events
that can be regarded as important in the history of its growth.
An early important development was the publication of my first book on
REBT, Haw to Live with a "Neurotic": At Home and at Work (Ellis, 1957). In this
book I advanced the thesis that partners could alleviate couple discord, first by
working to remain undisturbed about their partners' neurotic problems, and
then by experimenting with various solutions to help their partners get over
their neurotic difficulties. In a later text, written with Robert Harper, entitled
Parts of this chapter were adapted from W. Dryden, "Marital Therapy: The Rational-Emotive
Approach," in Dryden (1985b). Used by permission.
112

Couples Therapy 
U?
A Guide to Successful Marriage (Ellis & Harper, 1961b), I developed this thesis
and also made an important distinction between couple disturbance and couple
dissatisfaction, which has remained a cornerstone of REBCT ever since. In the
same book, Harper and I also wrote on the important role that unrealistic expec-
tations about intimate relationships play in the development and maintenance
of both couple dissatisfaction and disturbance. Although the term "expectation"
in psychotherapy is problematic in that it does not clearly differentiate between
"hopes," "assumptions," "predictions" of varying certitude, and "absolutisttc
demands," we made the valid point that there is often a large discrepancy
between what actually happens in intimate relationships and what one or'both
partners assume or predict will happen. Thus, unrealistic expectations are often
the breeding ground for the later development of relationship problems.
In 1962 my seminal book, Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy, was pub-
lished. This contained a chapter entitled "A Rational Approach to Marital
Problems," which was adapted and expanded from two earlier articles. Here I
clearly outlined that one of the major tasks of the marriage counselor was to
"tackle not the problem of the marriage, nor the neurotic interaction that exists
between the marital partners, but the irrational ideas or beliefs that cause the
neurosis a deux" (Ellis, 1962, p. 210).
As will be discussed later in this chapter, another cornerstone of REBCT is
its position on the role and treatment of angry and hostile reactions in inti-
mate relationships. I published an important paper on this topic (Ellis, 1976g)
in which I clearly outlined both the rational emotive behavioral position on
anger—namely, that it is a dysfunctional emotion that severely interferes with
relationship harmony—and its management in therapy.
Apart from myself, a number of other REBT therapists have made impor-
tant contributions to the field of REBCT. Among others, the writings of McClel-
lan and Stieper (1973) on a structured rational-emotive approach to group
marital counseling, and Hauck on (1) the reciprocity theory of love and mar-
riage (1981, 1983a) and (2) parenting styles (1983b) are particularly notewor-
thy. Special mention should be made of WaJen, DiGiuseppe, and Wessler's
(1980) chapter entitled "A Rational Approach to Marriage and Divorce Coun-
seling" in their book A Practitioner's Guide to Rational-Emotive Therapy. Finally,
in 1989, the first text was published that provided a comprehensive exposition
of the theory and practice of REBCT (Ellis, Sichel, Yeager, DiMattia, &
DiGiuseppe, 1989).
THE NATURE OF DISTURBED
INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS
REBT therapists clearly distinguish between couple dissatisfaction and cou-
ple disturbance. Couple dissatisfaction occurs when one or both partners are

114 
The Practice of REBT
not getting enough of what they want from their partner and/or from being
in an intimate relationship. Couple disturbance arises when one or both part-
ners become emotionally disturbed about these dissatisfactions. Thus, they
may make themselves anxious, angry, hostile, hurt, depressed, ashamed, guilty,
and jealous—emotions that usually interfere with constructive communica-
tion, problem-solving, and negotiation processes that aid the solution of cou-
ple dissatisfaction problems. In addition, when one or both partners are
emotionally disturbed, they generally act in a self- and relationship-defeating
manner, thus perpetuating couple disturbance. REBCT theory states that,
assuming they have the necessary constructive communication, problem-solv-
ing, and negotiation skills, couples are likely to solve their dissatisfaction prob-
lems on their own. When they are deficient in such skills, the focus of couples
is on training them to develop and use these skills. However, once couples are
in the disturbance stage of a relationship, unless their emotional problems are
dealt with, relationship problems usually remain, no matter how skillful one
or both partners are in communicating, solving problems, and negotiating
workable compromises. Couples, interestingly enough, often nusdiagnose their
own problems. They often conclude, for example, that their problems are due
to deficits in communication skills, whereas in reality they find it difficult to
talk to one another when one or both are hurt, angry, depressed, or anxious.
Couple Disturbance
As we have shown in chapter 1, emotional disturbance, C according to REBT's
ABC theory, stems not merely from events at A but mainly from a certain type
of evaluative thinking or Belief at B. This type of thinking, which is absolutis-
tic, devout, and grossly exaggerated in nature, is called "irrational" in REBT
theory, mainly to denote that it hinders people from actualizing their basic
goals and purposes. Thus, Irrational Beliefs that lead to such disturbed emo-
tions as anxiety, anger/hostility, hurt, depression, shame and embarrassment,
guilt, and jealousy largely stem, according to REBT theory, from a thinking
process known as "musturbation." In the couple context, this process is char-
acterized by one partner making absolute demands and commands on self, the
other partner, and/or the relationship situation.
In the main, three further self-defeating and grossly exaggerated thinking
processes tend to stem from musturbation (Ellis, 1994c). Once humans abso-
lutistically demand that something, for example, "must" not occur, they tend,
if that event occurs, to conclude that the event is "awful," "horrible," or "ter-
rible," that they "can't stand it" or "can't bear it," and that the perpetrator of
the event that must not have occurred is "no good," "worthless" (or "less wor-
thy"), or "bad"—whether the perpetrator is self, another person, or life con-
ditions in general. I (AE) noted that these four thinking processes, known
colloquially in REBT literature as (1) "musturbation," (2) "awfulizing," (3) "I-

Couples Therapy 
US
can't-stand-it-itis," and (4) "damning," represent a philosophy of devout belief,
in which the person adopts a godlike position and insists (not just desires or
prefers) that the world (and the people in it) be as he or she wants it (or them)
to be (Ellis, 1991b).
The rational (or self-enhancing) alternatives to these absolutistic beliefs are
framed within a nondemanding, nonabsolutistic philosophy of desire. Here,
in the relationship context, it is acknowledged that couples do have desires,
are probably happier when these are met, and become dissatisfied when these
remain unfulfilled. However, as has been stressed above, dissatisfaction is not
synonymous with disturbance; the latter mainly develops if one or both part-
ners escalate their nonabsolute desires into absolute demands. Couple dissat-
isfaction occurs when one or both partners' important desires are not being
fulfilled (and neither is insisting that they get what they want). Couple distur-
bance occurs when one or both partners demand their desires must be met.
Parenthetically, couples therapy is normally more difficult when bodi partners
are emotionally disturbed about the relationship than when only one partner is
thus disturbed.
The rational versions of the four dysfunctional thinking processes are as
follows:
1. Desiring (vs. musturbation). Here the partner acknowledges his or her
desires, does not insist that they be met, but is dissatisfied when they are not.
Such dissatisfaction often serves to stimulate constructive attempts at problem
solving that have a better chance of succeeding with a spouse who is also not
musturbating. Rational thinking processes tend to follow from nondemanding
desiring, just as dysfunctional thinking processes follow from musturbation.
2. Rating as bad or anti-awfitlizing (vs. awfulizing). REBT theory holds that
"awful" really means totally or 100% bad because such a definition stems from
the belief that this must not be as bad as it is." Thus "awful" is seen to be on a
different continuum from "bad." If a partner is not getting what he or she really
wants but is not insisting upon it, this person will tend to define the deprivation
as "bad" but not "awful." The general principle is that die more important the
unfulfilled desire, the more "bad" the definition of the deprivation is likely to
be. It is, thus, only under very unusual conditions that an event can be legiti-
mately rated as 100% bad. Nonabsolutistically defining something as "bad" but
not "awful" tends to help the partner to try to ameliorate the "bad" situation.
3. Tolerating (vs. I-can't-stand-it-itis). "I can't stand it" literally means disin-
tegrating or dying on the spot. It more often seems to mean not being able to
have any happiness whatsoever under any conditions, rather than actually
dying. However, tolerating something means (1) acknowledging that some
unwanted event has occurred and believing that there is no law that says it
must not occur, (2) rating it as "bad" but not "awful," and (3) determining
whether change is possible. If it is possible, constructive attempts are made to

116 
The Practice ofREBT
produce the desired change; if change is not possible, the person accepts but
definitely dislikes this "grim" reality. When partners are thinking rationally,
they are likely to see that, although they can tolerate a bad relationship, there
is no reason why they have to do so. Tolerating adverse conditions is an atti-
tude that may lead to constructive change attempts, whereas I-can't-stand-it-
itis often leads to destructive manipulative strategies.
4. Accepting (vs. damning). This attitude can be applied to self, others, and
the world. When a woman, for example, unconditionally accepts herself in this
way, she recognizes that she is a fallible human being who has an "incurable
error-making tendency" (Maultsby, 1984), meaning that she can and will make
mistakes. If she is able to accept herself as such, she will more likely be able to
acknowledge these errors, regard them as bad if they impede her goals, and
take responsibility for committing them. Moreover, if she does not insist that
her partner act well, she will more likely be able to accept him or her as falli-
ble, dislike the fact that he or she is acting badly, and initiate constructive nego-
tiations for future improvement. Finally, if she does not dogmatically mart that
her relationship be the way she wants it to be, she will tend to see it as a falli-
ble institution with good and bad components that can only be improved but
not perfected.
As Young (1975) has shown, rational thinking can and does (especially in the
arena of intimate relationships) lead to strong, healthy negative emotions, such
as concern, annoyance, sadness, disappointment, regret, and dislike. However,
these emotions tend to motivate marital partners to take constructive steps to
improve matters if their shared goal is to remain partnered.
Couple Dissatisfaction
REBCT theory notes that there are two major contributing factors to couple
dissatisfaction: relationship myths and important incompatibilities.
Couple dissatisfaction may occur if partners adhere to one or more myths
(Ellis & Harper, 1961b; Lazarus, 1985; Lederer & Jackson, 1968). Such myths
tend to be unrealistic in that they idealize the state of the relationship and
encourage partners to overestimate what they can realistically expect to derive
from being partnered. Some examples of commonly held relationship myths*
that are often implicated in marital dissatisfaction include the following: love
equals good sex; romantic love will endure throughout the partnership; my
partner will be able to know what I want without my having to communicate
my desires; good sex will always be spontaneous; I will not suffer any depriva-
tions or penalties as a result of being partnered; my partner will help me get
over my feelings of unworthiness; my partner will make up for my past frus-
'Partners often express such myths in idiosyncratic form.

Couples Therapy 
t!7
trations; my partner will make allowances for my bad behavior, my partner will
always be on my side, always be loyal, and always love me (no matter how badly
I behave). If partners do not modify these myths in line with their experiences,
they will tend to become dissatisfied, as reality proves to be discrepant from
their assumptions of what is "expected" to happen in the relationship. Fur-
thermore, it can be easily seen how such myths can further lead to couple dis-
turbance when linked to a philosophy of musturbation.
Couple dissatisfaction may also occur when partners are revealed to be
incompatible in one or more areas of the relationship. Generally, the more
important the area, the greater the dissatisfaction, especially if negotiations for
compromise fail to resolve the issues.
Couple incompatibility may stem from naive and superficial partner selec-
tion in which partners do not really get to know one another, or it may occur
as a result of changes in outlook on the part of one or both of them. A com-
monly encountered example of emergent incompatibility occurs when a
woman seeks to develop a more independent life-style. If this exceeds the role
expectations of her partner, then neither is likely to get what he or she wants in
a significant area of their relationship. If she does not act on her newly dis-
covered desire, she is likely to become dissatisfied and act less responsively
toward him so that he becomes dissatisfied. However, if she spends less time
in the house, he becomes dissatisfied because his desires for a well-kept house
are not being met; and if he begins to nag her, she becomes dissatisfied because
her desires for support are not met. Dissatisfaction based on emergent incom-
patibility can often be a stimulus for constructive renegotiation of roles and
responsibilities, but equally often, especially if the incompatibility occurs in a
centrally important area for one or both partners, it may lead to relationship
breakdown even if couple disturbance is not involved. In such a case one or
both partners conclude that the relationship no longer meets a very important
desire and is not likely to in the future. If the incompatibility is in a less impor-
tant area, it may lead to less intrusive dissatisfaction and may hardly affect the
relationship, especially if the partners can find expression for the desire else-
where and this is accepted by the other.
The Development and Perpetuation
of Couple Disturbance
REBCT theory holds that couple disturbance can develop and be perpetuated
in a number of different ways. Conflict may occur soon after die relationship has
been established if one or both partners are quite disturbed as individuals. Sim-
ilarly, conflict might develop at various stages of an ongoing relationship when
change occurs in the couple system. This change becomes a stimulus for one or
both partners to bring their philosophy of musturbation to the new situation.
Thus, a dissatisfaction can quickly become a disturbance if, for example, a man

us 
The Prattice ofKEBT
demands that his mate must not ask to see his pay packet or if the woman insists
that her mate must telephone to tell her that he will be staying late at the office.
Here partners give themselves an emotional problem about die problem of dis-
satisfaction. In addition, partners may give themselves secondary emotional prob-
lems about their newly developed primary emotional problems (Ellis, 1994c,
1995a, 1996c). Thus, a man may get angry with his mate because he is demand-
ing that she must not act in a certain manner; he may then notice his angry reac-
tion and condemn himself for reacting in such a terrible manner. He thus
becomes guilty for reacting angrily. It is unlikely that constructive communica-
tion or problem solving could ensue while he is experiencing anger alone and
doubly unlikely if he adds guilt to his emotional menu.
Unhealthy anger, stemming from the absolutistic demand that you, my part-
ner, must not act this way either because it is "wrong" or because it is a threat
to my "self-esteem," is probably the most prominent reason why couple dis-
FIGURE S.I The ABCs of dysfunctional couple interaction.

Couples Therapy 
ll9
turbance is perpetuated (Ellis, 1976g, 1977a). Indeed, when both partners are
damning each other, couple disturbance can be perpetuated indefinitely with
little chance of a constructive solution being found. Another core reason that
couple disturbance is perpetuated is anxiety over confronting basic issues. One
or both partners may be scared that if they shared their feelings of dissatisfac-
tion with one another something "awful" would ensue. They thus withdraw
from one another and feel lonely, guilty, and depressed about the growing dis-
tance between them.
Farmers with emotional disturbances tend to act in dysfunctional ways (behav-
ioral C's). These then serve as the stimulus for the second partner's inference
(INF). Vicious circles of disturbed couple interaction result when a dysfunctional
behavior (C) on the part of one partner serves as the trigger (INF2) for an irra-
tional Belief (B2) of the other partner that in turn leads to disturbed feelings and
behavior (C2). This serves as a new trigger (1NF3) for the first partner... and so
on. An example of such a vicious circle is shown in Figure 5.1. As this interac-
tion pattern demonstrates, partners often make inferences of each other's behav-
ior (which have been included under INF). These inferences may be correct but,
especially in the phase of couple disturbance, are likely to be faulty, colored as
they often are by dysfunctional evaluative thinking. Nevertheless, REBT ther-
apists do draw on Beck's (1976) work on "cognitive distortions" and note that
partners often make errors in processing interpersonal information and that these
errors often serve to perpetuate couple disturbance (see chapter 1). These also
become the focus for therapeutic work, but normally after partners' musturba-
tory evaluative thinking has been tackled.
PRACTICE
Contextual Considerations
REBT therapists are guided by the principle of flexibility throughout the ther-
apeutic process in working with couples. Thus, there are no absolute rules to
guide REBCT practitioners concerning whether to see partners conjointly,
concurrently, or consecutively in individual sessions. Therapeutic decisions
concerning the working context are suggested by therapeutic exigencies. Ellis
(in Dryden, 1984d) and Bard (1980), for example, consider that the decision
whether to see both partners together or separately at the outset of therapy
should preferably be made by clients themselves. However, individual sessions
may be indicated for three main reasons:
1. When the two partners persist in arguing nonproductively in the context
of conjoint sessions and thus negate the potential benefit of the therapist's
interventions.

120 
The Practice ofREBT
2. When the joint presence of the partners in the therapy room unduly
inhibits one or both of them. They may be so anxious about the possible
negative effects of speaking their minds that they do not disclose signifi-
cant material in therapy. In such cases a period of concurrent individual ses-
sions is often helpful.
3. When the goals of the individual partners are sufficiently incongruent to
preclude the establishment of a productive therapeutic alliance in conjoint
therapy, for example, when one person wishes to leave the relationship
while the other wishes to preserve it.
When both partners wish to be seen together, share basically congruent
goals, are not inhibited by their joint presence in therapy, and can contain their
strong angry feelings, then conjoint couples therapy is usually the most ben-
eficial context for productive work.
Some REBCT practitioners prefer to work concurrently with the partners
in individual sessions in the "overcoming couple disturbance" phase of treat-
ment. They hypothesize that partners are more likely to disclose their gen-
uinely held "deep" feelings (e.g., of hurt, jealousy, anger, and fear) if they see
the therapist alone. Partners can thus give their full attention to the therapeutic
process while the therapist helps them to see the connections between their
dysfunctional emotions/behavioral patterns and their irrational Beliefs and
helps them to Dispute and change these ideas. Because REBCT is by nature
an educational process, its practitioners are mindful of choosing environments
that best facilitate learning. We note, however, that partners can learn the
ABCs of REBCT in the context of conjoint therapy in the "disturbance" phase.
Here, our experience has taught us that while the therapist works with one
partner, helping him or her to identify, challenge, and change core irrational
Beliefs, the "listening" partner often learns the ABC framework of emo-
tional/behavioral disturbance better than the "working" partner.*
Although REBCT practitioners differ concerning their views about the
supremacy of conjoint versus concurrent therapy in the "overcoming couple
disturbance" phase of treatment, they generally agree that the presence of both
partners is highly desirable in the "enhancing couple satisfaction" phase. In
this phase both partners have, ideally, made some progress overcoming their
emotional disturbances about their differences and are ready to explore pos-
sible ways of improving their relationship if they have decided to stay together.
REBT therapists use a variety of methods to facilitate such exploration. Com-
munication, problem-solving, sex education, and negotiation training are used
"A similar phenomenon often occurs in individual REBT. When clients are given audiotape
recordings of therapy sessions they often learn the ABCs ofREBT better after they have listened
to these recordings than when they are in the therapy room. It may be that this is due to the fact
that later they are less emotionally involved with the material and can thus listen more attentively
to what the therapist and they themselves are saying.

Couples Therafy 
121
in this phase, and the presence of both partners is highly desirable to enable
the therapist to instruct them both to communicate more effectively, solve
problems, and negotiate more constructively so that they can improve the
quality of their relationship.
Conjoint REBCT is usually conducted with a single therapist, although
there are occasions when a cotherapy arrangement would be desirable, partic-
ularly if, say; a woman feels unduly adversely affected by the presence of a male
therapist. Here a female cotherapist would be helpful to strengthen the ther-
apeutic alliance, and such a four-person arrangement might be particularly
desirable in sex therapy.
In conclusion, the conduct of REBCT is not bound by strict rules of pro-
cedure; flexibility is encouraged, and changes in context may occur through-
out the therapeutic process. Such changes are made according to therapeutic
purposes that are generally made dear and agreed to by clients. It is in keeping
with REBT philosophy that REBCT practitioners are against dogmatically
insisting that therapy must be practiced in any predetermined context.
Developing and Maintaining a Therapeutic Alliance
It is important to note at the outset that REBCT practitioners consider that
their therapeutic contract is with the individuals in the relationship and not
only with the couple system (Ellis, Sichel, Yeager, DiMattia & DiGiuseppe,
1989; Harper, 1981; Walen et al., 1980). As Harper (1981) argues, the couple
system is an abstraction, and as such, REBCT therapists have great difficulty
seeing how a therapeutic alliance can be made with it. They prefer, whenever
possible, to develop alliances with each of the involved partners. It is prefer-
able that this is made clear to both partners at the outset of couples therapy so
that they can see that the therapist is not interested in trying to preserve, or
indeed destroy, their relationship. As has already been stressed, a primary
objective of REBCT therapists is to help both partners over their emotional
disturbance about their situation and then help them work on forging a more
mutually satisfying relationship if that is their goal. However, partners often
come into couples therapy with overt and hidden agendas, and it is often help-
ful to have separate interviews with each of the partners early in the process
to determine whether the goals of each partner are sufficiently concordant to
make conjoint couples therapy (which is the best working forum for partners
who have similar objectives) feasible. Since the therapeutic alliance is with the
individuals and not with "the relationship," the most appropriate therapeutic
arena is sought to help the individuals actualize their goals,
Because therapeutic goals can be based on irrational as well as rational think-
ing, it is our practice to explain to both partners that they are more likely to make
productive decisions about whether to stay partnered (and if so, what improve-
ments are desired) or to separate when diey are not emotionally disturbed about

J22 
The Practice ofREBT
what is presently happening in the relationship. Thus, we like to set goals appro-
priate to particular phases of couples therapy. If the partners are disturbed, we
attempt to have them identify and set goals that involve minimizing such dis-
turbance; and if they are dissatisfied but not disturbed, we attempt to work on
relationship enhancement goals after a decision has been made by born that they
wish to stay partnered. Too often we have seen non-REBCT therapy founder
because the therapist is working on couple enhancement goals when one or both
partners are emotionally disturbed, with the result that goal-sabotaging need-
lessly occurs.
Another common error made by non-REBCT practitioners occurs when
the therapist is only prepared to see the partners in conjoint therapy. Thus, if
one partner wishes to preserve the relationship and the other has a hidden
agenda to leave it but will not declare this openly in the therapeutic triangle,
such therapy is either terminated by the latter soon after its inception or is
marked by little or no improvement, to the detriment of both partners,
REBCT therapists would be more likely to identify such a situation earlier in
individual assessment interviews.
In the "overcoming emotional disturbance" phase of REBCT it is impor-
tant for the therapist to work with each partner individually, either in conjoint
therapy or in separate interviews. In conjoint therapy the therapist gives each
partner roughly equal amounts of time in order to maintain a productive
alliance in the three-person situation—a social system that can easily be desta-
bilized if the therapist, for example, excludes one partner for lengthy periods of
time. The therapist explains at the outset of this phase that the goal is to help
each of the partners overcome his or her own disturbance (intrapersonal focus)
so that they can more productively work on their disagreements later (inter-
personal focus). Productive REBCT occurs when both partners clearly under-
stand and agree to this modus operandi. In our experience, highly skilled
REBCT therapists who can present a convincing rationale concerning this
important point are usually, but not always, successful at developing a good
therapeutic alliance with both partners when such an alliance is based on this
principle. Failure to form a productive alliance with both partners at the out-
set of therapy usually leads to problems later in the therapeutic process and
does not bode well for successful outcome. Such failure is due to either poor
therapist skills or various partner factors, which include severe emotional dis-
turbance, rigid adherence to the Belief that the other person is totally respon-
sible for relationship problems, and various hidden agendas. In such instances
the therapist is advised to consider changing the therapeutic context or to con-
sider various systems-inspired interventions that are designed to change A fac-
tors in the ABC schema. If the therapist can successfully manage the "over-
coming emotional disturbance" alliance, then the alliance necessary to effect
productive change in the "enhancing couple satisfaction" phase is much eas-
ier to manage because both partners are in a position to make sound decisions

Couples Therapy 
123
about goals and are sufficiently free from emotional disturbance to work
toward goal achievement.
MAJOR TREATMENT TECHNIQUES
REBCT is a multimodal form of therapy in that it employs a variety of cogni-
tive (verbal and imagery), emotive, and behavioral techniques to help partners
overcome their emotional disturbances and couple dissatisfactions.
"Overcoming Couple Disturbance" Phase
The goal of the REBCT practitioner in this phase of couples therapy is to help
each partner become relatively undisturbed about the couples' problems so
that they can constructively work, if they wish, to improve their level of rela-
tionship satisfaction. The therapist helps both partners to think functionally
about themselves, their partner, and their relationship, which means feeling
healthily frustrated, sorry, annoyed, and sad about their predicament when
their desires are not met—emotions that will motivate them to work to
improve their relationship or separate without needless emotional pain.
In this phase the REBCT practitioner helps both partners to see how they
are needlessly upsetting themselves about their problems and often adopts a
"let's assume" approach with both of them. Both partners are encouraged to
assume that their negative inferences—about, for example, their partner—are
correct, for the tune being, to offset unproductive arguments about what actu-
ally occurred at A in the ABC framework. In this way the therapist helps each
partner to identify his or her underlying dysfunctional Beliefs and replace them
with rational alternatives. The therapist had better persistently encourage both
partners to focus on their own upset if the goals of this phase of treatment are
to be achieved.
A variety of cognitive methods are used at this stage. Partners are shown
how to use realistic, logical, and heuristic questioning to dispute their irra-
tional Beliefs. They are taught to ask themselves such questions as "Where is
the law of the universe that states that my partner mtist do the housework per-
fectly well?"; "How does it follow that she is bad for acting badly?"; "Is it true
that I cannot stand her behavior?"; "If I insist that my partner must be a perfect
father, what will happen to our relationship?" They are helped to see that there
is no evidence for such absolute statements, only evidence for their "prefer-
ential" form and that their dogmatic insistences will get and keep almost any
relationship in trouble.
A number of clients appear less able to perform this kind of Socratic ques-
tioning, and here the therapist would help them develop and employ rational
coping statements, such as "I don't like my partner's behavior but she has a right

124 
The Practice of REBT
to act badly"; "She is a fallible human being who is doing the wrong thing"; "I
can stand her behavior although I may never like it." These statements can be
further written down on index cards and rehearsed between sessions.
Some couples can be shown, similarly, how to Dispute each other's irrational
Beliefs and thus serve as therapists for each other between formal therapy ses-
sions. Other cognitive techniques employed in this phase of REBCT include
the use of (1) general semantics methods (Korzybski, 1988); (2) self-help forms
(see chapter 2); (3) audiotape recordings (of the couple's therapy sessions or
recorded lectures on various rational themes); (4) bibliotherapy, especially the
use of books that present the REBT perspective on how to overcome emo-
tional and behavioral disturbance; and (5) a variety of imagery techniques
(Lazarus, 1984)
Emotively, the therapist can employ several evocative and vivid methods of
REBT to help change the couple's irrational philosophies (Dryden, 1984b).
Such methods include the use of (1) rational-emotive imagery (Ellis, 1993d;
Maultsby, 1971)—where the partners deliberately imagine "upsetting events"
at A and practice making themselves feel healthily sad, annoyed, or frustrated
about these at C, which is achieved by spontaneously thinking more rationally
at B; (2) vigorous and forceful repetition of rational statements (Ellis, 1979c);
(3) role playing—to uncover hidden feelings that can then be traced back to the
relevant irrational Beliefs and Disputed; (4) shame-attacking exercises—where
couples deliberately seek out various "shameful" experiences and practice
accepting themselves for acting "shamefully"; and (5) therapist self-disclosure
and humor to help couples not take themselves and their partners too seriously.
Behaviorally, in this phase partners are encouraged to face and not avoid
potential problems so that diey may have real-life opportunities to stay in these
situations until they have made themselves undisturbed about them (Grieger
& Boyd, 1980; Ellis, Sichel, Yeager, et al., 1989).
"Enhancing Couple Satisfaction" Phase
Once both partners have made some progress at helping themselves and their
partner overcome their emotional disturbances about their dissatisfactory rela-
tionship, they are in a position to constructively look at ways of enhancing their
degree of relationship satisfaction or to be helped to amicably separate. Assum-
ing that they wish to stay partnered, there are a number of well-established
methods that can be used to help them to live more happily together. These
include communication training (Crawford, 1982; Ellis, 1993b, 1993c; Guer-
ney, 1977), negotiation training (Stuart, 1980), and a variety of behavioral tech-
niques designed to help them to develop appropriate relating and sexual skills
and to get more of what they want from each other (Mackay, 1985). Biblio-
therapy is often used in conjunction with these methods.

Couples Therapy 
t25
A hallmark of REBCT is that homework assignments are negotiated to
encourage couples to put into practice what they have learned in therapy.
Assuming that such assignments are carefully designed by the therapist and
agreed to by both partners, failure to execute them often reveals further emo-
tional disturbance, particularly that which stems from a philosophy of low frus-
tration tolerance (LFT). REBCT practitioners are alert to such possibilities
and strive to help both partners, if appropriate, overcome their LFT so that
they can follow through on the difficult task of changing the nature of their
relationship.
A final task of REBCT practitioners in this stage is to address the topic of
relationship myths (see the "Couple Dissatisfaction" section above) and help
partners develop more realistic perspectives concerning what they can legiti-
mately expect from intimate relationships.
Problems Encountered in REBCT and Their Solutions
The conduct of couples therapy is fraught with potential problems, no matter
which approach the practitioner adopts. The more flexible the practitioner can
be, the better, and in general it is highly desirable for REBCT therapists to
dispute their own irrational beliefs concerning how therapy must proceed, how
clients must behave, and what harmonious relationships must be like. Practi-
tioners are advised not to be invested in either preserving or destroying rela-
tionships if they are to truly help couples negotiate what is in their best
interests. Apart from therapist-derived problems, the following problems are
often encountered in REBCT.
Secrets Because REBCT therapists conceive their basic task to be one'of
helping both individual partners rather than the relationship, they will fre-
quently see the partners alone in individual sessions, particularly at the begin-
ning of therapy. Consequently, they will sometimes be called upon to keep
"secrets." They are prepared to do this, and in order to help both partners dis-
close what is really on their mind they will tell clients in individual sessions of
their willingness to do so. This tactic also helps therapists to quickly uncover
hidden agendas. Consequently, they had better be mindful of what informa-
tion is confidential to a particular partner and keep a mental note not to dis-
close this in front of the other. It should again be noted that this is done in
order to develop productive contracts with both partners. Some REBCT ther-
apists stress to both partners that whatever is discussed in individual sessions
is confidential to each partner concerned, so that if directly asked about what
occurred in an individual session with the other partner, they can refer to this
principle. Moreover, partners are advised to talk about their individual sessions
with each other in general terms rather than in detail.

126 
The Practice of REBT
Persistent Other-Blaming It sometimes happens that one or both partners
refuse to acknowledge that they make themselves disturbed about their mate's
behavior and cling rigidly to the assertion that their mate is the cause of their
upset. In certain of these cases it transpires that they are anxious that if they
admit that they make themselves upset, their mate will not be motivated to
change. In other cases such "defensiveness" is often motivated by fear of self-
criticism: "If I admit that I make myself disturbed, as I must not do, then I will
condemn myself." In these two instances good REBCT practitioners will test
such hypotheses rather than assume that their hunches are correct Such defen-
siveness can also be, in certain instances, a sign that the partner is profoundly
disturbed. One technique that sometimes helps clients who persistently blame
their partner is to stress that if they want their partner to change one of the
most effective ways of achieving this is to change their own behavior first.
When Disputing Fails In certain cases REBCT therapists will fail to
encourage one or both partners to identify, challenge, and change their Irra-
tional Beliefs that mediate their disturbance. When this occurs, the practi-
tioner can use some of the methods that are ideally intended for use in the
"enhancing couple satisfaction" phase. In the case where one partner is over-
coming his or her emotional disturbance and the other is not, the therapist
may focus his or her efforts on encouraging the former to be unusually nice
to the disturbed partner to encourage that partner to change. I (AE) originally
advocated this tactic in my book How to Live with a "Neurotic" (Ellis, 1957), and
it is one that sometimes proves successful. When both partners remain dis-
turbed after disputing fails, REBCT practitioners may use a number of sys-
tems-theory-inspired interventions that are designed to change A. Thus, for
example, refraining and various paradoxical procedures can be employed to
help the couple extricate themselves from a vicious circle of negative interac-
tions. If this is successful, it occasionally provides the stimulus for one or both
partners to then focus on their disturbance-creating Beliefs. However, although
such interventions may be successful in the short term, if both partners remain
emotionally disturbed, they might, as a result, experience more problems later,
because unresolved emotional disturbance is the driving force behind the
development and maintenance of much disturbed interactions.
Extremely Hostile Interchanges These are difficult to manage when they
occur in couples therapy sessions, and when they become a regular occurrence
it is advisable to see the partners individually. However, in dealing with such a
situation at a given time, I (WD) have found it helpful to do something unusual
to gain the coupled attention. Thus, I have, in the midst of a heated interchange,
got up and commenced speaking to a picture on the wall or tried to catch an
imaginary mouse. These attention-getting techniques are, in my experience,

Couples Therapy 
'27
generally more effective in defusing the situation than trying to shout the cou-
ple down, which tends to increase the heat in an overly hot kitchen.
The Change Process In the same way that a good navigator plots his favored
course but plans several different alternative routes should they be needed, so
do effective REBCT therapists have their preferred and alternative game plans.
Because couples differ markedly, the REBCT therapist who adheres rigidly to
a single game plan is likely to fail with a number of couple clients.
When therapy goes smoothly, REBCT practitioners are able to keep to their
preferred game plan. In cases where this applies, they help both partners see that
they have two different kinds of problems: those related to couple disturbance
and those related to couple dissatisfaction. They succeed at (1) showing the cou-
ple that they had better work on disturbance issues first; (2) explaining that their
disturbance results in the main from their Irrational Beliefs about their unsatis-
factory relationship; (3) inducing them to work at Disputing and changing those
Irrational Beliefs and replacing them widi rational alternatives; (4) inducing them
to work at identifying whether their differences can be reconciled; (5) if so, help-
ing them to negotiate more satisfying relationship arrangements; and (6) encour-
aging them to work to actualize these desired alternatives. When both partners
are only dissatisfied and not disturbed, only stages 4, 5, and 6 apply.
Problems still tend to occur even in this smooth change process and can be
generally attributed to one or both partners believing that change must be eas-
ier than it is (LFT) or to one or both partners testing the solidity of change
(Stuart, 1980). Here the therapist (1) helps the couple to tolerate the discom-
fort that change almost inevitably brings and to see that change is rarely easily
achieved, and (2) explains to the couple (preferably in advance) that testing
behavior is a common occurrence in the change process, that is, that one or
both partners sometimes tests the solidity of change by returning to dysfunc-
tional patterns. When partners are prepared for this eventuality, they are less
likely to disturb themselves about it. The therapist also explains that change
is rarely a linear process because humans easily return to well-ingrained but
dysfunctional patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion.
When both partners are disturbed at the inception of therapy and only one
changes for the better in this respect, the therapist will often, as noted above,
encourage that partner to make an extra effort for his or her own sake and for
the sake of determining the future prospects of the relationship. This involves
the less disturbed partner being unusually understanding and tolerant of the
still disturbed partner, a tactic that often serves as the fulcrum and lever that
encourages the more disturbed partner to begin to change. For it sometimes
happens that he or she needs to see that the other partner has shown an extra
amount of good faith before beginning to work on his or her own disturbance.
If such a tactic fails to yield beneficial results for the disturbed partner, then the

128 
The Practice of REST
other partner has useful information when coming to determine the viability
of the relationship.
As has also been noted above, when both partners remain disturbed even
after the therapist's interventions in the "overcoming couple disturbance" phase
of treatment, the therapist is prepared to use a variety of behavioral and sys-
tems-theory-inspired interventions to change A in the ABC framework, even
though he or she acknowledges that this is an inelegant approach to produc-
ing philosophic change at B (Ellis, 1979d; Ellis, Sichel, Yeager et al., 1989). If
these interventions are successful, then the couple has been helped to see that
they can extricate themselves from a negative pattern and thus may be encour-
aged to do so for themselves. There is always the danger, however, that if they
reencounter the original problem situation they will again become disturbed
and thus may need further help to change A.
It needs to be reiterated that REBCT practitioners tend to be flexible in
their use of different therapeutic contexts and thus may suggest changing the
therapeutic modality at various points in the process of couples therapy (e.g.,
from conjoint couples therapy to concurrent individual sessions with each per-
son). Such changes are usually instigated for positive therapeutic reasons but
can also be made if the therapy has become unproductively stuck in a given
modality.
The Personal Qualities of
Effective REBCT Therapists
In the practice of couples therapy effective REBCT practitioners will prefer-
ably be (1) comfortable using the structure of REBCT but flexible enough to
work in less structured ways when the occasions arise; (2) drawn to adopting
an active-directive teaching style and credible enough to teach their client cou-
ples the principles of REBT in ways appropriate to the learning abilities of the
people involved; (3) "authoritative without being authoritarian;... bring up
discussions of basic values without foisting their personal values on to clients;
... push, coach, persuade, and encourage clients to think and act against their
own self-sabotaging tendencies" (Ellis, 1982d, p. 316); and (4) prepared to
reveal their own feelings and Beliefs and show their clients that they are not
scared to take risks in helping them over their relationship difficulties. More-
over, they will tend to be philosophically inclined, scientific, empirical, multi-
modal, and antiabsolutistic in their approach to the problems of their couples
and will be drawn to REBCT because it allows them to fully express these ten-
dencies. They will he comfortable working with more than one person in ther-
apy and raising difficult issues with both partners, particularly in the area of
sexual relations.
It is not essential for effective REBCT therapists to have had firsthand expe-
rience of cohabiting relationships, but in our opinion this is desirable for a

Couples Therapy 
W
number of reasons. First, they will be able to talk with clients about their dif-
ficulties from a more authoritative and credible position, particularly if they
have been successful in dealing widi some of their own problems. Second, they
will tend to have a deeper understanding of the stresses of intimate relation-
ships and see the potential for growth and for harm that such relationships
hold. Finally, they will be able to share specific examples from their own expe-
riences to help show their clients the advantages of an REBT approach to cou-
pled life. However, it is noted that some REBCT practitioners are quite
successful without such firsthand couple experience.
CASE EXAMPLE
Mr. and Mrs. Rogers (pseudonym), married with no children, were seen
when I (WD) worked as a part-time counseling psychologist for an East
Birmingham (England) general practice. Mrs. Rogers, a 35-year-old house-
wife, was initially referred to me for "depression." In an initial intake inter-
view it transpired that she was depressed about what she described as her
husband's cold attitude toward her. I decided, with her permission, to invite
Mr. Rogers to come and see me to determine his opinions about his wife's
depression and the marital situation. In cases where one partner is referred
to me whose disturbance is rooted in an interpersonal context, I prefer to
interview the significant other because this contact facilitates his or her later
involvement in therapy if this is indicated. Mr. Rogers, a 38-year-old busi-
nessman, angrily complained about his wife's "low mood." He also expressed
concern that he could not "get through to her." They both stated in these
initial individual interviews that they would be interested in having coun-
seling for their problems. They wanted to stay married, but both stated that
they would like to be seen separately at first. I saw no reason to refuse their
requests.
"Overcoming Couple Disturbance" Phase
I began by helping Mrs. Rogers to see that she was absolutistically insisting
that she must have her husband's love and that she was unlovable because he
did not seem to love her at present. I showed her that it was her insisting atti-
tude rather than the assumed lack of love on his part that determined her feel-
ings of depression and proceeded to help her to accept herself even if her
husband did not love her. I helped her to Dispute her dysfunctional need for
love but encouraged her to keep to her desire for his love. I showed her that
she could be healthily sad but did not have to be unhealthily depressed if her
assumption that her husband did not love her proved to be correct now
and/or in the future.

130 
The Practice of REBT
When working with Mr. Rogers, I zeroed in on his demand that his wife
absolutely should not be depressed and helped him to see that this was related
to another demand that his wife must be supportive, which in turn was
related to his fear of failure at work. His wife used to help him by doing
important typing and bookkeeping, and this helped him maintain a high
standard of work performance. The fact that she was no longer assisting him
in this way confronted him directly with his own anxiety, which, as often
occurs, was masked by anger. I encouraged Mr. Rogers to race this fear and
helped him to Dispute his underlying Irrational Beliefs, namely, "I must do
well and continue to do well at work or I'd be an inadequate person."; and
"I must keep getting promoted or I may not be able to improve our living
standards, which would be terrible." For good measure, I showed him that,
although he wanted his wife to support him, there was no law in the universe
that decreed that she had to do so. When he changed these Beliefs, he con-
sequently became more tolerant and sympathetic toward his wife when she
was depressed.
At this point, it would have been tempting to bring Mr. and Mrs. Rogers
together for conjoint sessions; she was becoming less depressed and he was less
anxious and angry. However, I decided to continue to see them separately for
two more individual sessions each to help them deal more thoroughly with the
worst examples of A in the ABC framework that they could imagine. This
strategy, in fact, elicited Mrs. Roger's acute fear of divorce. I helped her to
identify and challenge her Belief that divorce would be "awful" and helped her
to see that she could lead an independent, happy life and therefore was not
impelled to stay in the marriage.* I also helped Mr. Rogers deal with his mor-
bid fear of unemployment and showed him that his value as a human being
was not dependent on his work status and that he could become vitally
absorbed in other pursuits if he ever faced unemployment.
When I felt satisfied that they had made progress in dealing with their worst
fears, I then arranged to see them in conjoint marital therapy, having seen
them individually for six sessions each.
"Enhancing Couple Satisfaction" Phase
This phase of treatment began with a shared review of what Mr. and Mrs.
Rogers had both learned in individual couples therapy. They reiterated their
desire to stay together and work toward increased marital satisfaction. At the
outset of this phase, Mrs. Rogers experienced a greater degree of dissatisfac-
tion than her husband. Although she had made great strides in accepting her-
self, she stated that, in her opinion, he was still taking her for granted and
This procedure, known as "de-awfulizing" divorce, is very helpful in reducing anxiety in part-
ners who feel impelled to stay married out of obligation rather than out of desire.

Couples Therapy 
131
expected that she would devote much of her life to helping him gain a man-
agerial position, to which he had always aspired. She said that she was no
longer prepared to devote as much time to helping him in this respect and
wanted more time to pursue her own emerging interests. Although Mr. Rogers
initially appeared to understand her desire for self-actualization, his actual
behavior in subsequent weeks belied his words.
Despite the fact that I had helped them to negotiate a more equitable
allocation of time to different tasks, Mr. Rogers failed to keep his part of
the bargain. At this point Mrs. Rogers decided to get tough with him. She
was able to do this because she was less anxious about the prospect of being
alone. When Mr. Rogers saw that his wife was really serious about pursu-
ing her own goals, he was jolted into realizing the implications of continu-
ing to act in an unsupportive way toward her.^ At this point he was able to
articulate his fears about what living with an independent woman might
mean for him. He feared that she might find another man, whereas in real-
ity Mrs. Rogers wanted not only to spend some time pursuing her own
interests but also to spend more time socially with him: "I no longer want
to be a doormat," she said.
At this point I did some individual work with Mr. Rogers in the context of
conjoint couples therapy. I helped him to see that he could still accept himself
even if his wife did in fact leave him for somebody else and that he could be
relatively happy if this happened. Mrs. Rogers tried, on several occasions, to
reassure him that she was not interested in other men, but I showed her and
her husband that this was not the central issue and that the real point was that
Mr. Rogers was anxious about the prospect of this happening. As he successfully
Disputed his dysfunctional Beliefs that he would be less of a man if his wife
left him, he calmed down and listened to her desires with greater empathy. At
this point I taught them how to listen and respond accurately to each other's
statements and how to check out their hunches about the meaning of such
statements rather than assume that their hunches were indeed facts. I further
helped them to consider the implicit contracts that they had made with each
other, at the time of their marriage, about their roles as husband and wife and
showed them that these role expectations could be renegotiated (Sager, 1976).
This led to a full discussion of their aspirations for themselves as individuals
and as a couple, and they were able to determine for themselves how they
could achieve "I-goals" and "We-goals." At the end of 10 conjoint sessions
they decided that they had achieved enough to keep working on "enhancing
couple satisfaction" on their own.
tl (WD) have often found that it is only when wives are prepared to take drastic action in pur-
suing their own goals that their husbands are "shocked" into realizing the implications of not lis-
tening to them. This shock is often the motivating factor for initiating constructive change.

H2 
The Practice of REST
Observations
This example clearly demonstrates the major features of REBCT. Issues of
couple disturbance were dealt with first, in this instance in individual couples
therapy sessions for both partners. Conjoint couples therapy sessions were
employed to deal with issues of relationship dissatisfaction. Communication,
problem-solving, and negotiation training procedures were all employed in
this second phase. The case also shows that REBCT practitioners are often
called upon to deal with further disturbance issues that emerge in the "enhanc-
ing couple satisfaction" phase. As is commonly found, emotional disturbance is
often uncovered as a result of the failure of one or both partners to execute
carefully negotiated homework assignments. In this case, Mr. Rogers's anxiety
about his wife having "affairs" was elicited as a consequence of his failure to
follow through on an assignment that was negotiated on two separate occa-
sions. He was helped to see that his "excuses" were in fact defensive in nature
and served to protect him from his own self-condemnation. Mr. Rogers con-
firmed my own hypothesis that it was my early focus on Disputing his Irra-
tional Beliefs in the first phase of treatment that encouraged him to disclose
this core fear. In his words, "I feel that I was helped to acquire the skills to
actually deal with this particular fear. I doubt whether I would have revealed
it if I felt unable to deal with it."
Follow-up
I conducted a follow-up session 6 months after treatment was terminated. Mr.
and Mrs. Rogers maintained the gains that they had achieved in therapy and,
according to them, were experiencing the most productive period of their mar-
riage. They reported that they were more able to express their desires to one
another and be supportive of each other's goals as well as spend more time
together. Mrs. Rogers had taken up volunteer work, pottery classes, and yoga.
She spent about an hour a day typing her husband!; business correspondence,
compared to the 4 hours daily work she used to do for him. She had not expe-
rienced any depressive episodes since treatment had ended. Mr. Rogers had
still not acquired his coveted managerial position. He occasionally experienced
bouts of panic about this fact but said that on these occasions he was able to
identify and Dispute the underlying irrational Beliefs. He had come to realize
that work was not the "be-all and end-all" of his life and had started to man-
age a local junior soccer team. He seemed genuinely pleased with his wife's
improvement and rarely got angry with her, and she felt that he showed sin-
cere interest in her activities. Together they had taken up ballroom dancing
lessons and enjoyed regular Saturday evenings at the local dance hall. They
reported that they were more able to challenge one another in a constructive
way when problems began to emerge and that they were able to resolve mat-
ters without undue upset.

Couples Thtrafy 
133
Interestingly enough, both Mr. and Mrs. Rogers pointed to the gains that
they had made in the first phase of treatment as the most significant feature of
their therapy experiences. Mrs. Rogers summed this up well when she said
"Although it was painful, you helped me most by showing me that divorce
wasn't the end of the world. I thought it was, you see. Yes, that really helped.
Before, we stayed together more out of fear and obligation than anything else,
but now we are together because we want to be together." That statement
beautifully encapsulates the goals and spirit of REBCT!

6
Family Therapy
Rational emotive behavior family therapy follows the principles and practice of
rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT). REBT holds what when family
members become emotionally disturbed or upset (e.g., anxious, depressed, hos-
tile, self-pitying, or behaviorally dysfunctional) at point C (emotional and behav-
ioral Consequence) following a significant Activating experience or Activating
event (point A), A may significantly contribute to but actually does not "cause"
C. Instead, disturbed Consequences (in individuals and in families) are largely
(though not exclusively) created by B—the family members' belief system. When
undesirable or disruptive Consequences (C) occur, these can largely be traced
to people's Irrational Beliefs (Bs)—absolutistic, musturbatory, or unrealistic
demands, commands, or expectations on (1) themselves, (2) others, and/or (3)
world conditions. When these dysfunctional Beliefs are effectively disputed (at
point D) by challenging them logically, empirically, and pragmatically, the dis-
turbed consequences are minimized or disappear and ultimately seldom recur.
When still using psychoanalysis, I (AE) began to do conjoint marital coun-
seling and family therapy but found these techniques to be much more effi-
cient and less time-consuming as I replaced analytical with REBT. REBT for
families, as will be shown below, not only gets to the fundamental philosophic
premises that underlie people's disillusionment with themselves and their fam-
ily arrangements but also uses cognitive, emotive, and behavioral methods of
teaching them communication, sexual, relating, and other skills that will help
them enhance their family relationships.
Scores of studies have shown that RET and CBT are effective (DiGiuseppe,
Miller, & Trexler, 1979; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979; Engels, Garnefeki, & Diekstra,
Parts of this chapter are adapted from Albert Ellis, "Rational-Emotive Family Therapy," in A. M.
Home and J. L. Passmore (Eds.), Family Counseling and Therapy (pp. 403-434), Itasca, IL:
Peacock, 1991; from Albert Ellis, "Family Therapy: A Phenomenologicai and Active Directive
Approach," Journal of Marriage and Family Counseling, April 1978, pp. 43-50; and from Albert
Ellis, "The Rational-Emotive Therapy (RET) Approach to Marriage and Family Therapy," The
Family Journal, 1993, 1: 292-307. Used by permission.
134

Family Therapy 
135
1983; Haaga & Davidson, 1989; Hajzler & Bernard, 1991; Hollon & Beck, 1994;
Lyons & Woods, 1991; McGovern & Silverman, 1984; Miller & Berman, 1983;
Silverman, McCarthy, & McGovern, 1992). The use of controlled studies of the
rational emotive behavioral and cognitive behavioral approach to family therapy
is still meager. However, it has already produced some findings that tend to show
that REBT can be used effectively in helping couples and families with emotional
problems. Outcome studies that support REBT hypotheses include papers and
books by Baucom and Epstein (1990), Eisenberg and Zingle (1975), Epstein,
Schlesinger, and Dryden (1988), Jacobson (1992), Margolin and Weiss (1978),
McClellan and Stieper (1973), Saxon (1980), and Tsoi-Hoshmand, 1976.
The first major books applying the principles of REBT to marriage and
family problems were How to Live with a "Neurotic" (Ellis, 1957) and A Guide
to Successful Marriage (Ellis & Harper, 1961b). Subsequently, a large number
of articles have been published that demonstrate how REBT can be efficiently
applied to marriage and family therapy and to parenting problems, and a num-
ber of books on REBT and CBT marital family issues have appeared, includ-
ing those by Barrish and Barrish (1985), Baucom and Epstein (1990), Grieger
(1986), Hauck (1977,1981,1984), Huber and Baruth (1989), and Ellis, Wolfe,
and Moseley (1966).
REBT APPROACH TO FAMILY THERAPY
The ABC theory of REBT states that the basic or main "cause" of disturbed
emotional Consequences (C) in family life (or in any other kind of human
activity) does not rest in the Activating experiences that happen in the family at
A but in the spouses' and children's Irrational Beliefs (IBs) with regard to these
A3s. Although people can theoretically have a large number of IBs, 12 of these
are exceptionally common (Ellis, 1962). These, in turn, can be reduced to three
major absolutistic musts, each of which includes several important subcate-
gories (Ellis, 1994c, 1996a; Ellis & Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Grieger, 1977; Ellis
& Harper, 1977; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979). These are (1) "I must (or should or
ought to) perform well and/or be approved by significant others. It is awful (or
horrible or terrible) if I don't! I can't stand it! I am a pretty rotten person when I
fail in these respects!" (2) "You must treat me considerately and fairly. It is hor-
rible if you don't! When you fail me, you are a bad individual, and I can't bear
you and your crummy behavior!" (3) "Conditions must be the way I want them
to be, and it is terrible when they are not! I can't stand living in such an awful
world! It is an utterly abominable place\"
If family members subscribe to one or more of these three basic musts and
their many derivatives, various forms of emotional disturbance and dysfunc-
tional behavior will almost inevitably follow. If they clearly see these abso-
lutistic and unrealistic commands on themselves, on others, and on the

136 
The Practice of REBT
universe and work hard at surrendering them and replacing them with strong
preferences, they will rarely disturb themselves about almost anything—
although they will still often have strong appropriate feelings of displeasure,
frustration, disappointment, and sorrow.
Although REBT places great emphasis on cognition, it does not hold that
psychoanalytic or psychodynamic insight leads to significant personality change
but that, instead, diis kind of insight is usually wasteful and sidetracking. There-
fore, it stressed three different kinds of insight and awareness that clients had
better achieve. Insight No. 1 is that the "causes" of the practical problems of fam-
ily members may lie in environmental situations but that the "causes" of their
emotional problems (or their problems about the practical problems) mainly
lie in their Irrational Beliefs (IBs) about die Activating experiences that the fam-
ily undergoes. Insight No. 2 is that regardless of how family members originally
became (or made themselves) disturbed, they feel upset today because they are
still indoctrinating themselves with the same kinds of IBs that they originated
in the past. Even if they learned some of these IBs from their parents and other
early socializing agents, they keep repeating and retaining them today. There-
fore, their ^//"-conditioning is more important than their early external condi-
tioning. Insight No. 3 is that if family members achieve Insights No. 1 and 2 and
thereby fully realize that they have created and keep carrying on their own dis-
turbed feelings, these two insights will not automatically make them change
their irrational Beliefs. Only if they constantly work and practice, in the present
as well as in the future, to think, feel, and act against these IBs are they likely to
change them and make themselves significantly less disturbed.
REBT takes the humanistic and existentialist position that family members
largely create their own world by the phenomenological view they take of what
happens to them. It also accepts the philosophy that people had better define
their own freedom and cultivate a good measure of individuality but at the
same time, especially if they are to live successfully in family ways, adopt an
attitude of caring, sharing, and social interest. In accordance with its human-
istic outlook, REBT especially emphasizes what Carl Rogers calls uncondi-
tional positive regard and what REBT practitioners call unconditional
self-acceptance (USA) and unconditional acceptance of others (UAO) (Ellis,
1962, 1972b, 1973, 1994c, 1996a). As a consequence, REBT takes the unusual
stand that we had better not rate ourselves, our essence, or our being but only
our deeds, acts, and performances. We can choose to do this limited kind of
rating not in order to prove ourselves—that is, to strengthen our ego and self-
esteem—but in order to be ourselves and enjoy ourselves.
REBT introduced the concept of acceptance into the field of marriage and
family therapy in the late 1950s (Ellis, 1957,1958b, 1960). This is because, as
Neil Jacobson (1992) and other behaviorist family therapists realized many
years later, showing family members how to condition their partners and chil-
dren to be more cooperative and loving often just doesn't work. They may

Family Therapy 
137
have their own agenda and sometimes are too disturbed to respond to even the
best marital training methods. Therefore, they present a somewhat grim real-
ity to other family members who cannot easily change them or leave them.
Acceptance is stressed in REBT family therapy in several important ways:
1. Acceptance of human fallibility. REBT teaches family members to accept
the reality that all humans—including their partners, siblings, and other rela-
tives—are exceptionally fallible. No matter what they agree to do, they fre-
quently do not do it; and whatever they agree to refrain from doing, they still
frequently do. To be happy with themselves and others, family members
preferably should fully accept their own fallibility and that of others to whom
they are attached. Then try to change what they can change.
2. Acceptance of human demandingness. All normal humans strongly prefer,
wish, and desire. Fine. But they also have an innate and learned tendency to
easily escalate their wants into absolutistic demands and commands: "Because
I very much want you to treat me lovingly, you always must do so!" "Because
it would be highly preferable if you saw things my way, you absolutely have to
agree with me!"
REBT shows family members that unless they understand and accept—
though not necessarily like—this almost universal condition of their intimates,
they will tend to demand that family demanders not be the way they indu-
bitably are. And their own demandingness will usually get them nowhere.
3. Acceptance ofuncaringnessandunlovingness. Children and adults are born
and reared with strong tendencies to care for others, particularly their family
members (Bowlby, 1988). Great! But most people are also born and raised with
sturdy proclivities to be often uncaring, uninterested in others, and unloving—
not to mention, at times to be antagonistic and hostile. Even family members
who really love each other can be affectionate with notable inconsistency. So
REBT points out to family clients: "If you find one person in your entire life-
time who is not this way, you are extremely lucky. If you find several, it is a
miracle! So accept, accept, and accept this reality."
4. Acceptance ofproneness to human disturbance. In some ways, nobody is fully
responsible for his or her own emotional and behavioral disturbance. First, we
are born with a strong tendency to upset ourselves over frustrations and diffi-
culties; otherwise we might not be motivated to minimize them and to survive
(Ruth, 1992). Second, we are often beset with tribulations and traumas, includ-
ing childhood abuse, assault, rape, incest, accidents, diseases, and handicaps.
Once seriously assaulted, we tend to remember these traumatic incidents and
strongly keep reacting—and often overreacting—to them. Third, our family,
school, and cultural teachings often show us that we should upset ourselves
when unfortunate Activating events occur.
Because important environmental and biological factors predispose family
members to various kinds of disturbability, REBT teaches family clients to

138 
The Practice of SEBT
expect some of their intimates to behave irrationally and to accept that eventu-
ality without unduly upsetting themselves about it.
Even though, as we pointed out in the beginning of this section, people are
in some ways not responsible for being easily upset, they still are responsible
for creating and indulging in some of their feelings of depression and rage. As
REBT shows, they have some choice about not upsetting themselves about fam-
ily affairs. REBT family therapy therefore tries to help each member accept
himself or herself -with his or her disturbances while also accepting responsi-
bility for these disturbances and for trying to reduce them.
5. Unconditional self-acceptance and other acceptance. As we keep emphasizing
in this book, REBT particularly shows family members (as well as single indi-
viduals) how to have unconditional self-acceptance (USA) even when they act
poorly and sabotage family living. It shows them how to fully accept all people
•whether or not they perform well and to rate their own and others' behavior but
not to rate their self or personbood for this behavior. Throughout the many years
we have practiced couples and family therapy we find that one of the best tech-
niques we can use to help family members reduce their anger at each other is
to have some of them—or preferably all of them—first give themselves USA
and then to achieve the same kind of unconditional acceptance of others (UAO)
to their close relatives (Ellis, 1957,1962,1988,1991d, 1993e, 1994c, 1996a).
6. Accept unchangeable frustrations. Hassles and frustrations of living are the
inevitable human condition. Although fami/y Ufe, especially for young chil-
dren, greatly relieves life's difficulties, it also considerably adds to them. As a
mate, parent, or child one has to go along with many domestic restrictions,
including room arrangements, money expenditures, meal scheduling, and a
hundred other limitations, loo bad—but that's it!
REBT therefore shows people how to accept family conditions that they
distinctly dislike but cannot—or will not—very well change. As Hauck (1984)
has shown, when a family setup is seen as "bad," one can (a) do nothing about
it, (b) work to change it, or (c) leave the situation. Most people, however, often
take one of these three paths and unduly disturb themselves—that is, whine!—
about taking it. REBT shows them how, instead, to uncomplainingly take one
of these choices without defining it as awful or horrible (Dryden & Ellis, 1990,
1991; Ellis, 1988,1994c, 1996a).
REBT FAMILY THERAPY AND OTHER
SYSTEMS OF FAMILY THERAPY
There are almost innumerable systems of family therapy today, but the main
(or at least most popular ones) seem to be the psychoanalytic systems, and

Family Therapy 
1&
behavioral schools. The following is a brief attempt to show how REBT fam-
ily therapy overlaps with and differs from these systems.
REBT and Psychoanalytic Family Therapy
REBT differs considerably and radically from what might be called "pure" or
"genuine" psychoanalytic therapy as originally presented by Freud (1965) and
his close followers. Fortunately or unfortunately, psychoanalysts and psycho-
analytically oriented therapists rarely stick to Freudian theories or techniques
these days; and what has been called neo-Freudian therapy—such as that of
Karen Horney, Erich Fromm, Franz Alexander and Thomas French, and
Harry Stack Sullivan—is actually much more neo-Adlerian than neo-Freudian.
Thus, what Paul Wachtel (1994) calls psychoanalysis really emphasizes clients'
understanding and changing their current interpersonal relationships (rather
than mulling around endlessly in their past lives) plus what might be called
low-level or mild REBT—that is, showing them how to acknowledge and
dispute their unrealistic and Irrational Beliefs about themselves, others, and
the world.
Classical Freudian psychoanalysis includes several basic assumptions that
psychoanalytic family therapists such as Nathan Ackerman (1958) partially,
adopt. These include the theories that (1) current family problems largely stem
from people's past experiences in their own original families, which they then,
transfer to their present mates and family members; (2) deep-seated family dif-
ficulties stem largely from the fairly severe emotional disturbances of the indi-
vidual family members; (3) only by understanding the early origins of their
own disturbances and working through these in prolonged psychoanalytic
therapy will people really overcome their current family upsets; (4) the main
therapeutic tool is the transference relationship between the therapist and his
or her client(s), and only by the therapist arranging for the client(s) to experi-
ence a transference neurosis during treatment and by using his or her personal
relationship with the client(s) is this neurosis, as well as the original neurosis,
of each family member to be truly resolved; (5) at bottom, virtually all dis-
turbed individuals, including family members, have unresolved Oedipal com-
plexes, castration fears, and repressed hostilities toward their parents and
siblings; and the understanding of and working through these complexes and
hostilities largely comprises cure; (6) all serious family disturbances result from
people's deeply unconscious or repressed thoughts and feelings, and when they
are made fully aware of these they no longer act or feel disturbed; (7) severe
emotional disturbances, such as schizophrenia, are largely caused by the treat-
ment of children during their early childhood and also by generations of poor
family conditions; (8) intellectual and emotional insight leads to behavioral
change, and behavioral solutions in themselves are almost useless and do not
lead to intellectual and emotional changes; (9) resistance to therapeutic change

140 
The Practice of REST
largely results from early family-inculcated disturbances and from unconscious
resistances to childhood-imbibed feelings and to transferring these feelings to
the therapist.
All of these basic psychoanalytic theories of personality formation of psy-
chotherapy, except the second one listed above, are strongly opposed by the
theory and practice of REBT. The REBT view is that these theories are
based on fictional "evidence," are not backed by research, and often lead to
more therapeutic harm than good (Ellis, 1968,1994c). Though it agrees with
the analytic view that family members are usually disturbed in their own
right and that elegant therapeutic resolution involves their overcoming their
intrapersonal (as well as their interpersonal) disturbances, REBT has few
other agreements with classical psychoanalysis. We would hold, in fact, that
the closer therapists stick to "pure" or "real" psychoanalysis, the more inef-
fective and the more iatrogenic they almost invariably are. When they sig-
nificantly deviate from psychoanalytic theory and practice mildly analytically
oriented psychotherapy, they then are much more helpful to individual and
family clients.
REBT AND SYSTEMS FAMILY THERAPY
REBT largely goes along with a great deal of the systems theory perspective,
including its endorsement of the following propositions that tend to be held
by different kinds of systems therapists, such as Gregory Bateson, Don Jack-
son, Paul Watzlawick, Jay Haley, Salvadore Minuchin, Virginia Satir, and Mur-
ray Bowen: (1) In studying families and family therapy, we had better pay
attention not only to interpretation of individual thoughts, feelings, and behav-
iors but also to wholeness, organization, and relationship among family mem-
bers; (2) we had better also seriously consider general (as well as reductionist)
principles that might be used to explain biological processes that lead to
increasing complexity of organization (for the organism); (3) we had better
concentrate on patterned rather than merely on linear relationships and on a
consideration of events in the context in which they are occurring rather than
an isolation of them from their environmental context; (4) the study of com-
munication among family members shows how they often become disturbed
and what they can do to ameliorate their disturbances (Ellis, Sichel, Yeager, et
al., 1989; Huber & Baruth, 1989).
While agreeing with these basic views of systems-theory-oriented family
therapy, REBT would offer a few caveats as follows:
1. Focusing on wholeness, organization, and relationship among family
members is important but can be overdone. Families become disturbed not

Family Tberafy 
^41
merely because of their organization and disorganization but because of the
serious personal problems of the family members. Unless, therefore, these are
considered and dealt with, too, any changes that are likely to occur through
changing the family system are likely to be superficial and unlasting, and fam-
ily therapy will tend to be wasteful.
2. Family systems therapy tends to require an active-directive therapist who
makes clear-cut interventions and who engages in a great deal of problem solv-
ing. REBT is highly similar in these respects. But most family systems thera-
pists tend to ignore the phenomenological and self-disturbing aspects of family
members' problems and mainly or only deal with the system-creating aspects
(Ellis, 1978a). In REBT terms, they focus on solving A-type (Activating
events-type) family problems and not on the more important B-type (Belief
system-type) problems. REBT first tends to show family members how they
philosophically disturb themselves about what is happening to them at point
A and how, at B, they basically create their own disturbances. It then also shows
them how to change their family and personal situations at A. Its approach is
double-barreled rather than single-barreled in this respect.
3. Because they focus largely on family situations and interpersonal com-
munications and problems, family therapists, for all of their cleverness and use
of many cognitive methods, usually miss the main reasons behind most peo-
ple's emotional and behavioral problems, namely, their absolutistic "must's"
and "should's" and their other irrational beliefs. In this respect, systems fam-
ily therapy is partially effective but still superficial.
REBT AND BEHAVIORAL FAMILY THERAPY
REBT subscribes to virtually all the main principles of behaviorally oriented
family therapy because it is a form of cognitive-behavior therapy itself and
invariably uses (as noted above) many behavioral theories and methods. How-
ever, it uses behavioral techniques mainly to help family members change their
basic philosophic assumptions and to make an "elegant" change in their think-
ing, feeling, and acting (Ellis, 1972b, 1980c) rather dian the symptomatic change
that some of the "pure" behavior therapists, such as Joseph Wolpe, aim for
(Wolpe, 1990). And it recognizes that some behavioral methods of individual
and family change, such as social reinforcement and gradual desensitization of
fears, not only have distinct limitations but also have profound philosophic
implications drat may lead to antitherapeutic results. Thus, if therapists rein-
force family members' changes by giving them social approval, these clients
may become overdependent on the therapist and may increase rather than
decrease their dire needs for approval, which are often one of the main sources
of their disturbances (Ellis, 1983b).

'« 
The Practice of REBT
REBT AND EXISTENTIAL FAMILY THERAPY
Robert Levant's (1978) phenomenological-humanistic critique of conventional
family therapy, including the approaches of the psychodynamic and the fam-
ily systems therapists, includes some excellent points that have been rather
neglected in the literature, and it may well serve as something of a corrective
influence in the future. As longtime skeptics of both the approaches that he
criticizes, we are inclined to endorse many of his views and to enthusiastically
join him in calling for a radically different, "third force" method of family ther-
apy that makes up for the grave deficiencies and distinct inefficiencies of the
two highly popular systems and that utilizes some of Levant's valuable sug-
gestions. However, in espousing a phenomenological-humanistic outlook
toward marriage and family counseling, Levant unfortunately sees this out-
look as being incompatible with an active-directive, information-giving ap-
proach, whereas we see the two as being highly compatible. Let us try to show
how they are compatible.
We start off with several propositions that Levant, along with existentialist,
humanistic, experiential, and client-centered therapists, is likely to agree with:
1. Disturbed martial and family relationships stem not so much from what
happens among family members as from the perceptions these members have
and the views they take of these happenings.
2. Consequently, no matter what family members do, with or without ther-
apeutic aid, to bring about more favorable events and relationships within the
family context, these events and relationships are not likely to remain favor-
able if one or more of the members perceive themselves and/or the other par-
ticipants in a highly distorted, negative way.
3. Almost all individuals who live in family settings have strong innate self-
correcting and self-actualizing tendencies so that even though they have dis-
torted, self-defeating, and family-sabotaging perceptions and behaviors, they
have a considerable ability, by dint of their own resources or with the help of a
therapist, to change their ways and to bring about more favorable events and
relationships within the family system.
4. A therapist can be of considerable help to family members who see them-
selves as being in trouble by conveying to them his or her empathic under-
standing of their misperceptions of themselves and others; by accepting them
fully, even with their foolish and self-sabotaging behavior; by encouraging
them to unconditionally accept themselves, no matter how badly they behave;
and by serving as a good model of an open, genuine, congruent individual who
is able to accept himself/herself in spite of personal deficiencies and in spite of
the hassles and uncertainties that life presents to all of us (Ellis, 1991c, 1993e,
1994c, 1996a).

Family Therapy 
W
This kind of phenomenological approach to human disturbance (inside and
outside family systems) and to the therapist's helping clients with such dis-
turbance appears, as Levant points out, indigenous to client-centered ther-
apy but not to most psychodynamic and system-oriented therapy. What he
fails to note is that it is also part and parcel of several kinds of active-direc-
tive therapy—for example, Perls' Gestalt therapy, FrankTs existential therapy,
and REBT—that radically differ from client-centered procedures. And we
contend that approaches that combine a phenomenological view of human
disturbance with a highly active-directive methodology not only include all
the advantages that Levant claims for client-centered family therapy but also
are more efficient than client-centered or other passive-nondirective forms
of treatment.
Our main reasons for believing in the efficacy of a phenomenological and
active-directive approach to family therapy arise from several propositions
about human disturbance and personality change that Levant (and other
client-centered proponents) significantly omits. Here are some of these
propositions: (1) Just as humans are born and reared with strong self-actual-
izing and self-correcting tendencies, they are also born and reared with excep-
tionally strong tendencies toward misperception, overgeneralization,
self-damning, deifying and damning others, omnipotence, magical thinking,
low frustration tolerance, and other forms of irrationality (Beck, 1976; Ellis,
1962,1976a, 1976b, 1979e, 1980b); (2) once people begin to think and act in
self-defeating ways they easily become habituated to doing so and resist
changing, not because of the unconscious motivations to which psychody-
namic therapists attribute their resistance but because it is intrinsically hard
for virtually any person to change his or her habitual dysfunctional thinking,
feeling, and behaving (Ainslie, 1974; Ellis, 1962,1979a, 1979e); (3) although
the most serious kinds of individual and group disturbance probably stem
from misperception and faulty personal constructs (Kelly, 1955), a consider-
able amount of sex, love, and marital difficulty, as well as individual dysfunc-
tion, partially arises from people's misinformation and lack of training for
marital and family living (Ellis, 1957; Ellis & Harper, 1961b; Raimy, 1975);
(4) people who have emotional difficulties, within or outside a family frame-
work, almost always require some kind of concrete, monitored homework
assignments that they can do by themselves or in between therapy sessions
(Ellis, 1994c, 1996a; Ellis & Grieger, 1977; Masters & Johnson, 1970; (5)
some individuals and some families have special handicaps such as low edu-
cational and/or socioeconomic status, and there is evidence that such handi-
capped persons would have enormous difficulties changing themselves or
improving their family structures solely with the help of relatively passive,
client-centered methods of counseling (Ellis, 1994c, 1995b). It seems likely
that even if many educated, middle-class clients can appreciably benefit from

W* 
The Practice ofREBT
phenomenological and nondirective family therapy, many other types of
clients require a more active-directive approach.
For reasons such as these, which are hardly exhaustive, we would suggest
that even though the active-directive approach taken by many psychodynamic
and family systems therapists leaves much to be desired in helping people
resolve their individual and family problems, other kinds of active-directive
approaches are suitable and will tend to bring about better results than pas-
sively oriented client-centered therapy. What specific kind of directive family
therapy would we recommend? Naturally, REBT, a comprehensive method of
treatment that consciously employs a large variety of cognitive, affective, and
behavioral methods, and that does so within a distinctly phenomenological and
humanistic framework (Ellis, 1973,1976g, 1988,1991c, 1993c, 1993d; Ellis &
Harper, 1997).
REBT FAMILY THERAPY
The most popular forms of family therapy today, psychodynamic and systems-
oriented therapy, leave much to be desired because they tend to ignore and to
lose family members as individuals, as people in their own right. They often
fail to help clients to see themselves as the creators and perpetrators of their
own intrapersonal and interpersonal problems, not merely as the victims of
early childhood upbringing or of contemporary environmental difficulties. A
phenomenological-humanistic view of families who come for therapy, such as
the client-centered view espoused by Levant (1978), would serve as something
of a corrective for the one-sided methods of family therapy espoused by most
of today's leading practitioners and writers. This view itself, however, omits
some of the realities of human individual and group disturbance and conse-
quently ends up being somewhat pollyannaish and ineffectual.
A "third force" in family therapy is therefore suggested here that com-
bines a phenomenological-humanistic approach with a highly active-direc-
tive attempt to help family members surrender their misperceptions of
themselves and others and to make profound philosophic changes in their
intrapersonal and interpersonal attitudes and behavior. As an example of this
kind of a phenomenological-humanistic and active-directive approach to
family therapy, some of the principles and practices ofREBT help individ-
uals change themselves and help each other within the family unit. In REBT
family therapy clients are shown how to acknowledge, understand, and min-
imize their own emotional problems, as well as how to help other family
members become more rational, experience more enjoyable and appropri-
ate emotional responses, and act in a less uelf-defeating and family-defeat-
ing manner.

Family Therapy 
l4*
WHERE REBT FAMILY THERAPY IS
MOST EFFECTIVE
All forms of therapy seem to be especially effective with clients who are young,
intelligent, verbal, and not too seriously disturbed; and REBT, too, works best
with family clients who are in this range. However, it is one of the few forms of
treatment that also is effective with DCs (difficult customers), that is, individ-
uals who are in the psychotic, borderline, organic, or mentally deficient cate-
gory. Naturally, it does not work as well with these DCs as it does with the less
disturbed clients. But it particularly helps such clients to accept themselves
with their disturbances, to stop downing themselves for being emotionally
inadequate. Then, because it is realistic and can easily accept the concept of
limited gains for some individuals, REBT helps family members with severe
personality disorders to train themselves to be less seriously aberrated,
although it does not pretend to "cure" them (Ellis, 1994b, 1994c, I994d,
1996a, 1996b).
Moreover, rational emotive behavioral family therapy is particularly effec-
tive at helping less seriously disturbed family members fully accept and nicely
put up with more aberrated members. If children are, as they often are,
dyslexic, overimpulsive, antisocial, or psychotic, REBT shows their parents
that although they may have significantly contributed to these children's dis-
turbances, they usually did not directly cause them. It teaches such parents that
there are almost inevitably strong biological factors in their children's over- or
underresponsiveness and that they, the parents, are hardly to blame for such
factors. It also shows parents how to fully accept their emotionally or physi-
cally handicapped offspring and how to try to help them be less (though not
necessarily non-) disturbed (Ellis, 1957,1995b; Ellis et al, 1966).
At the same time, REBT frequently shows children, such as older children
and adolescents, how to accept their alcoholic, psychopathic, borderline, and
psychotic parents with their handicaps and how to stop roundly criticizing and
excoriating them for being the way they currently are. Thus, in the case of 14-
and 12-year-old sons who were extremely incensed about their alcoholic
father's irresponsibility and their mother's neglecting them for a lover only a
few years older than themselves, they were able to see, after only a few sessions
of REBT family therapy, that both their parents were acting in a highly irre-
sponsible manner—since they had some choice about drinking and about
neglecting their children and were choosing to exert this choice in nonparental
ways—but that they, like all humans, had a right to be wrong, were fallible, dis-
turbed individuals who decided to act the way they did but who could be
accepted and forgiven in spite of their antifamily behaviors. Once these two
youngsters learned, in family therapy, to accept their parents with their irre-
sponsible behaviors, they were able to maintain reasonably good and loving

146 
The Practice of BEBT
relationships with these parents and to focus on what they, the children, were
going to do to get along better in this poor family environment. Their school-
work and their relations with their own friends then considerably improved;
they were even, to some degree, able to help their parents face their problems
and to act somewhat more responsibly. This is what frequently happens in
rational emotive behavior therapy: by accepting the "poor" or "bad" behavior
of other family members, parents, or children are then able to help these oth-
ers improve their behavior and act somewhat more responsibly.
GOALS OETHE FAMILY THERAPEUTIC PROCESS
The main goals of rational emotive behavioral family therapy are usually the
following:
1. To help all the family members, or at least as many as possible, to see that
they largely disturb themselves by taking the actions of the other members too
seriously and that they usually have the choice, no matter how these others
behave, of not seriously upsetting themselves about their behavior.
2. To help the members continue to keep, and even augment, their desires,
wishes, and preferences (including their desires for family love, amity, and
responsibility) but to be keenly aware of and to largely surrender their "must's"
demands, and commands that others in the family act the way they would pre-
fer them to act.
3. To encourage parents and children to feel strongly sad, regretful, frus-
trated, annoyed, and determined to change things when they are not getting
what they want or are getting what they do not want in and out of the family
setting, but to clearly demonstrate how to differentiate these healthy negative
feelings from feelings of severe anxiety, depression, hostility, self-pity, and low
frustration tolerance and to minimize the latter while acknowledging, feeling,
and at times even augmenting the former.
4. To pinpoint and be closely in touch with their Irrational Beliefs—their
absolutistic "should's," "ought's" and "must's"—-that usually seem to underlie
their unhealthy feelings and dysfunctional behaviors and to keep disputing and
challenging these ideas and replacing them with preferential, more sensible
philosophies of living.
5. To learn a variety of cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques that
will be available to them for combatting their dysfunctional ideas and encour-
aging them to think, feel, and behave more healthily and self-enhancingly.
6. As they change their basic disturbance-creating attitudes and philosophies,
to investigate more effective problem-solving ways of changing the practical
issues—the real frustrations and annoyances—that are preventing them and
other family members from being as happy and effective as they would like to

Family Therapy 
147
be. In REBT terms, as they particularly work on their Irrational Beliefs (IBs),
the goal is to simultaneously work on changing their A's (Activating events or
Activating experiences) that accompany and contribute to these IBs and that
also contribute to their C's (disturbed and dysfunctional Consequences).
7. Not only to learn to deal effectively with the present crises in their fam-
ilies and to stubbornly refuse to upset themselves about these crises but also
(and even more important) to realize that, no matter what occurs to them and
their close relatives in the future, they can develop a sensible way of accepting
these exigencies, again refusing to upset themselves about what occurs, and
striving to achieve both practical and emotional solutions to their family (and
other) problems.
CLIENTS' RESPONSIBILITIES
REBT teaches clients that, in the course of therapy as in the course of the rest
of their lives, their primary responsibilities are to themselves—not to the ther-
apist, the therapeutic situation, nor even to other family members. They are
shown that therapy can be a most helpful procedure but that there is no rea-
son why they must undergo it or have to follow its rules or teachings. As in
everything else, it is highly preferable that they do so but not necessary.
At the same time, all family members (or those old enough to understand)
are shown that if they really want to be responsible to themselves first and to
other family members second, they had better fully accept the decision to do
this; and that such acceptance only truly exists when they decide, and act upon
their decision, to work and practice at helping to change themselves and others.
They are continually shown that there is no free lunch and that the most desir-
able behaviors, on their own and others' part, do not automatically come into
existence but almost always had better be the result of strong determination
to change and hard work at changing themselves.
In REBT for families, therefore, each family member is pretty much made
responsible for his or her inner changing and for trying to modify the practi-
cal aspects of family problems. As in the family counseling methods of
Dreikurs (1974), it is recommended that children be given a chance to set fam-
ily policies, along with their parents and other adults; but that they also take
responsibility for their actions and try not to cop out by blaming others for
what they do. Adult family members, too, are shown how to acknowledge their
own activities and take responsibility for them, even when other individuals in
the family are acting badly and are contributing to difficulties. It is continu-
ally emphasized that one family member has little ability to change others
(though he or she can encourage such changes) and that changing oneself had
better largely depend on one's own attitudes and efforts, not on the manner in
which others treat one.

148 
The Practice of REBT
Clients are held to be responsible for their attendance at family therapy ses-
sions and for doing their homework assignments. If they do not like what is
happening during the therapy, they are encouraged to speak up about their
feelings and to object to what is going on. They are also encouraged to express
their feelings about other family members and to voice clearly what they would
like to see and would not like to see accomplished within the family system.
Clients are held responsible for their own change because no therapist can
really change them. They can only modify their own behavior (or refuse to do
so), and they are never blamed for choosing not to change. They are consis-
tently shown that they are in control of their own emotional destiny and that
they distinctly have the power to alter their own thinking, emotion, and behav-
ior. But if they stubbornly persist at self-defeating actions, they are merely
shown that this is their way and that they are fully entitled to keep it but that
they soil have strong options to change.
THERAPIST'S ROLE AND FUNCTION
REBT is one of the most active-directive forms of therapy, and this applies to
REBT family therapy. The therapist is presumably a highly trained individual
who understands how people needlessly upset themselves and what they can
usually do to stop doing so and to actualize themselves in (and outside) the
family setting. REBT therapists, therefore, are expected to be authoritative
without being authoritarian; to bring up discussions of basic values without
foisting their own personal values on clients; to be sensitive to and consider-
ate of multicultural influences on family members from different ethnic, reli-
gious, and cultural backgrounds; and to push, coach, persuade, and encourage
clients to think and act against their own self-sabotaging tendencies (Ellis,
1978b, 1994c).
Some of the specific skills that REBT practitioners had better display in
family therapy are the following:
1. They can empathize with clients' thinking and feeling and also with their
basic disturbance-creating philosophies.
2. They can monitor clients' reactions to other family members and to the
therapist and show them how to become highly involved but not overin-
volved and dependent on others (including the therapist).
3. They can show clients how they are relating well and poorly and teach
them communication inside and outside the therapeutic sessions.
4. They can teach the general principles of self-upsetness and self-help and
instruct clients how to specifically apply these to themselves and to other
family members.
5. They can confront clients with their avoidant, defensive, and resistant

Family Therapy 
t49
behavior, show them the irrational beliefs behind this kind of behavior, and
persuade them to change these beliefs and to become much less defensive.
6. They can at times be intrusive, questioning, forceful, and action-assigning,
just as a successful teacher of children or adults would be.
7. They can be self-revealing of their own feelings and ideas and show clients
that they are not afraid to express themselves during therapy sessions nor
to take risks in the therapeutic process.
8. They can unhesitatingly teach a variety of sex, love, marital relating, and
other skills as these seem appropriate for different clients but at the same
time, as noted above, not overdo practical skill training as opposed to teach-
ing the specific REBT disputing skills.
9. They can specifically focus on teaching themselves and clients the unique
REBT-oriented skills, such as (a) actively listening, probing, and evoking
clients' statements of what they are telling themselves, of their irrational
and rational beliefs; (b) showing clients the connections between thinking
and emoting—between B (their Belief system) and C (the emotional and
behavioral Consequences) of this thinking; and (c) Disputing (D) or chal-
lenging Irrational Beliefs (IBs) and giving follow-through homework
assignments to aid the achievement and maintenance of the corrected mis-
perceptions (Ellis, 1978b, 1991d, 1993e; Wessler & Ellis, 1980; Woods &
Ellis, 1996).
PRIMARY TECHNIQUES USED
IN REBT FAMILY THERAPY
The main techniques used in REBT family therapy include the following.
Cognitive Family Techniques
In REBT family therapy clients are shown what they do to largely create their
own disturbances: how they have dysfunctional (as well as functional) Beliefs;
and how they demand that they must do well and be approved, that others
(especially family members) must treat them fairly and lovingly, and that con-
ditions must be nice and easy. They are especially shown how to use realistic,
logical, and pragmatic methods to dispute their irrational Beliefs and to sur-
render them. On a lower or less elegant level of disputing, they are shown how
to give themselves coping statements to replace their irrational beliefs, includ-
ing such statements as, "I am a fallible human who doesn't have to behave com-
petently!" "Others will do what they want and not necessarily what is right or
what I want!" "I do not need what I want and can be a reasonably happy human
being even when frustrated or deprived!" They are taught to use some of the
principles of general semantics, promulgated by Alfred Korzybski (1933), and

150 
The Practice of REST
to interrupt their all-or-none thinking when they make such statements as, "I
always fail," "I can't change," and "I'll never get what I want."
Family members are given several different forms of cognitive homework
to do, such as to look for their absolutistic should'* and must's and to steadily
fill out the Self-Help Report Form (Sichel & Ellis, 1984) published by the
Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy. They are shown special cog-
nitive methods, such as "Disputing Irrational Beliefs" (DIBS) (Ellis, I974a),
which they can use on their own (see chapter 2). They are helped to figure out
several choices and actions that are better alternatives to the ones they are now
utilizing. They are taught sensible philosophies, such as "Nothing is awful—
only inconvenient!" "There's no gain without pain!" and the philosophies of
tolerance, flexibility, humanism, and unconditional acceptance of themselves
and others (Ellis, 1972b, 1994c). They are vigorously and consistently shown
some of the present and evil consequences of their self-defeating behaviors and
how they will inevitably suffer more from their low frustration tolerance,
short-range hedonism, and insistence on trying to get away with things. They
are taught imaging techniques that will help them in their marital and sex lives.
They are shown how to use methods of cognitive distraction, such as Edmund
Jacobson's (1938) relaxation technique or the sensate focus, to divert them from
their anxiety and depression.
Emotive Family Techniques
REBT family therapy employs a good many emotive, evocative, and dramatic
techniques of therapy that are also designed to show people how they feel and
think and to encourage them to make profound philosophic changes. Thus,
REBT therapists use rational-emotive imagery (Ellis, 1993a; Maultsby, 1971)
to help clients get in touch with their worst feelings, such as horrors, despair,
and rage, and to change them to healthy feelings, such as disappointment, sor-
row, and annoyance. They use role-playing methods to help clients to express
and work through some of their feelings and self-sabotaging behavior. They
employ shame-attacking exercises (Ellis, 1971a, 1973; Ellis & Abrahms, 1978)
to induce clients to deliberately bring on and then surrender their feelings of
intense shame and self-downing. They resort to dramatic and evocative con-
frontation, especially with clients who refuse to acknowledge or work through
some of their feelings (Ellis, 1962). They often use forceful language to help
loosen people up and get them to face some of their "unfaceable" problems
and emotions. They encourage clients to vigorously and powerfully repeat to
themselves in a highly emotive manner, sensible statements such as "I do not
need what I want!" "I never have to succeed, no matter how desirable it may be
to do so!" "People should sometimes treat me badly—for that's the way they
naturally behave!" (Ellis, 1993g). They often use humor and paradoxical inten-
tion to strongly attack some of their clients' irrational beliefs and to show how

Family Therapy 
151
silly they are (Ellis, 1977b; 1977c, 1987b). They give clients, as noted above,
unconditional acceptance and thereby show them that they can accept them-
selves, even when their behaviors are abominable (Ellis, 1994c, 1996a).
Behavioral Family Techniques
REBT has always been exceptionally behavioral as well as cognitive, more so in
some ways than the behavioral therapies of some of the main behavior thera-
pists, such as Joseph Wolpe. Some of the behavioral techniques it frequently
utilizes are these: It gives clients activity homework assignments, most of them
to be done in vivo rather than merely in these clients' imaginations. Frequently,
these assignments consist of clients staying in an unpleasant marital or family
situation until they make themselves unupset about it—and then perhaps leav-
ing it, REBT also makes use of a good deal of operant conditioning and con-
tracting methods: helping family members to contract with other members to
do one thing (such as communicate more often) if the other will also do some-
thing else (such as be more tidy around the house). Parents are also frequently
shown how to use operant techniques to help their children change their
undisciplined or other self-defeating behaviors. Skill training, such as asser-
tion training, is often taught, cognitive and behaviorally. Other decondition-
ing and reconditioning methods are also used in REBT family therapy,
including overt desensirization, emotional training, sexual resensitization, and
flooding. In regard to the latter technique, in vivo implosion or flooding is rec-
ommended for some family clients because it has been found to be one of the
most effective means to help them overcome long-standing phobias, compul-
sions, and obsessions that seriously interfere with their marital and family lives
(Ellis, 1988,1990,1991c, 1993b, 1993e, 1994c, 199Sa, 1996a).
GUIDELINES FOR FAMILY
MEMBERS TO BE SEEN
REBT has no special guidelines for family members that presumably have to
be followed to do effective family therapy. The preference is for all the family
members to be seen at some time during the therapy process, but there are no
compulsive rules about this, and different conditions and circumstances are
taken into account.
Different ways of seeing family members, all of which may be used in
REBT, are (1) seeing all the family members together for all of the sessions;
(2) seeing the family members usually together but sometimes seeing one or
more of them separately (e.g., seeing a more disturbed member more fre-
quently than the others); (3) seeing mainly the husband and wife and only
sometimes the other family members; (4) usually excluding very young family

I *2 
The Practice of REBT
members, seeing them a few times with the others but, especially if they are
children below the age of 4 or 5, not seeing them as regularly as the other
members; (5) seeing the parents together but the children, for the most part,
separately, either singly or together; (6) seeing mainly one parent and prefer-
ably trying to see the other parent and the children but working with the one
parent who will come for therapy if the others will not come too.
It is desirable for all family members to be seen, preferably often all
together. But, again, this is not an REBT rule, and when only other kinds of
sessions can be arranged, REBT family therapy can still be effective.
CASE EXAMPLE
The following is a typescript of part of the initial family treatment session with
a mother, father, and their IS-year-old daughter. The mother is 4S years of age
and is a housewife who had done a little professional dancing during die first few
years of her marriage. The father is also 45 and runs his own business in die gar-
ment center. They have 21-year-old and 17-year-old sons, both of whom are
doing well in school and not having any serious difficulties. But both parents are
very upset about their daughter because she has always shown herself to be quite
bright, with an IQ of 140 on regular intelligence tests and the ability to think
very clearly in certain respects, but she does not do her schoolwork, refuses to
cooperate in regard to family chores, does not get herself a job when she
promises to do so for the summer or after school, fights with her brothers, steals
from her family and from the neighbors, and is quite disruptive in several ways.
She acknowledges some of these behaviors but makes innumerable excuses for
or denies the other things that her family members accuse her of doing.
At the beginning of die first family therapy session widi me (AE), die daugh-
ter, Debbie, admits that she is a "kleptomaniac" and that she uncontrollably
steals, but she only partially admits that she steals to provide herself with
money for alcohol and pot and that she uses them steadily. She and her par-
ents agree that she had two good years, in the seventh and eighth grades, when
she was in a strict Catholic school, but since that time she has lost her purpose
in life, which was to be a lawyer and politician, and that she now feels pur-
poseless and hopeless and has no incentive to work at school or anything else.
Early in the session she noted that she had a goal during those two good years:
"I knew I wanted to be a lawyer."
THERAPIST Yes?
DEBBIE: And I worked on that process.
THERAPIST* But you've now given that up?
DEBBIE: Yeah.
THERAPIST. Why did you give that up?

Family Therapy 
M
DEBBIE: Because I really wanted to become a politician.
THERAPIST. And you don't want to become a politician anymore?
DEBBIE: No. They have bad practices and stuff.
THERAPIST: So that's out of the window?
DEBBIE: Yes, I have no goal.
THERAPIST. You're right. If you had a goal in life, that would probably help you be
happier and keep out of the trouble you're getting in. But if you no
longer want to be a politician, what stops you from picking some other
profession and working toward achieving that?
DEBBIE: Well, I usually only pick on one goal and don't think of other things.
THERAPIST: Well you could still choose to be a lawyer, even if not a politician. And
there are lots of other things that you could pick that you are capable of
doing. Do you think you're capable of doing what you really want to do?
DEBBIE: For the most part, yes.
THERAPIST: You had really better give some more thought to that. When bright
people like you screw up and give up on goals, they frequently feel that
they're incapable of succeeding at those goals. So perhaps you are in
that category, too.
DEBBIE: Maybe.
The therapist's main hypotheses, which he would hold on theoretical
grounds in most cases like Debbie's, are that she has low frustration tolerance
and refuses to do things, such as disciplining herself, that are hard and uncom-
fortable and that she has severe feelings of inadequacy that prevent her from
trying too hard to achieve anything and encourage her to cop out at school
and at other tasks at which she perfectionistically thinks that she might not do
well enough. He tries to get her to bring out information to back these
hypotheses and only partly succeeds in doing so. But the manner in which she
answers his questions and responds to the statements of her parents, who are
present during the entire session, lead him to believe that there is consider-
able evidence to back his hypotheses.
THERAPIST: Do you want to keep getting into the kind of trouble that you're in,
with your parents, with the school, and with your brothers?
DEBBIE: No.
THERAPIST: Why do you think you steal?
DEBBIE: 'Cause I can't control myself.
THERAPIST: That's a nutty hypothesis! Horseshit! You have Difficulty in controlling
yourself. But that doesn't mean that you can't. Suppose that every time
you stole, the authorities cut off one of your toes. How long do you
think you'd continue to steal?
DEBBIE: [Mumbles something like "Many times."]
THERAPIST: Many times? Well, that's a strong belief you have—but it's not true. You
most probably wouldn't. You would then have a powerful impulse to
steal, but you don't have to give in to your impulses. For two years you

1*4 
The Practice of REBT
weren't doing many self-defeating things and did well at school and at
home and didn't steal. Doesn't that show that you're able to control
your impulses?
DEBBIE: Yes, to some extent.
THERAPIST: Yes, for two whole years you were apparently okay. You were obviously
able to control yourself to some degree.
DEBBIE: Because I was allowing myself to have a purpose. And I was working on
that purpose.
THERAPIST: Yeah. And that was fine. If you have a purpose, you'll use your energies
in that direction, and then you won't be using them in the other, self-
defeating directions.
Although it is quite early in the first session, the therapist wants to try to
show Debbie and her parents that, in REBT terms, Activating events (A) do
not mainly cause or create emotional Consequences (C), but instead, Beliefs
(B) do. So he tries to help Debbie to see that just before she gives in to her
urge to steal she is telling herself something and that this set of Beliefs is the
main cause or contributing factor to her dysfunctional Consequences.
DEBBIE: I want it.
THERAPIST: You mean," I want the money I take?"
MOTHER.- I think the main thing she wants is to buy liquor or dope with the
money.
THERAPIST: That may be. But leti go along with Debbie's views. You're saying that
you want the money. Right?
DEBBIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: But if you only stuck to that belief—"I want the money"—you proba-
bly wouldn't steal. Do you know why?
DEBBIE: Because I'd see that I often get caught and wouldn't want to get caught
stealing it.
THERAPIST: Right! Whenever we have a want or a wish, we tend to see the conse-
quences of having it, and we often reject it. So you're probably saying
something much stronger than "I want the money" when you steal. Do
you know what that stronger belief probably is?
DEBBIE: No. Uh, maybe, "I need it."
THERAPIST: Correct! "I need the money that I want! I must have it because I want
it!" And that need and that must will often drive you to steal, even when
you know you may get caught and suffer the consequences. But is that
need or must true? Must you have the money? Or must you have what
you get with the money—alcohol, pot, or anything else?
DEBBIE: No.
THERAPIST: That's right! No! But if you keep insisting that you must have the
money (or anything else), you're going to feel not only uncomfortable
but horrible, off the wall, when you don't have what you think you
must. Then, when you feel exceptionally uncomfortable, you may well

Famify Therapy 
W>
go on to another must; "I must not feel uncomfortable. I can't stand this
discomfort of not having what I must have!" Is that what you're say-
ing, too?
DEBBIE: Yes, I can't stand it. I can't]
THERAPIST; Stop a minute, now! Can't you really stand it? Can you stand the dis-
comfort of being frustrated and not getting exactly what you want at
the very moment that you want it?
DEBBIE: I don't like it
THERAPIST: Right. But you're not merely sucking to "I don't like it." That would
be fine, if you did. I hear you saying, "because I don't like it, I can't stand
it! It's awful if I don't have it!"
DEBBIE: But I really want it!
THERAPIST. Yes, of course. But your want is not what drives you to stealing. Your
basic attitude, "I must have what I want!" is what does so. And we call
that attitude low frustration tolerance. You're apparently telling your-
self, "I want, and must have, what I want right now! I can't bear frustra-
tion and deprivation." Isn't that what's really going on in your head?
DEBBIE: Yes, I can't stand it.
THERAPIST: Well, as long as you have that basic philosophy—"I absolutely need what
I want and I can't stand not having it!"—you'll be driven, driven by those
ideas, to steal, fight with your family, break things, goof at school, and
do the other things that tend to get and keep you in trouble. But you
could have, instead, the philosophy: "I want what I want and am deter-
mined to try to get it. But if I don't get it right now, tough! So I don't!
I do not need everything I immediately want!" But you are saying to
yourself, as far as I can see, "I do need it!"
DEBBIE: Well, perhaps I'm doing it because I'm escaping.
THERAPIST: Escaping from what? What are you escaping from? Feelings of inade-
quacy, you mean? The feeling that you haven't the ability to get sorrie
of the things that you want or think you need?
DEBBIE: That could be one.
THERAPIST: Let% talk about those inadequacy feelings for a moment. What are they?
Are you willing to talk about them in front of your parents?
DEBBIE: It doesn't matter.
THERAPIST: Well, what do you feel inferior about?
DEBBIE: I'm confused. I haven't figured out what's the purpose of it all. I don't
see how to react to certain problems.
THERAPIST: Such 3S?
DEBBIE: Well, some domestic problems. And I just don't get along with people.
I like them but I don't understand them.
THERAPIST: And you think that you should, you must understand them?
DEBBIE: Yes. And that's why I often try to get high.
THERAPIST. And do you blame yourself, then, for getting high?
DEBBIE: Yes, sometimes.
THERAPIST: Well, let's assume that getting high won't solve things and make you
understand people better, and it's therefore something of a mistake. And

If* 
The Practice of REST
let's suppose you're not yet very good at understanding and getting
along with people. Why do you put yourself down for these errors or
deficiencies?
DEBBIE: Because I know that it's not right.
THERAPISTS Yes, well, let's assume that. Suppose what you're doing is wrong. How
does that make you a worm, that wrong behavior?
DEBBIE: [silence]
THERAPISTS Suppose your mother and father do something wrong. Are they shits
for doing that wrong thing?
DEBBIE: No.
THERAPIST: Then why are you?
DEBBIE: Because then I'm a wrong person.
THERAPISTS But you're not a wrong person! That's your nutty thinking! That's what
we call an overgeneralization. If we can get you to give up that kind of
irrational thinking and get you to completely accept yourself, even when
you are doing the wrong thing, then you can usually go back and cor-
rect your error. But if you put yourself down and define yourself as a shit
for acting shittily, there's no good solution to the problem! For how can
a shit be deshittifted? [Debbie and her parents all laugh fairly heartily
at this statement.] And feelings of inadequacy don't come from doing
the wrong thing. They come from condemning yourself for doing it—
putting yourself into hell. Then that makes things much worse.
DEBBIE: YeS, it does.
THERAPIST: But do you really see all of what's going on here? You first do badly—
or think that you will do badly at something. Then you put yourself
down, make yourself fet\ inadequate as a person. Then you tend to do
something like drink or take pot to make yourself relax temporarily and
feel a little better. But then you get into more trouble because of the
alcohol or pot or the stealing that you did to get the money for it, and
then you blame yourself more and go around and around in a vicious
self-damning circle.
DEBBIE: I guess I do. I keep thinking that I'm really no good. And then things
get worse.
THERAPIST: Right!
DEBBIE: But how can I stop that?
THERAPIST: The best solution is to see very clearly what I said before: that some of
your acts are poor or self-defeating but ihztyou are not a worm for
doing them. If we could get you to fully accept_yoar«^; your being, your
totality, even when you are screwing up and acting stupidly or badly,
then we could get you to go back and work on improving your screw-
ups. And you could change most of them, which you are quite capable
of doing if you weren't wasting your rime and energy and making things
worse by your self-blaming. That isn't going to work.
DEBBIE: It doesn't. I just feel worse. And then I think that I have to keep repeat-
ing this, uh, inadequate behavior.
THERAPIST Right! The more you condemn yourself for your poor behavior, the more
you lose confidence in your ability to correct that behavior.

Family Therapy 
J*7
DEBBIE: [smiling] A shit can't be deshittified!
THERAPIST: Exactly! If you are, to your core, a thorough turd, how can you change
your turdiness? No way!
DEBBIE: But how do I stop blaming myself?
THERAPIST. By getting rid of your fundamental musts. For, at bottom, you seem to be
saying: "I must, I have to do well." Not "I'd like or prefer to do well." And
you're also saying to yourself, and very strongly, "I must not suffer incon-
veniences. Irt awfitlin do." Not "I'd like to avoid inconveniences. But if
I don't, I don't! I can still abide them—and still be a happy human!"
DEBBIE: I see what you mean. But how am I going to keep seeing that and
believing it?
THERAPIST: By damned hard work! By continuing to think about what you say to
yourself and do. And by changing your perfectionistic, demanding
thinking into preferences and desires.
The therapist, without knowing too much about Debbie and her parents,
takes the main information he does have—that she demands that she do well
and that the universe treat her kindly—and quickly and forthrightly attacks
these unrealistic, dysfunctional Beliefs and tries to show her that she can do
this herself and can give them up. As he talks to her, he interrupts from time
to time to show the parents that they, too, have musts about Debbie and that
they are unrealistically demanding that she act well and are condemning her
and upsetting themselves when she doesn't. So he lets them listen to his dis-
puting of her dysfunctional beliefs but also indicates that they are often doing
the same thing she is, that they are acting irrationally, too—and do not have
to continue to do so. Toward the end of the session the therapist speaks to
Debbie and then to her parents:
THERAPIST: If I can help you to keep your desires and to give up your must's, you'll
get somewhere in feeling better and acting better. By so doing, you'll
most probably get more of what you desire and less of what you don't
want. But you won't get everything you desire. [To Debbie's parents]:
She has normal desires, but then she tells herself, "I must, I must fulfill
them!" And: "I must get what I want immediately?' Now, if I can get all
of you, including her, to look for the should, look for the must, which
you are all bright enough to do, and I can persuade you to tackle these
absolutes and give them up, you will be able to stop upsetting yourselves
and usually solve the original problem of getting along together and
living happily in this world. [To Debbie, again]: If I can help you do
that, then you'll get along with your parents and siblings and live more
successfully. But what you tend to do is to give up your desires because
of your must's. "I must do this and must do that! But maybe I won't. And
that would be terrihle\" Then you feel depressed and anxious and start
goofing. Then you blame yourself for the goofing and feel more anx-
ious and depressed. A very vicious circle! Have you read any of my writ-
ings on this?

IH 
The Practice of REST
The therapist closes the session by assigning all three of them, Debbie and
her parents, to read a group of pamphlets on REBT that the Institute for Ratio-
nal Emotive Behavior Therapy gives to all clients at its clinic in New York and
also to read A Guide to Rational Living (Ellis & Harper, 1997) and A Guide to
Personal Happiness (Ellis & Becker, 1982), which many clients are encouraged
to read. They are to make another appointment, for next week; in between,
they are to make a note of ail the times they feel upset during the week, espe-
cially about each other and what is happening in the family; to look for the
"should's" and "must's" that lead to these feelings; and to find them or fail to
find them and to bring up their feelings during the next session, so that they
and the therapist can look for the must's that largely create them.
Following this first session, Debbie and her parents were seen once a week
for a total of 16 weeks. Debbie was largely seen for individual sessions by her-
self, but usually one or both parents were also seen with her for a half hour,
and she was seen by herself for a half hour. On a few occasions her parents
were also seen by themselves to deal with their anger and other feelings of
upsetriess about her "rotten" behavior and about their own problems with each
other and with outsiders (especially her father's problems with his business
associates and her mother's problems with her women friends).
It would have been preferable as a part of the REBT for families mat was done
with Debbie and her parents to see her two brothers too during some of die ses-
sions. But the parents insisted that the brothers had no problems and might be
harmed by participating in the therapy. The brothers diemselves also resisted
coming because they thought that their sister had a serious emotional problem
and diey did not. Under more usual conditions the brothers would have been
seen along with die other members of the family in REBT for families.
The main REBT techniques for family therapy that were used widi Debbie
and her parents during these sessions were as follows.
Cognitive Methods
Whenever Debbie or her parents showed any feelings of anxiety, depression,
anger, or self-pity (which they frequently did) or when Debbie continued her
antisocial and antifamily behavior and failed to go for job interviews or to work
at the jobs she temporarily obtained, diey were shown die ABCs of REBT: diat
their C's (emotional Consequences) did not stem only from their Pis (Activat-
ing experiences) but largely from their own IBs (Irrational Beliefs) about these
A5s. They were shown their absolutist^ "should's" and "mustfe" and how to Dis-
pute these (using die logical, empirical, and pragmatic method of questioning
and challenging these "must's"). They were given the cognitive homework of
working on the REBT Self-help Form published by the Institute for Rational
Emotive Behavior Therapy (Sichel & Ellis, 1984), and these were gone over
with them and corrected by the therapist. They were given, as noted above,

Family Tberafy 
159
bibliotherapeutic materials on REBT to read and discuss with the therapist,
particularly A Guide to Rational living (Ellis & Harper, 1997); How to Live with
a ''Neurotic" (Ellis, 1957); and Overcoming Procrastination {Ellis & Knaus, 1977).
They were also encouraged to listen to some of the cassette recordings distrib-
uted by the Institute, such as How to Stubbornly Refuse to Be Ashamed of Anything
(Ellis, 1971b), and Conquering Low Frustration Tolerance (Ellis, 1976b). They also
participated in some of the 4-hour workshops on parent-child relationships and
overcoming depression that the institute regularly holds.
Cognitively, too, the members of this family, especially Debbie, were given
useful advice and suggestions on how to solve certain practical problems that
arose (such as how Debbie could get and keep a job, in spite of her poor repu-
tation in the community and her poor record of holding a job up to that time).
They were shown how to write down and focus on the real disadvantages of
their avoidant behaviors. They were taught some of the principles of general
semantics dealing with overgeneralization and allness (Korzybski, 1933). They
were made aware of their wrongly attributing motives and intentions to others
(e.g., Debbie continually thought that her parents were against her when they
were merely trying to get her to become more self-disciplined) and how to chal-
lenge these misattributions. They were shown how to use cognitive distraction
methods, such as Edmund Jacobson's (1938) progressive relaxation methods,
when they wanted to temporarily calm themselves down or overcome insom-
nia. The therapist sometimes used humor and paradoxical intention with
them—for example, tried to get Debbie to deliberately foil at certain tasks, to
prove to herself that the world did not come to an end when she did, and tried
to help her to see the humorous side of her taking things too seriously and
blaming herself for her poor behavior. And they were continually taught how
to accept themselves fully and to stop condemning themselves for anything,
even when they indubitably screwed up and made stupid mistakes.
Emotive Methods
Emotively, even though I (AE) pulled no punches in showing Debbie how she
was being irresponsible to herself and others and did not let her get off the hook
with her clever rationalizations in this respect, she could always see that I fully
accepted her as a human being, with her failings, and that I had confidence that
she definitely could—if she would—change. I also encouraged her, as a home-
work assignment, to do rational-emotive imagery—to imagine that she really did
very badly, at work or socially, and that others despised her for her poor behav-
ior—and to make herself feel only sorry and disappointed rather than depressed
and self-downing. I did role playing with her and her parents and let her confess
to them some of the things she hadn't yet told them, let her feel very ashamed,
and then had her persist at the confessions and work through the shame and be
able to handle their responses. I gave her out-of-session homework assignments

160 
The Practice of REBT
to deliberately do "foolish" or "shameful" things—such as wear very "loud" cloth-
ing—and to work at not making herself feel embarrassed or humiliated when she
did this. I got her to write out some rational self-statements—such as "I do not
need immediate gratification, no matter how much I realty want it"—and to repeat
these to herself very vigorously 10 or 20 rimes a day. I deliberately used "obscene"
language with her parents, who were very prim and rigid in this respect, to help
loosen them up and to show mem that they could even use this kind of language
themselves (Ellis, 1985c). I used George Kelly's (1955) dramatic enactment
method of fixed role playing with both Debbie and her parents and had them
write scripts about the kind of people diey would like to be and then enact these
scripts for a week, until they became used to acting in that unfamiliar way.
Behavioral Methods
With Debbie in particular I used several behavioral methods and taught her
parents how to use them with her. Whenever she spent at least 2 hours a week
looking for a part-time job, she was permitted to socialize with her friends or
do other things she enjoyed. And whenever she lied or stole, she was confined
to her room for several hours at a time. When her parents failed to do their
homework and criticized her in an angry, damning manner, they were also to
refrain from socializing with their friends, in person or over the phone, for
that day. These reinforcements and penalties worked fairly well, as long as they
were enforced. But her parents had to enforce them with Debbie, and she, to
some extent, had to enforce them with her parents.
Debbie agreed to take several different kinds of activity homework assign-
ments, including looking for a job, doing various family chores, and behaving
in a cooperative instead of disruptive manner with her parents and her siblings.
Some of these she quickly carried out and got a great deal of benefit from the
fact that she saw was able to do them and was not totally out of control, as she
often said she was. Other assignments, such as the chores, she did sporadically,
but she still seemed to derive some benefit from doing them.
Outcome
At the end of 16 weeks of family REBT, Debbie was doing her schoolwork
regularly, had ceased stealing, and was getting along much better with her fam-
ily members. Better than that, she was accepting herself much more than
before, even when she goofed and failed to do something up to her own stan-
dards. Her mother and father were considerably less angry at her, even when
she fell back into her old disruptive behavior; and though the emphasis of the
family therapy was not very much on their relations with each other, they vol-
untarily used some of the rational ideas we were all discussing and began to
feel less angry at one another and to behave more cooperatively. The parents'

Family Therapy 
161
sex life also improved considerably, though there was little discussion of this
during the therapy sessions. They especially understood Debbie much better
and were able to take her with her failings. The father returned for several
therapy sessions a year and a half later because he was avoiding some of his
office work and was putting himself down for this. At that time it was ascer-
tained that Debbie was still acting remarkably well and that a considerable
degree of family harmony had been achieved.
CONCLUSION
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, REBT and CBT have a good record
as far as their basic personality hypotheses and claims for clinical effectiveness
are concerned. In the field of marriage and family therapy in particular, sev-
eral favorable outcome studies have been published (as also noted above), but
research in this area is still in the formative stage. Clinically, REBT appears to
work very well, whether clients are seen separately or conjointly, and it works
in premarital, marital, and divorce cases (Ellis, 1962, 1978a, 1991c, 1993e).
However, studies and anecdotal reports of the effectiveness of any form of
therapy, especially family therapy, are highly suspect. In the final analysis, fam-
ily REBT will show proven effectiveness only when a considerable number of
controlled experiments have been performed to show that it brings better
results than other schools of family therapy, no therapy, or placebo therapy.

7
Qroup Therapy
Several methods of psychotherapy, such as psychoanalysis, employ group ther-
apy for expediency reasons—because it is more practical and less expensive for
clients, not because it notably fits in with the theory underlying these meth-
ods. Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT), however, distinctly uses an
educational rather than a medical or psychodynamic model (Ellis, 1962,197 la,
1973; Ellis & Grieger, 1977; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979). Consequently, like most
teaching, it distinctly favors group as well as individual sessions.
Although it is usually employed in small group processes—with from 8 to
10 clients on a once-a-week basis—REBT is also done with much larger
groups, such as a class of 20 or 30 students or a public workshop or a Rational
Emotive Behavior Training Intensive at which more than 200 people may be
present (see chapter 8). Its group aspects are also adaptable to audiovisual pre-
sentations because it can be taught and practiced by tape recordings, films and
videotapes, live radio and television presentations, bibliotherapy, programmed
instruction, and other forms of mass media presentations (Ellis, 1976b, 1976c,
1982b, 1993a; Shostrom, Ellis, & Greenwald, 1976). More than most other
methods of psychotherapy, therefore, REBT is truly group-oriented, and its
practitioners frequently use groups as die method of choice rather than because
of special circumstances.
DEFINITION OF GROUP THERAPY
As indicated in the previous section, REBT includes three main forms of psy-
chotherapy: (1) small-scale groups such as the seven regular groups of 8 to 10
individuals that I (AE) and Janet L. Wolfe lead every week at the Institute for
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Albert Ellis, "Rational-Emotive Family Therapy," in G.
M. Gazda (Ed,), Basic Approaches to Group Psychotherapy and Group Counseling (pp. 381-412).
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1982; and from Albert Ellis, "Group Rational-Emotive and
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy," International Journal of Group Therapy, 1992, 42:6)-SO.
162

Group Therapy 
163
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in New York; (2) large-scale groups of
50,100, or even more people, such as the regular workshop, Problems of Every-
day Living, that I and my associates give every Friday evening at 8:30 pm at
the institute; (3) special Rational Emotive Behavior Training Intensives, which
were started at the institute and in other cities in 1983 and which preliminary
research findings on several hundred participants indicate can produce favor-
able results in a single 8-hour large-scale intensive. Because small-scale group
therapy is more prevalent today than is large-scale, most of the present chap-
ter will discuss this type of group work using REBT principles and practices.
SPECIAL ASPECTS OF REBT GROUP THERAPY
In small-scale group REBT the main goals are for the members (1) to under-
stand the roots of their emotional and behavioral problems and to use this
understanding to overcome their current symptoms and function better in
their intrapersonal and interpersonal affairs; (2) to understand the difficulties
of other group members and be of some therapeutic help to these others; (3)
to minimize their (and the others') basic disturbability so that for the rest of
their lives they will tend to feel healthily rather than unhealthily emotional
and to upset themselves needlessly less often than when they first joined the
group; and (4) to achieve not only a behavioral but also a pronounced philo-
sophic change, including accepting (though not necessarily lilting) unpleasant
reality; surrendering magical, self-sabotaging thinking; desisting from consid-
ering life's misfortunes and frustrations awful; taking full responsibility for their
own emotional difficulties; and stopping all forms of self-rating and instead
learning to fully accept themselves and others as highly fallible and excep-
tionally error-prone humans.
In group REBT the therapist not only actively and directively shows mem-
bers who are bringing up their emotional problems that they are largely cre-
ating these problems themselves by devoutly and rigidly inventing and holding
on to Irrational Beliefs (IBs), vigorously questions and challenges these beliefs
and helps rip them up, encourages and pushes all the group members to look
for and dispute the shonld's, ought's, and mutt's of the other members, and helps
them give up their perfectionism and dictatorialness. All group participants
are steadily taught to think realistically and logically and to vigorously under-
mine, and to logico-empirically contradict, the disturbance-creating philoso-
phies of the other members. They are also shown how to Dispute their
irrational Beliefs by showing themselves the self-sabotaging consequences to
which they usually lead.
Both the therapist and the group consistently suggest activity-oriented home-
work assignments to participants. Some of these assignments (such as speak-
ing up in the group itself) may be carried out and monitored during the regular

/ 64 
The Practice of REST
sessions. Other assignments (such as making social contacts) are carried on
outside the group but are regularly reported and discussed during the sessions.
It has often been found that such assignments are more effectively given and
followed up when given by a group than by an individual therapist.
REBT includes a number of role-playing and behavior modification meth-
ods—such as assertion training, in vivo risk taking, and behavioral rehearsal—
that can be done during individual therapy sessions but that are more effective
in group. Thus, if a woman is afraid to tell people what she thinks of their
behavior, she may be induced to do so with other group members.
The group is deliberately arranged as a kind of laboratory where emotional,
gestural, and motor behavior can be directly observed rather than obtained
through clients' secondhand reports. Angry or anxious individuals who might
feel at home with an individual therapist and be able to hide their feelings from
him or her can often be more easily unmasked in group, where they are asked
to interact with several of their peers.
In REBT clients frequently fill out written homework report forms and give
them to the therapist to correct (Sichel & Ellis, 1984). During group sessions
a few homework forms are often read and corrected so that all members, not
merely the individual handing in the completed form, may be helped to see
specifically what are that person's Irrational Beliefs (IBs), and how he or she
can effectively dispute them. By hearing about other group members' main
problems and how they dealt with them on the homework report, clients are
helped to use these reports more efficiently themselves.
Members of REBT groups give each other valuable feedback as to how they
malfunction and what they are foolishly telling themselves to create this mal-
functioning. They also learn to view others and to give them feedback; even
more important, they get practice in talking other group participants out of
their Irrational Beliefs (IBs) and thereby consciously and unconsciously begin
to talk themselves out of their own self-defeating ideas.
One main purpose of REBT group sessions is to offer members a wider
range of possible solutions to their practical problems and their neurotic prob-
lems (that is, their problems about having the practical problems) than they
might normally receive in individual therapy sessions. Out of 10 people pres-
ent at a given session, 1 may finally zero in on a presenter's central problems
(after several others have failed), and another may offer an elegant solution to
it (after various lower-level solutions have been offered). Where a single
would-be helper may give up on a difficult issue (or person), some group mem-
bers may persist and may finally prove to be quite helpful.
Revealing intimate problems to a group of people may itself be quite ther-
apeutic for clients. In regular REBT group therapy they disclose many ordi-
narily hidden events and feelings to a dozen or so of their peers; in large-scale
REBT group procedures (such as at a large workshop on stress or on anger)
they may reveal themselves to a hundred or more people. Especially if clients

Group Therapy 
165
are shy and inhibited, this kind of disclosure may serve as a useful shame-
attacking or risk-taking experience. In its behavioral aspects, REBT special-
izes in this kind of shame-attacking or self-disclosing exercise and helps train
its group members to be able to do "shameful" acts without actually feeling
ashamed or putting themselves down in anyway (Ellis, 1969, 1971b, 1996a).
SELECTION OF GROUP MEMBERS
REBT therapy groups often include many different kinds of individuals, includ-
ing those who are moderately disturbed, severely neurotic, sociopathic, bor-
derline, and psychotic. At the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in
New York, where a number of groups meet regularly every week, group clients
are required to have at least one session of individual therapy for screening pur-
poses, to determine whether they are suitable for and are likely to benefit from
the group process. The vast majority of people interviewed for this purpose are
allowed, at least tentatively, to join a group. The relatively few who are screened
out are those who are (1) too undisciplined, talkative, or manic to listen to what
is taking place in group and to respond to others, (2) too autistic or schizoid to
participate, and (3) too hostile or too disruptive to be easily controlled by the
group leader and taught by the group to cooperate with the others.
If people are mistakenly permitted to join a group and it is later discovered
that they are too disruptive, require too much personal attention, and/or seri-
ously interrupt the fairly organized group process that normally is part of
REBT, they are first shown how to be more effective group members (for their
own sake and for that of the other participants). If this does not work, they are
told that they will, for the present, have to leave the group and go into indi-
vidual therapy until their therapist agrees that it is suitable for them to return
to group. In the course of the almost 40 years that I (AE) have been working
with REBT group therapy, fewer than 15 people have been specifically asked
to leave group and return to individual therapy.
GROUP COMPOSITION AND SETTING
The preferred composition of REBT groups is from 8 to 10 members, cover-
ing a wide range of diagnostic categories. An attempt is made to have about an
equal number of males and females in each group. Group members are of all
ages in the adult groups, ranging from about 18 to 60; most of them are
between 25 and 45. Adolescent groups include individuals from 13 to 17, again
with a fairly even distribution of males and females. Most of the group mem-
bers would be diagnosed as severely neurotic, a large minority as having per-
sonality disorders, and a few as psychotic. I (AE) have a large number of clients

166 
The Practice ofREBT
for individual REBT sessions at the clinic of the Institute for Rational Emo-
tive Behavior Therapy in New York; and a great many of these clients, after they
have had from 5 to IS sessions of individual treatment, are encouraged to join
a group and to finish their therapy by staying in the group from 6 months to
a year. This gives them time to work on their own emotional problems and to
relate to group process.
Once a member joins a group, he or she may have concomitant individual
therapy sessions regularly or irregularly. Most group members choose to have
them irregularly and therefore mainly learn the principles and practice of
REBT in the course of their group work. Clients who are shy or who have
interpersonal problems are particularly encouraged to join a group because it
is often more therapeutic for them to work out their problems with their peers
than to work on them only with an individual therapist (who may be a special
kind of person to them and therefore not representative of the people they
associate with in real life).
Originally, REBT groups were limited to 8 individuals. It was accidentally
discovered that when some members who had temporarily quit the group and
who wished to return were allowed to do so, the number could be raised to 10
or more. With groups of this size, usually about 8 or 9 attend each session
(because of absences); with this number in attendance, the group tends to
become more interesting and less repetitive.
The group is run in an organized manner, with the leader making sure that
only one member speaks at a time, that spontaneity is encouraged but a good
deal of order maintained, that silent members are pushed to speak up about
their own and others' problems, and that most members who bring up a prob-
lem are given specific homework assignments, which are later checked up on.
The leader also paces things so that no one is allowed to monopolize too much
of the group's time and no one is allowed to cop out and avoid participation.
Observation has shown that although REBT groups can be run regularly with
a small number of people, the presence of about eight persons at each session
is probably optimal for efficient and involved functioning.
My (AE's) groups meet once a week in my regular office in New York City,
which is furnished with three large sofas and extra-comfortable chairs. The
room is large (13 by 19 feet), is paneled, and has bookcases on most of its walk.
It is comfortable and attractive, has a special coat hanger for members' extra
clothing, and is equipped with adequate air conditioning in summer and heat
in winter. It has a high ceiling and two large windows. Every effort is made to
have the group members feel comfortable. The room is quite suited to group
marathons, which may continue for 10 or 14 hours a day.
When my groups go to another room for the second part of their session with
one of the group leaders who is in training, they go to another large and fairly
comfortable room. However, REBT group therapy is not dependent on any par-
ticular kind of setting and may be done in much less comfortable surroundings.

Group Therapy 
161
FREQUENCY, LENGTH, AND DURATION
OF GROUP SESSIONS
REBT groups usually meet once a week for 2 1/4 hours. My (AE's) groups are
also used to train leaders; therefore, they include a leader and an assistant
leader who is in training. The group stays with both these leaders for the first
1 1/2 hours and then goes to another room with the assistant leader for
another three-quarters of an hour. REBT groups, however, do not require two
leaders and can easily be run by one trained person without any assistance.
Groups are given a free 8-hour marathon every year, in addition to the regu-
lar once-a-week group process.
All groups are open-ended; once members join, they can attend group for
a minimum of 5 weeks and then (after giving 2 weeks' notice) can drop out at
any time. Those who drop out are usually soon replaced by new members.
New people therefore enter a group filled mostly with members who have
been in attendance for a period of several months and who help teach them
"some of the ropes" of REBT.
It is preferred that members stay in the group a minimum of 6 months
because it takes some time for them to learn the principles of REBT and to
have some group supervision of their homework assignments. Some less dis-
turbed individuals, however, are able to stay in group only 2 or 3 months and
get considerable help with their emotional problems.
PROCESS OF GROUP REBT THERAPY
Group REBT differs from other common forms of group procedures, such
as psychoanalytic and experiential group therapy, in several important
respects. To show what its process is like, let me (AE) describe its aspects in
my regular groups.
Transference Aspects
REBT views transference, first, as overgeneralization. Thus, because group
members were once treated badly by their father and treated well by their
mother, they may tend to put other males in the same category as their father
and may feel hostile or indifferent to men and warm toward women. They
may—or may not—also react to the therapist as a father/mother figure and to
other group members as siblings. These are overgeneralizations but, unless
they are extreme, may not lead to major emotional and behavioral problems.
Because REBT is not preoccupied with this kind of transference (as psycho-
analysis is), it does not obsessively look for it and consequently invariably
"find" it.

16S 
The Practice oj'REST
When normal, nondisturbed transference reactions are observed in my
groups, I largely ignore them; but when they escalate into disturbed reactions
in the group itself or in the members' personal lives, the other group mem-
bers and I pounce on these reactions and show members how destructive they
are and how to minimize or eliminate them. Thus, if Miriam avoids sex-love
relationships because her father kept rejecting her, we show her that all males
are not her father, that she can sensibly choose a different type of man, and that
if she makes a mistake and picks a partner who is as unloving as her father, that
doesn't prove that she needs his love, that she is worthless without it, nor that
she'll never be able to have a long-term loving relationship. The group and I
dispute her disturbed overgeneralizing but not her normal generalizing.
Similarly, if a male member deifies or devil-ifies me, the group leader, whom
he sees as a loved or hated father figure, we point out his disturbed transfer-
ence reactions, show him the distorted thinking that lies behind it, and encour-
age him to adopt less dysfunctional thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Or if a
woman fights with female group members just as she fights with her sisters,
we point out her transference and the irrational cognitions behind it and show
how to break her rigid women-are-all-like-my-sisters reaction.
The term transference is also used in psychotherapy to denote the close rela-
tionship that usually develops between clients and their therapist. I find that
such relationship factors do develop in my group but not nearly as intensely
as they do with my individual therapy clients. However, REBT actively
espouses the therapist's giving all clients close attention, showing real interest
in helping them solve their problems, and—especially—giving what Rogers
(1961) calls unconditional positive regard and what I have called unconditional
acceptance. So, although I am quite often confrontational with group mem-
bers, I try to show them that I really care about helping them; dial I will work
hard during every session to hear, understand, empathize with them; that I
have great faith that they can, despite their handicaps, change; that I can poke
fun at their unhealthy ways of thinking without laughing at them; and that I
totally accept them as fallible humans, no matter how badly they often think
and behave. I also use my person in my group sessions and consequently am
informal, take risks, reveal some of my own feelings, tell jokes and stories, and
generally am myself as well as a group leader. In this way, I hope to model flex-
ible, involved, nondisturbed behaviors.
Countertransference Aspects
I frankly like and dislike some of my group members more than I do others,
and I especially tend to dislike members who often come late, act unhelpfully
to others, fail to do their homework, and behave disruptively in group. When
I see that I am feeling this way, I look for my possibly telling myself, "They
absolutely shouldn't be the way they are and are rotten shits for being that way!"

Group Therapy 
169
I immediately dispute that damning Belief and convince myself that they should
act the poor way that they do because it is their nature to act that way right
now. I dislike what they do but I can accept them with their unfortunate doings.
By ridding myself of my demands of my clients, I largely (not completely)
overcome my negative countertransference, and I am able to deal with "bad"
group members more therapeutically. Sometimes, depending on their vulner-
ability, I confront them and honestly tell them, "I try not to hate you, but I
really do dislike some of your behavior, and I hope for my sake, the group's
sake, and especially your own sake, that you change it." When I find myself
prejudicedly favoring some members of my groups, I convince myself that they
are not gods or goddesses, and I make an effort to keep liking them personally
without unduly favoring them in group.
Levels of Intervention
Most of my interventions take place with each individual member as he is
telling about his homework, talking about his progress and lack of progress,
presenting new problems or returning to old ones. I speak directly to him, ask
questions, make suggestions, ferret out and dispute his dysfunctional thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors, and suggest homework. My interventions are mainly
about his personal problems, especially as they relate to his outside life but also
as they relate to what he says and doesn't say in group.
I often show the member that her actions (and inactions) in group may well
replicate her out-of-group behaviors. Thus, I may say, "Johanna, you speak so
low here that we can hardly hear what you say. Do you act the same way in social
groups? If so, what are you telling yourself to make yourself speak so low?"
My interpersonal interventions include commenting on how group members
react to each other; noting that they often fail to speak up to or interact with
other members; noting their warm or hostile reactions to others, encouraging
the former and questioning the latter; giving them relationship exercises to do
during group sessions; having a personal interaction with some of the members;
and, especially, pointing out that their group interactions may indicate how they
sabotage themselves in their outside relationships and giving them some in-
group skill training that may help them relate better outside the group.
My intervention with the group as a whole largely consists of giving all of
them cognitive, emotive, and behavioral exercises to be done in the group; giv-
ing them all the same homework exercise (such as a shame-attacking exercise)
to do before the next group session; giving them a brief lecture on one of the
main theories or practices of REBT; explaining to them some of the group
procedures and discussing with them the advantages and disadvantages of these
procedures.
Most of the time, as noted above, I intervene on the individual level, but
when interpersonal problems (such as two or more members failing to relate

'70 
Tbe Practice of REBT
to each other) arise, I often intervene with duos or trios. I also plan in advance
group-as-a-whole interventions, or else I spontaneously promote them as I
deem advisable (or as the spirit moves me!),
Process Versus Content Orientation
By far most of the time in my group sessions I use an individualized content
focus. I assume that the group members come to therapy to work on their own
individual problems and mainly to help themselves in their outside lives.
Therefore, I induce them largely to talk about the things they are disturbing
themselves about in their self-oriented and interpersonal relationships and,
with the help of the group, try to show them exactly how they are needlessly
upsetting themselves in their daily lives and what they can do to think, feel,
and act more healthily.
The purpose of REBT group (and individual) therapy is to show clients how
they are not only assessing and blaming what they do but also damning them-
selves for doing it; how they are also evaluating others' behavior and damning
these others for "bad" behavior, and how they are noting environmental dif-
ficulties and (externally and internally) whining about them instead of con-
structively trying to change or avoid them. Therefore, whenever members
bring up any undue or exaggerated upsetness and feel unhealthily panicked,
depressed, self-hating, and enraged (instead of healthily sad, disappointed, and
frustrated), the other members and I focus on showing them what they are
doing to upset themselves needlessly, how to stop doing this, and how to plan
and act on achieving a more fulfilling, happier existence. When they are, as it
were, on stage in the group, almost everyone focuses on them and their diffi-
culties and tries to help them overcome these in the group itself and in the out-
side world. So a majority of the time in each session is spent on dealing with
individual members' problems.
When, however, any of the members display a problem that particularly
relates to the group itself, this is dealt with specifically and group-wise. Thus,
if a member keeps coming quite late to group or is absent a good deal of the
time, I (or other members) raise this as an issue, and we speak to this member
about it. We determine, for instance, why he comes late, what core philoso-
phies encourage him to do so, how he defeats himself and the other members
by his lateness, how he can change, and what kind of homework assignment
in this respect he will agree to carry out At the same time, the general problem
of lateness—as it relates to group and also as it relates to the members' out-
side life—is also frequently discussed, and it is brought out how latecoming is
disadvantageous to other members and how it interferes with a cohesive and
beneficial group process.
Similarly, if a group member speaks only about her own problems and doesn't
take the risk of speaking to the others, disputing their self-defeating thoughts

Group Therapy 
J7i
and behaviors, and making some suitable suggestions for their change, she is
questioned about this and shown how and why she is blocking herself in group
and how and why she probably behaves similarly in her outside life. But the
general problem of members being too reserved (or sometimes too talkative) in
group is also raised, and various members are encouraged to speak up about
this problem and to give their ideas about how the group process would be
more effective if virtually all the members talked up appropriately, rather than
said too much or too little.
Also, if the group as a whole seems to be functioning poorly—for example,
being dull, uninterested, apathetic, or overly boisterous—I raise this issue,
encourage a general discussion of it, get members to suggest alternative ways
for the group to act, and check on these suggestions later to see if they are
being implemented. Once in a while I go over some of the general principles
of REBT—such as the theory that people largely upset themselves rather than
get upset—to make sure that the members as a whole understand these prin-
ciples and are better prepared to use them during the sessions and in their out-
side affairs.
Identifying Underlying Group Process Themes
I keep looking for cues for underlying issues that are not being handled well in
group, such as members being interested only in their own problems and not
those of other members; their not being alert during the group; their being too
negative to other members who may not be working at helping themselves
improve; their giving only practical advice to other members rather than dis-
puting their dysfunctional philosophies; their being too sociable rather than
being serious about their own and others' problems; their not staying for the
after-group session, which immediately follows each regular session and is led
by one of my assistant therapists after I leave the regular group session; and their
subgrouping or rudely interrupting others when the group is going on. I usually
intervene soon after these issues arise and raise the issue either with the indi-
vidual who is interfering with the group process or with the group as a whole.
My strategy of intervention is usually direct and often confrontational. Thus,
I may say, "Jim, you always bring up your own problems in group and seem to
have no trouble speaking about them. But I rarely hear you say anything to the
other group members about their problems. When you sit there silently while
die rest of us are speaking to one of the group members, I suspect that you are
saying quite a lot to yourself that you are not saying to the group. Am I right
about this? And if I am, what are you telling yourself to stop yourself from
speaking up to the others?"
A more general intervention will also usually be direct and will go some-
thing like this: "Several of you recently are not doing your agreed-upon home-
work or are doing it very sloppily. Let's discuss this right now and see if I am

172 
The Practice of REBT
observing this correctly, and if so, what can we do about it to see that the
homework assignments are more useful and to arrange that you tend to fol-
low them more often and more thoroughly."
If the group process is going well and the members are fairly consistently
bringing up and working on their problems, both in the group and outside the
group, my interventions are relatively few in regard to the group process. But
I frequently question, challenge, advise, and confront members about their
individual problems. I am an active teacher, confronter, persuader, encourager,
and homework suggester, and I usually talk more than any of the other mem-
bers during a given session. I try to make sure, however, that I do not give long
lectures or hold the floor too long. My questions and comments, therefore,
are usually frequent but brief. Although I can easily run one of my groups by
myself, without any assistance, because the Institute for Rational Emotive
Behavior Therapy in New York is a training institute and because we want all
of our trainees to be able to lead a group by themselves, I am usually assisted by
one of our trainees, a Fellow of the institute, who is with me and the group for
the first hour and a half of each session and who takes over the group by him-
self or herself for the after-group, for another 45 minutes. The assistant leader
is also trained to make active-directive interventions but not to hog the floor
at any one time and to encourage the other members to keep malting inter-
ventions, too. A few of the members in each group usually become quite vocal
and adept at making interventions, but I tacrfally correct them if they seem to
go too far off base. The assistant leader and I particularly go after the nonin-
tervening members and keep encouraging them to speak up more and more
about other people's problems. If they are recalcitrant or resistant in this
respect, we fairly often give them the assignment of speaking up a minimum
of three times in each session about other's issues.
Here-and*Now Activation
I keep showing the members how their behavior in group often—but by no
means always—mirrors their behaviors and problems outside the group. Thus,
if one member speaks sharply to another member, I may say, "Mary, you seem
to be angry right now at Joan. Are you just objecting to her behavior, with
which you may disagree? Or are you, as I seem to hear you doing, damning
her for exhibiting that behavior?" If Mary acknowledges her anger at Joan, I
(and the other group members) may then ask, "What are you telling yourself
right now to make yourself angry? What is your Jehovian demand on Joan?" If
Mary denies that she is angrily carping at Joan, I may then ask the rest of the
group, "What do you think and feel about Mary's reactions to Joan? Am I just
inventing her anger or do you sense it, too?"
We then get the group reactions to Mary; and if the group agrees that she
probably is quite angry at Joan, we go back to the question: "What are you

Group Therapy 
I'M
telling yourself right now to make yourself angry?" The others and I will also
try to get Mary to see that in her outside life she is probably more often angry
than she acknowledges and that she is telling herself the same kind of demand-
ing things about those at whom she is angry as she is now telling herself about
Joan in the group.
Again, if Ted only offers practical advice to the other members and never
helps them to see and to dispute their self-defeating philosophies by which
they are upsetting themselves, I, my assistant therapist, or one of the group
members may say to him, "Look, Ted, you just ignored Harold's perfectionist
demands diat are making him refuse to work on the novel he is trying to write;
instead, you only offered him some practical advice on how to take a writing
course. You often seem to do this same kind of thing in group. Now isn't it
likely that in your own life you don't look for and dispute your Irrational
Beliefs and that you only look for practical ways of acting better with those
irrationalities so that you do not have to tackle them and give them up?"
Working with Difficult Group Members
One kind of difficult group member is the one who interferes with the group
process, such as Mel, who interrupted others, indicated that they were pretty
worthless for not changing their ways, and often monopolized the group.
Other members and I pointed this out to him several times, but he persisted
in his disruptive behavior. So we insisted that he stop and consider what he
was telling himself when, for example, he interrupted others.
His main wmrturbatory Beliefs appeared to be (1) "I must get in what I have
to say immediately or else I might lose it and never get to say it and that would
be ffwfiif." and (2) "If I don't make a more brilliant statement to the group than
any of the others make, I am an inadequate person and I might as well shut my
mouth and say nothing at all!" We showed Mel how to dispute and change
these ideas to preferences but not necessities that he speak and be heard and
that he make fine contributions in group, and we have him the homework
assignment of watching his interrupting tendencies and forcing himself for a
while to speak up in group only after he had given some other member the
choice of speaking up first. After several more sessions he had distinctly
improved his interruptive tendencies and reported that he was doing the same
thing in his group participations and individual conversations outside the group.
Another difficult type of member is the one who rarely completes the home-
work assignment he has agreed to do or else completes it occasionally and slop-
pily. I (and other group members) then ask him to look for the self-defeating
ideas that he is overtly or tacitly holding to block his doing these assignments,
such as: "It's hard to do this god-damned assignment; in feet, it's too hard and
it shouldn't be that hard! I can get away with improving myself without doing
it, even though other people have to do their homework to change. Screw it, I

174 
TbePraeticeofREBT
won't do it!" We keep after this member to look at the Beliefs he holds to block
his doing the homework, to make a list of the disadvantages of not doing it and
to go over this list at least five times every day, to dispute his Irrational Beliefs
strongly and forcefully and to keep telling himself functional coping self-state-
ments in their stead, to use rational emotive imagery to make himself feel sorry
and displeased but not horrified and rebellious about having to do the home-
work, to reinforce himself whenever he does it and perhaps also to penalize
himself when he doesn't do it, and to use other suitable methods of REBT to
undercut his dysfunctional thinking, feeling, and behaving about doing the
homework.
Another type of difficult group member is the one who is overly passive,
polite, and nonparticipative. I usually do nothing about such a member until
she has been in the group for several weeks and has had a chance to acclimate
herself to its procedures and to some of the principles of REBT. But then I
directly question her about her passivity and Jack of participation; if she
acknowledges these behaviors, I encourage her to look at her blocking
thoughts and actively dispute them. Thus, one member, Josephine, kept telling
herself, just before she thought of speaking up in group, "What if I say some-
thing stupid! They'll all laugh at me! I'll be an utter fool! They are all brighter
than I and know much better how to use REBT. I'll never be able to say some-
thing intelligent or to be helpful to the other group members. I'd better quit
group and only go for individual therapy, where it is much easier for me to
speak up because I only have to talk about myself and don't have to help oth-
ers with their problems."
In this case, the group and I did what we usually do: we disputed Josephine's
empirically false or unrealistic attributions and inferences and showed her that
she wouldn't necessarily say something stupid; that the group might well not
laugh at her even if she did; that all the members were not necessarily brighter
than she; and that if she kept trying, she most probably would be able to say
something intelligent and to be helpful to the other members. As usual, how-
ever, we went beyond this—as we almost always do in REBT—by showing
Josephine, more elegantly, that even if the worst happened, even if she did say
something stupid, even if she was laughed at by the group, even if all the oth-
ers were brighter than she, and even if she never was able to say something
intelligent or to be helpful to the others, she still would never be an inadequate
or rotten person but would only be a person who was now behaving poorly
and who could always accept and respect herself while remaining unenthusi-
astic about some of her traits and behaviors.
This is what we usually try to achieve with difficult clients who continually
down and damn themselves and who therefore steadily feel depressed, panicked,
and worthless: the group members and I persist in showing her that we accept
her as a fallible human and that she can learn to consistently do the same for
herself. Group REBT (like individual REBT) is particularly oriented toward

Group Therapy 
helping all clients give themselves unconditional self-acceptance, that is, to
reject and to try to change many of their dysfunctional behaviors but always—
yes, always!—to accept themselves as humans. Yes, -whether or not they perform
well and whether or not, they are approved or loved by significant others.
This is one of the cardinal views of REBT and one that often—though, of
course, not always—works well with difficult clients. This aspect of REBT is
probably more effective in group than in individual therapy, because all the
members of the group are taught to accept both themselves and others uncon-
ditionally so that when an arrant self-denigrator comes to group, she is not
only accepted unconditionally by the therapist (who is especially trained to do
this kind of accepting) but is almost always accepted by the other group mem-
bers, thus encouraging and abetting her unconditionally accepting herself.
Activity Level of Therapist and Group Members
In cognitive-behavioral therapy in general and in group REBT in particular,
the activity level of the therapist tends to be high. I (AE) am a teacher who often
shows my clients how they upset themselves and what they can do to change,
but I also keep encouraging and pushing them to change. The romantic view
in therapy is that if clients are provided with a trusting and accepting atmo-
sphere they have considerable ability to change and will healthfully use this
ability to get themselves to grow and develop. I take the more realistic view
that they can but that they often won't choose to modify their thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors unless I actively and directively push them to do so. Con-
sequently, as noted previously in this chapter, I speak more than any other
group member during each session; I purposely and purposively lead the group
in "healthy" rather than "unhealthy" directions; and I keep each session going
in an organized, no-nonsense, presumably efficient way. I try to make sure that
no one is neglected during each session, that no one monopolizes the group,
and that sidetracking into chit-chat, empty discussion, bombast, endless phi-
losophizing, and other modes of problem avoidance is minimized.
As leader, I try to maximize honest revealing of feelings, cutting through
defensiveness, getting to members' core dysfunctional philosophies, disputing
these philosophies, accepting present discomfort, and carrying out difficult in-
group and out-of-group experiential and behavioral assignments. For exam-
ple, I (or the other members) may suggest that Sam, an unusually shy person,
go around the room and start a conversation with every member who is pres-
ent. I will then direct Sam to do so, will encourage him to keep going around
the room, will ask him about his feelings as he does so, will get him to look at
what he is thinking to create these feelings, will ask the other members for
their reactions to his overtures, and will lead a general discussion on what has
just transpired and how Sam and the other members can gain from this exer-
cise. Once, when we did this exercise with an exceptionally shy man, he not
175

176 
The Practice of REBT
only became much more active in group from that session onward but also,
for the first time in his life, began to approach people in his neighborhood bar,
where previously he had always waited for them to approach him. He noted
that my actively persuading him and the group to participate in this encour-
aging exercise was a real turning point in his life.
METHODS EMPLOYED
The main technique employed in a regular group REBT is that of each mem-
ber presenting a current problem, such as a feeling of anxiety, depression,
worthlessness, hostility, or self-pity, or a dysfunctional behavior such as addic-
tion, procrastination, or outbursts of violence. The therapist and several other
members of the group then talk to this presenter and first try to discover his
or her activating experience (A) and self-defeating emotional and behavioral
consequences (C). Once this is determined, the therapist and the group try to
help the presenter to zero in on the B's, the crucial Beliefs, and particularly the
absolutistic Irrational Beliefs (IBs) that are mainly creating of "causing" the
dysfunctional consequences (C). These dysfunctional Beliefs are then directly
and vigorously disputed (D) by the therapist and the group members, and they
try to help the presenter learn effective disputing and carry it on in his or her
outside life. Group members also regularly suggest cognitive and behavioral
homework assignments for the presenter to do to dispute Irrational Beliefs,
and they check up, in subsequent sessions, to see if these homework assign-
ments have actually been carried out and how they can be continued or mod-
ified in the future.
Many of the other cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques of REBT
are also regularly or occasionally used with group members who bring up
their problems (Ellis, 1992c, 1995a; Ellis & Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Grieger,
1977; Ellis & Harper, 1997; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979). There are few of the
regular REBT methods that are not equally effective when used in group; sev-
eral of the methods are even more effective. Thus, group-given homework
assignments are likely to be carried out more frequently and more thoroughly
than are the same assignments given in individual therapy; and role playing
in group is often more evocative, more anxiety-arousing, and more effectively
critiqued than the same kind of role playing done in the course of an indi-
vidual therapy session.
The following special methods are used in group REBT.
1. Structured exercises, such as risk taking, self-disclosing, and shame-
attacking exercises, are regularly given to tht groups in order to arouse, reveal,
and deal with feelings that some of the members might not normally experi-
ence or might refrain from talking about when they do experience them.

Group Therapy 
I77
2. All group members are encouraged to read some of the basic bibliother-
apy writings of REBT, such as How to Stubbornly Refuse to Make Yourself Miser-
able about Anything—Yes, Anything (Ellis, 1988), How to Keep People from Pushing
Your Buttons (Ellis & Lange, 1994), A Guide to Rational Irving (Ellis & Harper,
1997), Overcoming Procrastination (Ellis & Knaus, 1977), and A Guide to Per-
sonal Happiness (Ellis & Becker, 1982). All group members are given a series of
REBT pamphlets when they start therapy and are urged to read these and
other self-help materials that include the main REBT theories and practices.
When group members see that other members do not understand some of the
REBT philosophies, they frequently assign these readings in the form of
homework.
3. At the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in New York
City, group members have available to them a large variety of talks, workshops,
seminars, and specialized skill training groups. Thus, a shy person may not
only be a member of a regular REBT group but may, for a limited period of
six or eight sessions, join a social skills-group, where he or she will receive spe-
cific instructions in encountering and socializing with others. Group members
may also use some of the other events at the institute—especially the famous
Friday night workshop on Problems of Everyday Living—to meet and become
friendly with other people who may be using the REBT philosophy.
THERAPIST ROLE
In REBT groups the therapist takes a very active-directive role in leading and
running the group, keeping things in order, ensuring that silent people talk
up and that others are not too talkative, and seeing that people consistently
bring up their most serious problems and open up about them. In regard to
disputing members' Irrational Beliefs and helping them with practical solu-
tions to their problems, the therapist is one of the most active members of
the group, frequently the most active. REBT group therapists ask questions,
probe, teach, encourage, give homework assignments, present structured exer-
cises, and perform all the other directive functions that are usually performed
in individual REBT. The theory of REBT states that people not only severely
disturb themselves but frequently hold on, powerfully and rigidly, to their
absolutistic Beliefs, by which they make themselves disturbed; consequently,
their basic irrationalities had better be quite strongly and persistently revealed
and uprooted by REBT practitioners and by other group members. To this
end, group leaders try to see that the active-directive process of REBT is
steadily employed and that the group process practically never deteriorates
into dullness, apathy, disorganization, unrestrained display of feelings, anar-
chy, or other forms of behavior that some other kinds of therapy encourage
or allow. The REBT group leader, therefore, distinctly leads when he or she

118 
The Practice of WBT
does not, therapeutic processes may ensue but, at best, might be called low-
level or inelegant REBT (Ellis, 1978b).
GROUND RULES FOR THE GROUP
The REBT groups that are held at the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy in New York are given printed ground rules that explain how the ses-
sions are run, what the attendance rules are, to what extent they are encouraged
to socialize with other group members, and so on. Some of the main rules follow.
1. All transactions during the group and the sessions outside the group that
members have with each odier are to be strictly confidential and are not to
be revealed to others.
2. Group members are freely allowed to socialize with each other outside die
group as long as they bring the information they thus learn about each
other to the group sessions and as long as they do not make their whole
lives an in-group process. They can even date each other and go seriously
with each other, if doing so does not inhibit them from continuing to reveal
themselves fully in group.
3. Group members are encouraged to help each other during sessions and
outside the group, to be highly critical of others' behaviors but not to con-
demn other group members zs persons, and to be especially cooperative with
new people who join the group.
4. Group members are urged, in regular sessions and during rational en-
counter marathons, to push themselves as much as possible to reveal their
most uncomfortable feelings and to bring out their serious problems. They
are also encouraged to try to get others to reveal themselves and to refrain
from politely letting inhibited and untalkative members get away with this
kind of unrevealing behavior.
RESEARCH
An unusual number of outcome studies have been done on REBT that tend
to show it is more effective as a form of psychological treatment than when
emotionally disturbed individuals are left on a waiting list, given a placebo form
of therapy, or subjected to non-REBT procedures. There now exist over 500
controlled experiments using REBT and related cognitive-behavioral forms
of therapy; almost all of these experiments show positive results in favor of
REBT (DiGiuseppe, Miller, & Trexler, 1979; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979; Haaga &
Davison, 1989; Hajzler & Bernard, 1991; Hollon & Beck, 1994; Lyons &
Woods, 1991;McGovern & Silverman, 1984; Miller & Berman, 1983; Silver-

Group Therapy 
t!9
man et al., 1992). A good many of the outcome studies that have shown that
REBT and allied cognitive behavior therapy work effectively have been done
with group rather than individual psychotherapy (Ellis, 1992c; McClellan &
Stieper, 1973;Meichenbaum, Gilmore, & Fedoravicius, 1971).
In addition to these studies, a number of other controlled experiments have
been published, indicating that REBT and allied cognitive-behavioral group
therapy is effective when used in a classroom situation with children and adults
who are taught rational emotive behavioral methods and through this psy-
choeducational group technique are enabled to change their self-defeating feel-
ings and behaviors (Hajzler & Bernard, 1991; DiGiuseppe et al., 1979; Ellis
& Whiteley, 1979; Lange, 1979; Lyons & Woods, 1991; Rose, 1980; Upper &
Ross, 1979,1980).
LIMITATIONS OF GROUP REBT
Rational emotive behavior therapy, like psychotherapy in general, has distinct
limitations, as noted in the first major work in this area, Reason and Emotion in
Psychotherapy (Ellis, 1962). This is largely because, at bottom, people seem to
be biologically as well as sociologically disturbed and self-defeating, and so far
no way of curing them that is even near-perfect has yet been discovered.
REBT, moreover, has its own limitations and, like all therapeutic systems,
works only some of the time for some individuals. We would still hypothesize,
as in the first paper on REBT, given at the American Psychological Associa-
tion Convention in Chicago in September 1956 (Ellis, 1958a), that, compared
to other systems of therapy, REBT brings better results more quickly for more
disturbed people more of the time. However, it still leaves much to be desired
as a system of psychotherapy and considerably more research needs to be done
to improve it and to make up for some of its deficiencies.
Group REBT and counseling especially have intrinsic disadvantages and
limitations when compared to more individualized REBT processes. For exam-
ple, group members can easily, out of overzealousness and ignorance, mislead
other members and at times even present them with harmful directives and
views. They can give poor or low-level solutions, for example, continuing to
show disturbed people what "practical" methods they can use to make them-
selves more successful rather than what deeper philosophic changes they can
make in their disturbance-creating outlooks.
Group therapy, even when employing an organized and efficient procedure
like REBT, has its clear-cut ineffectualities. The best-intentioned members
can waste time in irrelevancies, lead the problem-presenter up the garden path,
sidetrack and defuse some of the therapist's main points, hold back because
they inordinately look for the approval of the therapist or of other group mem-
bers, bring out their own and others' minor instead of major difficulties, and

ISO 
The Practice of REBT
otherwise get out on various nontherapeutic limbs. Group members can also
bombard a presenter with so many and so powerful suggestions that he or she
is overwhelmed and partly paralyzed. They can give poor homework assign-
ments or keep presenting so many new problems that old assignments are not
sufficiently checked upon. They can allow a member, if the therapist does not
actively intervene, to get away with minimal participation and hence make lit-
tle change in his or her disordered behavior. They can become overly frus-
trated and hostile and can irrationally condemn participants for their symptoms
or for their continuing resistance to giving up these symptoms.
Group REBT, consequently, is hardly a panacea for all ills, nor is it suitable
for all individuals who come for help. Some clients are not ready for it and
preferably should have some individual REBT before they enter a group. Oth-
ers—such as compulsive talkers or hypomanic individuals—may benefit from
group work but are too disruptive to the group (and require too much moni-
toring). Hence, it is best to have them work on their problems in other modes
of treatment. We firmly believe that the great majority of disturbed clients can
benefit as much, and probably more, from group therapy than from individ-
ual treatment alone, but the majority hardly means all.
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
REBT poses ethical problems for people when therapists or members of a
group confuse its views on people being guilty of unethical and immoral acts
and their feeling guilty or self-downing about such acts. REBT tries to teach
clients that many human acts—such as those that needlessly harm others—
are distinctly wrong, unethical, or immoral but that the people who perform
these acts are not to be labeled or condemned as rotten or damnable persons. It
largely takes the Christian position of accepting the sinner but not the sin: it
shows clients how to fully or unconditionally accept themselves with their
antisocial or self-defeating behavior but not to accept that behavior and to try
to do their best to change it. If people wrongly believe that REBT condones
immoral acts, rather than fully accepts the humanity and fallibility of those
who perform such acts, they can lead others astray and misinterpret one of
the main principles of REBT.
Ethics are an exceptionally important part of group therapy because when
a member joins a group the assumption is that he or she will be able to open
up fully to the other members, reveal things that may be hidden from all oth-
ers, and receive not only the attention but the cooperation of the group when
doing so. Group therapy to a large extent depends on a high degree of confi-
dentiality and trust among the members. If this is lacking, little effective ther-
apy will take place, and considerable harm may be done to some of the
participants.

Group Therapy 
181
Group therapy also implies that the person joining a group has some defi-
nite responsibility to other members not merely to avoid harming them but to
do his or her best to help them. If people join a group only to learn about
themselves and to help themselves and if they have virtually no interest in the
other group members and make no effort to encourage them to bring up prob-
lems and to help them solve some of these problems, they are taking a one-
sided and essentially irresponsible attitude toward the group. The leader and
other members are to bring this to their attention (in a nondamning and non-
hostile way) and ask them to "shape up or ship out": make some real effort to
help others as well as themselves or else go into individual therapy, where they
can be as self-centered as they want and still ethically participate.
GROUP PROTOCOL
Following is an excerpt from a fairly typical session of group REBT. The main
presenter is David, a 28-year-old school social worker, who is not only anxious
with his clients but has great trouble discussing his cases in group supervision
sessions because he is afraid of being criticized and scorned by his chief super-
visor and other members of the supervision group. During the first 10 min-
utes of the present session he tells the group about his problems, and several
members and the therapist question him to try to pinpoint what he is most
anxious about and under what conditions his anxiety is at its worst. The ses-
sion continues:*
1. 
DAVID: When I hear the criticism of my supervisor and supervision group, I
take it to its illogical extremes—which is, I don't listen to it any
longer. I withdraw. I turn off emotionally.
2. THERAPIST: Because "I don't know everything I should know about what they're
asking me? I can't answer them perfectly well"?
3. 
DAVID: Yes.
4. 
MARY: [a 33-year-old housewife]: But isn't that because your worth as a per-
son is being involved there?
5. 
DAVID: Maybe.
6. 
JOHN: [a 45-year-old psychiatrist]: Let's get back to more specific examples
of when you feel hurt and small. In your description you mentioned
feelings of incompetency. Let's assume that you do act incompe-
tently. Let's assume that it's really dyed-in-the-wool incompetence.
How does \htfeelmg of incompetence come about?
7. 
DAVID: I suppose that what you're trying to get me to say is that in order to
be competent, I most be competent 100% of the time.
8. 
MARY: I suppose you want me to say: "I have a feeling that you think we're
all trying to program you."
The responses are numbered because they are discussed individually in the following section.

182 
The Practice of REBT
9. 
DAVID: I guess... I know by the book what the rational answer is, and I can
give you the rational answer. But it's obviously not the way I am
behaving at the moment I turn off.
10. 
THERAPIST: Well, let me ask, When you give the rational answer, do you believe
itls true} Or do you believe you just give it because you read it in one
of my boob?
11. 
DAVID: I believe that that's probably what I know. I think I do know what's
going on. But I'm not very successful at working at it, at feeling that
the criticism of me that the supervision group is making is not really
all that important.
12. 
JOAN: [a 28-year-old artist]: Oh, when you do see what's going on, when
you feel put down by criticism, how do you work at it? Or do you
work at it?
13. 
DAVID: I say to myself, "I am being defensive. I am closing myself off." I'm
feeling put down by the situation or by people.
14. THERAPIST: O.K. So you see you have a symptom, a poor way of reacting to the
situation or to people. Now, that could be negative. For you say to
yourself, "Oh shit! I'm defensive. What a louse I am for being defen-
sive!" What else do you say? For I got the feeling before, when you
talked about the supervision group's criticizing you, that (a) you were
putting yourself down for being criticized, and then (b) you were
putting yourself down again for being defensive after they criticized
you. Now, what do you do to stop putting yourself down for both a
and 6?
15. 
DAVID: Well, I typically say, "I am here in order to get feedback on my cases
and how I am doing with them." And, "It is not reasonable for me
to behave defensively to the feedback that I am getting."
16. 
THERAPIST: I still hear you describing that "I'm idiotically doing something." But
I don't hear you attacking what you're telling yourself to make your-
self defensive about their criticisms of you.
17. 
JOHN: When you were answering that, you could give the rational answer,
and that's probably what's going on; it seemed to me that it's just not
clear to you what's really going on. You're in a fog. How could you
find out more precisely what really is going on?
18. 
DAVID: I don't know. How could I find out? Oh, I could act as if thatfs what's
going on and challenge it. How, at the moment I am upset, do I
know what's going on? I don't know.
19. 
JOAN: Why can't you ask yourself, "Why am I upset?"
20. 
THERAPIST: Or, better, "What am I doing to upset myself?"
21. 
MARY: Maybe ... It's very difficult if the only thing you want to do is to
stop the feeling. One suggestion is that you'd better prolong the
feeling of shame about their criticism and examine your thinking and
your feelings about having the shame, rather than just concentrate
on stopping feeling ashamed.
22. 
THERAPIST: Or rather than concentrating on "Oh, shit! I'm having this terrible,
this idiotic feeling!"
23. 
MARY: Right!

Group Therapy 
18*
24. 
DAVID: Or hating myself for having it.
25. 
JOHN: Right!
26. 
DAVID: Well, I'm more likely to hate myself for having the feeling of not
being able to take the criticism and for turning off.
27. THERAPIST: Right. But that isn't the solution. That's psychoanalytical-type
insight: "Oh, shit! I'm doing it!" But it's not rational emotive behav-
ior therapy.
28. 
ROSE: [a 37-year-old teacher]: To get back to what Mary said, I see you, for
example, imagining this "put-down" situation, and lying on your bed
with the tape recorder going, and letting it run in a stream-of-con-
sciousness kind of way. Perhaps just talking out all these kinds of
things that come into your head (about what your feelings are like
when in mat situation, getting more criticism from your supervision
group) will help you get much more in touch with the kinds of
things that are exaggerating and escalating your feelings of being put
down, your feelings about yourself and so on.
29. 
DAVID: Let me ask you a question, Rose. Do you feel, from the description
I gave, that I wasn't in touch with my feelings?
30. 
ROSE: Yes, I felt so. I felt, as you said before, that you really wanted to cry
and squelched the feeling. But if you did feel like crying and cried,
what was it going to get for you?
31. 
DAVID: Well, I suppose that if I did cry and people heard me cry, all those
people are going to feel very sorry for having done this to me—crit-
icized me.
32. THERAPIST: And change their behavior if they hear me cry and moan!
33. 
DAVID: Yes—and change their behavior.
34. 
JOAN: David, you say you want feedback from your supervision group. But
you also said that you feel that some of what you get is really not
feedback but a putdown. And I'm wondering if what you're calling
putdown is, in fact, feedback that you can't accept—suggesting that
you're really not looking for feedback, but you're looking for
approval for what you're doing. And when you don't get it, you call
it a putdown.
35. 
DAVID: Yes, I think you've got a well-taken point there. It occurs to me that
negative feedback or constructive criticism, which is what I'm prob-
ably getting, is somehow tied in my head with loss of love or loss or
approval.
36. 
THERAPIST: And with horror at this loss. But suppose Joan is right and that you
always are going for positive feedback, for approval, and saying, "It's
horrible not to get it!" Then what's the next step? Which I don't
think you're taking!
37. 
DAVID: I could ask myself, "Why is it horrible?"
38. 
THERAPIST: Do you do that? I haven't got any indication, so far today, that you
got to that step. You say, "Yes, I'm wrong for feeling it's horrible to
be criticized." Or, "Yes, I'm wrong for feeling defensive." 1 get that.
But do you ever say, "Why is it horrible to not be approved?"
39. 
DAVID: If I do it, it's very superficial.

184 
The Practice of REBT
40. 
JOAN: And seldom, I guess!
41. 
JOHN: I think farther, though, before you ever ask that question, I think it's
important to find out whether you are thinking that.
42. 
THERAPIST: But he did seem meaningfully to agree with Joan that he is think-
ing that.
43. 
JOHN: Hefc thinking that; but what exactly is going on inside him? Whether
he's thinking that or whether he's thinking in some other terms.
44. 
DAVID: My strategy is to behave so that people will respond to me in a sort
of, uh, positive, loving kind of way.
45. 
JOAN: Instead of really facing the fact that "I do think it's terrible if they
don't. And shit!—I'd better give up that belief]" You immediate])'
jump back to point A, the Activating event, and say, "How can I
change A, so that they'll approve of me?" So you're really skipping
over B, your Belief system, which is creating your turned-off escape
from feeling at point C.
46. 
JOHN: I still think you're very unclear about the nature of that Belief at B.
For you to spell out that Belief more specifically would be the thing.
47. 
DAVID: I don't know how to do it. What do you want me to do?
48. 
JOHN: For example, when you're feeling hurt or feel like crying, have you
sat down and tried to figure out what's going on in your head—what
kind of feelings are happening?
49. 
MARY: David, I've got a feeling that you're saying one thing and feeling
something else right now. You're just looking exasperated.
50. 
DAVID: I feel kind of frustrated. I—I really made touch with what Joan said.
51. 
THERAPIST: But you're not making touch with what John said. John is telling you
exactly what he would like you to do and then you say, "I don't know
what you want me to do."
52. 
DAVID: I can't see concretely what to do.
5 3. 
THERAPIST: But he's being concrete. Except, John, you may be lousing David up
with the word feeling. Forget about that word! Let me repeat what
John said. Let's suppose you feel very hurt. Now I think it's fairly
clear what you frequently do to avoid feeling that way. You said it a
couple of minutes ago: "I immediately try to change my behavior
and change that behavior so I won't feel hurt."
54. 
DAVID: Yes, that's what I usually do. I turn right off and feel practically
nothing.
55. THERAPIST: Now, instead of letting yourself just do that and keep doing that
self-defeatingly and never get to the source of your problem or
how to solve it, John is telling you, (1) "Stay with your feelings,"
and (2) "Look exactly for what you're doing, what you're saying to
yourself, to create the hurt. Take the responsibility for hurting
yourself. And look precisely for your Beliefs, at B, which lead you
to create it. Don't just infer what these Beliefs are. Because that's
what you're doing; you're inferring it from the book. "Well, I guess
I must be saying this and this to myself when I feel hurt and with-
draw." But John is saying: "Don't guess. Look for what you are

Group Therapy 
I8*
actually believing, actually saying to yourself. There's something
precise there, and it may not be the sentence we're using or those
you read in the book."
56. 
JOE: [a SO-year-old accountant]: There are two reasons for prolonging
the feeling of hurt that you're trying to avoid having: (1) so that you
can see more precisely what you're thinking to create it, and (2) so
that you can challenge your idea that you can't tolerate this feeling.
So it seems that a major suggestion for the first step is for you to
prolong the feeling—so that you can use it to examine the feeling
itself and to check the idea that you can't stand it.
57. THERAPIST: Yes, stay with it. And then do what John is suggesting—which is,
first, "What am I doing to create it?" and then also, "Why can't I
tolerate it?" For that is another thing you're probably saying to your-
self: "I can't tolerate the feeling of hurt. 1 must get rid of it immedi-
ately!" But we'd like to see that you're saying that. You're just
inferring it. And you don't really see what is going on in your head
just before you have the feeling and attempt to squelch it. Most peo-
ple, when they at first infer what they're saying to themselves, later
manage to see it as clear as a bell—as I say in one of my books. But
you somehow manage to skip seeing it clearly. And you say, "Well,
I guess I'm saying that." Then you don't get on to the next step:
"Well, if I am saying that, why the hell do 1 have to believe what I'm
saying?" You're not contradicting your belief because you're not
really admitting what you're saying. Now, is that clear?
58. 
DAVID: Yes.
59. THERAPIST: But why wasn't it clear before? John said it pretty well. Why wasn't
it clear when he said it?
59a. 
DAVID: I don't think he said it that clearly. It has to be clearer, for me to get
it, than he put it. When you're saying to ;ne, it's very clear, very spe-
cific, very concrete. I understand it. It's very direct.
60. 
JOAN: And he also said it more vigorously. Was it the vigor?
61. 
DAVID: No, I don't think so.
62. 
JOHN: He was more direct, though. Is that it?
63. 
DAVID: I think it was the directness. That's what I respond to. {To John}: I
had a feeling that you wanted me to say something, but I wasn't sure
what you wanted me to say.
64. 
JOAN: So you started debating with yourself, "What'll I say? What'll I say?"
Is that right?
65. 
DAVID: Yes. I wasn't able to zero in on John's wavelength because I wasn't
sure of where he was going.
66. 
JOHN: Do you find it difficult to think that I'm simply inquiring, just ask-
ing—rather than having some previously conceived idea that you've
got to come up with?
67. THERAPIST: But you do have a preconceived idea. That's horseshit, to pretend
that you don't!
68. 
JOHN: Oh, I do, but...

186 
The Practice of REST
69. 
THERAPIST: Yeah! So he says to himself, "He's inquiring, when he knows fuck-
ing well what the answer is! So why is he inquiring in that fashion?"
So—you're giving him an extra problem!
70. 
JOHN: To an extent. But specifically, I suspect he's thinking something
along the lines we reached with him.
71. 
DAVID: But, John ...
72. 
JOHN: But the exact nature, that I don't know.
73. 
DAVID: I realize that it would be better if you could evoke this from me. But
if I can't go with you, perhaps the next best thing is to be more direct
and tell me what you think I am doing.
74. 
THERAPIST: You'd better take a flyer and say, "Isn't it x> Isn't it j>? Isn't it z?"
75. 
DAVID: Yes.
76. THERAPIST: You're doing it too nondirectively. "What is it?" That sometimes
works. But with confused people, it often does more harm than good.
77. 
DAVID: Yes, I think it docs in my case.
78. 
MARY: We seem to be coming to the end of the session. Why don't we give
David some homework?
79. 
THERAPIST: Yes. What would you suggest for yourself, David?
80. 
DAVID: Well, you all suggested, which I think is good, that when I begin to
feel hurt, that I prolong that feeling rather than moving to my
defensive kind of comfortable avoidance.
81. 
MARY: Stay with your feeling and...?
82. 
DAVID: Try really to experience or come in touch with what in fact I am say-
ing to myself to cause these feelings. And to challenge those statements.
And also to challenge the statement that I can't stand the feeling.
83. 
MARY.- Well spoken!
84. 
JOHN: Yes, let me emphasize that maybe the first few times exploring it or
investigating it can be the prime thing to do before you get in there
and start questioning it too much. I find you really have to do it two
or three times before you really discover all the crap that's going on
in your head, before you really ferret out all those meanings you
believe that accompany your feelings.
85. 
JOE: On the other hand, he might be able to start on one of them, see
clearly what his meaning is, and knock it down before he starts on
the other meanings. Even if he doesn't discover all of his horseshit,
if he hits on one irrational idea and knocks it down, it may help him
later discover the others.
86. 
THERAPIST: Right! Let's not be perfectionistic! And also, I want to emphasize
what you said before, David. At one time you were in touch with
your feelings—you cried, whined, et cetera—and you found out that
it didn't lead you to the thoughts behind these feelings; and this
release of feeling did lead you to other, pernicious things, like feeling
very sorry for yourself, feeling depressed, and being unable to do
anything. The trouble with your kind of instruction, John, is that
when some people emphasize getting in touch with their feelings in
the manner that you recommend, they do it much too well and mull

Group Therapy 
W?
around in the juices of their own goddamned negative feelings! So
it's an interaction thing, the best way of doing it: letting yourself feel
the feeling and looking pretty quickly for the self-defeating and irra-
tional ideas beyond your feelings, and then, as we especially empha-
size in KEBT, disputing, challenging, and changing these self-defeat-
ing feelings.
87. 
JOHN: I am only suggesting that Dave find out what's going on, since that's
the first step to changing feelings.
88. 
MARY: But they interact, they go together. I agree that we should not try to
get David to be too perfectionistic—so that he first has to find all
that's going on, then find all his thoughts behind his feelings, and
then contradict all these defeating things. It's a little Utopian!
89. THERAPIST: Yes, and I don't think that David works this perfectionistic way. I
don't think that many people work that way.
90. 
JOE: And working that way may not be necessary to produce change in
David.
91. 
MARY: Right!
92. 
JOHN: Maybe, on the other hand, though, he could use... Oh, when your
turning off happens, David, you could investigate your thoughts
more than once and not assume that you have found them all the
first time you do so.
93. THERAPIST: Oh, yes. Once you start working on it, as several of the group mem-
bers are saying, you can later work on another aspect of your think-
ing, and then another aspect, and then still another aspect. You do
not have to do it all at once, the first time. Is that clear, David?
94. 
DAVID: Fine, I'll try that.
DISCUSSION OF PROTOCOL
Many of the main aspects of REBT group work are illustrated in the excerpt
from this session. Let me make the following points in this connection:
Response 4: Mary brings up the possibility that David's real problem is his
worth as an individual; that is, his downing of himself, his total being, if he fails
in a single major aspect of his life, such as in the eyes of his supervision group.
She does this not merely because David has already shown, in previous ses-
sions or earlier in this one, that he is overconcerned about his worth as a per-
son but because, on theoretical grounds, REBT holds that this is a basic
problem of most humans. They not only rate their performances (which is often
good and happiness-producing) but rate themselves (which is illegitimate and
shame-producing). REBT constantly fights against this self-rating tendency;
and as a member of an REBT group and consequently one of its practition-
ers, Mary raises the issue of self-rating and asks David if this is not one of his
fundamental problems.

/W 
The Practice of REBT
Response 9: David says, "I know by the book what the rational answer is,"
because he (and the other group members) read such recommended books as
A Guide to Rational Living (Ellis & Harper, 1997), Reason and Emotion in Psy-
chotherapy (Ellis, 1994c), and A Guide to Personal Happiness (Ellis & Becker,
1982). Bibliotherapy is a strong part of REBT, and it is frequently found that
it aids the therapeutic process appreciably. But one of the main purposes of
individual and group REBT sessions is to make sure that the client actually
thinks through rather than passively parrots some of the rational ideas he partly
gets through the reading.
Response 12: Joan rightly emphasizes that David's "knowing" that "the criti-
cism of me that the supervision group is making is not really all that impor-
tant" will do him little good unless he consistently works at applying this
knowledge whenever he feels shame in his gut or acts defensively to run away
frorm this shame. In REBT the client is not only shown, to use a superstition
model, that he magically and unrealistically believes that viewing a black cat
can hurt him, but he is also shown that he had better work and work to disbe-
lieve that superstition before he can expect to become unaffected by the
thought of seeing a black cat. Unless he actively proves to himself, many times,
that his seeing a black cat cannot possibly harm him, he is not likely to think
that it will merely because he "knows" that he is superstitious about black cats.
Response 14: The therapist is not only active in REBT group work but is fre-
quently the most active, meaning the most actively teaching, member of the group.
He encourages other members to use the REBT system to help therapize the
individuals bringing up concrete problems; but he also supplements what these
group members say, particularly if they omit important aspects of an issue. Here
he brings up the point that clients not only feel inadequate and worthless because
they condemn themselves (rather than their poor performances) but also that,
once they recognize the self-downing feelings, they frequently denigrate them-
selves again for having such negative feelings. He tries to encourage David to see
that he is damning himself twice, for the original criticism he receives from his
supervision group and for his feeling depressed about the criticism.
Response 16: The therapist emphasizes the main cognitive aspect of REBT:
the client's attacking his own irrational ideas about others' criticizing him, once
he has seen and understood that he has these ideas. This is one of the main dif-
ferences between REBT and many other "insight" therapies. The latter may
clearly reveal to the client what he is thinking to create his "emotional" dis-
turbances, but they rarely try to persuade him, as REBT does, to directly and
vigorously attack, challenge, or dispute these ideas. REBT teaches him a logi-
coempirical method (i.e., the basic method of science) of disputing his unreal-
istic and dysfunctional hypotheses about people and the world. It teaches most
clients to be scientific about themselves and their own lives—to be flexible,
undogmatic, and antiabsolutistic, which is the essence of the scientific method.
Without this kind of active disputation and scientific thinking, at first done by

Group Therapy 
W
the therapist and then taught to the clients to do for themselves (for the rest
of their lives), REBT simply wouldn't be REBT (Ellis, 1962, 1963, 1994c,
1996a, 1996b).
Response 20: The therapist (and other group members) remind David that
he is not merely getting upset or being made upset by external people or events.
He is specifically doing something himself to bring on his feelings of distur-
bance (or his defenses against these feelings). In REBT each client is urged to
take/a// responsibility for his dysfunctional feelings and never to hold that oth-
ers made him have such feelings. He is taught to say, "I made myself angry" or
"I upset myself," rather than "It made me angry" or "You upset me." REBT
theory and practice says to the Davids of the world: "Since you are doing
something to upset yourself and since you can almost invariably change what
you are doing, let's get you to find out exactly what you are doing (including
what you are telling yourself) so that you can many times undo it. The so-
called why of your upsetness is rather meaningless unless it concretely includes
what you are doing to make yourself upset."
Response 27: When the therapist says that David has psychoanalytical-type
insight, he means that he has, at most, only the first of three insights that are
stressed in REBT. Insight No. 1 is the client's realization that he has some kind
of symptom and that it is psychologically caused, that is, connected with some
antecedent process (such as his innate and acquired tendencies to condemn
himself when he makes some "serious" error). Insight No. 2 is his realization
that, no matter how, when, and where his basic dysfunctional ideas arose (how
and why he originally started blaming himself for his mistakes), he now actively
carries on this self-defeating process. This continuation or here-and-nmx>ness of
the dysfunctional philosophy is really the issue, rather than its supposed (and
often unrevealable) origin. Insight No. 3 is his realization that because he very
vigorously still holds onto his fundamental irrational ideas (and may even have
a strong biological tendency to keep believing in them), nothing short of per-
sistent work and practice at disbelieving them is likely to change them signifi-
cantly. The therapist, in this response, is really urging David to acknowledge
the importance of Insights No. 2 and 3, now that he seems to have Insight No.
1 (Ellis, 1963,198Sc, 1994c, 1996a).
Response 36: A little more explicitly than the other members of the group, the
therapist emphasizes the horror that David feels whenever he gets negative feed-
back or criticism. This, again, is the essence of REBT: to show the client not
merely that he thinks that something, such as criticism of himself by others, is
bad but that it is awful, horrible, or terrible. For when a human being evaluates
something as bad, inconvenient, unfortunate, or disadvantageous, he normally
stays within the realm of reality, for these are empirically provable assessments.
Thus, David may be able to show how it would truly be unpleasant or incon-
venient to him if he kept getting negative feedback from his supervision group
and thus was shown to be a fairly inadequate therapist. But he cannot (nor can

190 
The Practice of REST
anyone else) possibly show that such an unpleasantness or inconvenience is truly
awful or horrible. Why? Because awful usually means totally bad or more than
unfortunate. And it means that because David's poor therapeutic behavior is
disadvantageous, he absolutely shouldn't or mustn't behave in the manner and is
a rotten person if he does (Ellis, 1987a; Ellis & Becker, 1982).
But of course nothing in reality can be more than unfortunate. Absolutistic
"shouldn'ts" and "mustn'ts" are magical fictions, categorical absolutes, that
have no true existence. And David, as a person, cannot be entirely rotten, even
though some or much of his behavior may be poor and ineffectual. So REBT,
through the therapist and the group members, tries to keep teaching David to
give up these absolutistic, demonological awfols, shouldn't*, and rotten person
concepts and to live thoroughly in reality (which can be disadvantageous
enough, without his dreaming up imaginary horrors to add to its disadvantages)
(Ellis, 1985c, 1994c, 1995a, 1996a; Ellis & Abrams, 1994).
Response 45: Joan tries to get David back to the essential ABCs of REBT.
According to rational emotive behavior theory, David experiences an Activat-
ing event at point A, his being responded to negatively by members of his
supervision group. Immediately, at point C, his emotional Consequence, he
reacts with feelings of anxiety or depression and then with a defense against
these feelings, numbness or avoidance of the "traumatizing" situation at A. He
tends to believe wrongly, as most disturbed individuals do, that A causes C—
that the Activating events cause him to feel anxious or to retreat defensively.
However, B, his Belief system, is the real issue. At B he first has a set of Ratio-
nal Beliefs (RBs): "How unfortunate for them to be so critical of me! I wish I
were a better therapist and they criticized me less! How annoying to be found
out like this!" If he stayed rigorously with these Beliefs and did not magically
add to them, he would feel healthily, sorry, sad, frustrated, and irritated and
would usually be motivated to get even more feedback from his supervision
group, at point A, and to change the therapeutic behavior that is encouraging
them to criticize him.
But being human (and innately and by training predisposed to think magi-
cally and demonologically), David goes on to a very important set of Irrational
Beliefs (IBs): "Isn't it horrible that they are so critical of me! I have to be a bet-
ter therapist and be criticized less! I'm a thorough ass and rotten person if they
keep seeing me in this negative light!" These highly self-defeating, unvalidat-
able, unfalsifiable Beliefs cause him to feel anxious and depressed and to make
him numbly run away from facing his critics.
If he sticks with the REBT framework, he will force himself, no matter how
hard it is for him to do so, to acknowledge his painful feelings at C, to see
clearly the irrational Beliefs (IBs) with which he is creating them, and to Dis-
pute them at D. His Disputing follows the logical, empirical, and pragmatic
methods of challenging any hypothesis: "Way is it horrible that the members
of my supervision group are so critical of me!1 Where is the evidence that I have

Group Therapy 
M
to be a better therapist and be criticized less? How does their seeing me nega-
tively prove that I am truly a thorough ass and a rotten person? What kind of
results will I get if I keep believing that I absolutely must not be criticized?" In
using REBT Disputing, David also gives up his dogmatic musts and looks for
(as science flexibly does) alternative theories and solutions to solve his prob-
lem (Dryden & Ellis, 1986; Ellis, 1962, 1973, 198Sb, 1985c, 1987, 1994c,
1996a, 1996b).
If David will persist at this kind of rational emotive behavioral attack on his
irrational Beliefs, he will almost always tend to end up with E—an Effective
New Philosophy. E is the logical, realistic, and pragmatic answer to D (Dis-
puting). For example: "Well, it really is too bad that my supervision group sees
me as being so ineffectual as a therapist, but that's all it is, too bad! Now, in
order to improve this bad position that I'm in, why don't I heed their sugges-
tions, change some of my procedures, become a more effective therapist, and
gain more approval from them? In fact, whether they approve of me or not,
why don't I use their criticism to help me as a therapist so that I can better
enjoy myself and help others in that capacity?" If he comes to this kind of con-
clusion, David will almost always find that his feelings of anxiety and depres-
sion will vanish and that he will not have to drive himself into defensive
numbness.
Therefore, Joan (and then John) try to help David to see the ABCs of his
disturbance and to work through them at D (Disputing) until he arrives at E
(Effective New Philosophy).
Response S3: The therapist, attempting to clarify what John has been saying
to David, tries to get him to stay with his feelings of anxiety instead of imme-
diately retreating from them and then to look specifically for his ideas, his Irra-
tional Beliefs (IBs), with which he creates such feelings, But instead of vaguely
inferring what these Beliefs are (which he can do on the basis of REBT the-
ory), he endorses John's point that David had better concretely search for these
Beliefs.
Response 56: Joe, who has been silent up to this point, comes in to reinforce
what John, the therapist, and others are saying to David. In REBT, all the
group members are encouraged to be therapists to any one member who raises
a problem. The theory says that the more of this kind of thing, that occurs, the
more likely is the problem-presenting member to be helped. Moreover, by
helping talk him out of his difficulties, the other group members (most of
whom have similar philosophic problems of downing themselves when they
make errors and are socially criticized) are likely to talk themselves out of their
own basic Irrational Beliefs (Bard, 1980; Ellis, 1962,198Sc, 1992c).
Response 63: If David is right, and it was directness rather than more demo-
cratic or Socratic questioning that he responded to, this is an important point
that is often overlooked in therapy. It is conventionally assumed, especially
by psychoanalytical or person-centered therapists (Freud, 1965; Rogers,

192
Tht Practice of REBT
1961), that the client will be most benefited if he conies to basic insights about
himself largely on his own, or with a minimum of therapist teaching. But
REBT theory says that this is all very well with some clients but that others
are so confused and befuddled when they come to therapy that direct teach-
ing is likely to help them more than any kind of nondirective reflection of
feeling (Ellis, 1962,1971a, 1973,1985c, 1994a, 1995a, 1996a, 1996b; Ellis &
Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Harper, 1997).
In this particular instance, John's somewhat objective and nondirective
questioning of David mainly influenced David to say to himself, "I wonder
what 'right' answer he wants me to give? What is it he wants? What is it he
wants?" This helped him to create greater anxiety and to be less likely to give
the "right" answer. When the therapist and other group members, however,
more directly gave David the "right" answer and then asked if it was correct
in his case, he was more able to handle this answer, to reflect on it, and to
make it his own. Even though the therapist largely restated John's original
points, David felt much more comfortable with this restatement and was able
to use it. Direct teaching, in his case, paid off better than more "democratic"
indirectness. John, a psychiatrist, was so "psychological" that he wasn't suffi-
ciently direct!
Response 76: The more David is asked about why he did not respond to John
but did respond to the therapist's restatement of what John said, the more it
appears that he is one of those confused people who can use considerable ther-
apeutic direction and that with him, as with many such people, open-ended
questioning can do more harm than good. Perhaps John's line of questioning
would have eventually paid off if the other group members were not present
to interfere with it. But perhaps it would have only continued to help David
become more confused. Anyway, the therapist, seeing what was happening, did
not hesitate to intervene and try to help David in another way. And his active
intervention seems to have paid off, at least in this particular instance. In other
instances it is possible that it would have been more disruptive than helpful.
But in general it is found that highly directive and didactic presentations of
REBT material within a group session, especially to confused clients, fre-
quently produces excellent results and sometimes produces them when other
less directive techniques do not help the client.
Response 78: In REBT, in vivo or activity homework assignments are fre-
quently given because it is held that clients not only talk themselves but act
themselves into disordered behavior; hence, it is highly valuable for them to
act in a less disordered way before they become truly habituated, in thought
and feeling as well as in behavior, to that new and healthier way of life. Typi-
cally, clients who are nonassertive are given homework assignments of
approaching members of the other sex, trying for new jobs, or otherwise act-
ing more assertively. And clients who are hostile and avoidant are given assign-

Group Therapy 
193
ments of deliberately jumping into hostility-creating situations (such as visit-
ing hated relatives) and training themselves how to think and feel less hostilely
while they are doing so.
In David's case he is given the assignment of staying with his uncomfortable
(anxiety-inciting) feelings, to challenge his Irrational Beliefs (IBs) that he can't
stand these feelings, and to find his other basic self-defeating Beliefs, such as
the idea that he is a horrible person if he continues to draw negative criticism
from his supervision group and to actively Dispute these Beliefs until he gives
them up. Urged on by the group to these assignments, David largely carried
them out during the next few weeks and seemed to benefit considerably in
terms of being able, first, to keep in touch with his feelings of anxiety and, sec-
ond, to minimize these feelings. Two months after the session that is reported
here he was able to report back to the group that he had become one of the
most open individuals in his supervision group and that he had no difficulty
facing this supervision group's criticism of his therapy sessions.
Response 86: The therapist points out that although it is advisable for David
to get in touch with his feelings of hurt about criticism, being too much in touch
with such feelings, as he used to be, has its own distinct disadvantages and is
not to be recommended. The reason for getting in touch with one's feelings,
in REBT, is not merely to acknowledge them and to feel them but to change
them when they are self-defeating. Moreover, REBT does not assume that if
clients merely reveal and express their feelings they automatically will improve.
It hypothesizes, instead, that a truly therapeutic understanding of one's feel-
ings includes the understanding of the philosophies that one is employing to
create them and a radical changing of these philosophies when they consis-
tently lead to anxiety, depression, and hostility.
Response 88: Just as REBT combats human perfectionism in general arid
shows how it is the root of much evil, it combats perfectionism in therapy
itself. The goal of REBT is not to have the clients perfectly understand or
change themselves, because they will always remain quite fallible humans and
will have difficulties and problems of one sort or another. Its goal is to have
them reduce much of their needless emotional pain and suffering but not to
become truly unemotional or even devoid of healthy negative emotions, such
as sorrow, regret, and extreme annoyance, when faced with truly obnoxious
Activating events. REBT mainly teaches human tolerance, including tolerance
of imperfect therapeutic results!
Troubled humans can decide to work persistently at changing and acting
against their irrational beliefs, or they can get help in doing so from straighter-
thinking therapists or friends or from books, lectures, demonstrations, tape
recordings, and other sources (Ellis, 1993 a, 1996a). They can help themselves
in a large-scale group or class; they can also work with an individual therapist or
group leader. If they choose a regular small-scale group process and if they pick

194 
The Practice ofREBT
a therapy group that follows rational emotive behavioral or cognitive-behavioral
principles, they will avail themselves of a multifaceted, comprehensive thera-
peutic procedure that has been shown to be effective in a large number of
research studies and clinical presentations. It is hypothesized that REBT group
treatment is more likely to help people find a quicker, deeper, and more lasting
solution to their emotional problems than other contemporary methods of psy-
chotherapy (Ellis, 1973,1982b, 1992c; Shostrom, Ellis, & Greenwald, 1976).

8
Rational Emotive Behavioral
Marathons and Intensives
We and our associates at the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
in New York City have been experimenting for 20 years with various types of
encounter groups in order to develop a procedure that would accomplish two
main goals: first, to provide maximum encountering experiences for all the
group members and, second, to include a good measure of cognitive and
action-oriented group psychotherapy that is designed not only to help the par-
ticipants feel better but also to get better. We have participated during this time
in several hundred marathon groups and intensives. We have deliberately used
a variety of techniques, ranging from the usual REBT procedures to many of
the highly experiential or expressive methods that are commonly employed in
basic encounter and marathon groups (Bach, 1966; Ellis, 1969; Otto, 1968;
Perls, 1969; Schutz, 1967.
We have devised and have often successfully used a procedure that we call
a Rational Emotive Behavioral Marathon. This procedure is more highly struc-
tured than the usual basic encounter, and it is deliberately weighted more on
the verbal than on the nonverbal side.
LENGTH OF MARATHONS
REBT marathons may take from 10 to 14 hours. A marathon group usually
consists of 12 to 18 people and can be run by one leader or two co-leaders.
Institute marathons are led only by professional therapists who have been
solidly trained in individual and group REBT and who have also had special
marathon training.
Parts of this chapter were adapted (torn Albert Ellis, "A Weekend of Rational Encounter," in Arthur
Burton (Ed.), Encounter (pp. 112-127), San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1969. Used by permission.
195

196 
The Practice of REBT
OPENING PROCEDURES
A typical rational emotive behavioral marathon begins with the leader wel-
coming the participants, explaining to them that everything that goes on in
the group will be strictly confidential and is to be subsequently discussed only
with other group members. All participants are then asked to introduce them-
selves and to answer the questions "Why are you here? How do you feel at this
moment about being here?" All members are given a maximum of 5 minutes
to present themselves. They are allowed to take as little time as they want and
to run down before 5 minutes are up.
The group members are then asked the following one or two questions; (1)
"What are you bothering yourself about most right now, either (a) in this
group situation or (b) in your outside life?" (1) "What are you most ashamed of
at present? Be as honest as you can be." While individuals are responding to
these questions, other group members are permitted briefly to query them, to
find out how they feel and what is going on inside them. The leader then says
to the group, "Look for something right now that touches you emotionally
(positively or negatively). Feel it. Report your feeling to the group." Several
of the members may volunteer to express their feelings at this point, or all of
them may be called upon.
SOME SUBSEQUENT PROCEDURES
A number of regular and special experiential exercises are used throughout the
REBT marathon. For example, the group leader may say, "Think of some-
thing risky you can" do at this moment. Do it." Again, volunteers can be
allowed to respond, or all group members can be asked to do something risky.
If some remain silent, they can be asked: "Why didn't you think or do some-
thing risky after the other members did so?" (The group leader explains, at
some point during the early stages of the marathon or at this particular point,
that members are allowed to do anything they like in the group as long as it is
not physically harmful to themselves or others. Breaking die furniture or jump-
ing out of the window, for example, is not allowed; taking off one's clothes or
calling someone names is permitted.)
The leader may say, "With what member of this group would you like to
have a love or affectionate experience? Ask this person if he or she will coop-
erate with you in having this kind of experience. If he or she consents, engage
in it as much as you can do, right now. If both of you feel that you would like
to have or to continue this love experience outside the room, you may leave
the group for a maximum of 5 minutes and have it in one of the odier rooms in
the building. Be sure, however, to return after 5 minutes are up." The leader

Marathons and Intensive! 
191
then sees that (1) individuals having love or affectionate experiences in the
room are asked about what they felt during the experience; (2) individuals who
do not choose to have love experiences with anyone are asked why they did
not choose to do so; (3) individuals who choose to go out of the room for 5
minutes to have their love experiences are asked, when they return to the
room, to describe in detail exactly what they did and what they felt while doing
it. In one way or another, all the members of the group are induced either to
have warm experiences with at least one other member or to report why they
do not desire to have them.
REST PROCEDURES
The leader says, "Pick out someone in the group who you think might well be
able to use some help with one of his or her basic problems. Sit in the center of
the group with him or her and try to help with these problems." All or most
of the members are encouraged to work with at least one other member about
his or her problems. Then the other members of the group, after watching and
listening for a while, are encouraged to join in to help the individual whom
the selector is trying to help. By the time this procedure is instituted, virtually
all the members have had sufficient opportunity—usually over a period of 5
or 6 hours—to express themselves, to engage in some nonverbal (especially
affectionate) behavior, and to show what some of their problem areas are. They
are therefore presumably ready for more detailed examination of their main
problems; and this technique intimately involves at least two members at a time
in the problem-solving process; encourages the members, whether they like it
or not, to go into more details about their thoughts, feelings, and behavior
than they previously may have done; and actively gets around to the REBT
aspect of the marathon, with the therapist beginning to supervise the actual
attempts of the members to help each other.
This problem-solving and cognitive restructuring part of the marathon is
usually repeated several times. Thus, Jim and Jane sit in the center of the group
and Jane helps Jim with his problem, let us say, of making himself severely
depressed when he is socially rejected. Jane tries to show Jim what his Irrational
Beliefs (IB's) are that lead to his depressed feelings, and to help him Dispute
these IB's. The leader of the marathon group, who is well trained in REBT,
supervises Jane and helps her work with Jim. The leader also encourages other
members to help Jane and assist Jim to think more rationally. This part of the
marathon resembles the work done in regular REBT group therapy and largely
consists of cognitive restructuring. All the members of the marathon group are
taught some of the main principles of the ABCDE's of REBT and all or most
of them are given a chance to use these principles with other group members

*98 
The Practice of REBT
and also to apply them to one of their own emotional and/or behavioral prob-
lems. As the marathon continues, the members usually become considerably
more adept at using the ABCDE^s of REBT under the watchful supervising eye
of the leader, who in turn tends to become a better REBT teacher.
CLOSING PROCEDURES
After the marathon has reached its two-thirds point, a modified version of Fritz
Perls' "hot seat" exercise is given; the usual version, where everyone is encour-
aged to take the "hot seat" and also forced to comment on everyone who takes
the seat, is usually too time-consuming and inefficient. In the REBT version
all participants are encouraged (but not forced) to sit in the hot seat in the cen-
ter of the room and all the others are encouraged (but not forced) to tell
them—briefly*—their positive and negative thoughts and feelings about them,
particularly in regard to how they have behaved in the marathon. The person
in the hot seat is not allowed to answer or rebut these comments. But at the
end of the exercise anyone who cares to reply is briefly allowed to do so.
In the closing hours of the rational emotive behavioral encounter marathon
the group and the leader usually tend to smoke out anyone who has not as yet
brought up any problem for detailed discussion. Such individuals are directly
asked why they have not said too much about themselves previously and are
induced to look for a major problem and to discuss it openly.
In the closing hours of the marathon there can be round-robins on these
questions: (1) "What are a iew of the most important experiences you have had
during the marathon and the most important things you have learned about
yourself?" (2) "In thinking about your marathon experience, what are some of
the things that you did not say to die group or to individuals in die group when
you had the chance to do so previously? Say these things now."
For the final half-hour or so of the marathon the leader selects one mem-
ber of the group at a time to sit in the center of the room while the leader says
to the rest of the group: "Anyone who can think of a suitable homework as-
signment to give X that might help her solve some of the problems raised here
or to live more happily and creatively in the future, suggest this kind of an
assignment right now. LetX, if necessary, take notes about these assignments
so as not to forget them."
After the REBT marathon encounter has ended, a date may be set for 6 to
10 weeks ahead, at which time die group members are invited to return to the
original setting for about 4 hours to discuss what they think they got from the
original marathon, what changes may have been effected in their lives as a
result of it, how they carried out (or failed to carry out) the homework assign-
ments that were given them, and other questions of this sort.

Marathons and Intensive! 
199
REBTINTENSIVES
Therapeutic lectures, classes, and sermons have been given for many centuries
by Confucius, Epictetus, Mary Baker Eddy, Emile Coue, Dale Carnegie, Nor-
mal Vincent Peale, and other teachers and preachers. After the experiential
movement got going in the 1960s, Werner Erhard and a number of his imita-
tors started in the 1970s to combine emotive-evocative exercises with impas-
sioned lectures and to give weekend Intensives. These include lectures,
experiential exercises, and emotional sharing and are usually given to groups
of SO to 200 people.
I (AE) had a series of planning sessions with several of our therapists at the
Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy in New York in 1983 and we devised
a 9-hour REBT Intensive. I, Ray DiGiuseppe, Diana Richman, Janet Wolfe,
and a number of Fellows and Associate Fellows of the institute have been giv-
ing these Intensives every year in New York and other major cities and have
found them to be quite effective. In fact, a study that we did of self-ratings of
participants before they took the Intensive and 2 months after they took it
showed significant improvement in their healthy Beliefs (Ellis, Sichel, Leaf, et
al., 1989). Personal communications by participants who were new to REBT
and by those who also had some REBT sessions before taking the Intensive
also bear out this finding.
The REBT Intensive commonly used by the institute usually has six major
sections, each of which takes about 1 1/4 hours: (1) "The ABCs of REBT and
Disputing of Irrational Beliefs," (2) "Perfectionism and Unconditional Self-
Acceptance," (3) "Dealing with Anger and Rage," (4) "Dealing with the Dire
Need for Approval and Love Slobbism," (5) "Dealing with Low Frustration
Tolerance," and (6) "Goal Setting and Homework."
Each section starts with a strong, evocative lecture on the REBT approach
to understanding and handling a major aspect of emotional disturbance, fol-
lowed by an experiential exercise that all the participants are encouraged to
perform. Then there is a 15-minute period for the sharing of thoughts and
feelings about the lecture and about participation in the exercise. By the end
of the 9-hour Intensive almost all the participants have been drawn into the
exercises and the sharing of their feelings. Many of them report dramatic per-
sonal experiences in the course of the Intensive, as well as later changes in
their lives.
The Intensive has a number of cognitive advantages for the participants,
including learning the general principles of REBT; learning to take responsi-
bility for many of their emotional and personality problems; modeling them-
selves after other Intensive participants who begin opening themselves up;
seeing their own problems, of which they were previously unaware; and see-
ing how many other people are suffering from similar problems.

200 
The Practice of REBT
A good deal of cognitive restructing is included in every Intensive. Each lec-
ture shows that Irrational Beliefs are quite different from Rational Beliefs and
lead to unhealthy feelings and behaviors. Several of the sections show partici-
pants how to dispute and change their iBs and how to reach Effective New
Philosophies (E's). Methods of refraining and of REBT referenting (cost-ben-
efit analysis) are explained and illustrated. When the participants give unreal-
istic and illogical answers during some of the exercises, the leader of the
Intensive briefly and sometimes humorously responds to them and shows them
and the rest of the participants what more practical solutions would be. Par-
ticipants are encouraged to ask questions and briefly raise personal problems;
and these are answered by the leader in terms of REBT philosophies. Some
illustrative disputing of the dysfunctional Beliefs of several participants is done.
Several people are shown how to specifically question their own iBs, to come
up with alternative RB's, and to take for homework assignments the steady and
vigorous repetition of their newly arrived at Effective Philosophies.
Emotively, the Intensive participants receive forceful presentations of REBT
and engage in some of its dramatic-evocative exercises, such as its famous
shame-attacking exercise. They are encouraged to take verbal and activity risks,
participate in the singing of rational humorous songs, and urged to be adven-
ture-seeking and pleasure-seeking.
Behaviorally, participants are given active-directive instructions, are
encouraged to take on goal-seeking and homework assignments, and are given
practice in carrying out REBT thinking, encountering, and skill training. The
Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in New York also offers a
series of follow-up talks and workshops on various aspects of REBT that are
open to any Intensive participants who want to take part in them. If some
individuals realize, in the course of the Intensive, that they have ongoing per-
sonality problems, the Institute also offers regular sessions of individual and
group therapy that they can arrange to take. As usual, the Institute also dis-
tributes a good many pamphlets, books, audio- and videocassettes, and other
self-help materials that Intensive participants can use for continuing home-
work assignments.
As is also true of individuals who have effective REBT Marathon experi-
ences, those who benefit from REBT Intensives may experience a cognitive
and emotional "high" for a few weeks following their participation but may
easily fall back later to their former lower levels of functioning. This has been
found in participants of all kinds of marathons and intensives. Therefore, fol-
low-up procedures and materials had better be available for participants who
are willing to use important aspects of REBT on a continuing basis.

9
Teaching the Principles of
Unconditional Self'Acceptance
in a Structured Qroup Setting
In this chapter we will describe an 8-week psychoeducational group that I
(WD) run, in which I teach group members the REBT principles of uncondi-
tional self-acceptance. In the chapter we will do the following:
1. Briefly review the REBT concept of ego disturbance.
2. Present the REBT principles of unconditional self-acceptance.
3. Outline the steps of a self-acceptance group, some of the exercises that can
be used at each step and discuss briefly the context in which I run these
groups.
REBT AND EGO DISTURBANCE
REBT therapists can, in our view, be seen as psychological educators in that
they teach their clients (a) the basic REBT view of disturbance and (b) how to
identify, challenge, and change the Irrational Beliefs that underpin their psy-
chological problems. Because this chapter concerns a structured group
approach to teaching clients unconditional self-acceptance, we will briefly
review the REBT concept of ego disturbance before presenting in the next
section the REBT concept of unconditional self-acceptance.
Adapted from Windy Dryden (1996), "Teaching the Principles of Unconditional Self-
Acceptance in a Structured, Group Setting." In R. Bayne, I. Horton, & J. Bimrose (Eds.), New
directions in counselling. London: Routledge. Used by permission.
201

202 
The Practice of REBT
Ego Disturbance
REBT theory distinguishes between two major types of psychological distur-
bance: ego disturbance and discomfort disturbance (Dryden, I994a). Ego dis-
turbance stems from irrational beliefs related to a person's "self," whereas
discomfort disturbance stems from irrational beliefs related to that individual!;
personal domain unconnected to his "self but centrally concerned with his
sense of comfort.
Ego disturbance results when a person makes a demand on himself, others,
or the world; and when that demand is not met, the person puts himself down
in some way. The following themes are usually involved in ego disturbance:
• failing to achieve an important target or goal
• acting incompetently (in public or private)
• not living up to one's standards
• breaking one's ethical code
• being criticized
• being ridiculed
• not being accepted, approved, appreciated, or loved by significant others
Although irrational ego Beliefs are found in a variety of emotional distur-
bances, we are not saying that such beliefs completely account for the emo-
tions listed below. Rather, we are saying that these beliefs are often found when
clients report these emotional experiences.
In the following examples of ego disturbance, you will note that each of
these Irrational Beliefs contains two elements. First, there is a demanding
Belief, which often takes the form of a "must," "absolutely should," "have to,"
or "got to"; second, there is a self-downing Belief, which takes the form of a
global negative evaluation of one's total "self." REBT theory states that self-
downing Beliefs tend to be derived from musturbatory beliefs.
Depression
"Because I have failed the test, as I absolutely should not have done, I am a
failure."
"Since my partner has rejected me, as he absolutely should not have done,
this proves that I am no good."
Anxiety
"If I fail at my upcoming test, which I must not do, I would be a failure."
"If he rejects me, as I think he will soon but which he must not do, I would
be no good."

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance
203
Guilt
"I have hurt the feelings of my parents, which I absolutely should not have
done, and therefore am a bad person."
"I failed to help a good friend of mine. The fact that I did not do what I
absolutely should have done proves that I am a rotten person."
Shame
"I have acted foolishly in front of my peers, which I absolutely should not
have done, and this makes me an inadequate person."
"I have been having sexual feelings toward my sister, which I absolutely should
not have, and the fact that I have these feelings makes me a shameful person."
Hart
"My ex-boyfriend is going out with my best friend, which absolutely should
not happen. Since it is happening, this proves that I am unlovable."
Anger
"You absolutely should not have criticized me in the way that you did. Your
criticism reminds me that I am a failure."
Jealousy
"If my wife looks at another man, which she must not do, it means that she finds
him more attractive, which must not happen and proves that I am worthless."
Envy
"My friend is making better progress than I am in our respective careers. I
must have what he has; and because I don't, this makes me less worthy than I
would be if I had what he has."
UNCONDITIONAL SELF-ACCEPTANCE (USA)
As we showed in the section above, ego disturbance occurs when a person
makes a global negative evaluation of her total self, which in turn tends to be
based on the existence of a musturbatory belief. REBT theory states that the
healthy alternative to ego disturbance is rooted in a set of beliefs based on the
concept of unconditional self-acceptance. In this section we will outline 10
principles that underpin this concept.
1. Human beings cannot legitimately be given a single global rating.
In the previous section we gave several examples of the ways in which peo-
ple put themselves down (e.g., "I am a failure," "I am a bad person," etc.). Each

204 
The Practice of REST
of these examples involves the person giving himself or herself a single global
rating. Indeed, the concept of self-esteem frequently advocated by the major-
ity of counselors and psychotherapists is based on this same principle. Low
self-esteem involves the assignment of a single negative global rating to a per-
son, and high self-esteem involves the assignment of a single positive global
rating to the person.
REBT theory argues that it is not possible to give a person a single global
rating whether negative or positive. This is best shown if we define clearly the
terms selfsmd esteem. First, let's take the term self. Paul Hauck (1991) has pro-
vided a very simple but profound definition of the self. He says that the self is
"every conceivable thing about you that can be rated" (p. 33). This means that
all your thoughts, images, feelings, behaviors, and bodily parts are part of your
self, and all these different aspects that belong to you from the beginning of
your life to the moment just before your death have to be included in your self.
Now let's consider the term esteem. This term is derived from the verb to esti-
mate, which means to give something a rating, judgment, or estimation. The
question then arises: Can we give the self a single legitimate rating, estimation,
or judgment that completely accounts for its complexity? The answer is clearly
no. As Hauck notes, it is possible to rate different aspects of one's self, but a
person is far too complex to warrant a single legitimate global rating.
Even if it were possible to give a person a single global rating—a task that
would involve a team of objective judges and a computer so powerful that it could
analyze the millions upon millions of data produced by that person—as soon as
that global judgment was made, it would become immediately redundant because
the person would continue to produce more data. In other words, a person is an
ongoing, ever-changing process and thus defies the ascription of a single static
global judgment (Ellis & Harper, I994c, 1996a; Ellis & Harper, 1961a, 1997).
To summarize, it is not possible, in any legitimate sense, to give one's self a sin-
gle global rating because (a) you are too complex to merit such an evaluation and
(b) you are an ongoing ever-changing process that defies being statically rated.
By contrast, the concept of unconditional self-acceptance does not involve
any such rating or evaluation. Rather, accepting yourself involves acknowl-
edging that you are a complex, ongoing, ever-changing process that defies
being rated by yourself or by others. However, and this is a crucial point,
unconditional self-acceptance does allow you to rate different aspects of your-
self. Indeed, it encourages this type of evaluation because doing so allows you
to focus on your negative aspects and do something to improve them without
self-blame. Conversely, if you focus on your negative aspects from the stand-
point of self-esteem, then you are less likely to change them because you are
sidetracked by giving your self a global negative rating for having these aspects.
It is difficult to change anything about yourself while you are beating yourself
over the head for having those aspects in the first place.

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
205
2. Human beings are essentially fallible.
REBT theory holds that if human beings have an essence it is probably that
we are essentially fallible. As Maxie Maultsby (1984) has put it, humans have
an incurable error-making tendency. I would add that we frequently make
more serious mistakes than we are prepared to accept and that we often keep
repeating the same errors. Why do we do this? As Paul Hauck (1991) has put
it, we keep repeating our errors out of stupidity or ignorance or because we
are psychologically disturbed. Albert Ellis (1994c) has noted that humans find
it very easy to disturb themselves and difficult to undisturb themselves. Self-
acceptance, then, means acknowledging that our essence is fallibility and that
we are not perfectible.
3. All humans are equal in humanity but unequal in their different aspects
This principle follows from the two listed above. If the essence of humanity
is fallibility, then all humans are equal in their humanity; and because human
beings cannot be rated, it follows that no human is worthier than any other.
This principle reveals REBT as one of the most, if not the most, humanistic
of all psychotherapies. However, this principle of parity among humans does
not deny that there is a great deal of variation among human beings with
respect to their different aspects. Thus, Adolf Hitler may be equal in human-
ity to Mother Teresa, but in terms of their compassion toward human beings,
the latter far outscores the former.
4. The rational use of the concept of human worth.
From the principles discussed thus far, you will see that the concept of
human worth is problematic because it rests on the assignment of a single
global rating (worth) to a process (the self) that defies such a simple rating.
However, a number of clients want to retain the idea of human worth even
though it has inherent problems. The main problem with the concept of
human worth is that people normally make their worth contingent on vari-
ables that change (e.g., "I am worthwhile if I do well in my exams," which
implies that if I do not do well then I am not worthwhile). Even if a person
fulfills the conditions of worth at any given moment, she is still vulnerable to
emotional disturbance if those conditions are not continually met.
The only way that a person can apply the concept of human worth in a
rational manner is to make her worth contingent on one of two constants.
First, she can say that she is worthwhile because she is human, and that will
work. Second, she can say that she is worthwhile as long as she is alive. This
will also work and can be even applied by people who believe in an afterlife ("I
am worthwhile as long as I am alive in this life or any future life that I may
have"). The difficulty with this concept, as Ellis (1972) has shown, is that some-
one can just as easily say: "I am worthless because I am alive" or "I am worth-
less because I am human." For this reason, many REBT therapists discourage
their clients from using the concept of human worth.

206 
The Practice of REBT
5. Unconditional self-acceptance avoids errors of overgeneraJization.
When people apply the concept of conditional self-esteem, they constantly
make errors of overgeneralization or what might be called part-whole errors.
In the part-whole error, a person infers that he has failed to achieve a certain
goal (which represents a part of the person), evaluates this failure negatively,
and then concludes that he is a failure (which is the whole of the person). In
other words, he rates the whole of himself on the basis of his rating of a part
of himself. Applying the concept of unconditional self-acceptance to this exam-
ple, the person would still infer that he has failed to achieve his goal and would
still evaluate this failure negatively. However, his conclusion, that his failure
proves that he is a fallible human being, would be perfectly logical
6. Unconditional self-acceptance is based on flexible, preferential philosophy.
Earlier in this chapter we pointed out that self-downing beliefs tend to be
derived from rigid, musturbatory beliefs, or in Albert Ellis's memorable phrase,
"Shouldhood leads to shithood. You're rarely a shit without a should." What
follows from this is that unconditional self-acceptance beliefs are derived from
flexible, preferential beliefs. For example, if you believe that you're inadequate
because you acted in a socially inappropriate manner, then this self-downing
belief tends to stem from the rigid belief "I must not behave inappropriately
in a social context." A self-accepting alternative belief would involve your
accepting yourself as a fallible human being who is not inadequate. This belief
in turn would tend to stem from the flexible belief "I would prefer not to act
in a socially inappropriate manner, but there's no reason why I absolutely must
not do so."
7. Unconditional self-acceptance promotes constructive action, not resignation.
If we can accept ourselves as fallible human beings with all that this means,
paradoxically we have a much better chance of minimizing our errors and psy-
chological problems than if we condemn ourselves for having them in the first
place. Such acceptance, then, does not imply resignation, as many people think.
Rather, it promotes our constructive efforts to learn from our errors and min-
imizes our tendency to disturb ourselves. Self-acceptance does this because, as
shown above, it is based on a flexible philosophy of desire, in this case a desire
to live as happily as possible. This desire motivates us to take constructive
action. Conversely, resignation is based on the idea that there is nothing we
can do to improve aspects of ourselves, so there is no point in trying. This,
then, is the antithesis of self-acceptance.
8. Unconditional self-acceptance is a habit that can be acquired (but never
perfectly, nor for all time).
Behavior therapists often construe self-defeating behavior as bad habits that
can be broken. Many clients resonate to the idea that self-downing is a bad
habit that can be broken. If you want to use the idea of self-downing and
unconditional self-acceptance as habits, you can do so but with the following

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
207
caveats. Be careful to stress that the "habit" of self-downing can be broken but
never perfectly and not in a once-and-for-all manner. Similarly, stress that
unconditional self-acceptance can be acquired but, again, never perfectly nor
for all time. Emphasize that it is the very nature of fallible human beings to go
back to self-downing under stress even though your client may have worked
very hard to break this habit. In doing so you are helping your client to accept
herself for her lack of self-acceptance!
9. Internalizing the philosophy of unconditional self-acceptance is difficult
and involves hard work.
Understanding the concept of unconditional self-acceptance is not that dif-
ficult. Internalizing a philosophy of unconditional self-acceptance so that it
makes a positive difference to the way we think, feel, and act most certainly is
difficult. Here it is useful to help clients view the acquisition of unconditional
self-acceptance as similar to the acquisition of any new skill that has to be
learned against the background of a well-ingrained habit that has been well
practiced and is now in place (e.g., golf or tennis). As such, acquiring self-
acceptance will involve your clients in a lot of hard work, work that has to be
done even though the clients will experience feelings and tendencies to act that
are consistent with their more thoroughly ingrained philosophy of self-down-
ing. This means that clients will have to tolerate a period of "feeling all wrong"
as they strive to internalize a philosophy that makes perfect sense but is not
yet believed. Such conviction comes from repeatedly challenging self-down-
ing beliefs and acting in a way that is consistent with a self-accepting beliefs.
10. Unconditional self-acceptance requires force and energy.
The hard work that we mentioned above can be done in two ways. First, it
can be done with force and energy; for example, clients can challenge their
self-downing beliefs with a great deal of force and throw themselves into act-
ing in ways that are consistent with their newly acquired self-accepting beliefs.
Second, this work can be done in a weak, "namby-pamby" fashion. Because
people tend to hold their self-downing beliefs quite rigidly, the latter way of
working to acquire a philosophy of self-acceptance will just not work. Thus,
it is important to help clients understand the importance of meeting strength
with strength or fighting fire with fire. Thus, the more clients use force and
energy as they strive to accept themselves, the better their results will be.
RUNNING SELF-ACCEPTANCE GROUPS
We will begin this section by providing a brief outline of the basic assumption
that underpins self-acceptance groups. Then we will describe the context in
which I (WD) run these groups before providing a session-by-session account
of a typical self-acceptance group.

208 
The Practice of REBT
Basic Assumption
Self-acceptance groups are based on the idea that the philosophy of uncondi-
tional self-acceptance can be taught in a structured, educational manner and
can be understood by group members in a short time. Although internalizing
this philosophy is a long and arduous endeavor that takes far more time than
the 8-week period over which the group is run, it is possible in this short
period to help group members take the first steps in integrating this philoso-
phy into their belief system.
The Context
The context in which a therapy group is run has a decided impact on how it
is established and how much impact it has on the well-being of its members.
As one colleague complained, "How can you run a group when every week
the chairs are different?" To which I (WD) replied that where I work the
chairs are the same every week, but the group membership is different. For
I (WD) used to work one morning a week in a private hospital setting where
two types of groups were offered: open groups, in which people come and
go and every week the size and membership of the group is different, and
closed groups, in which the same group of clients meets every week for a
time-limited period. The self-acceptance groups to be described here are, in
our experience, best run as a closed group. If they are run as an open group,
we would have, to introduce the same ideas every week and group cohesion
would be lost. A closed group means that clients are taken through the same
ideas at the same time and are introduced to the same techniques at the same
time, which means that they can help one another in a way that they could-
n't if the group were open.
One issue that does need to be addressed if you work in a private hospital is
clients' appointments with their consultant psychiatrists. Unless you inform
consultants of the times that you run your self-acceptance group and elicit their
agreement that they will not schedule appointments during this time, then the
group will be disrupted by clients coming back from or going out to see their
consultants.
Forming the Group
Before forming the group, you need to make decisions about the size of the
group, how often it is to meet and for how long each session. In a private hos-
pital there is the additional constraint that many clients, once they have
become "day patients," do not attend for long periods unless they can afford
the high fees or their insurance coverage permits long-term attendance. Con-
sequently, my (WD) practice was to run a self-acceptance group weekly for 1 %

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
209
hours over an 8-week period. I found that a group of between seven and nine
clients works best (allowing for one dropout per group).
Because my attendance at the hospital was limited, I did not have time to
interview all the people who wish to join the group. I thus left the selection of
group members to one of the full-time workers at the hospital who knows the
nature of the group and the type of clients who will benefit most from it.
These were people whose problems were mainly ego-related and who had pre-
vious exposure to REBT or cognitive therapy and agreed with the idea that
dysfunctional beliefs are at the core of psychological disturbance. In addition,
group members had to commit to weekly attendance over the life of the group
and be prepared to put into practice what they learn form the group, which in
practice meant the regular completion of homework assignments.
Session-by-Session Outline of a
Self-Acceptance Group
Session 1
1. Introductions, The members of the group and I introduce ourselves to one
another.
2. Clarifying the preconditions for attendance. Here I stress that the group is
for people whose problems have to do with negative attitudes toward the self
and that weekly attendance is expected from all. I also explain the usual rule
of confidentiality for group members and elicit members' willingness to com-
ply with this rule.
3. Who wants high self-esteem) I normally begin a self-acceptance group by
asking members who among them would like to have high self-esteem (or feel
better about themselves). Virtually everyone raises his hand. I then ask each
member to indicate what would raise their self-esteem. The kinds of answers
I get include
• doing well at work
• being a better mother
• being loved
• living up to my principles
• doing voluntary work
4. Teaching the principles of unconditional self-acceptance. Before I deal with the
responses to the question "What would raise your self-esteem?" I spend most
of the first session teaching the 10 principles of unconditional self-acceptance
outlined in the first half of this chapter. After teaching each point I pause for
questions and observations from group members.

2/0 
The Practice of 'REBT
5. Another look at self-esteem. After I have finished teaching the 10 principles
of unconditional self-acceptance, I ask the group members to reconsider their
answers to my previous question, "What would raise your self-esteem?" I help
them to see that their responses do not serve to raise their self-esteem but are
desirable things to have or achieve in their own right. I show them that self-
esteem is contingent upon doing well at work, being loved, and so on; and if
they were to do poorly at work later or lose the love of a significant person,
for example, their self-esteem would plummet. Helping group members to
understand that die concept of self-esteem is the cause of their problems and
not the solution is very liberating for most.
6. Homework. Virtually all the members in my self-acceptance groups have
been exposed to REBT or cognitive-behavior therapy and therefore are famil-
iar with the important role that homework assignments have in the therapeu-
tic process. It is beyond the scope of this chapter for us to deal with cases
where group members do not do dieir homework assignments or modify them
in some way, for this I refer the interested reader to Dryden (199Sb).
The first homework assignment that I suggest group members carry out
before the second group session is to read chapters 1 and 3 of Paul Hauck's
(1991) book on unconditional self-acceptance entitled Hold Your Head Up High
(or Overcoming the Rating Game in the American edition). Chapter 1 outlines
the problems that occur when people do not accept themselves, and chapter 3
presents the principles of unconditional self-acceptance. As such, these chap-
ters serve as a reminder of the material covered in the first session. I suggest
that, while reading the material, group members make a note of points they
disagree with or are unsure offer discussion the following week.
Session 2
1. Reviewing homework. It is an important principle of REBT that if you set
a homework assignment then you review it the following session. So at the
beginning of this session (and all subsequent sessions) it is important to review
what the group members did for homework. In doing so, I correct any mis-
conceptions that group members display in their reading of the chapters in
Hauck's (1991) book.
2. Goal setting. At this point the group members are ready to consider what
they can achieve from the group and what they can't. I point out that my role
is to teach them both the principles of unconditional self-acceptance and some
techniques to help them begin to internalize this philosophy. What I can do is
to help them begin the journey toward self-acceptance. In 8 weeks I cannot
help them to complete this journey. Given this limitation, I ask them to set
suitable goals for the group. "What," I ask, "would they have achieved by the
end of the eight weeks that would show them that they had begun the long
and arduous journey toward self-acceptance?" I encourage members to divide

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
211
into smaller groups and to make their goals as realistic and specific as possi-
ble. I then ask one group member to make a written note of everybody's goals,
which I then photocopy and distribute at the end of the session so that every-
body has a copy of the goals of each member.
3. Dealing with a specific example of the target problem. I then ask group mem-
bers to choose a specific example of a situation in which they considered them-
selves to be worthless, inadequate, bad, and so on. I then ask each member in
turn to talk about the experience briefly to the rest of the group. After the per-
son has finished relating the experience, I use the ABC framework of REBT
to help her assess it (where A stands for the actual or inferred activating event,
B for her musturbatory and self-downing beliefs, and Cfor her major disturbed
negative emotion and/or self-defeating behavior).
4. Homework. For homework, I ask each group member to use the ABC
framework to analyze another example of "low self-esteem."
Session 3
1. Reviewing homework. At the beginning of the session, I check each per-
son's ABC assessment and offer corrective feedback where relevant.
2. Teaching disputing of irrational ego beliefs. A central task of group members in
a self-acceptance group is to learn how to dispute their musturbatory and self-
downing irrational beliefs. Thus, I devote the bulk of this session to teaching this
core skill. As DiGiuseppe (1991) has shown, disputing involves group members
asking themselves three different types of questions of their irrational ego beliefs:
• Are they consistent with reality?
• Are they logical?
• Do they yield healthy results?
As we showed in the first half of this chapter, the answer to these questions is
no when they are applied to self-downing beliefs (see Dryden [1994a] for a full
discussion of why musturbatory beliefs are also inconsistent with reality and
illogical and yield unhealthy results for the individual concerned).
Disputing also involves helping group members to construct preferential
and self-accepting beliefs as healthy alternatives to their irrational ego beliefs.
Therefore, I spend a good deal of the third session helping group members to
construct rational ego beliefs.
3. Homework: identifying and disputing irrational ego beliefs in specific situations.
Armed with their new skill of disputing irrational ego beliefs and constructing
alternative rational ego beliefs, group members are now ready to put this new
skill into practice in their everyday lives before the next session. This forms
the basis for the homework assignment for that week.

212 
The Practice of REBT
Session 4
1. Reviewing homework. I begin the fourth group session by reviewing the
previous week's homework assignment and offering corrective feedback as
before.
2. Teaching the portfolio method. As mentioned arx>ve, disputing irrational
beliefs is a core client skill in REBT in general and in self-acceptance groups in
particular. As I have recently shown (Dryden, 1995a), the purpose of disput-
ing in the present context is to help group members understand why their irra-
tional ego beliefs are irrational and why their alternative rational ego beliefs
are rational. Once group members have understood this point, they need addi-
tional help to enable them to integrate this understanding into their belief sys-
tem so that it influences for the better the way they think and feel about
themselves and the way they act in the world. Helping them to develop a port-
folio of arguments in favor of their rational ego beliefs and against their irra-
tional ego beliefs is the cognitive technique that I use to initiate this integration
process.
Having introduced the idea of the portfolio, I suggest that group members
spend about 20 minutes in the session developing their own portfolio of argu-
ments. Then I ask them to work in two small groups, reviewing one another's
arguments and suggesting additional arguments. During this time I act as con-
sultant, listening to the small group discussion, offering feedback on the argu-
ments developed, and being available as a troubleshooter if either of the groups
get stuck.
3. Homework. For homework I suggest that group members review and add
to the arguments they have developed for their portfolio. I also suggest that
they make a particular note of any arguments about which they have reserva-
tions or doubts or do not find persuasive.
Session 5
1. Reviewing homework. I begin the fifth session by reviewing the previous
week's homework, paying particular attention to arguments that group mem-
bers have doubts or reservations about or do not find persuasive. I initiate a
group discussion on these arguments and intervene to correct misconceptions
or to provide additional explanations to help dispel these doubts and to make
their rational arguments more persuasive.
2. Teaching the zigzag technique. As noted above, it is common for people to
respond to their own arguments developed in favor of a self-accepting philos-
ophy with what might be called irrational rebuttals, that is, arguments that cast
doubt on the concept of unconditional self-acceptance and in fact advocate a
return to the philosophy of self-downing. The zigzag technique formalizes this
debate between the irrational and rational "parts" of the person and gives the

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
213
person practice at defending her rational ego belief against her own irrational
attack. This technique helps group members to integrate their rational ego
beliefs into their belief system.
In the zigzag technique, the group member begins by writing down a ratio-
nal ego belief and rating her degree of conviction in this belief on a 0-100 rat-
ing scale. Then she responds to this belief with an irrational argument, which
she then rebuts. The group member continues in this vein until she has
responded to all of her attacks and can think of no more. She then rerates her
degree of conviction in her rational ego belief, which is usually increased if the
person used the technique properly.
Once I have taught the group members the rudiments of this technique, I
ask them to carry out the technique on their own in the session. I stress the
importance of keeping to the point, as it is easy for the person to get side-
tracked when using this technique. As group members do this task, I go from
person to person ensuring that they are doing it correctly and, in particular,
keep the focus of the debate on their target rational ego belief (see Dryden
[1995a] for an extended discussion of the zigzag technique).
3. Teaching tape-recorded disputing. Tape-recorded disputing is similar to the
zigzag method in that group members put the dialogue between their rational
and irrational ego beliefs on tape. In addition to emphasizing once again that
it is important to keep to the point while using this method, it is useful to stress
that group members respond to their irrational attacks with force and energy.
It should be explained that because people often hold their irrational ego
beliefs very strongly, weak rational responses will have little lasting effect on
irrational attacks. It is useful to give the group members some examples so that
they can discriminate between weak and forceful disputing (see Dryden [1995a]
for an extended discussion of tape-recorded disputing).
4. Homework. Tape-recorded disputing is a good homework assignment to
set at this point, but it is important to establish first that group members all
have access to tape recorders. If not, suitable arrangements should be made for
them to gain such access. In addition, I usually suggest that group members
read and note any objections to chapter 4 of Paul Hauck's (1991) book, which
considers the importance of behavioral methods in the development of uncon-
ditional self-acceptance. This will be the focus of the next two group sessions.
Session 6
1. Reviewing homework. In checking group members' tapes it is important
to pay particular attention to their ability to stay focused on the target beliefs
and to the tone they used during disputing, and suitable feedback should be
given accordingly on these two points. As with other reading material, partic-
ular emphasis should be given to group members' reservations about the place
of behavioral methods of developing unconditional self-acceptance.

2H 
The Practice of WBT
2. Providing a rationale fir the conjoint use of cognitive and behavioral methods
in real-life settings. REBT theory states that behavioral methods have a central
role to play in the therapeutic change process. Unless group members act on
their rational ego beliefs, the benefits they will derive from the group will ulti-
mately be minimal. However, the power of behavioral methods is best har-
nessed when they are used conjointly with cognitive methods designed to give
group members the opportunity to practice their rational ego beliefs in a real-
life setting.
3. Negotiating behavioral-cognitive tasks. After you have provided group mem-
bers with a rationale for the conjoint use of behavioral and cognitive tech-
niques, it is important to encourage them to agree to set one or two be-
havioral-cognitive tasks that they can implement as homework assignments
before the next group session. These tasks should preferably be related to
group members' goals.
4. Teaching rational-emotive imagery. Rational-emotive imagery (REI) is an
evocative technique designed to give group members practice in strengthen-
ing their rational ego beliefs in the face of negative activating events (A!s). In
self-acceptance groups I suggest the use of REI as preparation for the imple-
mentation of the behavioral-cognitive techniques discussed above. Once group
members have set a behavioral-cognitive technique, I ask them to imagine a
worst-case scenario that constitutes the A in an ABC episode and have them
identify and get in touch with an ego-related, disturbed negative emotion (e.g.,
hurt). Then, while they are still imagining the same negative A, I ask them to
change their emotion to a self-accepting, healthy negative emotion. As I have
noted elsewhere (Dryden, 199Sa), group members achieve this by changing
their irrational ego beliefs to rational ego beliefs (see Dryden [1995a] for a
fuller discussion of REI).
5. Homework. For homework, I suggest that group members practice REI three
times a day for a few days before implementing their behavioral-cognitive tasks.
Session 7
1. Reviewing homework. In checking group members' use of REI, you need
to make sure that they did, in fact, change their irrational ego beliefs to their
rational alternatives rather than change the negative activating event to some-
thing more positive. In reviewing their behavioral-cognitive tasks, you need
to ensure (a) that they actually faced the situation they wanted to confront or
acted in the manner planned and (b) that they practiced thinking rationally
while doing so.
2. Agreeing on other behavioral-cognitive tasks. If members were successful in
implementing their behavioral-cognitive assignment, then it is important to
capitalize on this success by negotiating two additional behavioral tasks.
Encourage group members to choose tasks that are challenging but not over-
whelming for them. However, if any group member struggled with their ini-

Principles of Unconditional Self-Acceptance 
215
tial behavioral-cognitive task, then you will have to be less adventurous in the
next such assignment you negotiate with that person.
3. Explaining and agreeing on shame-attacking exercises. Shame-attacking exer-
cises involve group members acting in a so-called shameful manner and accept-
ing themselves as they do so. They should attract attention to themselves
without alarming others, breaking the law, or getting themselves into trouble
at work. Examples of good shame-attacking exercises are as follows:
• wearing different colored shoes
• asking to see a three-piece suite in a sweet shop
• singing off-key in public
• asking for directions to a road one is on
I suggest that group members do at least one shame-attacking exercise before
the last group session.
4. Homework. The last set of homework assignments is as described above.
In addition, I ask group members to come to the last session prepared to talk
about what they have achieved from the group and to give feedback about their
experience of being in the group.
Session 8
1. Reviewing homework. For the last time, I check on group members' home-
work assignments and give corrective feedback as usual. Group members are
usually keen to learn about one another's shame-attacking exercises, and this
generates a sense of fun that, in my opinion, is quite suitable to the ending of
a group of this educational nature.
2. The self-acceptance quiz. In the spirit of fun and to assess what group mem-
bers have learned, I then ask them to complete in writing a short written quiz
(see Figure 9.1).
Why not take die quiz yourself to see what you have learned from this chapter?
3. Evaluating progress and elicitingfeedback on the group. I then ask group mem-
bers to relate what progress they have made toward unconditional self-accep-
tance and whether or not they have achieved their goals. I also ask them to give
feedback on the group experience, my way of running it, and how it might be
improved. Because all group members are involved in other groups in the hos-
pital and many are also in individual psychotherapy, it has not been possible for
me to carry out formal research into the effectiveness of self-acceptance groups.
4. Helping group members to maintain and extend their gains. The final task that
I ask group members to do is to develop a list of ways that they can maintain
and extend the gains that they have made from participating in the group (see
Dryden [1995a, 1995b] for a fuller discussion of these two points). I stress to
them that they have taken the first few steps along the road to self-acceptance

216 
The Practice ofREBT
Give reasons for each answer.
1. Having the love of a significant other makes you a more worthwhile person.
True or false?
2. If someone you admire is better than you at an important activity, he or she is a
better person than you.
True or false?
3. If you fail at something really important, you are not a failure but a fallible
human being.
True or false?
4. You can give a human being a single global rating that completely accounts
for them.
True or false?
5. Someone who rapes a small child is wicked through and through.
True or false?
6. Mother Teresa has more worth than Adolf Hitler.
True or false?
FIGURE 9.1 Unconditional self-acceptance quiz.
and that how far they go along this road will be largely dependent on the
amount of work that they are prepared to do on themselves using the tools that
I have taught them during the group. On this point, I wish them well and we
say our good-byes.
It is likely that brief psychoeducational group interventions will become
increasingly popular within the managed care climate that is beginning to
dominate mental health delivery systems. As this chapter shows, with its
emphasis on teaching clients the nature of good mental health and what to do
to achieve it, REBT is in a good position to make a very useful contribution
to the development of such interventions.

10
The Rational Emotive
Behavioral Approach
to Sex Therapy
It is exceptionally difficult to present the rational emotive behavioral approach
to sex counseling and therapy within a brief chapter. This approach has a com-
prehensiveness that goes beyond the techniques usually employed by sex ther-
apists attached to other schools, such as those used by psychoanalysts, behavior
therapists, Reichian and bioenergetic practitioners, or Masters-and-Johnson-
schooled therapists. It not only includes many of the main methods utilized by
these other schools, but it does so on theoretical rather than mere practical
grounds, as pan and parcel of an integrated theory of psychotherapy. It avoids
some of the popular methods of sex counseling, such as psychoanalytic and
Reichian procedures, because it considers them nontherapeutic or harmful.
We shall not, therefore, try to state everything that goes on—and that does
not go on—in the REBT treatment of sex problems in this chapter. Several
other books and articles are devoted to this subject (Ellis, 1958b, 1960, 1976f,
1979b). We shall try to mention briefly various aspects of rational emotive
behavior therapy (REBT) that significantly overlap with various other kinds
of sex therapies and shall emphasize those aspects that seem rather unique to
REBT and to allied cognitive-behavior practices.
From its inception, REBT was vigorously applied to human sex problems,
particularly those of impotence and frigidity. Indeed, had I (AE) not done a
great deal of sex therapy first, I might never have developed rational emotive
behavioral methods because, almost more than any other human psychologi-
cal problem, sexual malfunctioning practically requires (as Masters & Johnson
[1970] later found) the effective use of direct teaching, training, and homework
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Albert Ellis, "The Rational-Emotive Approach to Sex
Therapy," The Counseling Psychologist, 1975, 5(1), 14-22. Used by permission.
2/7

218 
The Practice of REBT
assigning methods by an effective therapist. And by experimenting in these
respects, especially after I discovered that the "depth-centered" techniques of
psychoanalysis frequently harmed rather than helped sexually dysfunctioning
people, I probably led myself to give up traditional psychotherapy and develop
the REBT approach long before I otherwise would have done.
Anyway, the REBT treatment of sex difficulties uses a comprehensive, inter-
locking cognitive-emotive-behavioral approach. Let us outline some of its main
elements.
COGNITIVE SEX THERAPY
Information Giving
Like Masters and Johnson (1970), Kaplan (1974), and other therapists, the
REBT practitioner teaches most clients with sex anxiety, hostility, or compul-
siveness a good amount of corrective information, which, at the start, they usu-
ally seem to lack. In accordance with REBT theory, this information serves
largely to disabuse them of several dysfunctional ideas—for example, that they
must have conventional coitus to have successful and enjoyable sex; that all nor-
mal men and women desire sex incessantly and can easily get aroused and sat-
isfied; that spontaneous arousal by both partners must occur if they have good
sex; that loving partners automatically and easily feel aroused by their mates;
that adulterous desires are illegitimate and immoral; that sex play, to seem
proper, must end up with penile-vaginal copulation; that any knowledgeable
individual can easily turn on and give many orgasms to his or her partner (Ellis,
1979b, 1980c).
REBT therapists give as much or more down-to-earth information as any
other sex therapists. But they do it not only to provide more knowledge and
training procedures to sexually maladjusted individuals but also to try to help
them achieve a generally open, experimenting, individualistic, rational attitude
toward sex, love, and marriage and to help them surrender self-defeating and
couple-sabotaging myths, superstitions, and dogmas (Ellis, 1960,1979). Finally,
REBT therapists also give their clients up-to-date information about safe sex
practices and how to get the most out of sex without putting themselves at risk
for HIV/AIDS.
Imaging Methods
In line with its emphasis on cognition, REBT employs a good amount of
imaging methods in sex therapy. In particular, males and females who have
difficulty in feeling aroused or reaching orgasm are shown how to use any
kind of fantasy that will work in their individual cases and to do so without
any shame or guilt if their fantasy seems "bizarre" or socially disapproved.

Sex Therapy 
219
The therapist may help them use regular sex fantasies, various kinds of
"pornographic" images, romantic fantasies, focusing on their own or their
partner's sensations and responses, or fantasies mutually verbalized with their
partners. When advisable, written or pictorial materials may be recommended
as fantasy aids.
A special kind of imaging that has powerful cognitive, emotive, and behav-
ioral elements included in it remains in the special province of REBT: rational-
emotive imagery (RET), originally developed by Maxie C. Maultsby, Jr. (1971)
and incorporated as one of the main techniques of REBT (Ellis, 1993a). I (AE)
employed REI effectively with Sally, whose case I presented in an article, "The
Treatment of Sex and Love Problems in Women" (Ellis, 1974b). Sally came
to see me because she only occasionally achieved a climax, even when her
lovers massaged her clitoral region for 15 or 20 minutes and at the time she
came for therapy had started to feel completely turned off to sex, so that vir-
tually nothing aroused her. As I explained the REI procedure to her, in the
course of her second session:
"Close your eyes, right now, and fantasize just as vividly as you can, having
sex relations with your lover. Can you do that?"
"Yes."
"All right. Continue in your imagination, having sex with him. But picture,
quite vividly, that little or nothing happens. You do not get in the least aroused,
the whole thing proves a complete bust, and he starts feeling quite irritable
and disappointed in you because you keep failing. In fact, he wonders and
makes overt remarks about your continually failing, and he indicates that he
begins to suspect you are just a dud, sexually, and that you will not likely ever
satisfy any man in that respect. Picture these scenes just as dramatically as you
can. See it as really happening!"
"I can see it. I can clearly see it now."
"Fine. How do you feel? How do you honestly feel, right in your gut, as you
envision this kind of sexual failure?"
"Awful! Depressed!"
"Right. You normally feel that way when you think of this kind of thing hap-
pening. Now, change the feeling in your gut to a feeling of only disappoint-
ment and frustration. Keep the same fantasy in your head, exactly the same
picture, but only feel sorry, disappointed, and frustrated. Not awful, not
depressed, only disappointed. Can you do that?"
"I see I have great trouble feeling that way. I find it hard!"
"I know. But I know you can do it. You do have the power to change your
feelings—if only for a short time. So try some more. Feel only disappointed
and frustrated. See if you can do that."
(After a pause): "All right. I guess I can do it."
"Do what?"

220 
The Practice of REBT
"Feel/zwf disappointed. It keeps running back into depression. But I can feel
it, at least for a while."
"Good. I knew you could. Now, what did you do to make yourself feel that
way?"
"Let me see. I guess I kept thinking, 'It isn't the end of the world. I really
would like to feel much more aroused and to please Henry. But I don't have to.'"
"Yes. Anything else?"
"Yes, I guess: 'I won't be a rotten person, even if I never get very sexy again.
It only is one of my traits, sexiness, and doesn't constitute me. If I lose that, I
still very much have the rest of me.'"
"Fine. You could continue to think exactly that if you want to feel disap-
pointed but not depressed. For you don't become a rotten person if you lose your
sexiness. There is much more to you than that. And you can enjoy yourself and
even have a good love relationship going if you never feel very sexy again."
"Yes. I see now that I can."
"Right! Now, if you will practice this rational-emotive imagery technique
every day for the next few weeks, if you really keep practicing it, it will become
more and more a part of you. You'll see, more clearly than you ever did, that
you have a choice of what you think when you envision sex failure, that you can
choose to feel sorry and disappointed—or awful and depressed. And you will get
used to feeling the former and not the latter until it becomes almost an auto-
matic part of your thinking and feeling. Up to now, you have really vigorously
practiced the opposite—making yourself feel depressed whenever you think, as
you often do, of not becoming aroused or orgasmic. Now you can make your-
self feel differently, until you 'naturally' keep feeling that way. So every day, for
the next few weeks, practice this kind of rational-emotive imagery that we have
just done, until it becomes 'second nature.' Will you do that?"
"Yes, I will," said Sally.
And she did practice it steadily for the next few weeks and reported that when
she had sex with her lover and began to feel depressed at the thought of fail-
ing, she quickly and almost automatically started making herself feel sorry and
disappointed instead. After a few weeks, she even had trouble feeling de-
pressed! And she then, much more easily and better than before, proved capa-
ble of practicing intense sexual imaging of an exciting nature and of arousing
herself considerably and coming to orgasm.
Antiawfulizing and Antiabsolutizing
Rational-emotive imagery, as just demonstrated, usually constitutes an anti-
awfulizing and antiabsolutizing technique because it helps sexually malfunc-
tioning individuals, imaginatively, emotively, and behaviorally, to practice
thinking and acting differently and, notably, to change their awfulizing,

Sex Therapy 
22/
antiempirical philosophies of life. The main premise of REBT holds that
humans mainly feel disturbed and act dysfunctionally, in sex-love and other
areas, when they change almost any desire, preference, or wish into an abso-
lutistic, perfectionistic should, ought, must, command, or demandingness (Ellis,
1962,1972b, 1973, 1980d, 1994c; Ellis & Harper, 1961b, 1997; Hauck, 1973,
1991; Knaus, 1974; Young, 1974). REBT especially sees wwwturbation as good
and harmless but warturbation as pernicious and disturbance-creating. It con-
sequently teaches people to look for their irrational must's and vigorously and
persistently dispute them and change them back to it would be better's.
In REBT we teach most people with sexual problems the ABCs of emo-
tional disturbance, and we help them acquire cognitive (as well as emotive and
behavioral) tools to change these ABCs significantly. We deal, as does Helen
Kaplan (1974), not only with the client's specific sex problems but usually, as
well, with his or her general tendencies to create emotional disturbance in non-
sexual areas of life.
I (AE) will now illustrate REBT procedures with a summary of my treating
a 29-year-old male with a fairly typical case of impotence. Although he had
succeeded sexually with his ex-wife, to whom he remained married for 4 years,
he had not regularly achieved a good degree of erection with other females,
either before or after his marriage, except with prostitutes or "low level,"
"whorish" women who looked to him like hookers. He had explored his pre-
sumed Oedipal feelings toward his mother (who had kept criticizing him sex-
ually since his early childhood) and its supposed connection with his impotence
in the course of a 5-year period of psychoanalysis. But he had only become
more impotent during that time.
I quickly showed this client that although his inability to get aroused may have
at first partly stemmed from his fear of sex and his horror of having it with a "nice
woman," who may have symbolized a mother figure to him, its continuing and
main cause probably had little to do with the dysfunctional idea that he would be
a sinner if he succeeded sexually with any mother surrogate but had other philo-
sophic sources. At point C, his behavioral Consequence (or neurotic symptom),
was that he failed to have an erection with "nice women." And as an additional
emotional Consequence, he felt exceptionally ashamed of his failing. At point A,
his Activating experience or Activating event, he received permission from a
"good woman" to have sex with her, and he got into bed and attempted to have
it. Because, in REBT terms, C follows A but does not really create or cause it (as
assumed in psychoanalysis and several other therapeutic systems), the thing to
look for and change consists of B—this individual^ Belief system. What, in other
words, did he irrationally keep believing or telling himself at B?
As in many cases like this, I first start with the client's second C: his shame about
his impotence. In this REBT model, A (his Activating experience) represented
his sexual failure, and C (his emotional Consequence) represented his feelings of
shame, depression, and self-downing about A B (his Belief System) included two

222 
The Practice of REST
parts: a Rational Belief (RB) and an Irrational Belief (IB). His Rational Belief (as
he soon agreed) was obvious: "I would very much like to succeed sexually with all
types of females, including 'nice women,' and since I have just failed with this pres-
ent one, I find that unpleasant and inconvenient. How said that I failed! I wish I
had succeeded instead. Now let me see what I can do the next time I go to bed
with her, so that I can get aroused and enjoy myself and please her sexually."
This set of Rational Beliefs, if he only stayed with them, would tend to pro-
duce in the client (at C) healthy feelings of sorrow, regret, frustration, and
annoyance about his impotence at A. Thus he would feel healthily sad, sorry,
and frustrated about his impotence. But because we (he and I) knew that he
felt unhealthily, ashamed and self-downing about it (at C), we strongly sus-
pected that he had Irrational Beliefs, at B, in addition to his rational Beliefs.
And, looking for these Irrational Beliefs (IBs), we soon found that he kept
telling himself: "How awful that I am impotent! I can't stand having such symp-
toms! I must not act that way; and what a worm, what a complete slob I am if I
am as impotent as that!" He then, after having these profound beliefs, felt
ashamed and self-downing at C.
Because this client wished to minimize or eliminate his unhealthy feelings at
C, I helped him go to D—disputing his irrational Beliefs. To do this, I showed
him how to ask himself four main questions: (1) "What makes it awfitl(or terri-
ble or horrible) if I am impotent?" (2) "Why can't I stand having such symptoms?"
(3) "Show me the evidence that I must not have them." (4) "If I do behave impo-
tently, how do I become a worm or a complete slob for behaving that way?"
He then began to answer himself, at point E (his Effective New Philosophy):
1. "Nothing makes it awful (or terrible or horrible) if I am impotent. It is
inconvenient and frustrating. But that doesn't amount to awful or horriblel Awful-
ness means 100% inconvenience. And that hardly exists. Horror stems from my
believing that things sbouldn 't work out inconveniently. But if they do, they do!
Tough! No matter how inconvenient or disadvantageous it is to be impotent,
it never can be more than that."
2. "I can, again, stand impotence, though I of course need never like it. I can
also stand having any symptoms that I do have. And I'd better not make myself
ashamed of my impotence, only distressed about having it."
3. "I can't find any evidence supporting the proposition that I must not be
impotent. It would be highly desirable to act potently, but that hardly means
that I must. I will hardly die if I remain impotent. More important, I can have
sex pleasure, distinctly satisfy my partner, and have many kinds of nonsexual
joy in life, even if I stay sexually impotent forever."
4. "My impotence definitely doesn't make me a worm, or a complete slob; but
at worst, a person with a handicap. Having a poor trait never makes me a bad per-
son. I can fully accept myself and keep determined to lead as happy a life as I
can lead, even though I have important deficiencies, such as sexual impotence."

Sex Therapy 
223
By helping this client go through his A-B-C-D-E's in this fashion, I first
helped him to accept himself with his impotence and to feel unashamed of hav-
ing it. Once he began to feel better in this respect, he could work more ade-
quately on the impotence itseif. In this respect, his ABCs went as follows:
Activating experience (A): "This 'nice woman' wants me to have sex with her."
Rational Belief (RB): "Wouldn't it be unfortunate if I failed with her, especially
in view of the fact that I have failed in these circumstances before." Irrational
Belief (IB): "It would be terrible if I failed! I have to succeed, or else I prove
myself a thorough weakling instead of a man!"Behavioral Consequence (C):
Lack of adequate erection. Disputing of irrational Beliefs (D): "How is every-
thing terrible if I fail? What evidence exists that I have to succeed? How does
it prove, if I fail, that I am a thorough weakling instead of a man?" Effect of
Disputing (E): "Nothing is really terrible if I fail. Things still remain unfortu-
nate, handicapping, and inconvenient. But nothing more! There is no evidence
that I have to succeed, though it obviously would be high desirable if I did. I
don't have to succeed. I don't have to do anything! If I fail, I clearly am not a
Failure, a Weakling, or a Non-man. I still am a human, a man, who presently
fails and who may well succeed in the future. Even if I never-get fully sexually
potent, I don't become a bad person. Only my behavior, not my essence, is bad
or weak."
As he kept going through these ABCs, my client grew more and more
potent. After the third session he had intercourse with a "nice woman" and
succeeded reasonably well. Immediately thereafter, he assertively picked up
another "good woman" on a bus and spent a "wonderful weekend" in bed with
her. Thereafter he had virtually no sex problems, no matter what kind of a
partner he selected. He also, at first spontaneously and then with my help,
began to tackle his feelings of inadequacy at his job, accountancy, and after sev-
eral more months improved in that respect. As I find common, his sex prob-
lems were overcome much more quickly and thoroughly than his general
feelings of worthlessness. But the mastering of the former helped him go on
to the latter.
I used several of the other techniques mentioned in this chapter with this
client, particularly that of helping him imagine "nice women" as "sexy" and
that of getting him to question and challenge all his guilt feelings about sex.
However, doing his ABCs about his shame about impotence and about his
impotence itself proved most useful.
Removing Sex Guilt
As just noted, my impotent client found it quite helpful to rid himself of his
feelings of guilt. In treating people with sex problems, the technique of shame
and guilt reduction is often valuable. As I have shown in several books (Ellis,
1958b, I960, 1976, 1979b), even in today's relatively enlightened age millions

224 
The Practice of REBT
of people still make themselves needlessly ashamed or guilty about some of
their sex acts. Although other therapies—such as Gestalt therapy (Perls, 1969),
client-centered therapy (Rogers, 1961), and Reichian therapy (Reich, 1942)—
tackle this problem in their own ways, REBT specializes in the minimization
of shame and guilt.
When, for example, people feel guilty (at point C) about what they have
done sexually (at point A), the REBT therapist immediately looks for their
Beliefs (at point B). In the sexual area they have usually convinced themselves
of two major Beliefs: (1) this sex act that I have done is definitely wrong; and
(2) because of its wrongness, I should not have done it and must consider myself
a lousy person for doing so. Normally, Belief No. 1 may be rational because
people obviously can and do commit many wrong, mistaken, foolish, or uneth-
ical sex acts (such as compulsive peeping or rape). However, this Belief may
actually be unhealthy. Such acts, for example, as masturbation, noncoital sex
play leading to orgasm, and frequent sex fantasizing have often been labeled
as "wrong" or "wicked" when no evidence exists for their foolishness or
immorality. Consequently, people frequently make themselves ashamed of or
guilt about perfectly harmless, even beneficial sex acts. And in REBT we help
them question the "erroneousness" of such acts, just as we would get them to
ask themselves whether various nonsexual acts (such as primarily devoting one-
self to one's own life rather than following one's parents' rules) truly are wrong.
Second, and most important, REBT teaches people that even when they
commit an indubitably wrong, self-defeating, or antisocial act, they had bet-
ter not go on to Belief No. 2: "Therefore, I am a lousy person!" According to
REBT, no lousy people exist—only those who do rotten things (Ellis, 1972b,
1973, 1994c). We had better feel highly responsible for but not self-downing
about our poor behaviors. REBT therapists show people how to feel guilty
about their wrong and antisocial acts, and to feel remorse and regret about
doing them—but not to feel guilty and deprecating about themselves for these
poor actions. They thereby help sexually troubled clients to free themselves of
senseless guilt and to achieve maximum satisfaction (Ellis, 1973, 1976f, 1979b,
1988, 1994c).
Supplementary Psychoeducative Procedures
As an integral part of its program of cognitive restructuring, REBT employs a
great deal of bibliotherapy and recorded therapy. Following as it does the edu-
cational model, it uses all kinds of audiovisual modalities, including pamphlets,
books, recordings, films, talks, workshops, and computer programs, such as
those starred in the reference list of this book.
Clients frequently record their own sex therapy sessions on a cassette
recorder and listen to the recordings several times in between sessions. They
fill out REBT self-help reports (Sichel & Ellis, 1984) about their therapeutic

Sex Therapy 
225
progress and use the report forms to help them with their ABCs of REBT.
They participate in live workshops, lectures, and seminars at the Institute.
They have motto cards and games available to help them acquire REBT teach-
ings. Sex therapy at the Institute consists not only of regular therapy sessions
but of large- and small-group educative procedures and various supplemen-
tary psychoeducational methods.
EMOTIVE SEX THERAPY
Although REBUs most unique and best-known procedures tend to lie in die cog-
nitive area, it also includes a considerable amount of emotive-dramatic-evocative
methods. Let me exposit a few of diese in connection with REBT sex therapy.
Unconditional Acceptance by the Therapist
REBT is rivaled only by Rogerian therapy (Rogers, 1961) in its unconditional
acceptance of the client by the therapist. True to REBT principles, the thera-
pist accepts people with sex problems no matter how foolishly or antisocially
they behave (Ellis, 1973). Group REBT (where a good deal of sex therapy is
often done) also specializes in teaching all the members of the group to accept
(though not necessarily to like) the others members and to help show these
others that they have a perfect right to accept themselves in spite of their
sometimes execrable conduct. REBT practitioners, in addition to giving clients
with sex problems unconditional acceptance, go beyond Rogerian methods by
actively teaching them how to give it to themselves whether or not others favor
them (Ellis, 1962, I972b, 1973, 1974b, 1976a, 1994c; Ellis & Becker, 1982;
Ellis & Harper, 1997; Hauck, 1991; Mills, 1993).
Shame-Attacking Exercises
According to REBT, shame or self-downing constitutes the most important
part of many human disturbances. Clients, therefore, frequently are given
shame-attacking exercises of a sexual or nonsexual nature so that they thereby
can prove to themselves that their world will not come to an end if they actu-
ally perform so-called shameful, foolish, or ridiculous acts and even do so pub-
licly. When performing such "shameful" acts, either in the course of individual
or group REBT sessions, they do not do anything that would lead to real trou-
ble or self-defeatism, such as behaviors that would encourage them to get fired
or jailed. But they are encouraged to perform nonharmful "shameful" behav-
iors such as wearing sexy or ridiculous clothing; wearing conspicuous buttons,
including those that may have antipuritanical views emblazoned in large let-
ters; starting discussions of sex topics in social groups; talking intimately to

22<T 
The Practice of REST
strangers about some of the details of their love and sex lives; and pushing
themselves to perform supposedly "far-out" sex acts with some of their regu-
lar partners.
We find that these kinds of shame-attacking exercises frequently help inhib-
ited, unassertive, uptight individuals attain good results, sometimes in a short
period of time. This is especially true because in the course of REBT individ-
ual or group therapy, we not only encourage such exercises as emotive proce-
dures to be acted upon rather than merely talked about, but we then follow
them up with antiawfulizing discussions that show how they may be socially
"wrong" but not really "shameful." Just as we give our cognitive procedures
an emotive vector, we give these emotive procedures a cognitive vector; and
the two sides nicely tend to interact with and reinforce each other.
Risk-Taking Exercises
Along with shame-attacking, REBT therapists specialize in the use of risk-tak-
ing exercises. Humans, in sex-love as well as in other areas of their lives, stub-
bornly refuse to take risks because they often define them as horribly or awfully
dangerous when they actually involve little danger. Their most fearful risks
involve acting foolishly in the eyes of others. Sexually, they frequently define
various sex acts as "risky" or "dangerous" and avoid them like the plague. In
REBT we often persuade, encourage, and urge our clients to do emotive risk-
taking acts.
In both our individual and group therapy sessions we give our sexually trou-
bled clients risk-taking exercises. For example: "Go to a dance, singles bar, or
other social gathering and talk to at least five members of the other sex and try
to make a date with at least one of them." "Take the risk of asking your regu-
lar partner to engage in a sex act that you feel afraid he or she would like to
perform or would criticize you for asking him or her to perform." "Pick a per-
son for whom you feel you have a special liking and ask that person to go on
a date with you or do something else that you would normaiiy feel afraid to
ask this person to do." However, in this aspect of the REBT approach to sex
therapy, as in all others, we strongly encourage our clients to practice safe sex.
Although we wish them to take healthy risks, we certainly do not want them
to expose themselves to situations where they could develop HIV/AIDS.
Rational-Emotive Imagery
As noted above in the section on imaging methods, we frequently employ
rational-emotive imagery (REI) with our sex therapy clients because it not only
involves cognitive elements but important emotive factors as well. We there-
fore use it with REBT clients who have sexual and nonsexual problems.

Sex Therapy 
227
Nonverbal Exercises
Many REBT clients have difficulty doing nonverbal activities (far more, some-
times, than they have with verbal activities), so we frequently give them non-
verbal exercises. We may have them express their feelings to each other, as they
mill around the room slowly. One of them may stand within a circle while the
other members of the group show nonverbally how they feel toward him or
her or do various kinds of hand-holding, face massaging, or back rubbing exer-
cises. We may encourage them to behave foolishly in a nonverbal manner.
We use most of the nonverbal procedures nonsexually for general loosen-
ing-up processes. But some of them have clear-cut sexual meaning or impli-
cations. Thus, we sometimes have two males and two females respond to each
other physically to see if they bring out any hangups about homosexual feel-
ings when doing so. Or we may have males and females caress each other to
see what problems they reveal in the course of this kind of exercise.
Emotive Verbalizations
According to the theory of REBT, people create their own emotional upsets
largely by strong beliefs and vigorously help disturb themselves by holding vehe-
ment negative philosophies. Thus, men or women who have trouble achieving
an orgasm may very powerfully feel convinced that they must achieve it, can't
obtain it easily, and are worthless if orgasm remains unachieved. If these indi-
viduals only mildly contradict such beliefs, they may still mainly hold them and
remain emotionally upset by them. Consequently, in REBT we not only
attempt to help people to see their disturbance-creating ideas but to contra-
dict and dispute these in a highly emotive manner.
Thus, when we ask an impotent male why it would be awful or horrible if he
remained unarousable with his favorite partner, and he finally answers, in a
rather namby-pamby way, "Well, I guess it wouldn't," we frequently say to
him, "But I think it really would\n Or we say: "You don't convince me one bit,
by that tone of voice, that you think it wouldn't be awful. Now let me hear you
say, much more vigorously, 'No matter how many rimes I fail sexually with my
partner, I can still find it highly inconvenient but not awful!'" And we show
him how to repeat this statement strongly until he starts to truly believe it.
In other instances, REBT sex therapists help clients to powerfully convince
themselves that they can succeed sexually, that they have a right to enjoy them-
selves in bed, that their parents and early teachers often held very wrong views
about sex, and that masturbation and various other kinds of "shameful" acts
really are thoroughly unshameful and good. We not only, in REBT, encourage
clients to actively work and practice against their self-sabotaging sex views and
in favor of saner, health-creating views but to keep doing so with much
strength and forcefulness.

228 
The Practice ofREBT
Emotive Feedback
In REBT individual and group sessions we frequently give emotive feedback
to clients. If a woman has a desperate need for love and keeps sabotaging her
sex-love relations because she exudes this need, the therapist or one of the
group members may say to her: "Look, if I went on a date with you and I saw
how you keep acting—thoroughly obsessed with how much I care for you and
not really, because of your obsession, giving a shit about me—I'd say to myself:
'Who needs this? She may have lots of brains and good looks but she obvi-
ously won't be a good partner. Screw it! I think I'll look for someone who
shows much more interest in me.'" Or to a male, the therapist or a group
member may say: "If I went with you and you asked me to have sex with you
in the manner you just indicated you used with your woman friend, I'd feel
very turned off. I'd feel that you only cared for my tits and ass and hardly a fig
for me as a human. So even though I might feel attracted to you, I'd run!"
This kind of emotive feedback, when used in REBT, shows the client how
others will likely react and how he or she may change to bring about more
favorable reactions. The therapist and group members employ it educatively
and correctively, not just expressively.
BEHAVIORAL SEX THERAPY
As indicated above, REBT utilizes a great deal of behavior therapy. Its theory
states that humans rarely change and keep disbelieving a strong self-defeating
belief until they act against it. Consequently, REBT therapists have pioneered
in giving activity, in vivo homework assignments, to sexually malfunctioning
clients. Because REBT behavioral therapy overlaps significantly with the tech-
niques of Masters and Johnson (1970), Masters, Johnson, and Kolodny (1982),
and of other behavior therapists (Leiblum & Rosen, 1989), I shall only briefly
mention some of its main methods here.
Activity Homework Assignments
REBT favors in vivo desensitization in many instances. Thus, sexually mal-
functioning clients are encouraged to have more sex activities instead of their
common avoidance of such acts, to have sex with a partner without at first
attempting any kind of penile-vaginal intercourse (Masters and Johnson [1970]
call this technique the sensatefoms), to work on overcoming their hostility or
avoidance while remaining with an unsatisfactory partner instead of copping
out and running away from sex with that individual, to practice certain activi-
ties over and over until they acquire adeptness at them, and to practice sexu-
ally arousing fantasies (Ellis, 1976f, 1979b, 198Sc).

Sex Therapy 
229
Operant Conditioning
REBT often employs operant conditioning or self-management techniques.
Thus, clients are taught to reinforce their having sex with their mates and to
penalize (but not to damn) themselves when they avoid sex. Or they are shown
how to reinforce so-called shameful but harmless activities and how to use self-
management principles to minimize or stop their dysfunctional sex compul-
sions. Following the procedures of behavior-oriented therapists, they fre-
quently are supervised in making sex-love contracts with their mates and
monitored in carrying out these contracts (Heiman & LoPiccolo, 1988;
Leiblum & Rosen, 1989; Wolpe, 1990; Zilbergeld, 1992).
REBT also specializes in the use of operant conditioning techniques to rein-
force cognitive and emotive changes. If, for example, clients agree to antiaw-
fulize or to dispute some of their irrational ideas about how horrible things
would be if they failed sexually and if they did not persistently carry out these
cognitive homework assignments, we show them how to reward and penalize
themselves so as to increase the probability of their performing their assign-
ments. We find that operant conditioning techniques, when voluntarily
accepted by clients, serve as one of the best methods of backing up the kind of
homework assignments originally invented by Hertzberg (1945), Salter (1949),
and other active-directive therapists a good many years ago and now incorpo-
rated as routine REBT procedures.
Assertion Training
Assertion training procedures, used especially with shy and unassertive indi-
viduals, now constitute one of the most common behavior therapy procedures
(Alberti & Emmons, 1995; Lange & Jakubowski, 1976; Lazarus, 1989; Wolpe,
1990). Such procedures have existed as an integral part of REBT since its
beginnings. For example, in the first edition of The Intelligent Woman's Guide
to Dating and Mating (Ellis, 1979a), I (AE) included a pioneering chapter,
"How to Become Assertive without Being Aggressive," showing women how to
train themselves to overcome their usual passivity and to help themselves to
act as assertively as males frequently do in sex-love affairs.
Because women in our culture are often trained to be "femininely" passive,
REBT practitioners often help female clients, through a series of graduated
homework assignments, to pick up attractive males in public places (such as
dances, singles gatherings, or bars), to phone their men friends instead of pas-
sively waiting for the men to call, to make sexual overtures when they wish to
do so, to ask their partners to engage in sex-love practices that they particu-
larly enjoy, and to do many other "unfeminine" things they truly would like to
do (Ellis, 1974b; Wolfe, 1980, 1992; Wolfe & Naimark, 1991). As Patricia
Jakubowski-Spector (1973) has shown in an incisive article, "Facilitating the

2 JO 
The Practice of REBT
Growth of Women through Assertive Training," REBT techniques, along with
the usual kind of behavioral assertive training, can immensely help females in
our society. At the same time, of course, this same combination is used by
REBT therapists to enable a large number of overly passive, unassertive males
to succeed much better in their sex-love relations.
SUMMARY
In this brief presentation of the REBT approach to sex therapy we have nec-
essarily skimmed over some of the main details of this comprehensive cogni-
tive-emotive-behavioral practice. The main things we would like to note, in
summary, are the following: REBT consciously and on theoretical grounds employs
many of the methods used by odier well-known therapies. It holds that humans
simultaneously and transactionally think, emote, and behave and that when
what we call their emotions or behavior are disordered, we had better also seri-
ously take into account their thinking, imagining, and evaluating. It especially
stresses the desirability of profound cognitive or philosophic change if people
want to modify their sexual and nonsexual malfunctioning elegantly and per-
manently. But it never neglects changing beliefs through altering emotions
and actions (Ellis, 1957, 1994c; Ellis & Velten, 1992). As a general system of
psychotherapy, REBT envisions most serious sex problems within a frame-
work of prevailing emotional upsetness and strives for reduced general dis-
turbability along with correcting specific sexual malfunctioning. It recognizes,
however, that same sex problems require concrete informational and training
procedures, without the individual's having to receive extensive or intensive
psychotherapy, and it tries to remain practical, hard-headed, and efficient as
well as philosophically depth-centered.

11
The Use of Hypnosis
with REBT
WHY REBT IS EFFECTIVE WITH HYPNOSIS
Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) is often used in conjunction with
hypnosis and has been shown to work effectively in several controlled outcome
studies (Golden, 1982; Reardon & Tosi, 1977; Reardon, Tosi, & Gwynne,
1977; Stanton, 1977,1989; Tosi & Marzella, 1977; Tosi & Reardon, 1976; Tosi
& Murphy, 1995). There are several reasons why REBT and hypnosis can be
effectively combined:
1. Many authorities have held that therapeutic hypnosis itself largely works
through suggestion and mainly consists of giving clients strong positive state-
ments and inducing them to internalize and act on these self-statements. REBT
particularly teaches people how to dispute and challenge their negative self-
statements (Ellis, 1962,1971a, 1973; Ellis & Whiteley, 1979). But it also stresses
(as do other forms of cognitive-behavior therapy) the use of repeated and pow-
erful positive or functional coping statements Q. Beck, 1995; Burns, 1980; Dry-
den, 1984c; Dryden & Ellis, 1986; Dryden & Trower, 1986; Ellis, 1988,1994c,
1996a; Ellis & Abrahms, 1978; Ellis & Becker, 1982; Ellis & Grieger, 1977;
Ellis & Harper, 1975; Grieger & Boyd, 1980; Grieger & Grieger, 1982; Walen,
DiGiuseppe, & Dryden, 1992; Wessler & Wessler, 1980).
2. Autohypnosis and regular hypnosis assume that humans upset themselves
with ideas, images, and other cognitions and that they can be taught and trained
Parts of this chapter were adapted from Albert Ellis, "Anxiety about Anxiety: The Use of Hyp-
nosis with Rational-Emotive Therapy," in E, Thomas Dowd & James M. Healy (Eds.), Case
Studies in Hypnotherapy (pp. 3-11), New York: Guilford Press, 1986; and from Albert Ellis,
"Rational-Emotive Therapy and Hypnosis," in J. W. Rhue, S. J. Lynn, & I. Kirsch (Eds.),
Handbook of Clinical Hypnosis (pp. 173-186). Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa-
tion, 1993. Used by permission.
231

232 
The Practice of REBT
to change these cognitions and thereby significantly change their feelings and
actions (Araoz, 1983; Ellis, 1962,1993b; Golden et al., 1987). REBT strongly
posits and implements this same assumption.
3. Hypnosis and REBT are both highly active-directive methods and dif-
fer significantly from many other passive and nondirective therapies, such as
psychoanalytic and person-centered therapies.
4. REBT and hypnosis both emphasize homework assignments and in vivo
desensitization and frequently urge clients to do the things they are afraid of
and to work against their feelings of low frustration tolerance and their self-
defeating addictions.
Because some of the basic theories and practices of hypnotherapy and
REBT significantly overlap, I (AE) have combined REBT with hypnosis since
the early 1950s; one of my first published papers on RET was "Hypnotherapy
with Borderline Psychotics" (expanded version, Ellis, 1962). At first I had sev-
eral sessions with clients with whom I used hypnosis so that they could be
trained to go into a moderate or fairly light trance. I noticed, however, that a
number of clients who achieved only light trance states—states of deep relax-
ation but hardly hypnosis—did just as well or better with the REBT I taught
them as did clients who achieved deep or "true" hypnotic trances.
I therefore created a new hypnotic method that saved me and my clients
hours of therapy time. Using this method, I put the clients in what is usually
a light hypnotic (or deeply relaxed) state, employing a modified version of
Jacobsen's (1938) progressive relaxation technique, which takes only about 10
minutes to effect. I follow this with 10 minutes of REBT instruction, designed
to show the clients that they have a few specific Irrational Beliefs (IBs) with
which they are creating some major problem (e.g., anxiety, depression, rage,
or self-downing) and that if they keep actively and strongly disputing these IBs
(as I have previously taught them to do in several nonhypnotic sessions) they
will change their beliefs and thereby also appreciably change their self-defeat-
ing feelings and behaviors that stem from and help reinforce these IBs.
The unique feature of this REBT hypnotic procedure is that I often use it
only once, for a single session, to work on a client's main presenting problem.
I record both the 10 minutes of hypnotic-relaxation induction plus the fol-
lowing 10 minutes of REBT instruction on a C-60 cassette and give the cas-
sette to the clients to keep listening to every day, at least once a day, for the
next 30 to 60 days. Using this method, I see the clients for only a single 20-
minute hypnotic session, but they get 15, 30, or more hours of recorded REBT
hypnotic therapy at their own home or office for the next month or two. If
they actually use this time as I direct them to do, they often develop deeper
and deeper trance states, even though during the original live session they
develop only a very light trance or, as many of them report, no real trance state
at all.

The Use of Hypnosis with REBT 
233
To illustrate the use of this method, let me (AE) report the case of a 3 3-year-
old personality disordered female who had a 20-year history of being severely
anxious about her school, work, love, and sex performances. She became clas-
sically anxious about her anxiety, had a severe case of phrenophobia (fear of
going crazy), and was sure that she would end up as a bag lady without any
friends, lovers, or money. Actually, she was quite attractive, could have 10 to
IS orgasms a week when she felt secure with a love partner (which was rare),
and made a large salary as a sales manager.
I had 13 sessions with this severely anxious woman, and at times she used
the main message of REBT—that you largely feel the way you think—and
notably decreased her feelings of terror about failing in love, sex, and business.
But a few weeks later she would fall back again almost to zero and make herself
exceptionally upset, especially abo'ut her anxiety itself. After hearing that one
of her friends was helped to stop smoking by hypnotherapy, she asked me if I
used it along with REBT, and I said that I sometimes did but that I often did
not encourage clients to resort to it because they thought of it as a form of
magic and used it instead of working at the REBT. I agreed, however, to try it
with her and used it once. Here is a transcript of my first and only hypnotic
session with her.
TRANSCRIPT OF REBT HYPNOTIC SESSION
First loosen your toes and then tense them up. Just tense your toes. Now relax
them. Relax, relax. Now I'm going to put you through a series of relaxation
exercises like the one you just did with your toes but emphasizing the second
part—focusing on physical relaxation. I want you to relax your toes and only
focus on relaxing them. Think about your toes and focus on relaxing them.
Relax them, relax them, relax them. Then relax the rest of the muscles of your
feet—all your sole, instep, heel, and ankle muscles. Let all your feet muscles
sink into a nice, easy, free, relaxed state. Relax the soles of your feet, your
ankles, your heels, your whole feet. Just relax, relax, relax, relax.
Then relax the calves of your legs, let both calves relax—easy, free, warm,
nice, and relaxed. Then relax your knees, let your knee muscles go—nice, free,
flexible, warm, relaxed, Then your thighs: relax your thigh muscles, focus on
those thigh muscles, and relax, relax, relax them. Relax them, relax them, relax
them. Now your hips, let your middle region, your hips, relax, relax, relax. And
now go back to your toes again and let your toes, your feet, lower legs, your
calves, your knees, your thighs, and your hips relax, relax, all of them relax.
Let the whole lower part of your body relax, relax, relax, relax, relax. Now your
stomach muscles. Think of your stomach muscles, focus on your stomach mus-
cles, relax all those stomach muscles, relax them, let them go easy, nice, warm,
flexible, and free.

234 
The Practice of REBT
And now your chest muscles. Breathe easily—in and out, in and out, let go,
relax your chest muscles, let your whole chest, as well as your stomach, your
legs and your feet, relax, relax, relax, relax.
Now your shoulder muscles. Let go your shoulder muscles and relax them.
Let them sink, sink, sink into themselves. Let them sink, sink, sink into any
sofa, bed, or chair that you are resting on. Just let them go. Let them relax.
And now your upper arm muscles, let them go—easy, warm, free, relaxed. And
your elbows—let your elbow muscles relax, relax, relax. And your forearm
muscles—let them go, let them go. Warm, free, easy, relaxed. And let your
wrist muscles relax. Easy, free, relaxed, flexible, warm. And the muscles of your
fingers and your hand. Let them go—flexible, free, nice, warm, easy, relaxed.
Now your whole body's sinking into a totally nice relaxed state from the tip
of your toes to your neck, \bur shoulders and your arms are getting more and
more and more relaxed. Now focus on your neck muscles. Let them go. Let
those neck muscles, which are sometimes tense, relax, relax, relax. And now
your jaw muscles. Let your mouth hang slightly open. Let your jaw muscles
relax, relax, relax. And you can even relax your cheek muscles. You can let diem
go a little, let them get flabby and relaxed, more than they normally are. And
the muscles of your mouth, your lips—relax, relax them, relax diem, relax them.
And now the top of your head, your scalp muscles—wrinkle your scalp a lit-
tle and let the muscles relax, relax, relax. And especially your eye muscles,
which are now tense. Let your eyes relax, relax. Easy, free, and flexible. You
now want to let your eyes close into a nice, relaxed, easy state. And you focus
on letting your eyes relax, relax. And they're closing. Easy and free, warm and
relaxed. They're getting tired. They -want to relax and you want them to relax.
Along with your whole body, you especially want to let your eyes relax, let go.
They're closing, getting tired, tired, and more and more relaxed. And now
your eyes are closing and becoming more and more relaxed. You really^/the
relaxation in your eye muscles. They're closing, closing—becoming more and
more relaxed. \bu want to go, you want to let yourself go and feel fully calm
and relaxed. You want to sink into a totally, totally relaxed state.
Your eyes are getting heavier and heavier and you want to let yourself sink,
you're trying to let yourself sink, into a deeper, deeper, relaxed state. You want
to let your whole body, especially your eyes, go deeper, and deeper, and deeper,
into a totally free, warm, nice, flexible, relaxed state. And now you're letting
yourself go deeper, deeper, deeper, deeper. You want to fully relax and get your
body out of your way and to go deep, deep, down deeper, down deeper, into a fully,
fully, fully free and easy relaxed state. \bu're only listening to die sound of my
voice, that's all you're focusing on, that's all you want to hear—the sound of
my voice, dial's all you're focusing on, diat's all you want to hear—die sound of
my voice. And you're going to do what I tell you to do because you want to,
you want to do it. You want to stay in this relaxed state and be fully aware of
my voice and do what I ask you to do because you want to do it, you want to

The Use of Hypnosis with REST 
235
be relaxed. You want to rid yourself of your anxiety and you know that this will
help you relax and listen, relax and listen, go into a fully free and relaxed state.
You're only focusing on my voice, and you're going to listen carefully to
what I'm telling you. You're going to remember everything I tell you. And after
you awake from this relaxed, hypnotic state, you're going to feel very good.
Because you're going to remember everything and use what you hear—use it
for you. Use it to put away all your anxiety and all your anxiety about your anx-
iety. You're going to remember what I tell you and use it every day. Whenever
you feel anxious about anything, you're going to remember what I'm telling
you now, in this relaxed state, and you're going to fully focus on it, concen-
trate on it very well, and do exactly what we're talking about—relax and get
rid of your anxiety, relax and get rid of your anxiety.
Whenever you get anxious about anything, you're going to realize that the
main reason you're anxious is because you are saying to yourself, telling your-
self, "I must succeed! I must succeed! I must do this, or I must not do that!" You
will clearly see and fully accept that your anxiety mainly comes from your self-
statements. It doesn't come from without. It doesn't come from other people.
You make yourself anxious, by demanding that something must go well or must
not exist. It's your demand that makes you anxious. It's almost always you and
your self-talk; and therefore you control it and you can change it.
You're going to realize,"/ make myself anxious. I don't have to keep making
myself anxious, if I give up my demands, my must's, my should's, my ought's. If
I really accept what is, accept things the way they are when I can't change them,
then I won't be anxious. I can always make myself unanxious and less tense by
giving up my must's, by relaxing—by wanting and wishing for things but not
needing, not insisting, not demanding, not mumirbating about them."
You're going to keep telling yourself, "I can ask for things, I can wish. But I
do not need what I want, I never neo/what I want! There is nothing I absolutely
must have; and there is nothing I must avoid, including my anxiety. I'd like to
get rid of this anxiety. I can get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. But if I tell
myself, 'I must not be anxious! I must not be anxious! I must be unanxious!' then
I'll be anxious.
"Depression won't kill me. Anxiety won't kill me. Lack of sex won't kill me.
There are lots of unpleasant things in the world that I don't like, but I can stand
them, I don't have to get rid of them. If I'm anxious, I'm anxious—too damn
bad! Because / control my emotional destiny—as long as I don't feel that I have
to do anything, that I have to succeed at anything. That's what destroys me—
the idea that I have to be sexy or I have to succeed at sex. Or that I have to get
rid of my anxiety."
In your regular life, after listening to this tape regularly, you're going to think
and to keep thinking these things. Whenever you're anxious, you'll look at what
you're doing to make yourself anxious, and you'll give up your demands and
your must's. You'll dispute your ideas that "I must do well! I must get people to

236 
The Practice of REBT
like me! They must not criticize me! It's terrible when they criticize me!" You'll
keep asking yourself, "Why must I do well? Why do I have to be a great sex
partner? It would be nice if people liked me, but they don't have to. I do not need
their approval. If they criticize me, if they blame me, or they think I'm too sexy
or too little sexy, too damn bad! I do not need their approval. I'd like it, but I
don't need it. I'd also like to be unanxious but there's no reason why I must be.
Yes, there's no reason why I must be. It's just preferable. None of these things I
fail at are going to kill me.
"And when I die, as I eventually will, so I die! Death is not horrible. It's a
state of no feeling. It's exactly the same state as I was in before I was conceived.
I won't feel anything. So I certainly need not be afraid of that!
"And even if I get very anxious and go crazy, that too isn't terrible. If I tell
myself, 'I must not go crazy! I must not go crazy!' then I'll make myself crazy!
But even if I'm crazy, so I'm crazy! I can live with it even if I'm in a mental hos-
pital. I can live and not depress myself about it. Nothing is terrible—even when
people don't like me, even when I'm acting stupidly, even when I'm very anx-
ious! Nothing is terrible! I can stand it! It's only a pain in the ass!"
Now this is what you're going to think in your everyday life. Whenever you
get anxious about anything, you're going to see what you're anxious about, you're
going to realize that you are demanding something, saying "It must be so! I must
get well! I must not do the wrong thing! I must not be anxious!" And you're going
to stop and say, "You know—I don't need that nonsense. If these things happen,
they happen. It's not the end of the world! I'd like to be unanxious, I'd like to get
along with people, I'd like to have god sex. But if I don't, I donV. Tough! It's not
the end of everything. I can always be a happy human in spite of failures and has-
sles. If I don't demand, if I don't insist, if I don't say, 'I must, I must!' Must's are
crazy. My desires are all right. But, again, I don't need what I want!"
Now this is what you're going to keep working at in your everyday life.
You're going to keep using your head, your thinking ability, to focus, to con-
centrate on ridding yourself of your anxiety—just as you're listening and con-
centrating right now. Your concentration will get better and better. You're
going to be more and more in control of your thoughts and your feelings. You
will keep realizing that^oa create your anxiety, you make yourself upset, and
you don't have to, you never have to keep doing so. You can give your anxiety
up. You can change. You can always relax, and relax, and relax, and not take
anyone, not take anything too seriously.
This is what you're going to remember and work at when you get out of
this relaxed state. This idea is what you're going to take with you all day, every
day: "/ control me. I don't have to upset myself about anything. If I do upset
myself, too bad. I may feel upset for a while but it won't ruin my life or kill me.
And I can be anxious without putting myself down, without saying, 'I must not
be anxious!' At times I will make myself anxious, but I can give up my anxiety
if I don't demand that I be unanxious."

The Use of Hypnosis with REBT 
237
And you're going to get better and better about thinking this rational way.
You'll become more in control of you. Never totally in control because nobody
ever is totally unanxious. But you'll make yourself much less anxious and able
to live with it when you are anxious. And if you live with it, it will go away. If
you live with it, it will go away. Nothing is terrible, not even anxiety. That's
what you're going to realize and to keep thinking about until you really, really
believe it.
Now you feel nice and free and warm and fully relaxed. In a few minutes I'm
going to tell you to come out of this relaxed, hypnotic state. You will then have
a good day. You will feel fine when you come out of this state. You will experi-
ence no ill effects of hypnosis. You will remember everything I just said to you
and will keep working at using it. And you will play this tape every day for the
next 30 days. You will listen to it every day until you really believe it and follow
it. Eventually, you will be able to follow its directions and to think your way out
of anxiety and out of anxiety about being anxious without the tape.
You will then be able to release yourself from anxiety by yourself. You can
always relax and use the antianxiety technique you will learn by listening to
the tape. You can always accept yourself -with your anxiety and can stop telling
yourself, "I must not be anxious! I must not be anxious!" Just tell yourself, "I
don't like anxiety, I'll work to give it up. I'll conquer it. I'll control myself, con-
trol my own emotional destiny. I can always relax, make myself feel easy and
free and nice, just as I feel now, get away from cares for a while and then feel
unanxious. But I can more elegantly accept myself first with my anxiety, stop
fighting it desperately, and stop telling myself it's awful to be anxious. Then I
can go back to the original anxiety and get rid of it by refusing to awfulize
about failing and vigorously disputing my irrational beliefs, 'I must do well! I
must not be disapproved.'"
Now you feel good, you feel relaxed, and in a couple of minutes I'm going to
count to diree, and when I count to three you will awake and feel quite alive, have
a good day, and experience no bad effects, no headaches, no physical discomfort!
Everydiing is going to be fine, and you'll have a good day. You will remember all
this, and as I said, you will listen to this tape whenever you possibly can, at least
once a day. And you will think and act more and more on its message. You'll be
able to control yourself and reduce your anxiety appreciably. And when you do
feel anxious, you'll live with the anxiety, accept it, and refuse to panic yourself
about it. All right, I'm going to count to three, and when I say three you'll wake
and be fully alive and alert and feel great for the rest of the day. One, two, three!
DISCUSSION
My client used the recording of her hypnotic REBT session once or twice a
day for the next 45 days and reported a significant decrease in her anxiety level,

23S 
The Practice of REBT
especially in her anxiety about her anxiety. She stopped being phrenophobic,
convinced herself that if she had a breakdown and went to the mental hospi-
tal it would be highly inconvenient but not horrible or shameful, and then
hardly thought at all about going crazy. When she did, she was able to feel
comfortable within a few minutes by strongly telling herself, "So I'll be crazy!
Tough! I'm sure I won't stay that way very long—and if I do, that will just be
tougher. But not shameful! No matter how crazy I am, I'll never be a turd for
being that way!"
As she began to get over her anxiety about her anxiety, this woman's enor-
mous fears of failure, particularly of sex failure, for a while almost completely
disappeared. When, weeks lalter, they reappeared, they were relatively light,
and she was almost invariably able to cope successfully with them. She con-
tinued in REBT nonhypnotic treatment for 14 months more but had only 18
half-hour sessions during that time. For the past IS years she has maintained
her gains, with occasional moderate setbacks when a love affair ended, and is
now happily married and unarudously highly productive. Once in a while she
still listens to the original hypnotic tape and believes that it was quite instru-
mental in helping her make much greater progress than she had previously
made in REBT.
I tend to agree with her, partly because I have used similar taped sessions to
good avail with many other clients (although with little or no success with sev-
eral others). One important question I have not yet resolved is, does the ben-
efit presumably derived from this tape of recorded hypnotic sessions stem from
the use of the entire 20-minute tape, including the hypnotic-relaxation instruc-
tions, or would equal benefit stem from the client's listening a number of times
to the 10 minutes of REBT instruction on the tape even if this were heard
apart from the hypnotic section? I have tried to induce several researchers to
do a controlled study of this question, but so far no one, to my knowledge, has
done so. I still hope that this experiment will be done one day. Until then I
shall continue to use this recorded hypnosis-REBT procedure with some
amount of faith in the clinical results I have this far achieved with it.
There are several advantages to using REBT hypnotherapy, as against using
REBT regularly without hypnosis, including these:
1. Some clients believe, rightly or wrongly, in the power (or the magic) of
hypnosis, therefore ask for it, and are likely to be more favorably predis-
posed toward therapy when they have it.
2. The manner in which REBT hypnotherapy is done, as outlined in this chap-
ter, includes repetition of the therapeutic message many times, because the
clients are asked to listen to the original tape for at least a month or two,
every single day, to reinforce the REBT methods that are included on it.
3. Usually, only one problem at a time is tackled; and if and when the clients
are successful with that problem, other problems are then handled.

The Use of Hypnosis with REST 
239
4. This manner of doing REBT hypnotherapy includes homework assign-
ments, and these are repeated many times to encourage the clients to do
them.
5. Hypnotherapy, in the manner indicated in this chapter, can be mixed with
regular individual or group REBT and can be used to supplement non-
hypnotic RET.
The disadvantages of using REBT hypnotherapy include the following:
1. Clients tend to use all kinds of hypnotherapy as taking the authoritative
suggestions of the hypnotist as their own. REBT generally tends to empha-
size thinking scientifically, and taking the hypnotist's suggestions (or any kind
of suggestion from the therapist) may play down w^-thinking, which REBT
considers to be more profound and more elegant.
2. Hypnotism implies easy and magical ways of clients' changing themselves,
whereas REBT generally emphasizes their working hard at therapy, including
giving up their low frustration tolerance and their beliefs in magic. The form
of REBT hypnotherapy outlined in this chapter minimally resorts to sugges-
tion, magic, and ease of self-change, but it still may have these meanings to
some clients and may thereby help them make only partial progress in elimi-
nating and continuing to overcome their basic disturbances. For these reasons,
I (AE) use REBT hypnotherapy only occasionally and often talk clients out of
it so that they use regular REBT in a more independent and hardworking fash-
ion. But it adds an emotive quality to some clients' therapy and therefore can
be useful hi selected cases.

This page intentionally left blank 

Appendix
How to Maintain and Enhance Your
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy Gains
ALBERT ELLIS, PhD
Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy
New York City
If you work at using the principles and
practices of rational emotive behavior ther-
apy (REBT), you will be able to change
your self-defeating thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors and to feel much better than
when you started therapy. Good! But you
will also, at times, fall back—and some-
times far back No one is perfect and prac-
tically all people take one step backward to
every two or three steps forward. Why?
Because this is the nature of humans: to
improve, to stop improving at times, and
sometimes to backslide. How can you
(imperfectly!) slow down your tendency to
fall back? How can you maintain and
enhance your therapy goals? Here are
some methods that we have tested at the
Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy in New York and that many of
our clients have found quite effective.
HOW TO MAINTAIN
YOUR IMPROVEMENT
1. When you improve and then fall
back to old feelings of anxiety, depression,
or self-downing, try to remind yourself
and pinpoint exactly what thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors you once changed to
bring about your improvement. If you
again feel depressed, think back to how
you previously used REBT to make your-
self undepressed. For example, you may
remember that
a. You stopped telling yourself that you
were worthless and that you couldn't
ever succeed in getting what you
wanted.
b. You did well in a job or in a love affair
and proved to yourself that you did
have some ability and that you were
lovable.
c. You forced yourself to go on inter-
views instead of avoiding them and
thereby helped yourself overcome
your anxiety about them.
Remind yourself of thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors that you have changed and
that you have helped yourself by changing.
2. Keep thinking, thinking, and think-
ing rational Beliefs (RBs) or coping state-
ments, such as: "It's great to succeed but I
can fully accept myself as a person and
enjoy life considerably even when I fail!"
Don't merely parrot these statements but
go over them carefully many times and
think them through until you really begin
to believe and feel that they are true.
241

242
Appendix
3. Keep seeking for, discovering and
disputing and challenging your irrational
Beliefs (IBs) with which you are once
again upsetting yourself, lake each im-
portant irradonal Belief—such as "I have
to succeed in order to be a worthwhile
person!"—and keep asking yourself:
"Why is this Belief true?" "Where is the
evidence that my worth to myself, and my
enjoyment of living, utterly depends on
my succeeding at something?" "In what
way would I be totally unacceptable as a
human if I failed at an important task or
test?" "If I keep holding this Belief, what
kind of results will I get?"
Keep forcefully and persistently disputing
your irrationally Beliefs whenever you see
that you are letting them creep back
again. And even when you don't actively
hold them, realize that they may arise
once more, bring them to your con-
sciousness, and preventively—and vigor-
ously—dispute them.
4. Keep risking and doing things that
you irrationally fear—such as riding in ele-
vators, socializing, job hunting, or creative
writing. Once you have partly overcome
one of your irrational fears, keep acting
against it on a regular basis. If you feel
uncomfortable in forcing yourself to do
things that you are unrealistically afraid of
doing, don't allow yourself to avoid doing
them—and thereby to preserve your dis-
comfort forever! Often, make yourself as
a«comfortable as you can be, in order to
eradicate your irradonal fears and to be-
come unanxious and comfortable later.
5. Try to clearly see that difference
between healthy negative feelings—such
as those of sorrow, regret, and frustration,
when you do not get some of the impor-
tant things you want—and unhealthy neg-
ative feelings, such as those of depression,
anxiety, self-hatred, and self-pity, when
you are deprived of desirable goals and
plagued with undesirable things. When-
ever you feel overconcerned (panicked) or
unduly miserable (depressed), acknowl-
edge that you are having a statistically
normal but a psychologically unhealthy
feeling and that you are probably bring-
ing it on yourself with some dogmatic
should, ought, or must. Realize that you are
capable of changing your unhealthy (or
Tnawurbatory) feelings back into healthy
(or preferential) ones, lake your depressed
feelings and work on them until you only
feel sorry and regretful. Take your anxious
feelings and work on them until you mly
feel concerned and vigilant. Use rational
emotive imagery to vividly imagine un-
pleasant Activating events even before
they happen; let yourself feel unhealthily
upset (anxious, depressed, enraged, or self-
downing) as you imagine them; men work
on your feelings to change them to healthy
negative emotions (concern, sorrow, an-
noyance, or regret) as you keep imagining
some of the worst things happening.
Don't give up until you actually do change
your feelings.
6. Avoid self-defeating procrastination.
Do unpleasant tasks fast—today! If you
still procrastinate, reward yourself with
certain things that you enjoy—for exam-
ple, eating, vacationing, reading, and
socializing—only after you have per-
formed the tasks that you easily avoid. If
this won't work, give yourself a severe
penalty—such as talking to a boring per-
son for 2 hours or burning a $100 bill—
every time that you procrastinate.
7. Show yourself that it is an absorb-
ing challenge and something of an adven-
ture to maintain your emotional health
and to keep yourself reasonably happy no
matter what kind of misfortunes assail
you. Make the uprooting of your misery
one of the most important things in your
life—something you are utterly deter-
mined to steadily work at achieving. Fully
acknowledge that you almost always have
some choice about how to think, feel, and
behave; and throw yourself actively into

Appendix 
243
making that choice for yourself.
8. Remember—and use—the three
main insights of REBT that were first
outlined in Reason and Emotion in Psy-
chotherapy in 1962:
Insight No. 1: You largely choose to dis-
turb yourself about the unpleasant events
of your life, although you may be encour-
aged to do so by external happenings and
by social learning. You mainly feel the way
you think. When obnoxious and frustrat-
ing things happen to you at point A (Ac-
tivating events), you consciously or un-
consciously select rational Beliefs (RBs)
that lead you to feel sad and regretful, and
you also select irrational Beliefs (IBs) that
lead you to feel anxious, depressed, and
self-hating.
Insight No. 2: No matter how or when
you acquired your irrational Beliefs and
your self-sabotaging habits, you now, in
the present, choose to maintain them—and
that is why you are now disturbed. Your
past history and your present life condi-
tions importantly affect you; but they don't
disturb you. Your present phiksophy is the
main contributor to your current distur-
bance.
Insight No. 3: There is no magical way
for you to change your personality and
your strong tendencies to needlessly upset
yourself. Basic personality change requires
persistent work and practice—yes, work and
practice—to enable you to alter your irra-
tional Beliefs, your unhealthy feelings,
and your self-destructive behaviors.
9. Steadily—and unfrantically!—look
for personal pleasures and enjoyments—
such as reading, entertainment, sports,
hobbies, art, science, and other vital
absorbing interests. Take as your major
life goal not only the achievement of
emotional health but also that of real
enjoyment. Try to become involved in a
long-term purpose, goal, or interest in
which you can remain truly absorbed. A
good, happy life will give you something
to live for, will distract you from many
serious woes, and will encourage you to
preserve and to improve your mental
health.
10. Try to keep in touch with several
other people who know something about
REBT and who can help go over some of
its aspects with you. Tell them about
problems that you have difficulty coping
with and let them know how you are
using REBT to overcome these problems.
See if they agree with your solutions and
can suggest additional and better kinds of
REBT disputing that you can use to work
against your irrational Beliefs.
11. Practice using REBT with some of
your friends, relatives, and associates who
are willing to let you by to help them with
it. The more often you use it with others
and are able to see what their IBs are and
to try to talk them out of these self-defeat-
ing ideas, the more you will be able to
understand the main principles of REBT
and use them with yourself. When you
see other people act irrationally and in a
disturbed manner, try to figure out—with
or without talking to them about it—what
their main irrational Beliefs probably are
and how these could be actively and vig-
orously disputed.
12. When you are in REBT individual
or group therapy try to tape record many
of your sessions and listen to these care-
fully when you are between sessions so
that some of the REBT ideas that you
learned in therapy sink in. After therapy
has ended, keep these tape recordings and
play them back to yourself from time to
time, to remind you how to deal with
some of your old problems or new ones
that may arise.
13. Keep reading REBT writings and
listening to REBT audio- and audiovisual
cassettes. Included in your instructions
sheet, which you were given when you
started coming for therapy at the Institute,
is a list of some of the main books and

244
Appendix
cassettes giving the principles and prac-
tices of REBT. Read and listen to several
of these—particularly A Guide to Personal
Happiness (Ellis & Becker); A Guide to
Rational Living (Ellis & Harper); Over-
coming Procrastination (Ellis & Knaus);
Overcoming the Rating Game (Hauck); A
Rational Counseling Primer (Young); How
to Stubbornly Refuse to Make Yourself Miser-
able About Anything—Yes Anything1, and
Think Your Way to Happiness (Dryden &
Gordon). Keep going back to the REBT
reading and audiovisual material from
time to time, to keep reminding yourself
of some of the main REBT findings and
philosophies.
HOW TO DEAL WITH
BACKSLIDING
1. Accept your backsliding as normal—
as something that happens to almost all
people who at first improve emotionally
and who then fall back. See it as part of
your human fallibility. Don't make your-
self feel ashamed when some of your old
symptoms return, and don't think that
you have to handle diem entirely by your-
self and that it is wrong or weak for you to
seek some additional sessions of therapy
or to talk to your friends about your
renewed problems.
2. When you backslide, look at your
self-defeating behavior as bad and unfor-
tunate, but work very hard at refusing to
put yourself down for engaging in this
behavior. Use the highly important
REBT principle of refusing to ratejyoa,
your self, or your being but measure only
acts, deeds, and traits. You are always a per-
son who acts well or badly—never a good
person nor a bad person. No matter how
badly you fall back and bring on your old
disturbances again, work at fully accept-
ing yourself with this unfortunate or weak
behavior—and then try, and keep trying,
to change your behavior.
3. Go back to the ABCs of REBT and
clearly see what you did to fall back to
your old symptoms. At A (Activating
Event), you usually experienced some fail-
ure or rejection once again. At RB (ratio-
nal Belief) you probably told yourself that
you didn't like failing and didn't want to be
rejected. If you only stayed with these
rational Beliefs, you would merely feel
sorry, regretful, disappointed, or frus-
trated. But when you felt disturbed again
you probably then went on to some irra-
tional Beliefs (IBs), such as: "I must not
fail! It's horrible when I do!" "I have to be
accepted, because if I'm not that makes
me an unlovable worthless person1." Then,
after convincing yourself on these IBs,
you felt, at C (emotional Consequence),
once again depressed and self-downing.
4. When you find your irrational Be-
liefs by which you are once again disturb-
ing yourself, just as you originally used
Disputing (D) to challenge and surrender
them, do so again—immediately and persis-
tently. Thus, you can ask yourself, "Why
must I not fail? Is it really horrible if I do?"
And you can answer: "There is no reason
why I must not fail, though I can think of
several reasons why it would be highly
undesirable. It's not horrible if I do fail—
only distinctly inconvenient." You can also
Dispute your other irrational Beliefs by
asking yourself, "Where is it written that
I have to be accepted? How do I become
an unlovable, worthless person if I am
rejected?" And you can answer: "I never
have to be accepted, though I would very
much prefer to be. If I am rejected, that
makes me, alas, a person mho is rejected this
time by this individual under these condi-
tions, but it hardly makes me an unlovable,
•worthless person who will always be rejected
by anyone for whom I really care."
5. Keep looking for, finding, and ac-
tively and vigorously Disputing your irra-
tional Beliefs which you have once again
revived and that are now making you feel

Appendix 
245
anxious or depressed once more. Keep
doing this, over and over, until you build
intellectual and emotional muscle (just as
you would build physical muscle by learn-
ing how to exercise and then by continuing
to exercise).
6. Don't fool yourself into believing that
if you merely change your language you
will always change your thinking. If you
neurotically tell yourself, "1 must succeed
and be approved" and you sanely change
this self-statement to, "I prefer to succeed
and be approved," you may still really be
convinced, "But I really have to do well and
have got to be loved." Before you stop your
Disputing and before you are satisfied with
your answers to it (which in REBT we call
E, or an Effective New Philosophy), keep
on doing it until you are really convinced of
your rational answers and until your feel-
ings of disturbance truly disappear. Then
do the same thing many, many times—until
your new E (Effective New Philosophy)
becomes hardened and habitual—which it
almost always will if you keep working at
arriving at it and re-instituting it
7. Convincing yourself lightly or "intel-
lectually" of your new Effective New Phi-
losophy or rational Beliefs often won't help
very much or persist very long. Do so very
strongly and vigorously, and do so many
times. Thus, you can powerfully convince
yourself, until you really feel it: "I do not
need what I ioont\ I never have to succeed,
no matter how greatly I wish to do so!" "I
can stand being rejected by someone I care
for. It won't kill me—and I still can lead a
happy life!" "No human is damnable and
worthless —including and especially me\"
HOW TO GENERALIZE FROM
WORKING ON ONE EMOTIONAL
PROBLEM TO WORKING ON
OTHER PROBLEMS
1. Show yourself that your present emo-
tional problem and the ways in which you
bring it on are not unique and that virtually
all emotional and behavioral difficulties are
created by irrational Beliefs (IBs). Whatever
your IBs are, moreover, you can overcome
them by strongly and persistently disputing
and acting against them.
2. Recognize that you tend to have
three major kinds of irrational Beliefs that
lead you to disturb yourself and that the
emotional and behavioral problems that
you want to relieve fall into one of these
three categories:
a. "I must do well and have to be
approved by people whom I find impor-
tant." This IB leads you to feel anxious,
depressed, and self-hating; and to avoid
doing things at which you may fail and
avoiding relationships that may not turn
out well.
b. "Other people must treat me fairly
and nicely!" This IB contributes to your
feeling angry, furious, violent, and over-
rebellious.
c. "The conditions under which I live
must be comfortable and free from major
hassles!" This IB tends to create your feel-
ings of low frustration tolerance and self-
pity; and sometimes those of anger and
depression.
3. Recognize that when you employ
one of these three absolutistic musts—or
any of the innumerable variations on them
that you can easily slide into—you natu-
rally and commonly derive from them
other irrational conclusions, such as:
a. "Because I am not doing as well as
I must, I am an incompetent worthless
individual!" (self-downing).
b. "Since I am not being approved by
people whom I find important, as I have to
be, it's awful and terriblel" (Awfulizing).
c. "Because others are not treating me
as fairly and as nicely as they absolutely should
treat me, they are utterly rotten people and
deserve to be damned!" (Damnation).
d. "Since the conditions under which
I live are not that comfortable and since

246 
Appendix
my life has several major hassles, as it must
not have, I can't stand it! My existence is
a horror!" (Can't-stand-it-itis).
e. "Because I have failed and got re-
jected as I absolutely ought not have done,
I'll always fail and never get accepted as I
must be! My life will be hopeless and joy-
less forever!" (Overgeneralizing).
4. Work at seeing that these irrational
Beliefs are part of your general repertoire
of thoughts and feelings and that you
bring them to many different kinds of sit-
uations that are against your desires. Real-
ize that in just about all cases where you
feel seriously upset and act in a distinctly
self-defeating manner you are consciously
or unconsciously sneaking in one or more
of these IBs. Consequently, if you get rid
of them in one area and are still emotion-
ally disturbed about something else, you
can always use the same REBT principles
to discover your IBs in the new area and
to eliminate them there.
5. Repeatedly show yourself that it is
almost impossible to disturb yourself and
to remain disturbed in any way if you
abandon your absolutistic, dogmatic
should,'}, ought's, and must's and consistently
replace them with flexible and unrigid
(though still strong) desires and preferences.
6. Continue to acknowledge that you
can change your irrational Beliefs (IBs) by
rigorously (not rigidly!) using flexible sci-
entific methods. With scientific thinking,
you can show yourself that your irrational
Beliefs are only theories or hypotheses—
not facts. You can logically and realistically
Dispute them in many ways, such as these:
a. You can show yourself that your IBs
are self-defeating—that they interfere
with your goals and your happiness. For if
you firmly convince yourself, "I must suc-
ceed at important tasks and have to be
approved by all the significant people in
my life," you will of course at times fail
and be disapproved—and thereby tend to
make yourself anxious and depressed in-
stead of sorry and frustrated.
b. Your irrational Beliefs do not con-
form to reality—and especially do not
conform to the facts of human fallibility.
If you always bad to succeed, if the uni-
verse commanded that you must do so,
you obviously would always succeed. And
of course you often don't! If you invari-
ably bad to be approved by others, you
could never be disapproved. But obviously
you frequently are! The universe is clearly
not arranged so that you will always get
what you demand. So although your de-
sires are often realistic, your godlike com-
mands definitely are not!
c. Your irrational Beliefs are illogical,
inconsistent, or contradictory. No matter
how much you want to succeed and to be
approved, it never follows that therefore
you must do well in these (or any other)
respects. No matter how desirable justice
or politeness is, it never bos to exist.
Although the scientific method is not
infallible or sacred, it efficiently helps you
to discover which of your beliefs are irra-
tional and self-defeating and how to use
factual evidence, logical thinking, and
practical analysis to minimize them. If you
keep using flexible thinking, you will
avoid dogma and set up your hypotheses
about you, other people, and the world
around you so that you always keep them
open to change.
7. Try to set up some main goals and
purposes in life—goals that you would
like very much to reach but that you never
tell yourself that you absolutely must
attain. Keep checking to see how you are
coming along with these goals; at times
revise them; see how you feel about
achieving them; and keep yourself goal-
oriented without demanding that you
achieve your aims.
8. If you get bogged down and begin
to lead a life that seems too miserable or

Appendix
dull, review the points made in this pam-
phlet and work at using them. Once
again: if you fall back or fail to go forward
at the pace you prefer, don't hesitate to
return to therapy for some booster ses-
sions or to join one of the Institute's reg-
ular therapy groups.
I gratefully acknowledge the contri-
butions of the following people at the In-
stitute for Rational Emotive Behavior
247
Therapy in New York who read this pam-
phlet when it was in manuscript and who
made valuable comments on it: Raymond
DiGiuseppe, Mai Holland, Terry Jordan,
Leonor Lega, Naomi McCormick, Har-
riet Mischel, Beverly Pieren, Susan Presby,
Karin Schleider, Janet Wolfe, Joe Yankura,
and Thea Zeeve. However, I take all
responsibility for the views expressed in
the pamphlet.
Additional copies of this pamphlet are available at: 10 copies for $2.50; 50 copies for
$10.00; 100 copies for $15.00
from the
INSTITUTE FOR RATIONAL EMOTIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY
45 East 65th Street/New York, N.Y. 10021 - 6593
(212) 535-0822 FAX (212) 249-3582
Copyright © 1984 by Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy

This page intentionally left blank 

References
Items preceded by an asterisk include the main books and other materials on
rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT). Most of these materials are obtain-
able from the Institute for Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, 45 East 65th
Street, New York, NY 10021-6593; (212) 535-0822. The institute will con-
tinue to make available these and other materials on RET, as well as present
talks, seminars, workshops, training practica, and other presentations for pro-
fessionals and members of the public. Those interested can send for its free
list of publications and events.
Ackerman, N. (1958). The psychodynamics of family life. New York: Basic Books.
Adler, A. (1927). Understanding human nature. New York: Garden City.
Ainslie, G. (1974). Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impulsiveness and
impulse control. Psychological Bulletin, 82,463-496.
*Alberti, R. E., & Emmons, M. L. (1995). Your perfect right (6th ed.). San Luis
Obispo, CA- Impact.
Araoz, D. L. (1983). Hypnosis and sex therapy. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Bach, G. R. (1966). The marathon group: Intensive practice of intimate reac-
tion. Psychological Reports, 18,995-1002.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive the-
ory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
*Bard, J. (1980). Rational-emotive therapy in practice. Champaign, IL: Research
Press.
Barrish, H. H., & Barrish, I. J. (1985). Managing parental anger: The coping par-
ent series. Leawood: Kansas: Overland Press.
Barrish, I. J., & Barrish, H. H. (1989). Surviving and enjoying your adolescent.
Kansas City, MO: Westport Publishers.
Bartley, W. W., HI. (1984). The retreat to commitment (rev. ed.). Peru, IL: Open
Court.
Baucom, D. H., & Epstein, N. (1990). Cognitive-behavioral marital therapy. New
York: Brunner/Mazel.
249

250 
The General Theory of RET
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York:
International Universities Press.
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. E, & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of
depression. New York: Guilford.
Beck, A. T. (1988). Love is not enough. New York: Harper & Row.
Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford.
'Bernard, M. E. (Ed.). (1991). Using rational-emotive therapy effectively: A prac-
titioner's guide. New York: Plenum.
*Bernard, M. E., & DiGiuseppe, R. (Eds.). (1989). Inside RET: A critical appraisal
of the theory and therapy of Albert Ellis. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
*Bernard, M. E., & Wolfe, J. L., (Eds.). (1993). The SET resource book for prac-
titioners. New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
Bernheim, H. (1947). Suggestive therapeutics. New York: London Book Com-
pany. (Original publication, 1886)
Beutler, L. E. (1983). Eclectic psychotherapy: A systematic approach. New York:
Pergamon.
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 16,252-260.
*Boutin, G. E, & Tosi, D. J. (1983). Modification of irrational ideas and test
anxiety through rational stage directed hypnotherapy (RSDH). Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 39, 382-391.
Bowlby, J. (1988). Attachment and loss: 3. Loss: Sadness and depression. New York:
Basic Books.
Burns, D. D. (1980). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: Morrow.
Comfort, A. (1974). The joy of sex. New York: Crown.
Coue, E. (1921). My method. New York: Doubleday, Page.
*Crawford, T. (1982, October). Communication and rational-emotive therapy.
Workshop presented at the Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, Los
Angeles.
"Crawford, T., & Ellis, A (1989). A dictionary of rational-emotive feelings and
behaviors. Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 7(1),
3-27.
Danysh, J. (1974). Stop without quitting. San Francisco: International Society
for General Semantics.
*DiGiuseppe, R. (1991). Comprehensive cognitive disputing in RET. InM.
Bernard (Ed.), Using rational-emotive therapy effectively. New York: Plenum
Press.
*DiGiuseppe, R., Miller, N., & Trexler, L. (1979). A review of rational-emo-
tive psychotherapy outcome studies. In A. Ellis & J. M. Whiteley (Eds.).
Theoretical and empirical foundations of rational-emotive therapy (pp. 218-2 3 6).
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Dreikurs, R. (1974). Psycbodynamics, psychotherapy and counseling (rev. ed.).
Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute.

The General Theory of RET 
251
*Dryden, W. (1983). Audiotape supervision by mail: A rational-emotive
approach. British Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 1(1), 57-64.
Dryden, W. (1984a). Individual therapy in Britain. London: Harper & Row.
*Dryden, W. (1984b). Rational-emotive therapy. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Individ-
ual therapy in Britain (pp. 23S-263). London: Harper & Row.
*Dryden, W. (1984c). Rational-emotive therapy: Fundamentals and innovations,
Beckenham, Kent, England: Groom Helm.
Dryden, W. (1984d). Therapeutic arenas. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Individual ther-
apy in Britain (pp. 1-22). London: Harper & Row.
*bryden, W. (198Sa). Challenging but not overwhelming: A compromise in
negotiating homework assignments. British Journal of Cognitive Psy-
chotherapy, 3(1), 77-80.
*Dryden, W. (1985b). Marital therapy: The rational-emotive approach. In W.
Dryden (Ed.), Marital therapy in Britain (Vol. 1, pp. 195-221). London:
Harper & Row.
Dryden, W. (1987). Theoretically-consistent eclecticism: Humanizing a com-
puter "addict." In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Casebook of eclectic psychotherapy (pp.
221-237). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
*Dryden, W. (1994a). Invitation to rational-emotive psychology. London: Whurr.
*Dryden, W. (1994b). Progress in rational emotive behavior therapy. London:
Whurr.
*Dryden, W. (1995a). Brief rational emotive behavior therapy. London: Wiley:
*Dryden, W. (1995b). Facilitating client change in rational emotive behavior ther-
apy. London: Whurr.
*Dryden, W. (1995c). Preparing far client change in rational emotive behavior ther-
apy. London: Whurr.
*Dryden, W. (Ed.). (1995d). Rational emotive behavior therapy: A reader. Lon-
don: Sage.
*Dryden, W., & DiGiuseppe, R. (1990). A primer on rational-emotive therapy.
Champaign, IL: Research Press.
*Dryden, W., & Ellis, A. (1986). Rational-emotive therapy (RET). In W. Dry-
den & W. Golden (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioural approaches to psychotherapy
(pp. 129-168). London: Harper & Row.
*Dryden, W., & Ellis, A. (1990). The essential Albert Ellis. New York: Springer
Publishing Co.
*Dryden, W, & Ellis, A. (1991). A dialogue with Albert Ellis: Against dogma.
Philadelphia: Open University Press.
*Dryden, W, & Gordon, J. (1991). Think your way to happiness. London: Shel-
don Press.
*Dryden, W, & Hill, L. K. (Eds.). (1993). Innovations in rational-emotive ther-
apy. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
*Dryden, W, & Neenan, M. (1995). Dictionary of rational emotive behaviour
therapy. London: Whurr.

2*2 
The General Theory of RET
*Dryden, W., & Trower, P. (Eds.). (1986). Rational-emotive therapy: Recent devel-
opments in theory and practice. Bristol, England: Institute for RET (UK).
Duckro, P., Beal, D., & George, C. (1979). Research on the effects of discon-
firmed client role expectations in psychotherapy: A critical review. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 86, 260-275.
Dunlap, K. (1932). Habits: Their making and unmaking. New York: Liveright.
Eisenberg, J. M., & Zingle, H. W. (197'5). Journal of 'Marriage and Family Coun-
seling, (1), 81-91.
*Ellis, A. (1957). How to live with a "neurotic": At home and at work. New York:
Crown; revised ed., Hollywood, CA: Wilshire Books, 1975.
*Ellis, A. (1958a). Rational psychotherapy. Journal of General Psychology, 59,
35-49. Reprinted by the Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, New
York.
*Ellis, A. (1958b). Sex without guilt. New York: Lyle Stuart; rev. ed., New York,
Lyle Stuart, 1965.
*EHis, A. (1960). The art and science of love. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
*Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
*EHis, A. (1963). Toward a more precise definition of "emotional" and "intel-
lectual" insight. Psychological Reports, 13,125-126.
*Ellis, A. (1965). Suppressed: Seven key essays publishers dared not print. Chicago:
New Classics House.
*Ellis, A. (1968). Is psychoanalysis harmful? Psychiatric Opinion, 5(1), 16-25.
Reprinted by die Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, New York.
*Ellis, A. (1969). A weekend of rational encounter. Rational Living, 4(2), 1-8.
*Ellis, A. (197la). Growth through reason. North Hollywood, CA: Wilshire
Books.
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1971 b). How to stubbornly refuse to be ashamed of any-
thing (Cassette recording). New York: Institute for Rational Emotive
Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1972a). Helping people get better: Rather than merely feel better.
Rational Living, 7(2), 2-9.
*Ellis, A. (1972b). Psychotherapy and the value of a human being. New York: Insti-
tute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy: The rational-emotive approach. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
*Ellis, A. (1974a). Technique of disputing irrational beliefs (DIBS). New York:
Institute for Rational Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1974b). The treatment of sex and love problems in women. In V.
Franks & V. Hurtle (Eds.), Women in therapy (pp. 284-306). New York:
Brunner/Mazel.
*Ellis, A. (1976a). The biological basis of human irrationality. Journal of Indi-
vidual Psychology, 32, 145-168. Reprinted by the Institute for Rational-
Emotive Therapy, New York.

The General Theory of RET 
253
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1976b). Conquering low frustration tolerance (Cassette
recording). New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1976c). Rational-emotive psychotherapy applied to groups (Film).
Washington, DC: American Association of Counseling and Development.
*Ellis, A. (1976d). RET abolishes most of the human ego. Psychotherapy, 13,
343-348. Reprinted by the Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, New
York.
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1976e). Rational-emotive therapy with individuals and groups
(Videotape). Austin, TX: Audio-Visual Resource Center, University of
Texas.
*Ellis, A. (1976f). Sex and the liberated man. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
*Ellis, A. (1976g). Techniques of handling anger in marriage. Journal of Mar-
riage and Family Counseling, 2, 305-316.
*Ellis, A. (1977a). Anger: How to live with and without it. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel
Press.
*Ellis, A. (1977b). Fun as psychotherapy. Rational Living, 12(1), 2-6.
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1977c). A garland of rational humorous songs (Cassette
recording). New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1978a). Family therapy: A phenomenological and active-directive
approach. Journal of Marriage and Family Counseling, 4(2), 43-50.
Reprinted by the Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, New York.
*Ellis, A. (1978b). Personality characteristics of rational-emotive therapists and
other kinds of therapists. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 15,
329-332.
*EHis, A. (1979a). Discomfort anxiety: A new cognitive behavioral construct.
Part 1. Rational Living, 14(2), 3-8.
*Ellis, A. (1979b). The intelligent woman's guide to dating and mating. Secaucus,
NJ: Lyle Stuart.
*EHis, A. (1979c). The issue of force and energy in behavioral change. Journal
of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 10(2), 83-97.
*Ellis, A. (1979d). The practice of rational-emotive therapy. In A. Ellis & J.
M. Whiteley (Eds.), Theoretical and empirical foundations for rational-emo-
tive therapy (pp. 61-100). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
*Ellis, A. (1979e). The theory of rational-emotive therapy. In A. Ellis & J. M.
Whiteley (Eds.), Theoretical and empirical foundations of rational-emotive ther-
apy (pp. 33-60). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
*Ellis, A. (1980a). Discomfort anxiety: A new cognitive behavioral construct.
Part 2. Rational Living, 15(1), 25-30.
*EHis, A. (1980b). Rational-emotive therapy and cognitive behavior therapy:
Similarities and differences. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 4, 325-340.
*Ellis, A. (1980c). The treatment of erectile dysfunction. In S. R. Leiblum &
L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy (pp. 240-258). New
York: Guilford.

254 
The General Theory of RET
*EJlis, A. (1980d). The value of efficiency in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: The-
ory, Research, and Practice, 17,414-418.
*Ellis, A. (1981). The use of rational humorous songs in psychotherapy. Voices,
/6(4), 29-36.
*Ellis, A. (1982 a). Intimacy in rational-emotive therapy. In M. Fisher & G.
Striker (Eds.), Intimacy (pp. 203-217). New York: Plenum.
*EHis, A. (1982b). Rational-emotive group therapy. In G. M. Gazda (Ed.),
Basic approaches to group psychotherapy and group counseling (3rd ed.) (pp.
381-412). Springfield, IL: Thomas.
*Ellis, A. (1982c). The treatment of alcohol and drug abuse: A rational-emo-
tive approach. Rational Living, 17(2), 15-24.
Ellis, A. (1982d). Rational-emotive family therapy. In A. M. Home & M. M.
Ohlsen (Eds.), Family counseling and therapy (pp. 302-328). Itasca, IL:
Peacock.
*Ellis, A. (1983a). Failures in rational-emotive therapy. In E. B. Foa & P. M.
G. Emmelkamp (Eds.), Failures in behavior therapy (pp. 159-171). New
York: Wiley.
*Ellis, A. (1983b). The philosophic implications and dangers of some popular
behavior therapy techniques. In M. Rosenbaum, C. M. Franks, & Y. Jaffe
(Eds.), Perspectives in behavior therapy in the eighties (pp. 138-151). New
York: Springer Publishing Co.
Ellis, A. (1983c). Rational-emotive therapy (RET) approaches to overcoming
resistance. British Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 7(1), 28-38.
*Ellis, A. (1985a). Dilemmas in giving warmth or love to clients: An interview
with Windy Dryden. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Therapist's dilemmas (pp. 5-16).
London: Harper & Row.
*Ellis, A. (1985b). Expanding the ABCs of rational-emotive therapy. In M.
Mahoney & A. Freeman (Eds.), Cognition and psychotherapy (pp. 313-323).
New York: Plenum.
*Ellis, A. (1985c). Overcoming resistance: Rational-emotive therapy with difficult
clients. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
*Ellis, A. (1986). Anxiety about anxiety: The use of hypnosis with rational-emo-
tive therapy. In E. T. Dowd & J. M. Healy (Eds.), Case studies in hypnother-
apy (pp. 3-11). New York: Guilford.
"Ellis, A. (1987a). A sadly neglected cognitive element in depression. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 11, 121-146.
*Ellis, A. (1987b). The use of rational humorous songs in psychotherapy. In
W. E Fry, Jr. & W. A. Salameh (Eds.), Handbook of humor and psychother-
apy (pp. 265-286). San Diego: Professional Resource Exchange.
*EHis, A. (1988). HMD to stubbornly refuse to make yourself miserable about any-
thing—yes, anything'. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
*Ellis, A. (Speaker). (1989). Unconditionally accepting yourself and others (Cassette
recording). New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.

The General Theory of RET 
255
*EHis, A. (Speaker). (1990). Albert Ellis live at the Learning Annex (2 cassettes).
New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1991a). Are all methods of counseling equally effective? New York
State Journal for Counseling and Development, 6(2), 9-13.
*Ellis, A. (1991b). The case against religiosity (rev. ed.). New York: Institute for
Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1991c). Humanism and psychotherapy: A revolutionary approach, (rev.
ed.). New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy. (Original work
published 1972)
*Ellis, A. (1991d). Rational-emotive family therapy. In A. M. Home & J. L. Pass-
more (Eds.), Family counseling and therapy (2nd ed., pp. 403-434). Itasca,
IL: Peacock.
*Ellis, A. (1991e). Using RET effectively: Reflections and interview. In M. E.
Bernard (Ed.), Using rational-emotive therapy effectively (pp. 1-33). New
York: Plenum.
*Ellis, A. (1992a). Brief therapy: The rational-emotive method. In S. H. Bud-
man, M. F. Hoyt, & S. Fiedman (Eds.), The first session in brief therapy (pp.
36-58). New York: Guilford.
*Ellis, A. (1992b). Foreword. In P. Hauck, Overcoming the rating game (pp. 1-4).
Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox.
'Ellis, A. (1992c). Group rational-emotive and cognitive-behavioral therapy.
International Journal of Group Therapy, 42, 63-80.
*EHis, A. (1993 a). The advantages and disadvantages of self-help therapy mate-
rials. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 24, 335-339.
*Ellis, A. (1993b). Fundamentals of rational-emotive therapy for the 1990s. In
W. Dryden & L. K. Hill (Eds.), Innovations in rational-emotive therapy
(pp. 1-32). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
*Ellis, A. (1993c). General semantics and rational emotive behavior therapy.
Bulletin of General Semantics, 51,12-28. Also in P. D.Johnston, D. D. Bour-
landjr., & J. Klein (Eds.), MoreE-prime (pp. 213-240). Concord, CA:
International Society for General Semantics.
*Ellis, A. (1993d). Rational emotive imagery: RET version. In M. E. Bernard
& J. L. Wolfe (Eds.), The RET source book for practitioners (pp. II8-II10).
New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Ellis, A. (1993e). The rational-emotive therapy (RET) approach to marriage
and family therapy. Family Journal: Counseling and Therapy for Couples and
Families, 1, 292-307.
*Ellis, A. (1993f). Rational-emotive therapy and hypnosis. In J. W. Rhue, S. J.
Lynn, & L Kirsch (Eds.), Handbook of clinical hypnosis (pp. 173-186). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
'Ellis, A. (1993g). Vigorous RET disputing. In M. E. Bernard & J. L. Wolfe,
(Eds.), The RET'resource book for practitioners (pp. II-7). New York: Insti-
tute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.

2*6 
Tie General Theory of RET
*Ellis, A. (1994a). My response to "Don't throw the therapeutic baby out with
the holy water": Helpful and hurtful elements of religion! Journal of Psy-
chology and Christianity, 13, 323-326.
*Ellis, A. (1994b). Rational emotive behavior therapy approaches to obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD). Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-
Behavior Therapy, 12,121-141.
*Ellis, A. (1994c). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy (revised and updated).
New York: Birch Lane Press.
*Ellis, A. (1994d). Secular humanism. In E Wertz (Ed.), The humanistic move-
ment (pp. 233-242). Lakeworth, FL: Gardner Press.
*Ellis, A. (1994e). The treatment of borderline personalities with rational emo-
tive behavior therapy. Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-Behavior
Therapy, 12, 101-119.
*Ellis, A. (1995a). Rational emotive behavior therapy. In R. Corsini & D. Wed-
ding (Eds.), Current Psycbotberapies (5th ed., pp. 162-196). Itasca, IL: Peacock.
*Ellis, A (Speaker). (1995b). Using rational-emotive behavior therapy techniques to
cope with disability (Cassette recording). Englewood, CO: Sound Images Inc.
*Ellis, A (1996a). Better, deeper and more enduring brief therapy. New York: Brun-
ner/Mazel.
"Ellis, A. (1996b). A social constructionist position for mental health counsel-
ing: A response to Jeffrey T. Guterman. Journal of 'Mental Health Counseling.
*Ellis, A., & Abrahms, E. (1978). Brief psychotherapy in medical and health prac-
tice. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
*EHis, A., & Abrams, M. (1994). How to cope with a fatal disease. New York: Bar-
ricade Books.
*Ellis, A., & Becker, I. (1982). A guide to personal happiness. North Hollywood,
CA: Wilshire.
*Ellis, A., & Bernard, M. E. (Eds.). (1983). Rational-emotive approaches to the
problems of childhood. New York: Plenum.
*Ellis, A., & Bernard, M. E. (Eds.). (1985). Clinical applications of rational-emo-
tive therapy. New York: Plenum.
*EHis, A., & Grieger, R. (Eds.). (1977). Handbook of rational-emotive therapy
(Vol. 1). New York: Springer Publishing Co.
*Ellis, A., & Grieger, R. (Eds.). (1986). Handbook of rational-emotive therapy
(Vol. 2). New York: Springer Publishing Co.
*Ellis, A., & Harper, R. A. (1961a). A guide to rational /nwzg.Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
*Ellis, A., & Harper, R. A. (196lb). A guide to successful marriage. North Hol-
lywood, CA: Wilshire Books.
*Ellis, A., & Harper, R. A. (1997). A guide to rational living. (3rd ed.) Revised
and updated. North Hollywood, CA: Wilshire.
*Ellis, A., & Knaus, W. (1977). Overcoming procrastination. New York: New
American Library.

The General Theory of RET 
251
*Ellis, A., & Lange, A. (1994). How to keep people from pushing your buttons. New
York: Carol Publications.
*Ellis, A., Mclnerney, J. F., DiGiuseppe, R., & Yeager, R. J. (1988). Rational-
emotive therapy -with alcoholics and substance abusers. Needham, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.
*Ellis, A., & Robb, H. (1994). Acceptance in rational-emotive therapy. In S. C.
Hayes, N. S. Jacobson, V. M. Follette, & M. J. Dougher (Eds.), Acceptance
and change (pp. 91-102). Reno, NV: Context Press.
*Ellis, A., Sichel, J., Leaf, R. C., & Mass, R. (1989). Countering perfectionism
in research on clinical practice: 1. Surveying rationality changes after a
single intensive RET intervention. Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cogni-
tive-Behavior Therapy, 7,197-218.
*Ellis, A., Sichel, J. L., Yeager, R. J., DiMattia, D. J., & DiGiuseppe, R. A.
(1989). Rational-emotive couples therapy. Needham, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
*Ellis, A, & Velten, E. (1992). When AA doesn't work for you: Rational steps for
quitting alcohol. New York: Barricade Books.
*Ellis, A, & Whiteley, J. M. (1979). Theoretical and empirical foundations of ratio-
nal-emotive therapy. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
*Ellis, A., Wolfe, J. L., & Moseley, S. (1966). HOTS to raise an emotionally healthy,
happy child. North Hollywood, CA: Wilshire Boob.
*Ellis, A., & Yeager, R. (1989). Why some therapies don't work: The dangers of
transpersonalpsychology. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus.
Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Kuipers, A. C. M., & Eggeraat, J. B. (1978). Cognitive
modification versus prolonged exposure in vivo: A comparison with ago-
raphobics as subjects. Behavior Research and Therapy, 16, 33-41.
*Engels, G. L, Garnefski, N., & Diekstra, R. F. W. (1993). Efficacy of ratio-
nal-emotive therapy: A quantitative analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology, 61,1083-1090.
Epstein, N., Schlesinger, S. E., & Dryden, W. (Eds.). (1988). Cognitive-be-
havioral therapy -with families. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
*Eschenroeder, C. (1979). Different therapeutic styles in rational-emotive ther-
apy. Rational Living, 14(1), 3-7.
Freud, A. (1937). The ego and the mechanisms of defense. London: Hogarth.'
Freud, S. (1965). Standard edition of the complete psychological works ofSigmund
Freud. London: Hogarth.
Golden, W. L (1982). Rational-emotive hypnotherapy. International Journal of
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 1(2), 47-56.
Golden, W. L., Dowd, E. T, & Friedberg, F. (1987). Hypnotherapy: A modern
approach. New York: Pergamon.
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. (1994). Clinical behavior therapy (2nd ed.).
New York: Wiley.
*Grieger, R. M. (Ed.). (1986). Rational-emotive couples therapy (Special issue of
Journal of Rational-Emotive Therapy). New \brk: Human Sciences Press.

2W 
The General Theory of RET
*Grieger, R., & Boyd, J. (1980). Rational-emotive therapy: A skills-based approach.
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
*Grieger, R., & Grieger, I. (Eds.). (1982). Cognition and emotional disturbance.
New York: Human Sciences Press.
*Grieger, R. M., & Woods, P. J. (1993). The rational-emotive therapy companion.
Roanoke, VA: Scholars Press.
Guerney, B. G., Jr. (1977). Relationship enhancement: Skill training programs for
therapy, problem-prevention and enrichment. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
"Haaga, D. A., & Davison, G. C. (1989). Outcome studies of rational-emotive
therapy. In M. £. Bernard & R. DiGiuseppe (Eds.), Inside rational-emotive
therapy, (pp. 155-197). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
*Hajzler, D., & Bernard, M. E. (1991). A review of rational-emotive outcome
studies. School Psychology Quarterly, 6(1), 27-49.
"Harper, R. A. (1981). Limitations of marriage and family therapy. Rational
Living, 16(2), 3-6.
Harris, G. F. (Ed.). (1977). The group treatment of bttman problems: A social learn-
ing approach. New York: Grune & Stratton.
"Hauck, P. A. (1973). Overcoming depression, Philadelphia: Westminster.
*Hauck, P. A. (1974). Overcomingfrustration and anger. Philadelphia: Westminster.
*Hauck, P. A. (1977). Marriage is a loving business. Philadelphia: Westminster.
"Hauck, P. A. (1981). Overcoming jealousy and possessiveness. Philadelphia:
Westminster.
Hauck, P. A. (1983a). How to love and be loved. London: Sheldon Press.
*Hauck, P. A. (1983b). Working with parents. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard
(Eds.), Rational-emotive approaches to the problems of childhood (pp. 333-365).
New York: Plenum.
*Hauck, P. A. (1984). The three faces of love. Philadelphia: Westminster.
Hauck, P. (1991). Hold your head up high. London: Sheldon Press.
Heidegger, M. (1949). Existence and being. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Heiman, J. R., & LoPiccolo, J. (1988). Becoming orgasmic (rev. ed.). New York:
Prentice-Hall.
Hertzberg, A. (1945). Active psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Hollon, S. D., & Beck, A. T. (1994). Cognitive and cognitive-behavioral ther-
apies. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
and behavior change (pp. 428-466). New York: Wiley.
Homey, K. (1950). Neurosis and human growth. New York: Norton.
*Huber, C. H., & Baruth, L. G. (1989). Rational-emotive and systems family ther-
apy. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
Jacobson, E. (1938). You must relax. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Jacobson, N. S. (1992). Behavioral couple therapy: A new beginning. Behavior
Therapy, 23,491-506.
Jakubowski-Spector, P. (1973). Facilitating the growth of women through
assertive training. Counseling Psychologist, 4(1), 75-86.

The General Theory of RET 
259
Janis, I. L. (1983). Short-term counseling. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Jones, M. C. (1924). A laboratory study of fear: The case of Peter. Journal of
Genetic Psychology, 31, 308-315.
Kaplan, H. S. (1974). The new sex therapy. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Kelly, G. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs (2 vols.). New York: Norton.
Kendall, P. & Hollon, S. (Eds.). (198Q). Assessment strategies for cognitive-behav-
ioral interventions. New York: Academic Press,
*Knaus, W. J. (1974). Rational-emotive education. New York: Institute for Ratio-
nal-Emotive Therapy.
Korzybski, A. (1933). Science and sanity. San Francisco: International Society
of General Semantics.
*Lange, A.J. (1979). Cognitive-behavioral group therapy and assertion train-
ing. In D. Upper & S. M. Ross (Eds.), Behavioral group therapy. Cham-
paign, IL: Research Press.
*Lange, A,. & Jakubowski, P. (1976). Responsible assertive behavior. Champaign,
IL: Research Press.
Lazarus, A. A, (1984). In the mind's eye. New York: Guilford.
Lazarus, A. A. (1985). Marital myths. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact.
Lazarus, A. A. (1989). The practice ofmultimodal therapy. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins.
Lazarus, R. S,. & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York:
Springer Publishing Co.
Lederer, W. J., & Jackson, D. D. (1968). The mirages of marriage. New York:
Norton.
Leiblum, S. R., & Rosen, R. C. (1989). Principles and practice of sex therapy (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford.
Levant, R. (1978). Family therapy: A client-centered perspective. Journal of
Marriage and Family Counseling, 4(2), 35-42.
LoPiccolo, J., Stewart, R., & Watkins, B. (1972). Treatment of erectile failure
and ejaculatory incompetence with homosexual etiology. Behavior Ther-
apy, 3,1-4.
*Lyons, L. C., & Woods, P. J. (1991). The efficacy of rational-emotive ther-
apy: A quantitative review of the outcome research. Clinical Psychology
Review, 11,357-369.
Macaskill, N. D., & Macaskill, A. (1983). Preparing patients for psychother-
apy. British Journal of Clinical and Social Psychiatry, 2, 80-84.
Mackay, D. (1984). Behavioural psychotherapy. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Individ-
ual therapy in Britain (pp. 264-294). London: Harper & Row.
Mackay, D. (1985). Marital therapy: The behavioral approach. In W. Dryden
(Ed.), Marital therapy in Britain: Vol. 1. Context and therapeutic approaches
(pp. 222-248). London: Harper & Row.
Mahoney, M. J. (1991). Human change processes. New York: Basic Books.

260 
The General Theory of RET
Margolin, G., & Weiss, R. I. (1978). Comparative evaluation of therapeutic
components associated with behavioral marital treatments. Journal of Cm-
suiting and Clinical Psychology, 46,1476-1486,
Masters, W., & Johnson, V. A. (1970). Human sexual inadequacy. Boston: Lit-
tle, Brown.
Masters, W. H., Johnson, V. E., & Kolodny, R. C. (1982). Human sexuality.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Maultsby, M. C., Jr. (1971). Rational emotive imagery. Rational Living, 6(1),
24-27.
*Maultsby, M. C.Jr. (1984). Rational behavior therapy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
*McClellan, T. A., & Stieper, D. R. (1973). A structured approach to group
marriage counseling. Rational Living, 8(2), 12-18.
*McGovern, T. E., & Silverman, M. S. (1984). A review of outcome studies of
rational emotive therapy from 1977 to 1982. Journal of Rational-Emotive
Therapy, 2(1), 7-18.
Meichenbaum, D. (1992). Evolution of cognitive behavior therapy: Origins,
tenets, and clinical examples. In J. K. Zeig (Ed.), The evolution of psy-
chotherapy: The second conference, (pp. 114-128). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Meichenbaum, D, Gilmore, J., & Fedoravicius, A. (1971). Group insight ver-
sus group desensitization in treating speech anxiety. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 36,410-421.
*Miller, R. C., & Herman, J. S. (1983). The efficacy of cognitive behavior ther-
apies: A quantitative review of the research evidence. Psychological Bulletin,
94, 39-53.
*Miller, T. (1983). The unfair advantage. Manlius, NY: Author.
*Mills, D. (1993). Overcoming self-esteem. New York: Institute for Rational-
Emotive Therapy.
*Moore, R. H. (1983). Inference as "A" in RET. British Journal of Cognitive Psy-
chotherapy, 1(2), 17-23.
Norcross, J. C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1982). A national survey of clinical psy-
chologists: Characteristics and activities. Clinical Psychologist, 35,1-8.
Otto, H. (1968). Group methods designed to actualize human potential. Chicago:
Achievement Motivation Systems.
Perls, E (1969). Gestalt therapy verbatim. Lafayette, CA: Real People Press.
*Phadke, K. M. (1982). Some innovations in RET theory and practice. Ratio-
nal Living, 17(2), 25-W.
Popper, K. R. (19S9). The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Harper & Row.
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations. New York: Harper & Row.
*Powell, J. (1976). Fulfy human, fully alive. Niles, IL: Argus.
Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross,}. C. (1983). Contemporary psychotherapists:
A national survey of characteristics, practices, orientations, and attitudes.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, & Practice, 20, 161-173.

The General Theory of RET 
261
Raimy, V. (1975). Misunderstandings of the self. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ravid, R. (1969). Effect of group therapy on long term individual therapy. Dis-
sertation Abstracts International, 30,2427B.
*Reardon, J., & Tbsi, D. (1977). The effects of rational stage directed imagery
on self-concept and reduction of stress in adolescent delinquent males.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33, 1084-1092.
*Reardon, J., Tosi, D., & Gwynne, P. (1977). The treatment of depression
through rational stage directed hypnotherapy (RSDH): A case study. Psy-
chotherapy, 14,95-103.
Reich, W. (1942). The junction of the orgasm. New York: Orgone Institute.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Rose, S. D. (1980). Casebook in group therapy: A behavioral-cognitive approach.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Russell, B. (1950). The conquest of happiness. New York: New American Library.
Russell, B. (1965). The basic writings ofBertrand Russell. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Russianoff, P. (1981). Why do I think 1 am nothing -without a man? New York:
Bantam.
*Ruth, W. J. (1992). Irrational thinking in humans: An evolutionary proposal
for Ellis' genetic postulate. Journal of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-Behav-
ior Therapy, 10, 3-20.
Sager, C. J. (1976). Marriage contracts and marital therapy. New York: Brunner/
Mazel.
Salter, A. (1949). Conditioned reflex therapy. New York: Creative Age.
Saxon, W. (1980). The use of rational therapy with emotionally upset parents of
handicapped children. Unpublished manuscript, University of Southern
Mississippi.
Schutz, W. (1967). Joy. New York: Grove.
Shahan, L. (1981). Living alone and liking it. New York: Warner.
*Shostrom, E., Ellis, A., & Greenwald, H. (Speakers). (1976). Three approaches
to group therapy (Film). Corona Del Mar, CA: Psychological and Educa-
tional Films.
*Sichel, J., & Ellis, A. (1984). RETSelf-Help Form. New York: Institute for
Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Silverman, M. S., McCarthy, M., & McGovern, T. (1992). A review of out-
come studies of rational-emotive therapy from 1982-1989. Journal of
Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 10(3), 111-186.
*Stanton, H. (1977). The utilization of suggestions derived from rational-emo-
tive therapy. International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 25,
18-26.
*Stanton, H. E. (1989). Hypnosis and rational-emotive therapy: A de-stress-
ing combination. International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypno-
sis, 37, 95-99.

262 
The General Theory of RET
Stuart, R. B. (1980). Helping couples change: A social learning approach to marital
therapy. New York: Guilford.
Tillich, P. (1977). The courage to be. New York: Fountain.
*Tosi, D., & Marzella, J. N. (1977). The treatment of guilt through rational
stage directed therapy. In J. L. Wolfe & E. Brand (Eds.), Twenty years of
rational therapy (pp. 234-240). New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive
Therapy.
*Tosi, D. J., & Murphy, M. A. (1995). The effect of cognitive experiential therapy
on selected psychobiological and behavioral disorders. Columbus, OH: Authors.
*Tosi, D,. & Reardon, J. P. (1976). The treatment of guilt through rational
stage directed therapy. Rational Living, 11(1), 8-11.
Tsoi-Hoshmund, L. (1976). Marital therapy: An integrative behavioral model.
Journal of Marriage and Family Counseling, 2, 179-192.
Upper, D., & Ross, S. (Eds.). (1979). Behavioral group therapy, 1979. Cham-
paign, IL: Research Press.
Upper, D., & Ross, S. (Eds.). (1980). Behavioral group therapy. Champaign, IL:
Research Press.
Wachtel, P. L. (1994). From eclecticism to synthesis: Toward a more seamless
psychotherapeutic integration. Journal ofPsychotherapeutic Integration, 1,
43-54.
*Walen, S., DiGiuseppe, R., & Dryden, W. (1992). A practitioner's guide to ratio-
nal-emotive therapy (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
*Walen, S. R., DiGiuseppe, R., & Wessler, R. L. (1980). A practitioner's guide
to rational-emotive therapy. New York: Oxford.
*Warren, R., Deffenbacher, J., & Brading, P. (1976). Rational-emotive ther-
apy and the reduction of test anxiety in elementary school students. Ratio-
nal Living, 11(2), 2S-29.
Watson, J. B,, & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 3,1-14.
*Wessler, R. A., & Wessler, R. L. (1980). The principles and practice of rational-
emotive therapy. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Wessler, R. L. (1984). Alternative conceptions of rational-emotive therapy:
Toward a philosophically neutral psychotherapy. In M. A. Reda & M. J.
Mahoney (Eds.), Cognitive psychotherapies: Recent developments in theory,
research and practice (pp. 65-79). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
*Wessler, R. L., & Ellis, A. (1980). Supervision in rational-emotive therapy. In
A. K. Hess (Ed.), Psychotherapy supervision (pp. 181-191). New York: Wiley.
•Wolfe, J. L. (Speaker). (1980). Woman—assert yourself (Cassette recording).
New York: Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Wolfe, J. L. (1992). What to do when be has a headache. New York: Hyperion.
"Wolfe, J. L., & Naimark, H. (1991). Psychological messages and social con-
text: Strategies for increasing RET's effectiveness with women. In M.
Bernard (Ed.), Using rational-emotive therapy effectively. New York: Plenum.

The General Theory of 'RET 
263
Wolpe, J. (1990). The practice of behavior therapy (4th ed.). Needham Heights,
MA: Allyn and Bacon.
*Woods, P. J., & Ellis, A. (1996). Supervision in rational emotive behavior ther-
apy. In C. E. Watkins Jr. (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy supervision. New
York: Wiley.
Yankura, J., & Dryden, W. (1990). Doing RET: Albert Mis in action. New York:
Springer Publishing Co.
*Yankura, J., & Dryden, W. (1994). Albert Ellis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
*Young, H. S. (1974). A rational counseling primer. New York: Institute for
Rational-Emotive Therapy.
*Young, H. S. (1975). Rational thinkers and robots. Rational Living, 10(2),
29-31.
*Young, H. S. (1984). The work of Howard S. Young [special issue]. British
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 2(2), 1-101..
Zilbergeld, B. (1992). The new male sexuality. New York: Bantam.

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
A
ABCs, of rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, overview, 8-14
Acceptance
of client, by therapist, unconditional,
27-28
and psychological health, 18
stress on, family therapy and, 137-
138
unconditional, 62
Ackerman, Nathan, 139
Actions, dysfunctional, working toward
change, 7
Activating events
beliefs about, 9-13,13-14
negative musturbatory evaluations,
12-13
negative preferential evaluations,
11-12
nonevaluative inferences, 9-10
nonevaluative observations, 9
positive musturbatory evaluations,
10-11
positive preferential evaluations, 10
consequences, 8
Active-directive style of therapist, 29
Adler, influence of, 3
Alexander, Franz, 139
All-or-none thinking, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Anger, 203
vs. annoyance, 21
couples therapy and, 118
Antiprocrastination exercises, 63
Anxiety, 202
about anxiety, 23
vs. concern, 20
hypnotic rational emotive behavior
therapy and, 233
Arguments
empirical, 47-58
logical, 58-60
pragmatic, 60-62
Asian philosophers, work of, contribu-
tion of, 2
Assertion training, sex therapy and, 230
Assessment
of clients' problems, 31-42, 36-39
steps in, 33-34
individual rational emotive behavior
therapy, 97
Audiotapes, as aids to clients, case exam-
pie, 77
Aurelius, Marcus, work of, contribution
of, 2
Awfulizing, psychological disturbance
and, overview, 15
B
Background information, client's, 34
Backsliding, 246-247
Bateson, Gregory, 140
265

266
Index
Behavioral problems, ABCs of, 52-57
Beliefs
about activating events, 9-13
consequences, 13-14
negative musturbatory evaluations,
12-13
negative preferential evaluations,
11-12
nonevaluative inferences, 9-10
nonevaluative observations, 9
positive musturbatory evaluations,
10-11
positive preferential evaluations, 10
irrational
detecting, case example, 75
rational beliefs, contrasted, 5-6
restructuring of, 24-25
rational, 5
irrational beliefs, contrasted, 5-6
Bibliotherapy, 46
Biographical information form, 88-95
Biological tendencies, of humans, 6-7
Blaming, of other, persistent, couples
therapy and, 126
Books, as aids to clients, case example, 77
Bowen, Murray, 140
Buddha, work of, contribution of, 2
C
"Can't-stand-it-itis," psychological dis-
turbance and, overview, 15
Case example, rational emotive behavior
therapy, 72-83
individual, 108-111
Change
in dysfunctional thinking, acting, work-
ing toward, 7
therapeutic, theory of, 24-26
Choice, exercising power of, and to work
toward changing their dysfunctional
thinking and acting, 7
Christian philosophy, influence of, 3
Client
goals of, change over time, 104
obstacles to client progress, 67-68
progress, overcoming obstacles to,
65-68,67-68
relationship obstacles, 65-66
therapist obstacles, 66-67
resistance, 105
Cognition, in rational emotive behavior
therapy, 5-6
Cognitive-behavioral approach, to psy-
chotherapy. See Rational emotive
behavior therapy
Cognitive methods, rational emotive
behavior therapy, 44-47,48-53,
74-79
Concern, vs. anxiety, 20
Conclusions, jumping to, as "must"
thinking, 15
Confidentiality, among group members,
180
Confucius, work of, contribution of, 2
Congruence, between clients' goals,
goals of therapy, 104
Contraindications for individual therapy,
86-87
Coping self-statements, case example,
76
Countertransference, group rational
emotive behavior therapy, 168-169
Couples therapy, 112-133
case example, 129-133
couple dissatisfaction, 116-117
couple disturbance, 114-116,117-119,
118
disturbed intimate relationships, nature
of, 113-119
practice, 119-123
treatment techniques, 123-129
Creative pursuits, commitment to, psy-
chological health and, 19
D
"Damnation," psychological disturbance
and, overview, 15
Defensiveness, perpetuation of psycho-
logical problems and, 23
Demandingness, acceptance of, family
therapy and, 137
Depression, 202
vs. sadness, 20
Desensitization, 63
Desiring, philosophy of, 17
Disappointment, vs. shame, 20
Discomfort disturbance, 7-8
Discriminating, 45
Disputing
of irrational beliefs, 44

Index
267
stage of therapy, 41-42
examples of, 47-62
Disqualifying positive, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Disruptive behavior, of group member,
165
Dissatisfaction, of couple, 116-117
Disturbance, psychological
about disturbance, 23
of humans, fundamental, 7-8
nature of, 14-21
Disturbance-oriented therapist obstacles
to progress, 66-67
E
Eclectic-analytic therapy, Ellis's work in,
Ego disturbance, 7-8,201-203
Embarrassment, vs. disappointment, 20
Emotional problems, ABCs of, 52-53
Emotional reasoning, as "must" think-
ing, 16
Emotive techniques, rational emotive
behavior therapy, 62-63
case example, 79-81
Empathy of therapist, 28
philosophic, 28
Empirical arguments, 47-58
End phase, individual rational emotive
behavior therapy, 102-103
Envy, 203
Epicretus, influence of, 2,112
Epicurus, work of, contribution of, 2
Esteem, derivation of term, 204
Ethical considerations, group rational
emotive behavior therapy, 180-181
Ethical humanism, 3
Evaluating badness, psychological health
and, 17
Existential philosophy, influence of, 3
F
Fallibility, acceptance of, family therapy
and, 137
Family rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, 134-161
behavioral family therapy, contrasted,
141
case example, 152-161
client, responsibilities of, 147-148
existential family therapy, contrasted,
142-144
goals, 146-147
guidelines, 151-152
other systems of family therapy, con-
trasted, 138-140
psychoanalytic family therapy, con-
trasted, 139-140
rational emotive behavior therapy, exis-
tential family therapy and, 142-144
systems family therapy, contrasted,
140-141
techniques, 149-151
therapist, role of, 148-149
Fantasy, use of, in sex therapy, 218-219
Feedback, group rational emotive behav-
ior therapy, 164
Flexibility, psychological health and, 18
Flooding, 63
Focusing on negative, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Forms
biographical information, 88-95
personality data, 36-39
self-help, 48-51
Fortune-telling, as "must" thinking, 15
French, Thomas, 139
Fromm, Erich, 139
Frustration tolerance, low, 22
G
Gautama Buddha, work of, contribution
of, 2
General rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, vs. preferential rational emotive
behavior therapy, 68-71
Generalization, from one problem,
247-249
Genuineness of therapist, therapeutic, 28
Goals
of client, goals of therapy, congruence,
104
human life and, 4
Greek philosophers, work of, contribu-
tion of, 2
Group rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, 162-194
composition, of group, 165-166
duration, of group sessions, 167
2

268
Index
Group (continued)
ethical considerations, 180-181
frequency, length, and duration, of
group sessions, 167
group members, selection of, 165
group rules, 178
group therapy, definition of, 162-163
length, of group sessions, 167
limitations of, 179-180
methods, 176-177
process, 167-176
protocol, 181-187
discussion of, 187-194
research, 178-179
setting, of group, 165-166
therapist, role of, 177-178
Group sessions, participation in, 72-73
Group socializing, case example, 80
Group therapy, definition of, 162-163
Groups, marathons, rational emotive
behavioral, 195-198
Guide to Successful Marriage, 113
Guilt, 203
vs. regret, 20
sexual, 223-224
H
Haley, Jay, 140
Health, psychological, nature of, 14-21
Hedonism, psychological health and, 19
Heidegger, influence of, 3
High frustration tolerance, psychologi-
cal health and, 18
Homework, rational emotive behavior
therapy
case example, 82
cognitive, 45-46,48-53
group rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, 164
rarely completing, group rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 173
Horney, Karen, influence of, 3,139
Hostile interchanges, couples therapy
and, 126-127
Hot seat exercise, in marathons, 198
How to Live with a Neurotic: at Home and
at Work, 112
Humor
case example, 78-79
in therapy, 28
Hypnotic rational emotive behavior
therapy, 231-239
advantages, over therapy without hyp-
nosis, 238-239
anxiety, 233
phrenophobia, 233,238
transcript, hypnotic session, 233-237
I
Imagery
rational emotive, case example, 79
rational emotive, sex therapy, 218-220,
219
Incompatibilities, couples and, 117
Indications for individual therapy, 85-
86
Individual therapy, 84-111
context, 84-87
contraindications, 86-87
indications, 85-86
process of, 87-103
case example, 108-111
end phase, 102-103
individualizing therapy, 103-107
initial phase, 87-99, 88-95
assessment, 97
therapeutic intervention, 97-99
middle phase, 99-102
typical session, 105-107
Inducting clients, into rational emotive
behavior therapy, 31
Inferences, nonevaluative, 9-10
Initial phase, individual rational emotive
behavior therapy, 87-99, 88-95
Intimate relationships, disturbed, nature
of, 113-119
Irrational, defined, 4
Irrational beliefs
as biological tendency, 6-7
debating, case example, 75-76
detecting, case example, 75
rational beliefs, contrasted, 5-6
vs. rational beliefs, discrimination, case
example, 75
restructuring of, 24-25
J
[ackson, Don, 140
Jealousy, 203

Index
269
Jumping to conclusions, as "must"
thinking, 15
K
Kant, Immanuel, influence of, 2
L
Labeling, as "must" thinking, 16
Lao-Tsu, work of, contribution of, 2
Levants, Robert, 142
Logical arguments, 58-60
Love experience, in marathon, 196-197
M
Maintenance of improvement, 243-249
Marathons, rational emotive behavioral,
195-198
closing procedures, 197-198
groups, 195-198
hot seat exercise, 198
intensives, 199-200
length of, 195
love experience, in marathon, 196-197
opening procedures, 196
Perls, Fritz, 195
procedures, 197
subsequent procedures, 196-197
Marcus Aurelius, influence of, 112
Maultsby, Maxie C. Jr., 219
Middle phase, individual rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 99-102
Minimization, as "must" thinking, 16
Minuchin, Salvadore, 140
Musturbatory evaluations
consequences of, assessment of, 34-35
negative, 12-13
overview, 14-17
positive, 10-11
N
Negative, focusing on, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Negative emotions, appropriate, inap-
propriate, distinction between,
19-21
Negative musturbatory evaluations,
12-13
Negative non sequiturs, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Negative preferential evaluations, 11-12
Nerverness, as "must" thinking, 15
Non sequiturs, negative, as "must"
thinking, 15
Nonevaluative inferences, 9-10
Nonevaluative observations, 9
Nonparticipative group member, 174
Nonutopianism, psychological health
and, 19
O
Observations, nonevaluative, overview, 9
Obstacles to client progress, 65-68
Overgeneralization, as "must" thinking,
16
P
Passive group member, 174
Perfectionism, as "must" thinking, 16
Perls, Frite, 195
Perpetuation, of psychological distur-
bance, 21-24
Personality data form, 36-39
Personalizing, as "must" thinking, 16
Philosophic causation, psychological dis-
turbances, 2
Philosophic restructuring, of irrational
beliefs, 24-25
Philosophical influences, rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 2-3
Philosophy, contribution of, 2
Philosophy of desiring, 17
Phonyism, as "must" thinking, 16
Phrenophobia, hypnotic rational emo-
tive behavior therapy and, 233,238
Positive, disqualifying, as "must" think-
ing, 15
Positive musnirbatory evaluations,
10-11
Positive preferential evaluations, 10
Pragmatic arguments, 60-62
Preferential evaluations
consequences of, assessment of, 34-35
negative, 11-12
positive, 10
Preferential rational emotive behavior
therapy, 42-44

270
Index
Preferential (continued)
vs. general rational emotive behavior
therapy, 68-71
Problem solving, case example, 77-78
Procrastination, 23
Productive bond, assessment of, 99
Protocol, group rational emotive behav-
ior therapy, 181-187
discussion of, 187-194
Psychoanalyst, Ellis's work as, 1-2
Psychoeducational methods, case exam-
ple, 77
Psychological disturbance, 14-17
acquisition of, 21-24
health, nature of, 14-21
must's and, 14-17
philosophic causation of, 2
Psychological health, 17-19
Psychological influences, rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 3-4
Psychological processes, interaction of,
5-6
Psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral
approach to. See Rational emotive
behavior therapy
Purpose, human life, 4
Q
Quiz, unconditional self-acceptance, 216
R
Rating badness, psychological health
and, 17
Rational, defined, 4
Rational beliefs, 5
irrational beliefs, discrimination, 5-6
case example, 75
Rational emotive behavior therapy
ABCs of, overview, 8-14
basic practice, 27-71
behavioral methods, 81-82
case illustration, 72-83
couples therapy, 112-133. See also
Couples therapy
family therapy, 134-161. See also Fam-
ily rational emotive behavior ther-
apy
general theory, 1-26
group setting, structured, 201-216
group therapy, 162-194. See also
Group rational emotive behavior
therapy
historical development, 1-4
humanistic emphasis, 4-5
hypnotic procedure, 231-239. See also
Hypnotic rational emotive behavior
therapy
individual therapy, 84-111. See also
Individual therapy
marathons, 195-198. See also
Marathons, rational emotive behav-
ioral
Rational, continued
philosophical influences, 2-3
preferential, vs. general rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 68-71
psychological influences, 3-4
sex therapy, 217-230. See also Sex
therapy
teaching to others. See also Teaching
principles
case example, 77
theoretical concepts, 4-8
treatment techniques in, 42-44,44-
65
behavioral techniques, 63-64
cognitive techniques, 44-47,48-53
disputing work, examples of, 47-62
emotive techniques, 62-63
techniques avoided, 64-65
Rational emotive imagery, 46
case example, 79
Rational self-statements, 46
Rationality, in human life, overview, 4
Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy, 113
Reasoning, emotional, as "must" think-
ing, 16
Recorded therapy, sex therapy, 224-225
Redundancy, as aim of therapist, 102
Reeducation, in individual rational emo-
tive behavior therapy, 101
Referenting, 76-77
Regret, vs. guilt, 20
Reinforcements, case example, 82
Relationship myths, 116-117
Relationship obstacles to client progress,
65-66
Resistance, of client, 105

Index
271
Responsibility, for emotional distur-
bance, psychological health and, 19
Restructuring, of irrational beliefs,
24-25
Rewards, penalties and, 64
Risk taking
exercises in, 63
group rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, 176
psychological health and, 19
Role playing, case example, 80
Role reversal, 63
Roman Stoic philosophers, work of,
contribution of, 2
S
Sadness, vs. depression, 20
Satir, Virginia, 140
Schopenhauer, influence of, 2
Scientific thinking, psychological health
and, 19
Secrets, couples therapy and, 125
Self, defined, 204
Self-acceptance
psychological health and, 19
unconditional, 62,201-216,203-207
case example, 81
family therapy and, 138
quiz, 216
Self-acceptance groups, 207-215
Self-dialogue, forceful, case example, 81
Self-direction, psychological health and,
18
Self-disclosure, 62
group rational emotive behavior ther-
apy, 176
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 23
Self-help form, 48-51
Self-interest, psychological health and,
18
Self-responsibility, for emotional distur-
bance, psychological health and, 19
Self-statements
forceful, case example, 80-81
rational, 46
Setting
individual rational emotive behavior
therapy, 84
rational emotive behavior theraov. 72
Sex therapy, 217-230
antiabsolutizing technique, 220-223
assertion training, 229-230
awfulizing, 220-223
bibliotherapy, 224-225
emotive, 225-228
fantasy, use of, 218-219
feedback, emotive, 228
guilt, 223-224
homework, 228
imagery, 218-220,220, 226
information giving, 218
Maultsby.Maxie C.Jr., 219
nonverbal exercises, 227
operant conditioning, 229
psychoeducative procedures, 224-225
rational emotive imagery, 219
recorded therapy, 224—225
risk-taking exercises, 226
shame-attacking exercises, 225-226
verbalizations, emotive, 227
Shame, 203
vs. disappointment, 20
exercises, 63
case example, 79-80
group therapy, 176
Skill-oriented therapist obstacles to
progress, 66
Skill training, case example, 82
Social interest, psychological health and,
18
Socializing, group, case example,
76
Spinoza, influence of, 2
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 139
T
Teaching principles, 203-208
anger, 203
anxiety, 202
context, in which therapy group is run,
208
depression, 202
ego disturbance, 201-203, 202-203
envy, 203
esteem, derivation of term, 204
group, forming, 208-209
guilt, 203
hurt, 203

272
Index
Teaching principles (continued)
jealousy, 203
self, defined, 204
self-acceptance groups, 207-215
sessions, 209-216
shame, 203
unconditional self-acceptance,
201-216,203-207
Techniques, for treatment, in rational
emotive behavior therapy, overview,
44-65
Theoretical concepts, rational emotive
behavior therapy, 4-8
Therapeutic change, dieory of, 24-26
Therapeutic intervention, 97-99
Therapeutic relationship, 27-31
personal qualities of therapist, 29-31
therapeutic conditions, 27-29
therapeutic style, 29
Therapeutic style, 29
Therapist obstacles to client progress,
66-67
Thinking, See also Cognition
all-or-none, as "must" thinking, 15
Thinking, continued
dysfunctional, working toward change, 7
irrational, as biological tendency, 6-7
Tillich, Paul, 3
Tolerance
for frustration, low, 22
and psychological health, 17
Transference, group rational emotive
behavior therapy, 167-168
Treatment techniques, rational emotive
behavior therapy, 42-44,44-65
U
Uncaringness, acceptance of, case exam-
ple, 137
Uncertainty, acceptance of, psychologi-
cal health and, 18
Unconditional self-acceptance, 62,
201-216
case example, 81
family therapy and, 138
quiz, 216
W
Watzlawick, Paul, 140
Wblpe, Joseph, 141

