
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Richard Tarnas is a professor of philosophy and cultural history at the
California Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco, where he founded
the graduate program in Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness. He also
teaches archetypal studies and depth psychology at Pacifica Graduate
Institute in Santa Barbara. Born in 1950 in Geneva, Switzerland of American
parents, he is a graduate of Harvard University and Saybrook Institute. His
most recent book, Cosmos and Psyche: Intimations of a New World View,
received the Book of the Year Prize from the Scientific and Medical Network
in the UK.


THE PASSION OF THE
WESTERN MIND
Understanding  the ideas  that  have shaped  our  world  view
Richard Tarnas
PIMLICO

This eBook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any
way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed
under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly
permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use
of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s
rights and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
Epub ISBN: 9781407053998
Version 1.0
www.randomhouse.co.uk

 
Published by Pimlico 2010
2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
Copyright © Richard Tarnas 1991
Richard Tarnas has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and Parents Act 1988 to be
indentified as the author of this work
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold,
hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or
cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition, including this
condition, being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
First published in the USA in 1991 by Crown
First published in the UK in 1996 by Pimlico
Pimlico
Random House, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
London SW 1V 2SA
www.vintage-books.co.uk
Addresses for companies within The Random House Group Limited can be found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm
The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 9781845951627
The Random House Group Limited supports The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), the leading
international forest certification organisation. All our titles that are printed on Greenpeace approved
FSC certified paper carry the FSC logo. Our paper procurement policy can be found at
www.rbooks.co.uk/environment
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
CPI Mackays, Chatham ME5 8TD

To Heather

Contents
Preface 
Introduction
 
 
 
 
I. The Greek World View                            1
The Archetypal Forms                                                                                      3
 
Ideas and Gods                                                                                                 11
The Evolution of the Greek Mind from Homer to Plato                              14
 
The Mythic Vision                                                                                       14
 
The Birth of Philosophy                                                                              17
 
The Greek Enlightenment                                                                           24
 
Socrates                                                                                                        30
 
The Platonic Hero                                                                                       35
 
The Philosopher’s Quest and the Universal Mind                                         41
 
The Problem of the Planets                                                                           49
 
Aristotle and the Greek Balance                                                                      57
 
The DualLegacy                                                                                               72
II. The Transformation of the Classical Era            77
 
Crosscurrents of the Hellenistic Matrix                                                          79
 
The Decline and Preservation of the Greek Mind                                      79
 
Astronomy                                                                                                    83
 
Astrology                                                                                                       86
 
Neoplatonism                                                                                                89
 
Rome                                                                                                              92
 
The Emergence of Christianity                                                                         94
i

III. The Christian World View                        97
 
Judaic Monotheism and the Divinization of History                                      100
 
Classical Elements and the Platonic Inheritance                                            105
 
The Conversion of the PaganMind                                                                 113
 
Contraries Within the Christian Vision                                                           128
 
Exultant Christianity                                                                                         134
 
Dualistic Christianity                                                                                         140
 
Further Contraries and the Augustinian Legacy                                              149
 
Matter and Spirit                                                                                           149
 
Augustine                                                                                                       154
 
Law and Grace                                                                                                160
 
Athens and Jerusalem                                                                                    163
 
The Holy Spirit and Its Vicissitudes                                                                   167
 
Rome and Catholicism                                                                                       171
 
The Virgin Mary and the MotherChurch                                                        175
 
A Summing Up                                                                                                   179
 
 
 
IV. The Transformation of the Medieval Era            185
 
The Scholastic Awakening                                                                               189
 
The Quest of Thomas Aquinas                                                                         194
 
Further Developments in the High Middle Ages                                            206
 
The Rising Tide of Secular Thought                                                             206
 
Astronomy and Dante                                                                                  208
 
The Secularization of the Church and the Rise of Lay Mysticism              211
 
Critical Scholasticism and Ockham’s Razor                                                    215
 
The Rebirth of Classical Humanism                                                                 225
 
Petrarch                                                                                                         225
 
The Return of Plato                                                                                      227
ii
 

 
 
At the Threshold                                                                                                       237
 
 
 
 
V. The Modern World View                          239
 
The Renaissance                                                                                              240
 
The Reformation                                                                                              250
 
The Scientific Revolution                                                                             266
 
Copernicus                                                                                                   266
 
The Religious Reaction                                                                             270
 
Kepler                                                                                                          273
 
Galileo                                                                                                          276
 
The Forging of Newtonian Cosmology                                                      280
 
The Philosophical Revolution                                                                         292
 
Bacon                                                                                                           292
 
Descartes                                                                                                     296
 
Foundations of the Modern World View                                                       303
 
Ancients and Moderns                                                                                     313
                          
The Triumph of Secularism                                                                            321
 
Science and Religion: The Early Concord                                                  321
 
Compromise and Conflict                                                                           325
 
Philosophy, Politics, Psychology                                                                  332
 
The Modem Character                                                                                343
 
Hidden Continuities                                                                                     345
VI. The Transformation of the Modern Era             349
 
The Changing Image of the Human from Copernicus through Freud         350
 
The Self-Critique of the Modern Mind                                                           358
 
From Locke to Hume                                                                                    358
 
Kant                                                                                                               366
 
The Decline of Metaphysics                                                                         378
iii

 
 
The Crisis of Modern Science                                                                          382
 
Romanticism and Its Fate                                                                                 395
 
The Two Cultures                                                                                        395
 
The Divided World View                                                                            405
 
Attempted Syntheses: From Goethe and Hegel to Jung                            408
 
Existentialism and Nihilism                                                                        418
 
The Postmodern Mind                                                                                    426
 
At the Millennium                                                                                          443
VII. Epilogue                                     446
 
The Post-Copernican Double Bind                                                               447
 
Knowledge and the Unconscious                                                                  453
 
The Evolution of World Views                                                                      465
 
Bringing It All Back Home                                                                             474
Chronology                                                                                                     480
 
Notes                                                                                                               515
 
Bibliography                                                                                                    537
 
Acknowledgments                                                                                          555
iv

Preface
This book presents a concise narrative history of the Western world view
from the ancient Greek to the postmodern. My aim has been to provide,
within the limits of a single volume, a coherent account of the evolution of
the Western mind and its changing conception of reality. Recent advances
on several fronts—in philosophy, depth psychology, religious studies, and
history of science—have shed new light on this remarkable evolution. The
historical account presented here has been greatly influenced and enriched
by these advances, and at the end of the narrative I have drawn on them to
set forth a new perspective for understanding our culture’s intellectual and
spiritual history.
We hear much now about the breakdown of the Western tradition, the
decline of liberal education, the dangerous lack of a cultural foundation for
grappling with contemporary problems. Partly such concerns reflect
insecurity and nostalgia in the face of a radically changing world. Yet they
also reflect a genuine need, and it is to that growing number of thoughtful
men and women who recognize such a need that this book is addressed.
How did the modern world come to its present condition? How did the
modem mind arrive at those fundamental ideas and working principles that
so profoundly influence the world today? These are pressing questions for
our time, and to approach them we must recover our roots—not out of
uncritical reverence for the views and values of ages past, but rather to
discover and integrate the historical origins of our own era. I believe that
only by recalling the deeper sources of our present world and world view
can we hope to gain the self-understanding necessary for dealing with our
current dilemmas. The West’s cultural and intellectual history can thus serve
as a preparatory education for the challenges that face us all. Through this
book I have hoped to make an essential part of that history more readily
accessible to the general reader.
Yet I also simply wanted to tell a story I thought worth telling. The history
of Western culture has long seemed to possess the dynamics, scope, and
beauty of a great epic drama: ancient and classical Greece, the Hellenistic era
and imperial Rome, Judaism and the rise of Christianity, the Catholic Church
v

and the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, Reformation, and Scientific
Revolution, the Enlightenment and Romanticism and onward to our own
compelling time. Sweep and grandeur, dramatic conflicts and astonishing
resolutions have marked the Western mind’s sustained attempt to
comprehend the nature of reality—from Thales and Pythagoras to Plato and
Aristotle, from Clement and Boethius to Aquinas and Ockham, from Eudoxus
and Ptolemy to Copernicus and Newton, from Bacon and Descartes to Kant
and Hegel, and from all these to Darwin, Einstein, Freud, and beyond. That
long battle of ideas called “the Western tradition” has been a stirring
adventure whose sum and consequence we all bear within ourselves. An
epic heroism has shone forth in the personal struggles of Socrates, of Paul
and Augustine, of Luther and Galileo, and in that larger cultural struggle,
borne by these and by many less visible protagonists, which has moved the
West on its extraordinary course. There is high tragedy here. And there is
something beyond tragedy.
The following account traces the development of the major world views
of the West’s mainstream high culture, focusing on the crucial sphere of
interaction between philosophy, religion, and science. Perhaps what Virginia
Woolf said of great works of literature could be said as well of great world
views: “The success of the masterpieces seems to lie not so much in their
freedom from faults—indeed we tolerate the grossest errors in them all—
but in the immense persuasiveness of a mind which has completely
mastered its perspective.” My goal in these pages has been to give voice to
each perspective mastered by the Western mind in the course of its
evolution, and to take each on its own terms. I have assumed no special
priority for any particular conception of reality, including our present one
(which is itself multiple and in profound flux). Instead, I have approached
each world view in the same spirit that I would approach an exceptional
work of art—seeking to understand and appreciate, to experience its human
consequences, to let its meaning unfold.
Today the Western mind appears to be undergoing an epochal
transformation, of a magnitude perhaps comparable to any in our
civilization’s history. I believe we can participate intelligently in that
transformation only to the extent to which we are historically informed.
Every age must remember its history anew. Each generation must examine
vi

and think through again, from its own distinctive vantage point, the ideas
that have shaped its understanding of the world. Our task is to do so from
the richly complex perspective of the late twentieth century. I hope this
book will contribute to that effort.
R. T.
vii

The world is deep:
deeper than day can comprehend.
Friedrich Nietzsche
Thus Spoke Zarathustra
viii

Introduction
A book that explores the evolution of the Western mind places special
demands on both reader and writer, for it asks us to enter into frames of
reference that are sometimes radically different from our own. Such a book
invites a certain intellectual flexibility—a sympathetic metaphysical
imagination, a capacity for viewing the world through the eyes of men and
women from other times. One must in a sense wipe the slate clean, attempt
to see things without the benefit or burden of a preconceived outlook. Of
course such a pristine, malleable state of mind can only be striven for, never
achieved. Yet to aspire to that ideal is perhaps the single most important
prerequisite for an enterprise such as this. Unless we are able to perceive
and articulate, on their own terms and without condescension, certain
powerful beliefs and assumptions that we no longer consider valid or
defensible—for example, the once universal conviction that the Earth is the
stationary center of the cosmos, or the even more enduring tendency among
Western thinkers to conceive of and personify the human species in
predominantly masculine terms—then we will fail to understand the
intellectual and cultural foundations of our own thought. Our constant
challenge is to remain faithful to the historical material, allowing our
present perspective to enrich, but not distort, the various ideas and world
views we examine. While that challenge should not be underestimated, I
believe that today, for reasons that will become clear in the later chapters of
the book, we are in a better position to engage this task with the necessary
intellectual and imaginative flexibility than at perhaps any time in the past.
The following narrative is organized chronologically according to the
three world views associated with the three major eras that have
traditionally been distinguished in Western cultural history—the classical,
the medieval, and the modern. Needless to say, any division of history into
“eras” and “world views” cannot in itself do justice to the actual complexity
and diversity of Western thought during these centuries. Yet to discuss such
an immense mass of material fruitfully, one must first introduce some
provisional 
principles 
of 
organization. 
Within 
these 
overarching
generalities, we may then better address the complications and ambiguities,
ix

the internal conflicts and unanticipated changes that have never ceased to
mark the history of the Western mind.
We begin with the Greeks. It was some twenty-five centuries ago that the
Hellenic world brought forth that extraordinary flowering of culture that
marked the dawn of Western civilization. Endowed with seemingly primeval
clarity and creativity, the ancient Greeks provided the Western mind with
what has proved to be a perennial source of insight, inspiration, and
renewal. Modern science, medieval theology, classical humanism—all stand
deeply in their debt. Greek thought was as fundamental for Copernicus and
Kepler, and Augustine and Aquinas, as for Cicero and Petrarch. Our way of
thinking is still profoundly Greek in its underlying logic, so much so that
before we can begin to grasp the character of our own thought, we must
first look closely at that of the Greeks. They remain fundamental for us in
other ways as well: Curious, innovative, critical, intensely engaged with life
and with death, searching for order and meaning yet skeptical of
conventional verities, the Greeks were originators of intellectual values as
relevant today as they were in the fifth century B.C. Let us recall, then, these
first protagonists of the Western intellectual tradition.
Note: A detailed chronology for the events discussed in this book appears at the end of the text (page
446), while dates of birth and death for each historical figure cited can be found next to the
individual’s name in the Index. A discussion of gender and language in the text appears at the
beginning of the Notes (page 468).
x

T
I
The Greek World View
o approach what was distinctive in a vision as complex and protean as
that of the Greeks, let us begin by examining one of its most striking
characteristics—a sustained, highly diversified tendency to interpret
the world in terms of archetypal principles. This tendency was in evidence
throughout Greek culture from the Homeric epics onward, though it first
emerged in philosophically elaborate form in the intellectual crucible of
Athens between the latter part of the fifth century B.C. and the middle of the
fourth. Associated with the figure of Socrates, it there received its
foundational and in some respects definitive formulation in the dialogues of
Plato. At its basis was a view of the cosmos as an ordered expression of
certain primordial essences or transcendent first principles, variously
conceived as Forms, Ideas, universals, changeless absolutes, immortal deities,
divine archai, and archetypes. Although this perspective took on a number
of distinct inflections, and although there were important countercurrents
to this view, it would appear that not only Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, and
Pythagoras before them and Plotinus after, but indeed Homer and Hesiod,
Aeschylus and Sophocles all expressed something like a common vision,
reflecting a typically Greek propensity to see clarifying universals in the
chaos of life.
Speaking in these broad terms, and mindful of the inexactness of such
generalities, we may say that the Greek universe was ordered by a plurality
of timeless essences which underlay concrete reality, giving it form and
meaning. These archetypal principles included the mathematical forms of
geometry and arithmetic; cosmic opposites such as light and dark, male and
female, love and hate, unity and multiplicity; the forms of man (anthrōpos)
and other living creatures; and the Ideas of the Good, the Beautiful, the Just,
1 

and other absolute moral and aesthetic values. In the pre-philosophical
Greek mind, these archetypal principles took the form of mythic
personifications such as Eros, Chaos, Heaven and Earth (Ouranos and Gaia),
as well as more fully personified figures such as Zeus, Prometheus, and
Aphrodite. In this perspective, every aspect of existence was patterned and
permeated by such fundamentals. Despite the continuous flux of
phenomena in both the outer world and inner experience, there could yet
be distinguished specific immutable structures or essences, so definite and
enduring they were believed to possess an independent reality of their own.
It was upon this apparent immutability and independence that Plato based
both his metaphysics and his theory of knowledge.
Because the archetypal perspective outlined here provides a useful point
of departure for entering into the Greek world view, and because Plato was
that perspective’s preeminent theoretician and apologist, whose thought
would become the single most important foundation for the evolution of the
Western mind, we shall begin by discussing the Platonic doctrine of Forms.
In subsequent chapters, we shall pursue the historical development of the
Greek vision as a whole, and thereby attend to the complex dialectic that led
to Plato’s thought, and to the equally complex consequences that followed
from it.
Yet to approach Plato, we must bear in mind his unsystematic, often
tentative, and even ironic style of presenting his philosophy. We should bear
in mind too the inevitable and no doubt often deliberate ambiguities
inherent in his chosen literary mode, the dramatic dialogue. Finally, we must
recall the range, variability, and growth of his thought over a period of some
fifty years. With these qualifications, then, we may make a provisional
attempt to set forth certain prominent ideas and principles suggested by his
writings. Our tacit guide in this interpretive effort will be the Platonic
tradition itself, which preserved and developed a specific philosophical
perspective it regarded as originating with Plato.
Having established that pivotal position within the Greek mind, we can
then move backward and forward—retrospectively to the early
mythological and Presocratic traditions, and then onward to Aristotle.
2 

The Archetypal Forms
What has been commonly understood as Platonism revolves around its
cardinal doctrine, the asserted existence of the archetypal Ideas or Forms.
That assertion demands a partial shift, though a profound one, from what
has come to be our usual approach to reality. To understand this shift, we
must first ask, “What is the precise relation between the Platonic Forms or
Ideas and the empirical world of everyday reality?” Upon this question turns
the entire conception. (Plato used the Greek words idea and eidos
interchangeably. Idea was taken over into Latin and English, while eidos was
translated into Latin as forma and into English as “form.”)
It is crucial to the Platonic understanding that these Forms are primary,
while the visible objects of conventional reality are their direct derivatives.
Platonic Forms are not conceptual abstractions that the human mind creates
by generalizing from a class of particulars. Rather, they possess a quality of
being, a degree of reality, that is superior to that of the concrete world.
Platonic archetypes form the world and also stand beyond it. They manifest
themselves within time and yet are timeless. They constitute the veiled
essence of things.
Plato taught that what is perceived as a particular object in the world can
best be understood as a concrete expression of a more fundamental Idea, an
archetype which gives that object its special structure and condition. A
particular thing is what it is by virtue of the Idea informing it. Something is
“beautiful” to the exact extent that the archetype of Beauty is present in it.
When one falls in love, it is Beauty (or Aphrodite) that one recognizes and
surrenders to, the beloved object being Beauty’s instrument or vessel. The
essential factor in the event is the archetype, and it is this level that carries
3 

the deepest meaning.
It could be objected that this is not the way one experiences an event of
this sort. What actually attracts one is not an archetype but a specific person,
or a concrete work of art, or some other beautiful object. Beauty is only an
attribute of the particular, not its essence. The Platonist argues, however,
that this objection rests on a limited perception of the event. It is true, he
answers, that the ordinary person is not directly aware of an archetypal
level, despite its reality. But Plato described how a philosopher who has
observed many objects of beauty, and who has long reflected on the matter,
may suddenly glimpse absolute beauty—Beauty itself, supreme, pure,
eternal, and not relative to any specific person or thing. The philosopher
thereby recognizes the Form or Idea that underlies all beautiful phenomena.
He unveils the authentic reality behind the appearance. If something is
beautiful, it is so because it “participates” in the absolute Form of Beauty.
Plato’s mentor, Socrates, had sought to know what was common to all
virtuous acts, so that he could evaluate how one should govern one’s
conduct in life. He reasoned that if one wishes to choose actions that are
good, one must know what “good” is, apart from any specific circumstances.
To evaluate one thing as “better” than another assumes the existence of an
absolute good with which the two relative goods can be compared.
Otherwise the word “good” would be only a word whose meaning had no
stable basis in reality, and human morality would lack a secure foundation.
Similarly, unless there was some absolute basis for evaluating acts as just or
unjust, then every act called “just” would be a relative matter of uncertain
virtue. When those who engaged in dialogue with Socrates espoused
popular notions of justice and injustice, or of good and evil, he subjected
these to careful analysis and showed them to be arbitrary, full of internal
contradictions and without any substantial basis. Because Socrates and Plato
believed that knowledge of virtue was necessary for a person to live a life of
virtue, objective universal concepts of justice and goodness seemed
imperative for a genuine ethics. Without such changeless constants that
transcended the vagaries of human conventions and political institutions,
human beings would possess no firm foundation for ascertaining true
values, and would thus be subject to the dangers of an amoral relativism.
Beginning with the Socratic discussion of ethical terms and the search for
4 

absolute definitions, Plato ended with a comprehensive theory of reality. Just
as man as moral agent requires the Ideas of justice and goodness to conduct
his life well, so man as scientist requires other absolute Ideas to understand
the world, other universals by which the chaos, flux, and variety of sensible
things can be unified and made intelligible. The philosopher’s task
encompasses both the moral and the scientific dimensions, and the Ideas
provide a foundation for both.
It seemed evident to Plato that when many objects share a common
property—as all human beings share “humanness” or as all white stones
share “whiteness”—that property is not limited to a specific material
instance in space and time. It is immaterial, beyond spatiotemporal
limitation, and transcendent to its many instances. A particular thing may
cease to be, but not the universal property that the particular thing
embodied. The universal is a separate entity from the particular and, because
it is beyond change and never passes away, is superior in its reality.
One of Plato’s critics once stated, “I see particular horses, but not
horseness.” Plato answered, “That is because you have eyes but no
intelligence.” The archetypal Horse, which gives form to all horses, is to Plato
a more fundamental reality than the particular horses, which are merely
specific instances of the Horse, embodiments of that Form. As such, the
archetype is apparent not so much to the limited physical senses, though
these can suggest and lead the way, as to the more penetrating eye of the
soul, the illuminated intellect. Archetypes reveal themselves more to the
inner perception than to the outer.
The Platonic perspective thus asks the philosopher to go through the
particular to the universal, and beyond the appearance to the essence. It
assumes not only that such insight is possible, but that it is mandatory for the
attainment of true knowledge. Plato directs the philosopher’s attention away
from the external and concrete, from taking things at face value, and points
“deeper” and “inward,” so that one may “awaken” to a more profound level of
reality. He asserts that the objects one perceives with one’s senses are
actually crystallizations of more primary essences, which can be
apprehended only by the active, intuitive mind.
Plato maintained a strong distrust of knowledge gained by sense
perceptions, since such knowledge is constantly changing, relative, and
5 

private to each individual. A wind is pleasantly cool for one person but
uncomfortably cold for another. A wine is sweet to a person who is well but
sour to the same person when ill. Knowledge based on the senses is
therefore a subjective judgment, an ever-varying opinion without any
absolute foundation. True knowledge, by contrast, is possible only from a
direct apprehension of the transcendent Forms, which are eternal and
beyond the shifting confusion and imperfection of the physical plane.
Knowledge derived from the senses is merely opinion and is fallible by any
nonrelative standard. Only knowledge derived directly from the Ideas is
infallible and can be justifiably called real knowledge.
For example, the senses never experience true or absolute equality, since
no two things in this world are ever exactly equal to each other in every
respect. Rather, they are always only more or less equal. Yet because of the
transcendent Idea of equality, the human intellect can comprehend absolute
equality (which it has never known concretely) independently of the senses,
and can therefore employ the term “equality” and recognize approximations
of equality in the empirical world. Similarly, there are no perfect circles in
nature, but all approximate circles in nature derive their “circleness” from
the perfect archetypal Circle, and it is on this latter reality that the human
intelligence depends to recognize any empirical circles. So too with perfect
goodness or perfect beauty. For when one speaks of something as “more
beautiful” or “more good” than something else, this comparison can be made
only against an invisible standard of absolute beauty or goodness—Beauty
itself and the Good itself. Everything in the sensible world is imperfect,
relative, and constantly shifting, but human knowledge needs and seeks
absolutes, which exist only on the transcendent level of pure Ideas.
Implicit in Plato’s conception of the Ideas is his distinction between being
and becoming. All phenomena are in a never-ending process of
transformation from one thing into another, becoming this or that and then
perishing, changing in relation to one person and another, or to the same
person at different times. Nothing in this world is, because everything is
always in a state of becoming something else. But one thing does enjoy real
being, as distinguished from merely becoming, and this is the Idea—the only
stable reality, that which underlies, motivates, and orders the flux of
phenomena. Any particular thing in the world is actually a complexly
6 

determined appearance. The perceived object is a meeting place of many
Forms which at different times express themselves in varying combinations
and with varying degrees of intensity. Plato’s world, therefore, is dynamic
only in that all phenomenal reality is in a state of constant becoming and
perishing, a movement governed by the shifting participation of Ideas. But
the ultimate reality, the world of Ideas wherein resides true being, not just
becoming, is in itself changeless and eternal, and is therefore static. The
relation of being to becoming for Plato was directly parallel to the relation of
truth to opinion—what is apprehensible by the illuminated reason in
contrast to what is apprehensible by the physical senses.
Since the Forms endure, while their concrete expressions come and go,
the Forms can be said to be immortal, and therefore similar to gods. Though
a particular incarnation of the moment may die, the Form that was
temporarily embodied within that particular continues to manifest itself in
other concrete things. A person’s beauty passes, but Aphrodite lives on—
archetypal Beauty is eternal, neither vulnerable to the passing of time nor
touched by the transience of its particular manifestations. The individual
trees of the natural world eventually fall and rot away, but the archetypal
Tree continues to express itself in and through other trees. A good person
may fall and perform evil acts, but the Idea of the Good stands forever. The
archetypal Idea comes into and out of being in a multiplicity of concrete
forms, yet simultaneously remains transcendent as a unitary essence.
Plato’s use of the word “idea” (which in Greek denoted the form, pattern,
essential quality, or nature of something) clearly differs from our
contemporary usage. In the usual modern understanding, ideas are
subjective mental constructs private to the individual mind. By contrast,
Plato meant something that exists not only in human consciousness but
outside of it as well. Platonic Ideas are objective. They do not depend on
human thought, but exist entirely in their own right. They are perfect
patterns embedded in the very nature of things. The Platonic Idea is, as it
were, not merely a human idea but the universe’s idea, an ideal entity that
can express itself externally in concrete tangible form or internally as a
concept in the human mind. It is a primordial image or formal essence that
can manifest in various ways and on various levels, and is the foundation of
reality itself.
7 

The Ideas are thus the fundamental elements of both an ontology (a
theory of being) and an epistemology (a theory of knowledge): they
constitute the basic essence and deepest reality of things, and also the means
by which certain human knowledge is possible. A bird is a bird by virtue of
its participation in the archetypal Idea of the Bird. And the human mind can
know a bird by virtue of the mind’s own participation in that same Idea of
the Bird. The red color of an object is red because it participates in
archetypal redness, and human perception registers red by virtue of the
mind’s participation in the same Idea. The human mind and the universe are
ordered according to the same archetypal structures or essences, because of
which, and only because of which, true understanding of things is possible
for the human intelligence.
The paradigmatic example of Ideas for Plato was mathematics. Following
the Pythagoreans, with whose philosophy he seems to have been especially
intimate, Plato understood the physical universe to be organized in
accordance with the mathematical Ideas of number and geometry. These
Ideas are invisible, apprehensible by intelligence only, and yet can be
discovered to be the formative causes and regulators of all empirically visible
objects and processes. But again, the Platonic and Pythagorean conception of
mathematical ordering principles in nature was essentially different from
the conventional modern view. In Plato’s understanding, circles, triangles,
and numbers are not merely formal or quantitative structures imposed by
the human mind on natural phenomena, nor are they only mechanically
present in phenomena as a brute fact of their concrete being. Rather, they
are numinous and transcendent entities, existing independently of both the
phenomena they order and the human mind that perceives them. While the
concrete phenomena are transient and imperfect, the mathematical Ideas
ordering those phenomena are perfect, eternal, and changeless. Hence the
basic Platonic belief—that there exists a deeper, timeless order of absolutes
behind the surface confusion and randomness of the temporal world—
found in mathematics, it was thought, a particularly graphic demonstration.
The training of the mind in mathematics was therefore deemed by Plato
essential to the philosophical enterprise, and according to tradition, above
the door to his Academy were placed the words “Let no one unacquainted
with geometry enter here.”
8 

The position described thus far represents a fair approximation of Plato’s
most characteristic views concerning the Ideas, including those set forth in
his most celebrated dialogues—the Republic, the Symposium the Phaedo, the
Phaedrus, and the Timaeus—as well as in the Seventh Letter, his one
probably genuine extant letter. Yet a number of ambiguities and
discrepancies remained unresolved in the corpus of Plato’s work. At times
Plato seems to exalt the ideal over the empirical to such an extent that all
concrete particulars are understood to be, as it were, only a series of
footnotes to the transcendent Idea. At other times he seems to stress the
intrinsic nobility of created things, precisely because they are embodied
expressions of the divine and eternal. The exact degree to which the Ideas
are transcendent rather than immanent—whether they are entirely separate
from sensible things, with the latter only imperfect imitations, or whether
they are in some manner present in sensible things, with the latter
essentially sharing in the Ideas’ nature—cannot be determined from the
many references in the different dialogues. Generally speaking, it seems that
as Plato’s thought matured, he moved toward a more transcendent
interpretation. Yet in the Parmenides, probably written after most of the
dialogues cited above, Plato presented several formidable arguments against
his own theory, pointing out questions concerning the nature of the Ideas—
how many kinds are there, what are their relations to each other and to the
sensible world, what is the precise meaning of “participation,” how is
knowledge of them possible—the responses to which raised seemingly
unsolvable problems and inconsistencies. Some of these questions, which
Plato posed perhaps as much out of dialectical vigor as from self-criticism,
became the basis for later philosophers’ objections to the theory of Ideas.
Similarly, in the Theaetetus, Plato analyzed the nature of knowledge with
extraordinary acuity and with no firm conclusions, never adducing the
theory of Ideas as a way out of the epistemological impasse he depicted. In
the Sophist, Plato ascribed reality not just to the Ideas but also to change, life,
soul, and understanding. Elsewhere he pointed to the existence of an
intermediate class of mathematical objects between Ideas and sensible
particulars. On several occasions he posited a hierarchy of Ideas, yet
different dialogues suggested different hierarchies, with the Good, the One,
Existence, Truth, or Beauty variously occupying supreme positions,
9 

sometimes simultaneously and overlapping. Clearly Plato never constructed
a complete, fully coherent system of Ideas. Yet it is also evident that, despite
his own unresolved questions concerning his central doctrine, Plato
considered the theory true, and that without it human knowledge and moral
activity could have no foundation. And it was this conviction that formed the
basis for the Platonic tradition.
To sum up: From the Platonic perspective, the fundamentals of existence
are the archetypal Ideas, which constitute the intangible substrate of all that
is tangible. The true structure of the world is revealed not by the senses, but
by the intellect, which in its highest state has direct access to the Ideas
governing reality. All knowledge presupposes the existence of the Ideas. The
archetypal realm, far from being an unreal abstraction or imaginary
metaphor for the concrete world, is here considered to be the very basis of
reality, that which determines its order and renders it knowable. To this end,
Plato declared direct experience of the transcendent Ideas to be the
philosopher’s primary goal and ultimate destination.
10 

Ideas and Gods
All things are indeed “full of gods,” Plato asserted in his final work, the Laws.
And here we must address a peculiar ambiguity in the nature of archetypes
—an ambiguity central to the Greek vision as a whole—that suggested the
existence of an underlying connection between ruling principles and mythic
beings. Although at times Plato favored a more abstract formulation of
archetypes, as with the mathematical Ideas, at other times he spoke in terms
of divine figures, mythical personages of exalted stature. On many occasions,
Socrates’s way of speaking in the Platonic dialogues has a distinctly Homeric
tone, treating various philosophical and historical matters in the form of
mythological figures and narratives.
A taut irony, a playful seriousness, colors Plato’s use of myth, so that one
cannot pin down precisely the level on which he wishes to be understood.
He often prefaced his mythical excursions with the ambiguous ploy, at once
affirming and self-distancing, of declaring that it was “a likely account” or
that “either this or something very like it is true.” Depending on a specific
dialogue’s context, Zeus, Apollo, Hera, Ares, Aphrodite, and the rest could
signify actual deities, allegorical figures, character types, psychological
attitudes, modes of experience, philosophic principles, transcendent
essences, sources of poetic inspiration or divine communications, objects of
conventional piety, unknowable entities, imperishable artifacts of the
supreme creator, heavenly bodies, foundations of the universal order, or
rulers and teachers of mankind. More than only literalistic metaphors,
Plato’s gods defy strict definition, in one dialogue serving as fanciful
characters in a didactic fable, in another commanding an undoubted
ontological reality. Not infrequently, these personified archetypes are used in
11 

his most philosophically earnest moments, as if the depersonalized language
of metaphysical abstraction were no longer suitable when directly
confronting the numinous essence of things.
We see this memorably illustrated in the Symposium, where Eros is
discussed as the preeminent force in human motivations. In a fine succession
of elegantly dialectical speeches, the several participants in Plato’s
philosophical 
drinking 
party 
describe 
Eros 
as 
a 
complex 
and
multidimensional archetype which at the physical level expresses itself in
the sexual instinct, but at higher levels impels the philosopher’s passion for
intellectual beauty and wisdom, and culminates in the mystical vision of the
eternal, the ultimate source of all beauty. Yet throughout the dialogue that
principle is represented in personified and mythical terms, with Eros
considered a deity, the god of love, with the principle of Beauty referred to
as Aphrodite, and with numerous allusions to other mythic figures such as
Dionysus, Kronos, Orpheus, and Apollo. Similarly, in the Timaeus, when
Plato sets forth his views on the creation and structure of the universe, he
does so in almost entirely mythological terms; so too in his many discussions
of the nature and destiny of the soul (Phaedo, Gorgias, Phaedrus, Republic,
Laws). Specific qualities of character are regularly attributed to specific
deities, as in the Phaedrus, where the philosopher who seeks after wisdom is
called a follower of Zeus, while the warrior who would shed blood for his
cause is said to be attendant upon Ares. Often there is little doubt that Plato
is employing myth as pure allegory, as when in the Protagoras he has the
Sophist teacher use the ancient myth of Prometheus simply to make an
anthropological point. In his theft of fire from the heavens, giving it to
mankind with the other arts of civilization, Prometheus symbolized rational
man’s emergence from a more primitive state. At other times, however,
Plato himself seems swept up into the mythic dimension, as when, in the
Philebus, he has Socrates describe his dialectical method of analyzing the
world of Ideas as “a gift of heaven, which, as I conceive, the gods tossed
among men by the hands of a new Prometheus, and therewith a blaze of
light.”
By philosophizing in such a manner, Plato gave expression to a unique
confluence of the emerging rationalism of Hellenic philosophy with the
prolific mythological imagination of the ancient Greek psyche—that
12 

primordial religious vision, with both Indo-European and Levantine roots
extending back through the second millennium B.C. to Neolithic times, which
provided the Olympian polytheistic foundation for the cult, art, poetry, and
drama of classical Greek culture. Among ancient mythologies, that of Greece
was singularly complex, richly elaborated, and systematic. As such, it
provided a fertile basis for the evolution of Greek philosophy itself, which
bore distinct traces of its mythic ancestry not only in its initial emergence
but in its Platonic apogee. Yet it was not just the language of myth in Plato’s
dialogues, but rather the underlying functional equivalence of deities and
Ideas implicit in much of his thought, that made Plato so pivotal in the
development of the Greek mind. As the classicist John Finley has noted, “Just
as the Greek gods, variable though they may have been in cult, corporately
comprise an analysis of the world—Athena as mind, Apollo as random and
unpredictable illumination, Aphrodite as sexuality, Dionysus as change and
excitement, Artemis as untouchedness, Hera as settlement and marriage,
Zeus as order dominant over all—so the Platonic forms exist in their own
right, lucent and eternal above any transitory human participation in
them. . . . [Like the forms, the gods] were essences of life, by contemplation
of which any individual life took on meaning and substance.”1
Plato often criticized poets for anthropomorphizing the gods, yet he did
not cease from teaching his own philosophical system in striking
mythological formulations and with implicitly religious intent. Despite the
high value he placed on intellectual rigor, and despite his dogmatic
strictures concerning poetry and art in his political doctrines, the distinct
implication in many passages of the dialogues is that the imaginative faculty,
both poetic and religious, was as useful in the quest for attaining knowledge
of the world’s essential nature as any purely logical, let alone empirical,
approach. But of especial importance for our present inquiry was the effect
of Plato’s vision on the unstable and problematic condition of the Greek
world view. For by speaking of Ideas on one page and gods on another in
such analogous terms, Plato resolved, tenuously yet with weighty and
enduring consequences, the central tension in the classical Greek mind
between myth and reason.
13 

The Evolution of the Greek Mind from Homer to
Plato
The Mythic Vision
The religious and mythological background of Greek thought was
profoundly pluralistic in character. When successive waves of Greek-
speaking Indo-European nomadic warriors began sweeping into the lands of
the Aegean around the turn of the second millennium B.C., they brought with
them their heroic patriarchal mythology, presided over by the great sky-god
Zeus. Although the ancient matriarchal mythologies of the indigenous pre-
Hellenic societies, including the highly developed Minoan goddess-
worshiping civilization on Crete, were eventually subordinated to the
religion of the conquerors, they were not entirely suppressed. For the
northern male deities mated with and married the ancient southern
goddesses, as Zeus did Hera, and this complex amalgamation which came to
constitute the Olympian pantheon did much to ensure the dynamism and
vitality of classical Greek myth. Moreover, this pluralism in the Hellenic
inheritance was further expressed in the continuing dichotomy between, on
the one hand, Greek public religion, with its polis festivals and civic rituals
focused on the major Olympian deities, and, on the other, the widely
popular mystery religions—Orphic, Dionysian, Eleusinian—whose esoteric
rites drew on pre-Greek and Oriental religious traditions: death-rebirth
initiations, agricultural fertility cults, and worship of the Great Mother
Goddess.
Given the oath-bound secrecy of the mystery religions, it is difficult from
the present vantage point to judge the relative significance of the various
14 

forms of Hellenic religious belief for individual Greeks. What is evident,
however, is the pervasive archetypal resonance of the archaic Greek vision,
expressed above all in the foundational epic poems of Greek culture that
have come down to us, the Homeric Iliad and Odyssey. Here, at the
luminous dawn of the Western literary tradition, was captured the
primordial mythological sensibility in which the events of human existence
were perceived as intimately related to and informed by the eternal realm of
gods and goddesses. The archaic Greek vision reflected an intrinsic unity of
immediate sense perception and timeless meaning, of particular
circumstance and universal drama, of human activity and divine motivation.
Historical persons lived out a mythic heroism in war and wandering, while
Olympian deities watched and intervened over the plain of Troy. The play of
the senses on an outflung world bright with color and drama was never
separated from a comprehension of the world’s meaning that was both
ordered and mythic. Keen apprehension of the physical world—of seas and
mountains and dawns, of banquets and battles, of bows, helmets, and
chariots—was permeated with the felt presence of the gods in nature and
human destiny. The immediacy and freshness of the Homeric vision was
paradoxically tied to a virtually conceptual understanding of the world
governed by an ancient and venerable mythology.
Even the towering figure of Homer himself suggested a peculiarly
indivisible synthesis of the individual and the universal. The monumental
epic poems were brought forth from a greater collective psyche, creations
of the Hellenic racial imagination passed on, developed, and refined
generation after generation, bard after bard. Yet within the established
formulaic patterns of oral tradition that governed the epics’ composition
there also lived an unmistakably personal particularity, a flexible
individualism and spontaneity of style and vision. Thus “Homer” was
ambiguously both an individual human poet and a collective personification
of the entire ancient Greek memory.
The values expressed in the Homeric epics, composed around the eighth
century B.C., continued to inspire successive generations of Greeks
throughout antiquity, and the many figures of the Olympian pantheon,
systematically delineated somewhat later in Hesiod’s Theogony, informed
and pervaded the Greek cultural vision. In the various divinities and their
15 

powers lay a sense of the universe as an ordered whole, a cosmos rather
than a chaos. The natural world and the human world were not
distinguishable domains in the archaic Greek universe, for a single
fundamental order structured both nature and society, and embodied the
divine justice that empowered Zeus, the ruler of the gods. Although the
universal order was especially represented in Zeus, even he was ultimately
bound by an impersonal fate (moira) that governed all and that maintained a
certain equilibrium of forces. The gods were indeed often capricious in their
actions, with human destinies in the balance. Yet the whole cohered, and the
forces of order prevailed over those of chaos—just as the Olympians led by
Zeus had defeated the Giants in the primeval struggle for rulership of the
world, and just as Odysseus after his long and perilous wanderings at last
triumphantly achieved home.2
By the fifth century B.C., the great Greek tragedians Aeschylus, Sophocles,
and Euripides were employing the ancient myths to explore the deeper
themes of the human condition. Courage, cunning and strength, nobility and
the striving for immortal glory were the characteristic virtues of the epic
heroes. Yet however great the individual, man’s lot was circumscribed by
fate and the fact of his mortality. It was above all the superior man whose
actions could draw the destructive wrath of the gods upon him, often
because of his hubris, sometimes seemingly unjustly. Against the backdrop of
that opposition between human endeavor and divine stricture, between free
will and fate, sin and retribution, the moral struggle of the protagonist
unfolded. In the hands of the tragedians, the conflicts and sufferings that had
been straightforwardly and unreflectively portrayed in Homer and Hesiod
were now subjected to the psychological and existential probings of a later,
more critical temperament. What had been long-accepted absolutes were
now searched, questioned, suffered through with a new consciousness of the
human predicament. On the stage of the Dionysian religious festivals in
Athens, the pronounced Greek sense of the heroic, balanced against and in
integral relation to an equally acute awareness of pain, death, and fate,
discharged itself in the context of mythic drama. And just as Homer was
called the educator of Greece, so too were the tragedians expressive of the
culture’s deepening spirit and shapers of its moral character, with the
theatrical performances as much communal religious sacrament as artistic
16 

event.
For both archaic poet and classical tragedian, the world of myth endowed
human experience with an ennobling clarity of vision, a higher order that
redeemed the wayward pathos of life. The universal gave comprehensibility
to the concrete. If, in the tragic vision, character determined fate, yet both
were mythically perceived. Compared with the Homeric epics, Athenian
tragedy reflected a more conscious sense of the gods’ metaphorical
significance and a more poignant appreciation of human self-awareness and
suffering. Yet through profound suffering came profound learning, and the
history and drama of human existence, for all its harsh conflict and
wrenching contradiction, still held overarching purpose and meaning. The
myths were the living body of that meaning, constituting a language that
both reflected and illuminated the essential processes of life.
The Birth of Philosophy
With its Olympian order, the mythic world of Homer and Sophocles
possessed a complex intelligibility, but this persistent desire for system and
clarity in the Greek vision, as well as the growing humanism visible in the
tragedies, was beginning to take new forms. The great shift had already
commenced in the early sixth century B.C. in the large and prosperous Ionian
city of Miletus, situated in the eastern part of the Greek world on the coast
of Asia Minor. Here Thales and his successors Anaximander and
Anaximenes, endowed with both leisure and curiosity, initiated an approach
to understanding the world that was radically novel and extraordinarily
consequential. Perhaps they were impelled by their Ionian location, where
they were confronted with neighboring civilizations that possessed
mythologies differing both from each other and from the Greek. Perhaps,
too, they were influenced by the social organization of the Greek polis,
which was governed by impersonal, uniform laws rather than the arbitrary
acts of a despot. Yet whatever their immediate inspiration, these prototypical
scientists made the remarkable assumption that an underlying rational unity
and order existed within the flux and variety of the world, and established
for themselves the task of discovering a simple fundamental principle, or
17 

archē, that both governed nature and composed its basic substance. In so
doing, they began to complement their traditional mythological
understanding with more impersonal and conceptual explanations based on
their observations of natural phenomena.
At this pivotal stage, there was a distinct overlap of the mythic and
scientific modes, visible in the principal statement attributed to Thales in
which he affirmed both a single unifying primary substance and a divine
omnipresence: “All is water, and the world is full of gods.” Thales and his
successors proposed that nature arose from a self-animated substance that
continued to move and change itself into various forms.3 Because it was
author of its own ordered motions and transmutations, and because it was
everlasting, this primary substance was considered to be not only material
but also alive and divine. Much like Homer, these earliest philosophers
perceived nature anc divinity as yet intertwined. They also maintained
something of the old Homeric sense of a moral order governing the cosmos,
an impersonal fate that preserved the world’s equilibrium amidst all its
changes.
But the decisive step had been taken. The Greek mind now strove to
discover a natural explanation for the cosmos by means of observation and
reasoning, and these explanations soon began to shed their residual
mythological components. Ultimate, universal questions were being asked,
and answers were being sought from a new quarter—the human mind’s
critical analysis of material phenomena. Nature was to be explained in terms
of nature itself, not of something fundamentally beyond nature, and in
impersonal terms rather than by means of personal gods and goddesses. The
primitive universe ruled by anthropomorphic deities began to give way to a
world whose source and substance was a primary natural element such as
water, air, or fire. In time, these primary substances would cease to be
endowed with divinity or intelligence, and would instead be understood as
purely material entities mechanically moved by chance or blind necessity.
But already a rudimentary naturalistic empiricism was being born. And as
man’s independent intelligence grew stronger, the sovereign power of the
old gods grew weak.
The next step in this philosophical revolution, a step no less consequential
than that of Thales a century earlier, was taken in the western part of the
18 

Greek world in southern Italy (Magna Graecia) when Parmenides of Elea
approached the problem of what was genuinely real by means of a purely
abstract rational logic. Again, as with the early Ionians, Parmenides’s thought
possessed a peculiar combination of traditional religious and novel secular
elements. From what he described as a divine revelation emerged his
achievement of an unprecedentedly rigorous deductive logic. In their search
for simplicity in explaining nature, the Ionian philosophers had stated that
the world was one thing, but had become many. But in Parmenides’s early
struggle with language and logic, “to be” something made it impossible for it
to change into something it is not, for what “is not” cannot be said to exist at
all. Similarly, he argued that “what is” can never have come into being or
pass away, since something cannot come from nothing or turn into nothing
if nothing cannot exist at all. Things cannot be as they appear to the senses:
the familiar world of change, motion, and multiplicity must be mere opinion,
for the true reality by logical necessity is changeless and unitary.
These rudimentary but foundational developments in logic necessitated
thinking through for the first time such matters as the difference between
the real and the apparent, between rational truth and sensory perception,
and between being and becoming. Of equal importance, Parmenides’s logic
eventually forced into the open the distinction between a static material
substance and a dynamic ordering life-force (which had been presumed
identical by the Ionians), and thereby highlighted the basic problem of what
caused motion in the universe. But most significant was Parmenides’s
declaration of the autonomy and superiority of the human reason as judge
of reality. For what was real was intelligible—an object of intellectual
apprehension, not of sense perception.
These two advancing trends of naturalism and rationalism impelled the
development of a series of increasingly sophisticated theories to explain the
natural world. Obliged to reconcile the conflicting demands of sensory
observation with the new logical rigor, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and finally
the atomists attempted to explain the world’s apparent change and
multiplicity by reinterpreting and modifying Parmenides’s absolute monism
—reality as one, motionless, and changeless—in terms of more pluralistic
systems. Each of these systems adhered to Parmenides’s view that what was
real could not ultimately come into being or pass away, but they interpreted
19 

the apparent birth and destruction of natural objects as being the
consequence of a multiplicity of fundamental unchanging elements which
alone were truly real, and which moved into and out of various
combinations to form the objects of the world. The elements themselves did
not come into being or pass away. Only their constantly shifting
combinations were subject to such change. Empedocles posited four
ultimate root elements—earth, water, air, and fire—which were eternal, and
which were moved together and apart by the primary forces of Love and
Strife. Anaxagoras proposed that the universe was constituted by an infinite
number of minute, qualitatively different seeds. But instead of explaining
matter’s movement in terms of blind semimythic forces (such as Love and
Strife), he postulated a transcendent primordial Mind (Nous), which set the
material universe into motion and gave it form and order.
But the most comprehensive system in this development was that of
atomism. In an attempt to fulfill the Ionians’ search for an elementary
substance constituting the material world, while also overcoming the
Parmenidean argument against change and multiplicity, Leucippus and his
successor Democritus constructed a complex explanation of all phenomena
in purely materialistic terms: The world was composed exclusively of
uncaused and immutable material atoms—a unitary changeless substance, as
Parmenides required, though of infinite number. These invisibly minute and
indivisible particles perpetually moved about in a boundless void and by
their random collisions and varying combinations produced the phenomena
of the visible world. The atoms were qualitatively identical, different only in
shape and size—i.e., in quantitative and hence measurable terms.
Democritus further answered Parmenides’s objection by stating that what “is
not” could indeed exist, in the sense of a void—an empty but real space
which made room for the atoms to move and combine. The atoms were
moved mechanically, not by any cosmic intelligence such as the Nous, but by
the blind chance of natural necessity (anankē). All human knowledge was
derived simply from the impact of the material atoms on the senses. Much of
human experience, however, such as that of hot and cold or bitter and
sweet, derived not from the atoms’ inherent qualities but from human
“convention.” Qualities were subjective human perceptions, for the atoms
possessed only quantitative differences. What was real was matter in space,
20 

atoms moving randomly in the void. When a man died, his soul perished;
matter, however, was conserved and did not perish. Only the specific
combinations of atoms changed, with the same atoms constantly colliding
and forming different bodies in various stages of increase and decrease,
conglomerating and breaking apart, thereby creating and dissolving over
time an infinite number of worlds throughout the void.
In atomism, the mythological residue of the earliest philosophers’ self-
animated substance was now fully removed: the void alone caused the
random motions of the atoms, which were entirely material and possessed
neither divine order nor purpose. For some, this explanation succeeded as
the most lucid rational effort to escape the distortions of human subjectivity
and desire, and to grasp the unadomed mechanisms of the universe. For
others, however, much was left unresolved—the issue of forms and their
duration, the question of purpose in the world, the need for a more
satisfying answer to the problem of a first cause of motion. Significant
advances in understanding the world seemed to be developing, yet much
that had been certain for the primitive, prephilosophical mind was now
problematic. By implication of these early philosophical forays, not only the
gods but the immediate evidence of one’s own senses might be an illusion,
and the human mind alone must be relied upon to discover rationally what
is real.
There was one major exception to this intellectual progress among the
Greeks away from the mythic and toward the naturalistic, and this was
Pythagoras. The dichotomy of religion and reason seems to have not so
much pressed Pythagoras antithetically away from one in favor of the other,
but rather provided for him an impetus toward synthesis. Indeed, his
reputation among the ancients was that of a man whose genius was as much
religious as scientific. Yet little can be said about Pythagoras with any
definiteness. A rule of strict secrecy was maintained by his school, and an
aura of legend surrounded it from its beginnings. Originally from the Ionian
island of Samos, Pythagoras probably traveled and studied in Egypt and
Mesopotamia before migrating westward to the Greek colony of Croton in
southern Italy. There he established a philosophical school and religious
brotherhood centered on the cult of Apollo and the Muses, and dedicated to
the pursuit of moral purification, spiritual salvation, and the intellectual
21 

penetration of nature—all of which were understood as intimately
interconnected.
Where the Ionian physicists were interested in the material substance of
phenomena, the Pythagoreans focused on the forms, particularly
mathematical, that governed and ordered those phenomena. And while the
main current of Greek thought was breaking away from the mythological
and religious ground of archaic Greek culture, Pythagoras and his followers
conducted philosophy and science in a framework permeated by the beliefs
of the mystery religions, especially Orphism. To comprehend scientifically
the order of the natural universe was the Pythagorean via regia to spiritual
illumination. The forms of mathematics, the harmonies of music, the motions
of the planets, and the gods of the mysteries were all essentially related for
Pythagoreans, and the meaning of that relation was revealed in an education
that culminated in the human soul’s assimilation to the world soul, and
thence to the divine creative mind of the universe. Because of the
Pythagorean commitment to cultic secrecy, the specifics of that meaning and
of the process by which that meaning was disclosed remain largely
unknown. What is certain is that the Pythagorean school charted its
independent philosophical course according to a belief system that decisively
maintained the ancient structures of myth and the mystery religions while
advancing scientific discoveries of immense consequence for later Western
thought.
But the general tenor of Greek intellectual evolution was otherwise, as
from Thales and Anaximander to Leucippus and Democritus a naturalistic
science matured in step with an increasingly skeptical rationalism. Although
none of these philosophers commanded universal cultural influence, and
although for most Greeks the Olympian gods were never seriously in doubt,
the gradual rise of these different strands of early philosophy—Ionian
physics, Eleatic rationalism, Democritean atomism—represented the seminal
vanguard of Greek thought in its development out of the era of traditional
belief into the era of reason. With the exception of the relatively
autonomous Pythagoreans, the Hellenic mind before Socrates followed a
definite, if at times ambiguous, direction away from the supernatural and
toward the natural: from the divine to the mundane, from the mythical to
the conceptual, from poetry and story to prose and analysis. To the more
22 

critical intellects of this later age, the gods of the ancient poets’ stories
seemed all too human, made in man’s own image, and increasingly dubious
as real divine entities. Already near the start of the fifth century B.C. the poet-
philosopher Xenophanes had disparaged the popular acceptance of
Homeric mythology, with its anthropomorphic gods engaged in immoral
activities: if oxen, lions, or horses had hands with which to make images,
they would undoubtedly form gods with bodies and shapes like their own. A
generation later, Anaxagoras declared that the Sun was not the god Helios
but was rather an incandescent stone larger than the Peloponnese, and that
the Moon was composed of an earthy substance which received its light
from the Sun. Democritus considered that human belief in gods was no
more than an attempt to explain extraordinary events like thunderstorms or
earthquakes by means of imagined supernatural forces. An equivocal
skepticism toward the ancient myths could be seen even in Euripides, the
last of the great tragedians, while the comic dramatist Aristophanes openly
parodied them. In the face of such diverging speculations, the time-honored
cosmology was no longer self-evident.
Yet the more the Greek developed a sense of individual critical judgment
and emerged from the collective primordial vision of earlier generations, the
more conjectural became his understanding, the more narrow the compass
of infallible knowledge. “As for certain truth,” Xenophanes asserted, “no man
has known it, nor will he know it.” Philosophical contributions such as the
irresolvable logical paradoxes of Zeno of Elea, or Heraclitus’s doctrine of the
world as constant flux, often seemed only to exacerbate the new
uncertainties. With the advent of reason, everything seemed open to doubt,
and each succeeding philosopher offered solutions differing from his
predecessor’s. If the world was governed exclusively by mechanical natural
forces, then there remained no evident basis upon which firm moral
judgments could be founded. And if the true reality was entirely divorced
from common experience, then the very foundations of human knowledge
were called into question. It seemed that the more man became freely and
consciously self-determining, the less sure was his footing. Still, that price
appeared well worth paying if human beings could be emancipated from
the superstitious fears and beliefs of conventional piety and allowed insight,
however provisional, into the genuine order of things. Despite the continual
23 

emergence of new problems and new attempted solutions, a heartening
sense of intellectual progress seemed to override the various confusions
accompanying it. Thus Xenophanes could affirm: “The gods did not reveal,
from the beginning, all things to us; but in the course of time, through
seeking, men find that which is the better. . . .”4
The Greek Enlightenment
This intellectual development reached its climax in Athens as the various
streams of Greek thought and art converged there during the fifth century
B.C. The age of Pericles and the building of the Parthenon saw Athens at the
peak of its cultural creativity and political influence in Greece, and Athenian
man asserted himself within his world with a new sense of his own power
and intelligence. After its triumph over the Persian invaders and its
establishment as leader of the Greek states, Athens rapidly emerged as an
expansive commercial and maritime city with imperial ambitions. Its
burgeoning activities provided Athenian citizens with increased contact
with other cultures and outlooks and a new urban sophistication. Athens
had become the first Greek metropolis. The developrr nt of democratic self-
government and technical advances in agriculture and navigation both
expressed and encouraged the new humanistic spirit. Earlier philosophers
had been relatively isolated in their speculations, with one or perhaps a few
disciples to carry on their work. Now in Athens such speculation became
more representative of the city’s intellectual life as a whole, which
continued to move toward conceptual thought, critical analysis, reflection,
and dialectic.
In the course of the fifth century, Hellenic culture attained a delicate and
fertile balance between the ancient mythological tradition and the modern
secular rationalism. Temples to the gods were erected with an
unprecedented zeal to capture a timeless Olympian grandeur. Yet in the
monumental buildings, sculptures, and paintings of the Parthenon, in the
artistic creations of Phideas and Polyclitus, this grandeur was accomplished
not least through meticulous analysis and theory, through a vigorous effort
to combine human rationality with the mythic order in concrete form. The
24 

temples to Zeus, Athena, and Apollo seemed to celebrate man’s triumph of
rational clarity and mathematical elegance as much as they offered homage
to the divine. Similarly, the Greek artists’ renderings of gods and goddesses
were renderings of Greek men and women—ideal, spiritualized, yet
manifestly human and individual. Still, the characteristic object of artistic
aspiration continued to be the gods, and there remained a sense of man’s
proper limits in the universal scheme. The new creative treatment of myth
by Aeschylus and Sophocles, or the odes of the great choral poet Pindar, who
saw intimations of the gods in the athletic feats of the Olympic games,
suggested that man’s own developing abilities could enhance and give
exalted expression to the divine powers. Yet both tragedies and choral
hymns upheld the boundaries of human ambition, beyond which lay danger
and impossibility.
As the fifth century advanced, the balance continued to shift in favor of
man. Hippocrates’s seminal work in medicine, Herodotus’s observant
histories and travel descriptions, Meton’s new calendrical system,
Thucydides’s penetrating historical analyses, the bold scientific speculations
of Anaxagoras and Democritus—all extended the scope of the Hellenic mind
and forwarded its grasp of things in terms of rationally comprehensible
natural causes. Pericles himself was intimate with the rationalist philosopher
and physicist Anaxagoras, and a new intellectual rigor, skeptical of the old
supernatural explanations, was widespread. Contemporary man now
perceived himself as more a civilized product of progress from savagery
than a degeneration from a mythical golden age.5 The commercial and
political rise of an active middle class further moved against the aristocratic
hierarchy of the old gods and heroes. The long-stable society celebrated by
Pindar for his aristocratic patrons was giving way to a new order that was
more fluidly egalitarian and aggressively competitive. With that change was
also left behind Pindar’s conservative maintenance of the old religious values
and sanctions against uninhibited human endeavor. Belief in the traditional
deities of the Athenian polis was being undermined, and a more critical and
secular spirit was strongly on the ascent.
The most acute stage in this evolution was reached in the latter half of the
fifth century with the emergence of the Sophists. The leading protagonists of
the new intellectual milieu, the Sophists were itinerant professional teachers,
25 

secular humanists of a liberal spirit who offered both intellectual instruction
and guidance for success in practical affairs. With the expanded possibilities
for political participation in the democratic polis, the services of the Sophists
were in high demand. The general tenor of their thought was marked by the
same rationalism and naturalism that had characterized the development of
philosophy before them, and that increasingly reflected the spirit of the age.
But with the Sophists, a new element of skeptical pragmatism entered Greek
thought, turning philosophy away from its earlier, more speculative and
cosmological concerns. According to Sophists such as Protagoras, man was
the measure of all things, and his own individual judgments concerning
everyday human life should form the basis of his personal beliefs and
conduct—not naive conformity to traditional religion nor indulgence in far-
flung abstract speculation. Truth was relative, not absolute, and differed
from culture to culture, from person to person, and from situation to
situation. Claims to the contrary, whether religious or philosophical, could
not stand up to critical argument. The ultimate value of any belief or opinion
could be judged only by its practical utility in serving an individual’s needs
in life.
This decisive shift in the character of Greek thought, encouraged by the
contemporary social and political situation, owed as much to the
problematic condition of natural philosophy at that time as to the decline in
traditional religious belief. Not only were the old mythologies losing their
hold on the Greek mind, but the current state of scientific explanation was
reaching a point of crisis. The extremes of Parmenidean logic with its
obscure paradoxes, and of atomistic physics with its hypothetical atoms, both
of which controverted the tangible reality of common human experience,
were beginning to make the entire practice of theoretical philosophy seem
irrelevant. In the Sophists’ view, the speculative cosmologies neither spoke
to practical human needs nor appeared plausible to common sense. From
Thales on, each philosopher had proposed his particular theory as to what
was the true nature of the world, with each theory contradicting the others,
and with a growing tendency to reject the reality of more and more of the
phenomenal world revealed by the senses. The result was a chaos of
conflicting ideas, with no basis upon which to certify one above the rest.
Moreover, the natural philosophers seemed to have been constructing their
26 

theories about the external world without adequately taking into account
the human observer, the subjective element. By contrast, the Sophists
recognized that each person had his own experience, and therefore his own
reality. In the end, they argued, all understanding is subjective opinion.
Genuine objectivity is impossible. All a person can legitimately claim to
know is probabilities, not absolute truth.
Yet, according to the Sophists, it did not matter if man had no certain
insight into the world outside him. He could know only the contents of his
own mind—appearances rather than essences—but these constituted the
only reality that could be of valid concern to him. Other than appearances, a
deeper stable reality could not be known, not only on account of man’s
limited faculties, but more fundamentally because such a reality could not be
said to exist outside of human conjecture. Yet the true aim of human
thought was to serve human needs, and only individual experience could
provide a basis for achieving that aim. Each person should rely on his own
wits to make his way through the world. Acknowledgment of the
individual’s intellectual limitations would therefore be a liberation, for only
in that way could a man seek to make his thought stand on its own,
sovereign, serving himself rather than illusory absolutes arbitrarily defined
by unreliable sources external to his own judgment.
The Sophists proposed that the critical rationalism that had previously
been directed toward the physical world could now more fruitfully be
applied to human affairs, to ethics and politics. The evidence of travelers’
reports, for example, suggested that social practices and religious beliefs
were not absolutes but merely local human conventions, received pieties
varying according to each nation’s customs with no fundamental relation
either to nature or to divine commandment. The recent physical theories
were drawn on to suggest the same conclusion: If the experience of hot and
cold had no objective existence in nature but was merely an individual
person’s subjective impression created by a temporary arrangement of
interacting atoms, then so too might the standards of right and wrong be
equally insubstantial, conventional, and subjectively determined.
The existence of the gods could similarly be recognized as an
undemonstrable assumption. As Protagoras said, “Concerning the gods, I
have no means of knowing whether they exist or not, nor of what form they
27 

are; for there are many obstacles to such knowledge, including the obscurity
of the subject and the shortness of human life.” Another Sophist, Critias,
suggested that the gods were invented to instill fear in those who would
otherwise have acted in an evil manner. Much like the physicists with their
mechanistic naturalism, the Sophists considered nature an impersonal
phenomenon whose laws of chance and necessity bore little concern for
human affairs. The evidence of unbiased common sense suggested that the
world was constituted by visible matter, not invisible deities. The world was
therefore best viewed apart from religious prejudices.
Hence the Sophists concluded in favor of a flexible atheism or agnosticism
in metaphysics and a situational morality in ethics. Since religious beliefs,
political structures, and rules of moral conduct were now seen to be
humanly created conventions, these were all open to fundamental
questioning and change. After centuries of blind obedience to restrictive
traditional attitudes, man could now free himself to pursue a program of
enlightened self-interest. To discover by rational means what was most
useful for man seemed a more intelligent strategy than to base one’s actions
on belief in mythological deities or the absolutist assumptions of unprovable
metaphysics. Since it was futile to seek absolute truth, the Sophists
recommended that young men learn from them the practical arts of
rhetorical persuasion and logical dexterity, as well as a broad spectrum of
other subjects ranging from social history and ethics to mathematics and
music. The citizen could thereby be best prepared to play an effective role in
the polis democracy and, more generally, assure for himself a successful life
in the world. Because the skills for achieving excellence in life could be
taught and learned, a man was free to expand his opportunities through
education. He was not limited by traditic nal assumptions such as the
conventional belief that one’s abilities were forever fixed as a result of
chance endowment or the status of one’s birth. Through such a program as
that offered by the Sophists, both the individual and the society could better
themselves.
Thus the Sophists mediated the transition from an age of myth to an age
of practical reason. Man and society were to be studied, methodically and
empirically, without theological preconceptions. Myths were to be
understood as allegorical fables, not revelations of a divine reality. Rational
28 

acuity, grammatical precision, and oratorical prowess were the prime
virtues in the new ideal man. The proper molding of a man’s character for
successful participation in polis life required a sound education in the
various arts and sciences, and thus was established the paideia—the classical
Greek system of education and training, which came to include gymnastics,
grammar, rhetoric, poetry, music, mathematics, geography, natural history,
astronomy and the physical sciences, history of society and ethics, and
philosophy—the complete pedagogical course of study necessary to produce
a well-rounded, fully educated citizen.
The Sophists’ systematic doubting of human beliefs—whether the
traditional belief in the gods or the more recent but, in their view, equally
naive faith in human reason’s capacity genuinely to know the nature of
something as immense and indeterminate as the cosmos—was freeing
thought to take new and unexplored paths. As a result, man’s status was
greater than ever before. He was increasingly free and self-determining,
aware of a larger world containing cultures and beliefs besides his own,
aware of the relativity and plasticity of human values and customs, aware of
his own role in creating his reality. Yet he was no longer so significant in the
cosmic scheme, which, if it existed at all, had its own logic heedless of man
and Greek cultural values.
Other problems were presented by the Sophists’ views. Despite the
positive effects of their intellectual training and establishment of a liberal
education as a basis for effective character formation, a radical skepticism
toward all values led some to advocate an explicitly amoral opportunism.
Students were instructed how to devise ostensibly plausible arguments
supporting virtually any claim. More concretely disturbing was the
concurrent deterioration of the political and ethical situation in Athens to
the point of crisis—the democracy turning fickle and corrupt, the
consequent takeover by a ruthless oligarchy, the Athenian leadership of
Greece becoming tyrannical, wars begun in arrogance ending in disaster.
Daily life in Athens saw minimally humane ethical standards unscrupulously
violated—visible not least in the exclusively male Athenian citizenry’s
routine and often cruel exploitation of women, slaves, and foreigners. All
these developments had their own origins and motives, and could hardly be
laid at the feet of the Sophists. Yet in such critical circumstances, the
29 

philosophical denial of absolute values and sophistical commendation of
stark opportunism seemed both to reflect and to exacerbate the problematic
spirit of the times.
The Sophists’ relativistic humanism, for all its progressive and liberal
character, was not proving wholly benign. The larger world opened by
Athens’s earlier triumphs had destabilized its ancient certainties and now
seemed to require a larger order—universal, yet conceptual—within which
events could be comprehended. The Sophists’ teachings provided no such
order, but rather a method for success. How success itself was to be defined
remained moot. Their bold assertion of human intellectual sovereignty—that
through its own power man’s thought could provide him with sufficient
wisdom to live his life well, that the human mind could independently
produce the strength of equilibrium—now seemed to require reevaluation.
To more conservative sensibilities, the foundations of the traditional Hellenic
belief system and its previously timeless values were being dangerously
eroded, while reason and verbal skill were coming to have a less than
impeccable reputation. Indeed, the whole development of reason now
seemed to have undercut its own basis, with the human mind denying itself
the capacity for genuine knowledge of the world.
Socrates
It was in this highly charged cultural climate that Socrates began his
philosophical search, as skeptical and individualistic as any Sophist. A
younger contemporary of Pericles, Euripides, Herodotus, and Protagoras,
and growing up in an era when he could see the Parthenon built on the
Acropolis from start to finish, Socrates entered the philosophical arena at the
height of tension between the ancient Olympian tradition and the vigorous
new intellectualism. By virtue of his extraordinary life and death, he would
leave the Greek mind radically transformed, establishing not only a new
method and new ideal for the pursuit of truth, but also, in his own person,
an enduring model and inspiration for all subsequent philosophy.
Despite the magnitude of Socrates’s influence, little is known with
certainty about his life. Socrates himself wrote nothing. The richest and most
30 

coherent portrait of the man is that contained in Plato’s Dialogues, but
precisely to what extent the words and ideas attributed there to Socrates
reflect the subsequent evolution of Plato’s own thought remains unclear (a
problem we shall address at the end of the chapter). The extant reports of
other contemporaries and followers—Xenophon, Aeschines, Aristophanes,
Aristotle, later Platonists—though helpful, are generally secondhand or
fragmentary, often ambiguous, and sometimes contradictory. Nevertheless, a
reasonably reliable picture can be pieced together by drawing on the early
Platonic dialogues in combination with the other sources.
It is evident from these that Socrates was a man of singular character and
intelligence, who was imbued with a passion for intellectual honesty and
moral integrity rare for his or any other age. He insistently sought answers
to questions that had not before been asked, attempted to undermine
conventional assumptions and beliefs to provoke more careful thinking
about ethical matters, and tirelessly compelled both himself and those with
whom he conversed to seek a deeper understanding of what constituted a
good life. His words and deeds embodied an abiding conviction that the act
of rational self-criticism could free the human mind from the bondage of
false opinion. Because of his dedication to the task of discovering wisdom
and drawing it forth from others, Socrates neglected his private affairs,
spending all his time instead in earnest discussion with his fellow citizens.
Unlike the Sophists, he did not charge for his instruction. Although intimate
with the elite of Athens, he was altogether indifferent to material wealth and
conventional standards of success. Socrates gave the impression of being a
man unusually at one with himself, though his personal character was full of
paradoxical contrasts. Disarmingly humble yet presumptuously confident,
puckishly witty yet morally urgent, engaging and gregarious yet solitary and
contemplative, Socrates was above all a man consumed by a passion for
truth.
As a young man Socrates appears to have studied the natural science of
his time with some enthusiasm, examining the various contemporary
philosophies concerned with speculative analysis of the physical world.
Eventually, however, he found these unsatisfying. The welter of conflicting
theories brought more confusion than clarity, and their explanations of the
universe solely in terms of material causation, ignoring the evidence of
31 

purposive intelligence in the world, seemed to him inadequate. Such
theories, he judged, were neither conceptually coherent nor morally useful.
He therefore turned from physics and cosmology to ethics and logic. How
one should live, and how to think clearly about how one should live, became
his overriding concern. As Cicero would declare three centuries later,
Socrates “called down philosophy from the skies and implanted it in the
cities and homes of men.”
Such a shift was indeed already reflected in the ideas of the Sophists, who
also resembled Socrates in their concern with education, language, rhetoric,
and argument. But the character of Socrates’s moral and intellectual
aspirations was sharply different. The Sophists offered to teach others how
to live a successful life, in a world in which all moral standards were
conventions and all human knowledge was relative. Socrates believed such
an educational philosophy was both intellectually misconceived and morally
detrimental. In opposition to the Sophist view, Socrates saw his own task as
that of finding a way to a knowledge that transcended mere opinion, to
inform a morality that transcended mere convention.
At an early date in the young philosopher’s life, the oracle of Apollo at
Delphi had declared that no man was wiser than Socrates. Seeking, as he
later put it with characteristic irony, to disprove the oracle, Socrates
assiduously examined the beliefs and thinking of all who considered
themselves wise—concluding that he was indeed wiser than all others, for
he alone recognized his own ignorance. But while the Sophists had held
genuine knowledge to be unattainable, Socrates held rather that genuine
knowledge had not yet been achieved. His repeated demonstrations of
human ignorance, both his own and that of others, were intended to elicit
not intellectual despair but rather intellectual humility. The discovery of
ignorance was for Socrates the beginning rather than the end of the
philosophical task, for only through that discovery could one begin to
overcome those received assumptions that obscured the true nature of what
it was to be a human being. Socrates conceived it his personal mission to
convince others of their ignorance so that they might better search for a
knowledge of how life should best be lived.
In Socrates’s view, any attempt to foster true success and excellence in
human life had to take account of the innermost reality of a human being,
32 

his soul or psyche. Perhaps on the basis of his own highly developed sense of
individual selfhood and self-control, Socrates brought to the Greek mind a
new awareness of the central significance of the soul, establishing it for the
first time as the seat of the individual waking consciousness $$nd of the
moral and intellectual character. He affirmed the Delphic motto “Know
thyself,” for he believed that it was only through self-knowledge, through an
understanding of one’s own psyche and its proper condition, that one could
find genuine happiness. All human beings seek happiness by their very
nature, and happiness, Socrates taught, is achieved through living the kind
of life that best serves the nature of the soul. Happiness is the consequence
not of physical or external circumstances, of wealth or power or reputation,
but of living a life that is good for the soul.
Yet to live a genuinely good life, one must know what is the nature and
essence of the good. Otherwise one will be acting blindly, on the basis of
mere convention or expediency, calling something good or virtuous
whenever it conforms to popular opinion or serves the pleasure of the
moment. By contrast, Socrates argued, if a man does know what is truly
good—what is beneficial for him in the deepest sense—then he will
naturally and inevitably act in a good manner. Knowing what is good will
necessarily cause one to act on that basis, for no man deliberately chooses
that which he knows would harm himself. It is only when he mistakes an
illusory good for a genuine good that he falls into erroneous conduct. No
one ever does wrong knowingly, for it is the very nature of the good that
when it is known, it is desired. In this sense, Socrates held, virtue is
knowledge. A truly happy life is a life of right action directed according to
reason. The key to human happiness, therefore, is the development of a
rational moral character.
But for a person to discover what is genuine virtue, hard questions must
be asked. To know virtue, one has to discover the common element in all
virtuous acts: i.e., the essence of virtue. One has to take apart, analyze, test
the worth of every statement about the nature of virtue in order to find its
true character. It is not enough to cite examples of various kinds of virtuous
actions and say that this is virtue itself, for such an answer does not reveal
the single essential quality within all the examples that makes them genuine
instances of virtue. So also with goodness, justice, courage, piety, beauty.
33 

Socrates criticized the Sophist belief that such terms were ultimately only
words, mere names for currently established human conventions. Words
could indeed distort and deceive, giving the impression of truth when
actually they lacked solid foundation. But words could also point, as to a
precious invisible mystery, to something genuine and enduring. To find
one’s way to that genuine reality was the task confronting the philosopher.
It was in the course of pursuing this task that Socrates developed his
famous dialectical form of argument that would become fundamental to the
character and evolution of the Western mind: reasoning through rigorous
dialogue as a method of intellectual investigation intended to expose false
beliefs and elicit truth. Socrates’s characteristic strategy was to take up a
sequence of questions with whomever he was in discussion, relentlessly
analyzing one by one the implications of the answers in such a way as to
bring out the flaws and inconsistencies inherent in a given belief or
statement. Attempts to define the essence of something were rejected one
after another as being either too wide or too narrow, or as missing the mark
altogether. Often it happened that such an analysis ended in complete
perplexity, with Socrates’s fellow discussants feeling as if they had been
numbed by a stingray. Yet at such times it was clear that philosophy for
Socrates was concerned less with knowing the right answers than with the
strenuous attempt to discover those answers. Philosophy was a process, a
discipline, a lifelong quest. To practice philosophy in the Socratic manner
was continually to subject one’s thoughts to the criticism of reason in
earnest dialogue with others. Genuine knowledge was not something that
could simply be received from another secondhand like a purchased
commodity, as with the Sophists, but was rather a personal achievement,
won only at the cost of constant intellectual struggle and self-critical
reflection. “The life not tested by criticism,” Socrates declared, “is not worth
living.”
Because of his incessant questioning of others, however, Socrates was not
universally popular, and his active encouraging of a critical skepticism
among his pupils was regarded by some as a dangerously unsettling
influence which undermined the proper authority of tradition and the state.
In his painstaking effort to find certain knowledge, Socrates had spent much
of his life outdoing the Sophists at their own game, but ironically it was with
34 

the Sophists that Socrates was classed when, in the politically unstable
period in Athens following the disastrous Peloponnesian War, two citizens
accused him of impiety and of corrupting the young. Caught in a backlash
against a number of political figures, some of whom had once been in his
circle, Socrates was sentenced to death. In such a situation it would have
been customary to propose an alternative punishment of exile, and this was
probably what his accusers desired. But Socrates refused at every stage of
the trial to compromise his principles, and rejected all efforts to escape or
modify the consequences of the verdict. He affirmed the rightness of the life
he had led, even if his mission to awaken others now brought him death—
which he did not fear, but rather welcomed as a portal to eternity.
Cheerfully drinking the poison hemlock, Socrates became an unreluctant
martyr to the ideal of philosophy that he had so long championed.
The Platonic Hero
The friends and disciples who gathered around Socrates in his last days were
drawn to a man who, to a singular degree, had embodied his own ideal.
With its unique synthesis of eros and logos—of passion and mind, friendship
and argument, desire and truth—Socrates’s philosophy appears to have
been a direct expression of his personality. Each Socratic idea and its
articulation bore the mark of, and seemed to have been born of, the very
core of his personal character. Indeed, as he was portrayed in the full course
of Plato’s dialogues, it was this very fact—that Socrates spoke and thought
with an intellectual and moral confidence based on profound self-
knowledge, rooted as it were in the depths of his psyche—that gave him the
capacity to express a truth that was in some sense universal, grounded in
divine truth itself.
Yet it was not only this charismatic profundity of mind and soul that Plato
emphasized in his portrait of the master. The Socrates commemorated by
Plato also developed and set forth a specific epistemological position that in
effect brought the dialectical Socratic strategy to its metaphysical fulfillment.
And here we shall extend our discussion of this pivotal figure by drawing on
the more elaborated—and more decisively “Platonic”—interpretation of
35 

Socrates contained in the great middle dialogues of Plato. Beginning with the
Phaedo, and in fully developed form in such dialogues as the Symposium and
the Republic, the character of Socrates increasingly voices positions that
move beyond those attributed to him in the earlier dialogues and by other
sources such as Xenophon and Aristotle. Although the evidence may be
interpreted in several ways, it would appear that Plato, in reflecting upon
the legacy of his teacher in the course of his own intellectual evolution,
gradually made explicit in these more developed positions what he
understood to be implicit in both Socrates’s life and his arguments.
As the dialogues progress (and their exact order is not entirely clear), the
earlier account of Socrates—pressing hard his demands for logical
coherence and meaningful definitions, criticizing all the presumed
certainties of human belief—begins to move forward to a new level of
philosophical argument. After having investigated every current system of
thought, from the scientific philosophies of nature to the subtle arguments
of the Sophists, Socrates had concluded that all of them lacked sound critical
method. To clarify his own approach, he decided to concern himself not
with facts but with statements about facts. These propositions he would
analyze by treating each as a hypothesis, deducing its consequences, and
thereby judging its value. A hypothesis whose consequences were found to
be true and consistent would be provisionally affirmed, though not proved,
since it in turn could be certified only by appeal to a more ultimate accepted
hypothesis.
Finally, according to Plato’s middle dialogues, after exhaustive argument
and meditation on these matters, Socrates put forth his own fundamental
postulate to serve as that ultimate foundation for knowledge and moral
standards: When something is good or beautiful, it is so because that thing
partakes of an archetypal essence of goodness or beauty that is absolute and
perfect, that exists on a timeless level that transcends its passing particular
manifestation, and that is ultimately accessible only to the intellect, not to the
senses. Such universals have a real nature beyond mere human convention
or opinion, and an independent existence beyond the phenomena they
inform. The human mind can discover and know these timeless universals,
through the supreme discipline of philosophy.
As described by Plato, this hypothesis of the “Forms” or “Ideas,” though
36 

never proved, seems to have represented something more than a plausible
result of logical discussion, standing rather as an apodictic—absolutely
certain and necessary—reality beyond all the conjectures, obscurities, and
illusions of human experience. Its philosophical justification was finally
epiphanic, self-evident to the lover of truth who had attained the distant
goal of illumination. Plato’s implication seemed to be that in Socrates’s
resolute attention to his mind and soul, to moral virtue as well as intellectual
truth, the world order itself had been contacted and revealed. In Plato’s
Socrates, human thought no longer stood precariously on its own, but had
found a confidence and certainty grounded in something more fundamental.
Thus, as dramatically set forth by Plato, the paradoxical denouement of
Socrates’s skeptical pursuit of truth was his final arrival at the conception,
or vision, of the eternal Ideas—absolute Good, Truth, Beauty, and the rest—
in contemplation of which he ended his long philosophical search and
fulfilled it.
The age of mythic heroes and gods seemed long past for the modern
urban Athenians, but in Plato’s Socrates the Homeric hero was reborn, now
as hero of the intellectual and spiritual quest for absolutes in a realm
endangered by the Scylla of sophistry and the Charybdis of traditionalism. It
was a new form of immortal glory that Socrates revealed as he faced his
death, and it was in this act of philosophical heroism that the Homeric ideal
took on fresh significance for Plato and his followers. For through Socrates’s
intellectual labor had been born a spiritual reality apparently so
fundamental and all-comprehensive that even death did not dim its
existence, but on the contrary served as its gateway. The transcendent world
unveiled in Plato’s dialogues—themselves great works of literature like the
epic poems and dramas already gracing Hellenic culture—bespoke a new
Olympian realm, a realm that reflected the new sense of rational order while
also recalling the exalted grandeur of the ancient mythic deities. The
Socrates of Plato’s report had remained true to the Greek development of
reason and individualistic humanism. But in the course of his intellectual
odyssey, critically employing and synthesizing his predecessors’ insights, he
had forged a new connection to a timeless reality, one now endowed with
philosophical significance as well as mythic numinosity. In Socrates, thought
was confidently embraced as a vital force of life and an indispensable
37 

instrument of the spirit. Intellect was not just a profitable tool of Sophists
and politicians, nor just the remote preserve of physical speculation and
obscure paradox. It was, rather, the divine faculty by which the human soul
could discover both its own essence and the world’s meaning. That faculty
required only awakening. However arduous the path of awakening, such
divine intellectual power lay potentially resident in humble and great alike.
Thus stood the figure of Socrates for Plato—the resolution and climax of
the Greek quest for truth, the restorer of the world’s divine foundation, the
awakener of the human intellect. What for Homer and the archaic mind had
been an inseparable connection between the empirical and the archetypal, a
connection that was increasingly challenged in the naturalism of the Ionian
physicists and the rationalism of the Eleatics, and eliminated altogether in
the materialism of the atomists and the skepticism of the Sophists, was now
reformulated and restored on a new level by Socrates and Plato. In contrast
to the undifferentiated archaic vision, the perceived relation between the
archetypal and the empirical had now become more problematic,
dichotomized, and dualistic. This step was a crucial one. But the underlying,
rediscovered commonality with the primordial mythic vision was equally
crucial. In the Platonic understanding, the world was again illuminated by
universal themes and figures. Its governing principles were again knowable
by the human mind. Divine absolutes once more ruled the cosmos and
provided a foundation for human conduct. Existence was again endowed
with transcendent purpose. Intellectual rigor and Olympian inspiration no
longer stood opposed. Human values were again rooted in nature’s order,
both of which were informed by divine intelligence.
With Socrates and Plato, the Greek search for clarity, order, and meaning
in the manifold of human experience had come full circle, bringing an
intellectual restoration of the numinous reality known in Hellenic culture’s
distant Homeric childhood. Thus Plato joined his conception with, and gave
new life and significance to, the archaic archetypal vision of the ancient
Greek sensibility.
Socrates is the paradigmatic figure of Greek philosophy—indeed, of all
Western philosophy—yet we possess nothing written by him that could
38 

represent his ideas directly. It was largely through the powerful prism of
Plato’s understanding that his life and thought were passed on to posterity.
Socrates’s impact on the young Plato was potent enough that the Platonic
dialogues seem to bear the Socratic imprint on almost every page, carrying
in their very form the dialectical spirit of Socratic philosophy, and making
any final distinctions between the two philosophers’ thought virtually
impossible. The character of Socrates plays the major role and expresses the
central themes in most of the important dialogues, and does so with a large
degree of what appears to be faithfully portrayed personal idiosyncrasy.
Where the historical Socrates ends and the Platonic Socrates begins is
notoriously ambiguous. His self-effacing claim of ignorance seemingly
contrasts with the Platonic knowledge of absolutes; yet the latter appears to
have grown directly from the former, as if an unconditional intellectual
humility were the eye of the needle giving passage to universal wisdom.
Certainly Socrates’s lifelong pursuit of truth and order would seem to have
implicitly depended on a faith in the ultimate existence of that truth and
order.6 Moreover, the character and direction of his arguments, as
represented not only in the early Platonic dialogues but also in the reports of
others, strongly suggest that Socrates was at least logically committed to
what would later be seen to be a theory of universals.
The trial and execution of Socrates by the Athenian democracy left a
profound impression on Plato, persuading him of the untrustworthiness of
both a rudderless democracy and a standardless philosophy: hence the
necessity of an absolute foundation for values if any political or
philosophical system was to be successful and wise. On the basis of the
available historical and literary evidence, it would appear that Socrates’s
personal search for absolute definitions and moral certainty, and very
possibly his suggestion of some early form of the doctrine of Ideas, was
developed and extended through Plato’s more encompassing sensibility into
a comprehensive system. Additional insights were incorporated by Plato
from the various Presocratics, particularly Parmenides (the changeless and
unitary nature of intelligible reality), Heraclitus (the constant flux of the
sensible world), and above all the Pythagoreans (the intelligibility of reality
via mathematical forms). Socrates’s more focused concerns and strategies
thereby became the basis for Plato’s broader enunciation of the major
39 

outlines and problems for subsequent Western philosophy in all its diverse
areas—logic, ethics, politics, epistemology, ontology, aesthetics, psychology,
cosmology.
Plato expressed that deepening and expansion by using the figure of
Socrates to articulate the philosophy that he believed Socrates’s life had
nobly exampled. For in Plato’s vision, Socrates appeared as a living
embodiment of goodness and wisdom, the very qualities Plato considered to
be the foundational principles of the world and the highest goals of human
aspiration. Socrates thus became not only the inspiration for but also the
personification of the Platonic philosophy. From Plato’s art emerged the
archetypal Socrates, the avatar of Platonism.
In this view, Plato did not provide a verbatim documentary of Socrates’s
thought; nor, in the opposite extreme, did he use Socrates merely as a
mouthpiece for his own completely independent ideas. Rather, Plato’s
relationship to Socrates appears to have been more complicated, more
mysterious, more interpretive and creative, as he elaborated and
transformed his master’s ideas to bring them to what he understood to be
their inherent, systematically argued, metaphysically articulate conclusions.
Socrates often referred to himself as an intellectual midwife, through his
dialectical skill bringing to birth the latent truth in another’s mind. Perhaps
Platonic philosophy itself was the final and fullest fruit of that labor.
40 

The Philosopher’s Quest and the Universal Mind
For all its devotion to dialectical precision and intellectual rigor, Plato’s
philosophy was permeated with a kind of religious romanticism that affected
both its ontological categories and its epistemological strategy. As in his
discussion of Eros in the Symposium, Plato described the Ideas not so much
as neutral objects of dispassionate rational apprehension but as transcendent
essences that, when directly experienced by the pure philosopher, evoke
intense emotional response and even mystical rapture. The philosopher is
literally a “lover of wisdom” and approaches his intellectual task as a
romantic quest of universal significance. For Plato, the ultimate reality is not
only ethical and rational in nature, but also aesthetic. The Good, the True,
and the Beautiful are effectively united in the supreme creative principle, at
once commanding moral affirmation, intellectual allegiance, and aesthetic
surrender. As the most accessible of the Forms, visible in part even to the
physical eye, Beauty opens up human awareness to the existence of the
other Forms, drawing the philosopher toward the beatific vision and
knowledge of the True and the Good. Hence Plato suggested that the highest
philosophical vision is possible only to one with the temperament of a lover.
The philosopher must permit himself to be inwardly grasped by the most
sublime form of Eros—that universal passion to restore a former unity, to
overcome the separation from the divine and become one with it.
Plato described knowledge of the divine as being implicit in every soul,
but forgotten. The soul, immortal, experiences direct and intimate contact
with the eternal realities prior to birth, but the postnatal human condition of
bodily imprisonment causes the soul to forget the true state of affairs. The
goal of philosophy is to free the soul from this deluded condition in which it
41 

is deceived by the finite imitation and veiling of the eternal. The
philosopher’s task is to “recollect” the transcendent Ideas, to recover a direct
knowledge of the true causes and sources of all things.
In the Republic, Plato illustrated the difference between authentic
knowledge of reality and the illusion of appearances with a striking image:
Human beings are like prisoners chained to the wall of a dark subterranean
cave, where they can never turn around to see the light of a fire that is
higher up and at a distance behind them. When objects outside the cave pass
in front of the light, the prisoners mistake as real what are merely shadows
created on the wall. Only one who is freed from his chains and leaves the
cave to enter into the world beyond can glimpse true reality, though when
first exposed to the light he may be so overwhelmed by its dazzling
luminosity as to be unable to recognize its actual character. Yet once he
habituates himself to the light and comes to recognize the true causes of
things, he would hold precious the clarity of his new understanding.
Recalling his former fate among the other prisoners, where all incessantly
devote their minds to the understanding of mere illusions, he would, like
Homer, prefer to endure anything in the real world rather than be forced to
live in the underworld of shadows. Indeed, were he required to return to the
cave and, unaccustomed to its darkness, contend with the others in their
usual activity of “understanding” the shadows, he would likely only provoke
their ridicule, and be unable to persuade them that what they were
perceiving was only a dim reflection of reality.
For Plato, then, the great task facing the philosopher was to emerge from
the cave of ephemeral shadows and bring his darkened mind back into the
archetypal light, the true source of being. When speaking of this higher
reality, Plato repeatedly linked light, truth, and goodness. In the Republic, he
described the Idea of the Good as being to the intelligible realm what the
Sun is to the visible realm: in the same way that the Sun allows objects of the
visible world to grow and to be visible, so does the Good grant to all objects
of reason their existence and their intelligibility. The philosopher’s
attainment of virtue consists in his discovering that luminous knowledge
which brings harmony between the human soul and the cosmic order of
archetypes, an order governed and illuminated by the supreme Idea of the
Good.
42 

Yet to achieve liberation from the unenlightened state requires
extraordinarily sustained intellectual and moral effort, so that the intellect—
considered by Plato the highest part of the soul—can rise above the merely
sensible and physical to reattain the lost knowledge of the Ideas. In some
dialogues (such as the Republic), Plato emphasized the power of dialectic, or
rigorously self-critical logic, to accomplish this aim, while elsewhere (such
as in the Symposium and the Seventh Letter), he spoke more of a
spontaneous recognition by the intuitive intellect—a visitation or moment of
grace, as it were, after long discipline. In either case, the recollection of the
Ideas is both the means and the goal of true knowledge.
And so Plato’s primary directive for philosophy focused on the strenuous
development of the intellect and will, motivated by a ceaseless desire to
reattain the lost union with the eternal. Through the labor of philosophical
recollection, the human mind can bring to birth the divine wisdom that was
its former possession. Education, therefore, is in the service of the soul and
the divine, and not, as for the Sophists, of the secular and human alone.
Moreover, education is a process through which truth is not introduced into
the mind from without, but is “led out” from within. The mind then finds
revealed within itself a knowledge both of its own nature and of the
universe, a knowledge otherwise clouded by the obscurities of mundane
existence. Under Plato’s guidance, the classical paideia assumed the deeper
metaphysical and spiritual dimensions of the Academy, an institution as
much monastery as university, holding forth the ideal of inner perfection
realized through disciplined education.
Philosophical illumination, then, is a reawakening to and remembrance of
forgotten knowledge, a reestablishment of the soul’s happy intimacy with
the transcendent Ideas that inhere in all things. Here Plato asserted the
redemptive aspect of philosophy, for it is the soul’s direct encounter with
eternal Ideas that reveals to the soul its own eternity. In Plato’s account of
Socrates’s last hours, it would appear that Socrates so highly valued this state
of archetypal awareness transcending physical existence that he expressed
equanimity, even eagerness, in anticipation of his death by hemlock. His
entire life, he declared, had been directed toward this moment of embracing
death, when the soul could at last return to the glory of its immortal state.
Such passionately affirmed confidence in the reality of the eternal,
43 

accompanied by the dialogues’ frequent references to myth and the sacred
mysteries, suggests that Socrates and Plato themselves may have been
intimately involved with the Greek mystery religions. In the Platonic vision,
not only did the divine exist, as in traditional Greek public religion, but
through the philosophical path the human soul could attain knowledge of
its own divine immortality. Such a belief set Plato apart from the Homeric
tradition, which had kept relatively strict limits between mortal humans and
eternal gods, and placed him rather in the company of the mystery religions,
in which initiation brought a revelation of immortality, and in the company
of the Pythagoreans, for whom philosophy itself provided the highest path
to mystical illumination and assimilation to the divine. Plato’s affinity with
such groups was also reflected in his belief that the highest truths should not
be communicated to all, lest they be abused. Hence he preferred not the
straightforward treatise, but the more ambiguous dialogue, which could
conceal—and, for the properly prepared, reveal—the deepest truths of his
philosophy.
It could be said that the dualism of the characteristic Platonic values—the
philosopher over the common man, the mind and soul over matter, the pre-
existing ideal Forms over the phenomenal world, the absolute over the
relative, the posthumous spiritual life over the present physical life—
reflected Plato’s reaction to the political, moral, and intellectual crises of
Athens during his lifetime. Whereas the fifth century at its height during the
Periclean age had embraced the notion of mankind’s autonomous
achievement 
of 
progress 
from 
primitive 
ignorance 
to 
civilized
sophistication, Plato often tended toward the earlier Greek view, set forth by
Hesiod, that mankind’s state had gradually degenerated from an earlier
golden age. Plato saw not only contemporary man’s technical progress but
also his moral decline from the simpler innocence of the men of old, “who
were better than ourselves and dwelt nearer the gods.” Human achievement
per se was relative and precarious. Only a society founded on divine
principles and governed by divinely informed philosophers could save
mankind from its destructive irrationality; and the best life was one directed
away from mundane life and toward the world of the eternal Ideas. The
changeless spiritual realm preceded and would forever be superior to
whatever human beings tried to accomplish in the temporal world. The
44 

spiritual alone held genuine truth and value.
Yet for all his seeming antiworldly pessimism, Plato’s outlook was marked
by a certain cosmic optimism, for behind the obscure flux of events he
posited the providential design of divine wisdom. And despite, or rather
underlying, his flights of rhapsodic mysticism, Plato’s philosophy was
fundamentally rationalist in character—though his rationalism rested on
what he regarded as a universal and divine foundation rather than a merely
human logicality. For at the heart of Plato’s conception of the world was the
notion of a transcendent intelligence that rules and orders all things: divine
Reason is “the king of heaven and earth.” The universe is ultimately ruled not
by chance, materialistic mechanics, or blind necessity, but rather by “a
wondrous regulating intelligence.”
Plato also recognized in the world’s composition an irreducible element of
stubborn errancy and irrationality, which he referred to as anankē or
Necessity. In the Platonic understanding, the irrational was associated with
matter, with the sensible world, and with instinctual desire, while the
rational was associated with mind, with the transcendent, and with spiritual
desire.7 Anankē, the refractory purposelessness and random irrationality in
the universe, resists full conformity to the creative Reason. It shadows the
archetypal perfection, obscuring its pure expression in the concrete world.
Reason overrules Necessity in the greatest part of the world so that it
conforms to good purpose, but on some points Reason cannot overcome the
errant cause—hence the existence of evil and disorder in the world. As a
finite creation, the world is necessarily imperfect. Yet precisely because of its
problematic nature, anankē serves as an impulsion for the philosopher’s
ascent from the visible to the transcendent. Although wayward chance and
irrational necessity are real and have their place, they exist within a greater
structure informed and governed by the universal intelligence, Reason,
which moves all things in accordance with an ultimate wisdom, the Idea of
the Good.
Here Plato made fully articulate the principle that had been broached in
earlier Greek philosophy, and that would play a central role in its
subsequent development. Anaxagoras in Periclean Athens had proposed that
Nous, or Mind, was the transcendent source of the cosmic order. Both
Socrates and Plato were attracted by Anaxagoras’s first principle, with its
45 

suggestion of a rational teleology as the basis of the universe’s existence.
They were disappointed, however, as was Aristotle later, that Anaxagoras
had not developed the principle further in his own philosophy (which was
predominantly materialistic, like that of the atomists), and particularly that
he had not made explicit the intentional goodness of the universal mind. But
about a half-century before Anaxagoras, the poet-philosopher Xenophanes,
having criticized the anthropomorphic deities of naive popular tradition,
had posited instead a single supreme God, a universal divinity who
influenced the world through pure intellection, and who was in essence
identified with the world itself. Shortly afterward, another Presocratic
philosopher, the solitary and enigmatic Heraclitus, introduced a similarly
immanent conception of divine intelligence with his use of the term logos
(originally meaning word, speech, or thought) to signify the rational
principle governing the cosmos. All things are in constant flux, and yet are
fundamentally related and ordered through the universal Logos, which is
also manifest in the human being’s power of reason. Heraclitus associated
the Logos with the element of fire, which, like the Heraclitean world as a
whole, is born of strife, ever-consuming, and in constant movement. It is the
law of the universal Logos that everything is defined by, tends toward, and is
ultimately balanced by its opposite, so that all opposites ultimately constitute
a unity. The finest harmony is composed of elements that are in tension with
each other. Heraclitus asserted that most human beings, by not
understanding the Logos, live as if asleep in a false dream of the world, and
consequently in a state of constant disharmony. Human beings should seek
to comprehend the Logos of life, and thereby awaken to a life of intelligent
cooperation with the universe’s deeper order.
But it was the Pythagoreans, perhaps above all other philosophical
schools, who stressed the world’s intelligibility, and especially taught the
spiritual value of scientifically penetrating its mysteries to achieve ecstatic
union between the human soul and the divine cosmos. For Pythagoreans, as
later for Platonists, the mathematical patterns discoverable in the natural
world secreted, as it were, a deeper meaning that led the philosopher
beyond the material level of reality. To uncover the regulative mathematical
forms in nature was to reveal the divine intelligence itself, governing its
creation with transcendent perfection and order. The Pythagorean discovery
46 

that the harmonics of music were mathematical, that harmonious tones
were produced by strings whose measurements were determined by simple
numerical ratios, was regarded as a religious revelation. Those mathematical
harmonies maintained a timeless existence as spiritual exemplars, from
which all audible musical tones derived. The Pythagoreans believed that the
universe in its entirety, especially the heavens, was ordered according to
esoteric principles of harmony, mathematical configurations that expressed
a celestial music. To understand mathematics was to have found the key to
the divine creative wisdom.
Pythagoreans also taught that these forms are brought to light first in the
human mind, and then in the cosmos. The mathematical laws of numbers
and figures are recognized in the external world only after they have been
established by the human intelligence. By this means the human soul
discovers its own essence and intelligence to be the same as that hidden
within nature. Only then does the meaning of the cosmos dawn within the
soul. Through intellectual and moral discipline, the human mind can arrive
at the existence and properties of the mathematical Forms, and then begin to
unravel the mysteries of nature and the human soul. The word kosmos,
which signified a peculiarly Greek combination of order, structural
perfection, and beauty, was traditionally supposed to have been first applied
to the world by Pythagoras, after whose time it was frequently understood in
that Pythagorean sense. As restated by Plato, to discover kosmos in the world
was to reveal kosmos in one’s own soul. In the thought life of man, the
world spirit revealed itself. Here the Socratic dictum “Know thyself” was seen
not as the creed of an introspective subjectivist, but as a directive to
universal understanding.
The belief that the universe possesses and is governed according to a
comprehensive regulating intelligence, and that this same intelligence is
reflected in the human mind, rendering it capable of knowing the cosmic
order, was one of the most characteristic and recurring principles in the
central tradition of Hellenic thought. After Plato, the terms logos and nous
were both regularly associated with philosophical conceptions of human
knowledge and the universal order, and through Aristotle, the Stoics, and
later Platonists, their meanings were increasingly elaborated. As ancient
philosophy progressed, logos and nous were variously employed to signify
47 

mind, reason, intellect, organizing principle, thought, word, speech, wisdom,
and meaning, in each case relative to both human reason and a universal
intelligence. The two terms eventually came to denote the transcendent
source of all archetypes, as well as the providential principle of cosmic order
that, through the archetypes, continuously permeates the created world. As
the means by which human intelligence could attain universal
understanding, the Logos was a divine revelatory principle, simultaneously
operative within the human mind and the natural world. The highest quest
of the philosopher was to achieve inner realization of this archetypal world
Reason, to grasp and be grasped by this supreme rational-spiritual principle
that both ordered and revealed.
48 

The Problem of the Planets
Among many other significant themes and concepts discussed in the Platonic
dialogues, one in particular requires our present attention. For this aspect of
Plato’s thought was to prove uniquely consequential for the evolution of the
Western world view, not only forming a basis for the cosmology of the later
classical world, but emerging again as a crucial force in the birth of modern
science. It may well have been the single most important factor giving both
dynamism and continuity to the Western mind’s attempt to comprehend the
physical cosmos.
Plato repeatedly recommended one area of study, astronomy, as especially
important for the attainment of philosophical wisdom, and in this study he
specified one outstanding problem that especially required solution.
Moreover, this problem—how to explain mathematically the erratic
movements of the planets—was so significant for Plato that he described the
need for its resolution as if it were a matter of religious urgency. The nature
of the problem—indeed, its very existence—clearly illuminates the
character of Plato’s world view, underscoring not only its own inner
tensions, but also its pivotal position between the ancient mythological
cosmos and the universe of modern science. For the riddle of the planets as
formulated by Plato, and the long and arduous intellectual struggle to solve
it, would culminate two thousand years later in the work of Copernicus and
Kepler and their initiation of the Scientific Revolution.
But to pursue this remarkable line of thinking from Plato to Kepler, we
must first briefly attempt to reconstruct the ancient view of the heavens
prior to Plato, specifically that associated with the earliest astronomer-
astrologers from the ancient Mesopotamian kingdom of Babylonia. For it
49 

was from these distant origins nearly two millennia before Christ that the
cosmology of the West would first emerge.
It would appear that from very early times ancient observers noticed a
fundamental distinction between the celestial and terrestrial realms. While
earthly life was everywhere marked by change, unpredictability, generation
and decay, the heavens seemed to possess an eternal regularity and luminous
beauty that established them as a realm of an entirely different and superior
order. While observations of the heavens continued to disclose this
unchanging regularity and incorruptibility night after night, century after
century, observations of mundane existence by contrast revealed incessant
change—with plants and animals, the seas and the weather undergoing
ceaseless alteration, with human beings dying and being born, with entire
civilizations rising and passing away. The heavens appeared to possess an
order of time that transcended human time, an order of time suggestive of
eternity itself. It was also evident that the movements of the heavenly bodies
influenced earthly existence in various ways—bringing dawn after every
night, for example, or spring after every winter, with unfailing constancy.
Certain major seasonal fluctuations in climatic conditions, droughts, floods,
and tides seemed to coincide with specific phenomena in the heavens. And
while the heavens appeared as a vast distant space beyond human reach,
populated by insubstantial, jewel-like points of bright light, the earthly
environment was immediate, tangible, and composed of patently grosser
materials like rock and dirt. The celestial realm seemed to express—indeed it
seemed to be—the very image of transcendence. Perhaps because the
heavens were distinguished by these extraordinary qualities—luminous
appearance, timeless order, transcendent location, terrestrial effects, and an
all-encompassing majesty—the ancients viewed the celestial realm as the
residence of the gods. The starry sky reigned above as an eternal revolving
illustration of the mythic deities, their visible incarnation. From this
perspective, the heavens were not so much a metaphor for the divine, but
rather the divine’s very embodiment.
The divine character of the heavens compelled human attention to the
patterns and movements of the stars, with significant events in the celestial
realm considered indicative of parallel events in terrestrial life. In the
50 

imperial cities of ancient Babylonia, centuries of continuous and increasingly
precise observations, for omens as well as for calendrical calculations, gave
rise to a large body of systematic astronomical records. But when these
observations, as well as their mythological correspondences, reached the
cultural environment of the early Greek philosophers, and there met the
Hellenic demand for coherent rational and natural explanation, a
fundamentally new dimension in cosmological speculation was created.
While for other contemporary cultures the heavens remained, like the
overall world view, principally a mythological phenomenon, for the Greeks
the heavens became linked as well to geometrical constructions and physical
explanations, which in turn became basic components of their evolving
cosmology. The Greeks thereby bestowed to the West a tradition which
demanded that a cosmology not only must satisfy the human need to exist in
a meaningful universe—a need already served by the archaic mythological
systems—but must also delineate a coherent physical and mathematical
structure of the universe accounting for detailed systematic observations of
the heavens.8
In accord with their newly naturalistic outlook, early Greek philosophers
such as the Ionians and the atomists began regarding the heavens as
composed of various material substances whose movements were
mechanically determined. But the evidence that the celestial motions
maintained a consistent order in perfect conformity to mathematical
patterns was for many Greeks a fact pregnant with significance. For Plato in
particular, that mathematical order revealed the heavens as the visible
expression of the divine Reason and the embodiment of the anima mundi,
the living soul of the universe. In his cosmological dialogue, the Timaeus,
Plato described the stars and planets as visible images of immortal deities
whose perfectly regulated movements were paradigms of the transcendent
order. God, the primordial artist and craftsman (Demiurge) who had formed
the world from a chaos of primordial matter, had created the heavens as a
moving image of eternity, revolving precisely according to perfect
mathematical Ideas, which in turn created and established the patterns of
time. Plato believed it was man’s encounter with the celestial movements
that had first given rise to human reasoning about the nature of things, to
the divisions of the day and the year, to numbers and mathematics, and even
51 

to philosophy itself, that most liberating of the gods’ gifts to mankind. The
universe was the living manifestation of divine Reason, and nowhere was
that Reason more fully manifest than in the heavens. If earlier philosophers
had thought the latter comprised nothing more than material objects in
space, for Plato their evident mathematical order proved otherwise. Far
from being merely a soulless domain of moving stones and dirt, the heavens
contained the very sources of the world order.
Plato therefore stressed the value of studying the movements of the
heavens, for the harmonious symmetry of the celestial revolutions
constituted 
a 
spiritual 
perfection 
directly 
accessible 
to 
human
understanding. By devoting himself to things divine, the philosopher could
awaken divinity within himself and bring his own life into intelligent
harmony with the celestial order. In the spirit of his Pythagorean forebears,
Plato elevated astronomy to high status among those studies demanded in his
ideal education for the philosopher-ruler, for astronomy revealed the
eternal Forms and divinities governing the cosmos. Only the person who
had fully applied himself to such studies, and through his long labor of
education comprehended the divine ordering of things both in the heavens
and on Earth, could be capable of being the just guardian of a political state.
An unthinking traditional belief in the existence of the gods was acceptable
for the masses, but a prospective ruler should be expected to have mastered
all possible proofs of the universe’s divinity. He must be able to regard the
many and perceive the one, the divine intelligent unity of design behind all
apparent diversity. The paradigmatic field for this philosophical imperative
was astronomy, for above all the passing phenomena of the world stood the
timeless perfection of the heavens, whose manifest intelligence could inform
the philosopher’s life and awaken wisdom in his soul.
Beginning with Thales (renowned for having predicted an eclipse) and
Pythagoras (credited with being the first to conclude that the Earth was a
sphere, rather than a flat circular disc as in Homer and Hesiod), each of the
major Greek philosophers had brought new insights concerning the
apparent structure and character of the cosmos. By Plato’s time, the
continuing observations of the heavens had revealed a cosmos that seemed
52 

to most thoughtful observers to be structured in two concentric spheres,
with the vast outer sphere of stars revolving diumally westward around the
much smaller sphere of the Earth, and with the Earth stationary in the exact
center of the universe. The Sun, Moon, and planets revolved in approximate
synchrony with the outer starry sphere, moving in a space somewhere
between the Earth and the stars. The conceptual clarity of this two-sphere
scheme, which readily explained the overall diurnal motion of the heavens,
gradually allowed Greek astronomers to discern what Babylonians had
earlier observed but what was to the Greeks, with their passion for lucid
geometrical understanding, a disturbing phenomenon. Indeed, the
phenomenon now fully revealed was so problematic as to challenge the
entire science of astronomy and to place the divine scheme of the heavens in
jeopardy. For it had become evident that several celestial bodies did not
move with the same eternal regularity as did the rest, but instead they
“wandered” (the Greek root for the word “planet,” planētēs, meant
“wanderer,” and signified the Sun and Moon as well as the other five visible
planets—Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn). Not only did the Sun
(in the course of a year) and the Moon (in a month) move gradually
eastward across the starry sphere in an opposite direction from the
westward diurnal movement of the entire heavens. More puzzling, the
other five planets had glaringly inconsistent cycles in which they completed
those eastward orbits, periodically appearing to speed up or slow down
relative to the fixed stars, and sometimes to stop altogether and reverse
direction while emitting varying degrees of brightness. The planets were
inexplicably defying the perfect symmetry and circular uniformity of the
heavenly motions.
Because of his equation of divinity with order, of intelligence and soul
with perfect mathematical regularity, the paradox of the planetary
movements seems to have been felt most acutely by Plato, who first
articulated the problem and gave directions for its solution. To Plato, the
proof of divinity in the universe was of the utmost importance, for only with
such certainty could human ethical and political activity have a firm
foundation. In the Laws, he cited two leasons for belief in divinity—his
theory of the soul (that all being and motion is caused by soul, which is
immortal and superior to the physical things it animates), and his conception
53 

of the heavens as divine bodies governed by a supreme intelligence and
world soul. The planetary irregularities and multiple wanderings seemingly
contradicted that perfect divine order, thereby endangering human faith in
the divinity of the universe. Therein lay the significance of the problem. Part
of the religious bulwark of Platonic philosophy was at stake. Indeed, Plato
considered it blasphemous to call any celestial bodies “wanderers.”
But Plato not only isolated the problem and defined its significance. He
also advanced, with remarkable confidence, a specific—and in the long run
extremely fruitful—hypothesis: namely, that the planets, in apparent
contradiction to the empirical evidence, actually move in single uniform
orbits of perfect regularity. Although there would seem to have been little
but Plato’s faith in mathematics and the heavens’ divinity that could have
supported such a belief, he enjoined future philosophers to grapple with the
planetary data and find “what are the uniform and ordered movements by
the assumption of which the apparent movements of the planets can be
accounted for”—i.e., to discover the ideal mathematical forms that would
resolve the empirical discrepancies and reveal the true motions.9 Astronomy
and mathematics were to be mastered in order to penetrate the riddle of the
heavens and comprehend their divine intelligence. Naive empiricism, which
took the appearance of erratic and multiple planetary movements at face
value, was to be overcome by critical mathematical reasoning, thereby
revealing the simple, uniform, and transcendent essence of the celestial
motions. The philosopher’s task was to “save the phenomena”—to redeem
the apparent disorder of the empirical heavens through theoretical insight
and the power of mathematics.
Of course, “saving the phenomena” was in some sense the main goal of all
Platonic philosophy: to discover the eternal behind the temporal, to know
the truth hidden within the apparent, to glimpse the absolute Ideas that
reign supreme behind and within the flux of the empirical world. But here
Plato’s philosophy was put on the line, so to speak, in open confrontation
with a specific empirical problem under the full gaze of future generations.
The problem itself was significant only because of the Greeks’, and
particularly Plato’s, assumptions about geometry and divinity—that the two
were intrinsically associated with each other and with the heavens. But the
long-term consequences of those assumptions—consequences that would
54 

develop directly from the centuries-long struggle with the planetary
movements—were to be singularly antithetical to their Platonic foundation.
Here, then, we find many of the most characteristic elements of Platonic
philosophy: the search for and belief in the absolute and unitary over the
relative and diverse, the divinization of order and the rejection of disorder,
the tension between empirical observation and ideal Forms, the
consequently ambivalent attitude toward empiricism as something to be
employed only to be overcome, the juxtaposition of the primordial mythic
deities with the mathematical and rational Forms, the further juxtaposition
of the many gods (the celestial deities) with the single God (the Creator and
supreme Intelligence), the religious significance of scientific research, and
finally the complex and even antithetical consequences which Plato’s
thought would hold for later developments in Western culture.
Before moving onward past Plato, let us briefly review the various
methods for acquiring knowledge suggested in the course of the Platonic
dialogues. Knowledge of the transcendent Ideas that were the governing
principles of the divine intelligence was the foundation of Platonic
philosophy, and access to this archetypal knowledge was said to be mediated
by several different (and usually overlapping) cognitive modes, involving
different degrees of experiential directness. The Ideas could be known most
directly through an intuitive leap of immediate apprehension, which was
also considered to be a recollection of the immortal soul’s prior knowledge.
The logical necessity of the Ideas could also be discovered by meticulous
intellectual analysis of the world of empirical experience, both through
dialectic and through mathematics. In addition, the transcendent reality
could be encountered through the astronomical contemplation and
understanding of the heavens, which displayed the moving geometry of the
visible gods. The transcendent could also be approached through myth and
the poetic imagination, as well as by attending to a kind of aesthetic
resonance within the psyche touched off by the presence of the archetypal
in veiled form within the phenomenal world. Thus intuition, memory,
aesthetics, imagination, logic, mathematics, and empirical observation each
played a specific role in Plato’s epistemology, as did spiritual desire and
55 

moral virtue. But of all these, the empirical was typically depreciated and, at
least in its uncritical employment, considered more hindrance than help in
the philosophical enterprise. This was the legacy that Plato passed on to his
most brilliant pupil, Aristotle, who studied for twenty years in Plato’s
Academy before setting forth his own distinctive philosophy.
56 

Aristotle and the Greek Balance
With Aristotle, Plato was, as it were, brought down to earth. And if, from a
Platonic view, the luminosity of Plato’s universe based on the transcendent
Ideas was diminished in the process, others would point to a decisive gain in
the articulate intelligibility of the world as described by Aristotle, and would
indeed consider his outlook to be a necessary modification of Plato’s
idealism. To understand the basic tenor of Aristotle’s philosophy and
cosmology is prerequisite for comprehending the further movement of
Western thought and its succession of world views. For Aristotle provided a
language and logic, a foundation and structure, and, not least, a formidably
authoritative opponent—first against Platonism and later against the early
modern mind—without which the philosophy, theology, and science of the
West could not have developed as they did.
The problem of discovering the exact character and development of
Aristotle’s thought presents a different set of difficulties from that facing the
interpreter of Plato. Virtually none of Aristotle’s extant works were
apparently intended for publication. Works that were published by Aristotle
are now lost, these being highly Platonic in doctrine and written in popular
literary form, while those that survive are concentrated treatises composed
for school use in the form of lecture-course notes and texts for students.
These surviving manuscripts were compiled, edited, and titled by
Aristotelians several centuries after the philosopher’s death. The modern
attempt to trace Aristotle’s development from this much-transformed body
of material has not brought forth unequivocal results, and his judgments on
certain issues remain obscure. Yet the overall character of his philosophy is
clear, and a general theory of its evolution can be surmised.
57 

It would seem to be that after an initial period when his thought still
reflected a more unreservedly Platonic influence, Aristotle began to
construct a philosophical position sharply distinguished from his master’s.
The crux of their difference involved the precise nature of the Forms and
their relation to the empirical world. Aristotle’s intellectual temperament
was one that took the empirical world on its own terms as fully real. He
could not accept Plato’s conclusion that the basis of reality existed in an
entirely transcendent and immaterial realm of ideal entities. True reality, he
believed, was the perceptible world of concrete objects, not an
imperceptible world of eternal Ideas. The theory of Ideas seemed to him both
empirically unverifiable and fraught with logical difficulties.
To counter that theory, Aristotle put forth his doctrine of categories.
Things can be said “to be” in many ways. A tall white horse is in one sense
“tall,” in another sense “white,” and in another sense a “horse.” Yet these
different ways of being are not equivalent in ontological status, for the
tallness and whiteness of the horse depend for their existence entirely on the
primary reality of the particular horse. The horse is substantial in its reality
in a way that the adjectives describing it are not. To distinguish between
these different ways of being, Aristotle introduced the notion of categories;
the particular horse is a substance, which constitutes one category; its
whiteness is a quality, which constitutes another category altogether. The
substance is the primary reality, upon which the quality depends for its
existence. Among the ten categories established by Aristotle, only substance
(“this horse”) signifies concrete independent existence, while the others—
quality (“white”), quantity (“tall”), relation (“faster”), and the rest—are
derivative ways of being in that they exist solely relative to an individual
substance. A substance is onto logically primary, while the various other
types of being that may be predicated of it are derivative. Substances
underlie and are the subjects of everything else. If substances did not exist,
nothing would exist.
For Aristotle, the real world is one of individual substances which are
distinct and separate from each other, yet which are characterized by
qualities or other types of being held in common with other individual
substances. This commonality, however, does not signify the existence of a
transcendent Idea from which the common quality is derived. The common
58 

quality is a universal recognizable by the intellect in sensible things, but it is
not a self-subsistent entity. The universal is conceptually distinguishable
from the concrete individual, but is not onto logically independent. It is not
itself a substance. Plato had taught that things like “whiteness” and “tallness”
possessed an existence independent of any concrete things in which they
might appear, but for Aristotle that doctrine was untenable. The error, he
held, lay in Plato’s confusion of categories, whereby he treated a quality, for
example, as a substance. Many things can be beautiful, but that does not
mean there is a transcendent Idea of the Beautiful. Beauty exists only if at
some point a concrete substance is beautiful. The individual man Socrates is
primary, while his “humanness” or “goodness” exists only to the extent that it
is found in the concrete particular Socrates. In contrast to the primary
reality of a substance, a quality is only an abstraction—though it is not
merely a mental abstraction, for it is based on a real aspect of the substance
in which it resides.
By replacing Plato’s Ideas with universals, common qualities that the mind
could grasp in the empirical world but that did not exist independently of
that world, Aristotle turned Plato’s ontology upside down. For Plato, the
particular was less real, a derivative of the universal; for Aristotle, the
universal was less real, a derivative of the particular. Universals were
necessary for knowledge, but they did not exist as self-subsistent entities in a
transcendent realm. Plato’s Ideas were for Aristotle an unnecessary idealist
duplication of the real world of everyday experience, and a logical error.
But further analysis of the world, specifically of change and motion,
suggested to Aristotle the need to introduce a more complex account of
things—an account that paradoxically made his philosophy closer in spirit
to Plato’s yet also more distinctly his own. A substance, Aristotle concluded,
is not simply a unit of matter, but is an intelligible structure or form (eidos)
embodied in matter. Although the form is entirely immanent, and does not
exist independently of its material embodiment, it is the form that gives to
the substance its distinctive essence. Thus a substance is not only “this man”
or “this horse” in simple contrast to its qualities and other categories, for
what makes these substances what they are is their specific composition of
matter and form—i.e., the fact that their material substrate has been
structured by the form of a man or a horse. Yet form for Aristotle was not
59 

static, and it was especially here that Aristotle both sustained certain
elements of Plato’s philosophy and added a fundamentally new dimension.
For in Aristotle’s view, form gives to a substance not only its essential
structure but also its developmental dynamic. Organic biology, rather than
abstract mathematics, was Aristotle’s characteristic science, and in lieu of
Plato’s static ideal reality Aristotle brought a more pronounced recognition
of nature’s processes of growth and development, with each organism
striving to move from imperfection to perfection: from a state of potentiality
to a state of actuality, or realization of its form. While Plato emphasized the
imperfection of all natural things compared with the Forms they imitated,
Aristotle taught that an organism moves from an imperfect or immature
condition in a teleological development toward achievement of a full
maturity in which its inherent form is actualized: the seed is transformed
into a plant, the embryo becomes the child, the child becomes the adult, and
so on. The form is an intrinsic principle of operation that is implicit in the
organism from the latter’s inception, as the form of the oak is implicit in the
acorn. The organism is drawn forward by the form from potentiality to
actuality. After this formal realization is achieved, decay sets in as the form
gradually “loses its hold.” The Aristotelian form bestows an indwelling
impulse in each organism which orders and motivates its development.
The essence of something is the form into which it has grown. The nature
of something is to actualize its inherent form. Yet for Aristotle, “form” and
“matter” are relative terms, for the actualization of a form can in turn lead to
its being the matter out of which a higher form can grow. Thus the adult is
the form of which the child was matter, the child the form of which the
embryo was matter, the embryo the form of which the ovum was matter.
Every substance is composed of that which is changed (the matter) and that
into which it is changed (the form). “Matter” here does not simply mean a
physical body, which in fact always possesses some degree of form. Matter is,
rather, an indeterminate openness in things to structural and dynamic
formation. Matter is the unqualified substrate of being, the possibility of
form, that which form molds, impels, brings from potentiality to actuality.
Matter becomes realized only because of its composition with form. Form is
matter’s actuality, its purposefully completed figuration. All of nature is in
the process—is itself the process—of this conquest of matter by form.
60 

Though a form is not itself a substance, as in Plato’s view, every substance
has a form, an intelligible structure, that which makes the substance what it
is. Moreover, every substance not only possesses a form; one could say it is
also possessed by a form, for it naturally strives to realize its inherent form. It
strives to become a perfect specimen of its kind. Every substance seeks to
actualize what it already is potentially.
In Aristotle’s conception, the being-becoming distinction that had been
developed by Plato from the differing views of reality given by Parmenides
and Heraclitus has now been placed entirely in the context of the natural
world, where it is seen as actuality and potentiality. Plato’s distinction, with
“being” the object of true knowledge and “becoming” the object of sense-
perceived opinion, had reflected his elevation of real Forms above relatively
unreal concrete particulars. Aristotle, by contrast, gave to the process of
becoming its own reality, asserting that the governing form itself is realized
in that process. Change and movement are not signs of a shadowy unreality
but are expressive of a teleological striving for fulfillment.
This understanding was achieved through the Aristotelian idea of
“potentiality,” an idea uniquely capable of providing a conceptual basis for
both change and continuity. Parmenides had not allowed the rational
possibility of real change, because something that “is” cannot change into
something that it is not, for what “is not” cannot exist, by definition. Plato,
mindful too of Heraclitus’s teaching that the natural world is in constant
flux, had therefore located reality in the changeless Forms transcending the
empirical world. He also, however, pointed out a verbal distinction that shed
light on Parmenides’s problem. Parmenides was not distinguishing between
two significantly different meanings of the term “is,” for on the one hand one
could say that something “is” in the sense that it exists, while on the other
hand one could say that something “is hot” or “is a man” in the sense of a
predicable. Building upon this important distinction, Aristotle asserted that
something can change into something else if there is a continuing substance
that undergoes change from a potential to an actual state as determined by
the substance’s inherent form. Thus Aristotle moved toward reconciling the
Platonic Forms with the empirical facts of dynamic natural processes, and
more deeply stressed the human intellect’s capacity to recognize these
formal patterns in the sensible world.
61 

While Plato distrusted knowledge gained by sense perception, Aristotle
took such information seriously, contending that knowledge of the natural
world derives first from the perception of concrete particulars in which
regular patterns can be recognized and general principles formulated. All
living things require powers of nutrition to survive and grow (plants,
animals, man), while some also require powers of sensation to be aware of
objects and distinguish between them (animals, man). In the case of man,
who is further endowed with reason, these powers enable him to store up
his experience, to make comparisons and contrasts, to calculate and reflect
and draw conclusions, all of which make possible knowledge of the world.
Human understanding of the world thus begins with sense perception.
Before any sensory experience, the human mind is like a clean tablet on
which nothing is written. It is in a state of potentiality with regard to
intelligible things. And man requires sensory experience to bring his mind,
with the help of mental images, from potential knowledge to actual
knowledge. Empiricism, if perhaps humbler than Plato’s direct intuition of
absolute Ideas, is dependably tangible.
Yet it is man’s reason that allows sense experience to be the basis for
useful knowledge, and Aristotle was above all that philosopher who
articulated the structure of rational discourse so the human mind might
apprehend the world with the greatest degree of conceptual precision and
effectiveness. Establishing systematic rules for the proper employment of
logic and language, Aristotle built on principles already worked out by
Socrates and Plato, but brought new clarity, coherence, and innovations of
his own. Deduction and induction, the syllogism, the analysis of causation
into material, efficient, formal, and final causes, basic distinctions such as
subject-predicate, 
essential-accidental, 
matter-form, 
potential-actual,
universal-particular, genus-species-individual, the ten categories of
substance, quantity, quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, and
affection: all were defined by Aristotle and established thereafter as
indispensable instruments of analysis for the Western mind. Where Plato
had placed direct intuition of the transcendent Ideas as the foundation of
knowledge, Aristotle now placed empiricism and logic.
Yet Aristotle believed that the mind’s greatest power of cognition derived
from something beyond empiricism and the rational elaboration of sensory
62 

experience. Although it is difficult to discern his precise meaning from the
brief and somewhat obscure statements he made concerning the issue, it
would seem that Aristotle regarded the mind not only as that which is
activated by sensory experience, but also as something that is eternally
active, and indeed divine and immortal. This aspect of mind, the active
intellect (nous), alone gave man the intuitive capacity to grasp final and
universal truths. Empiricism renders particular data from which
generalizations and theories can be derived, but these are fallible. Man can
attain necessary and universal knowledge only through the presence of
another cognitive faculty, the active intellect. Just as light makes potential
colors into actual colors, so does the active intellect actualize the mind’s
potential knowledge of forms and provide man with the fundamental
principles that make possible certain rational knowledge. It illuminates the
processes of human cognition while it yet remains beyond them, eternal and
complete. Only because man shares in the divine nous can he apprehend
infallible truth, and the nous constitutes the only part of man that “comes in
from outside.” In Aristotle’s view, the individual human soul might cease to
exist with death, since the soul is vitally joined to the physical body it
animates. The soul is the form of the body, just as the body is the matter of
the soul. But the divine intellect, of which each man has a potential share
and which distinguishes man from other animals, is immortal and
transcendent. Indeed, man’s highest happiness consists in the philosophical
contemplation of eternal truth.
As Aristotle agreed finally with Plato’s evaluation of the human intellect as
divine despite his new regard for sense perception, so also, despite his
diminishing the ontological status of the Forms, Aristotle still maintained
their objective existence and their crucial role in the economy of nature and
the processes of human knowledge. Like Plato, he believed that a philosophy
such as Democritus’s atomism, based solely on material particles and lacking
a decisive concept of form, was unable to account for the fact that nature,
despite constant change, contains a visible order with distinct and lasting
formal qualities. Also like Plato, Aristotle believed the deepest cause for
things must be sought not in the beginning of things but in their end—their
telos, their purpose and final actuality, that to which they aspire. Although
the Aristotelian forms (with one exception) are wholly immanent in nature
63 

and not transcendent, they are essentially changeless and are thus
recognizable by the human intellect amidst the flux of organic development
and decay. Cognition takes place when the mind receives the form of a
substance into itself, even though in the world that form never exists apart
from its particular material embodiment. The mind conceptually separates,
or abstracts, what is not separated in reality. Yet because reality possesses
inherent structure, cognition is possible. An empirical approach to nature is
meaningful because of nature’s intrinsic openness to rational description, by
which it can be cognitively organized according to forms, categories, causes,
genera, species, and the like. Thus Aristotle continued and brought new
definition to the Platonic conception of an ordered and humanly knowable
cosmos.
In essence, Aristotle realigned Plato’s archetypal perspective from a
transcendent focus to an immanent one, so it was fully directed to the
physical world with its empirically observable patterns and processes. By
emphasizing the Forms’ transcendence, Plato had found it difficult to explain
how particulars participated in Forms, a difficulty rooted in his ontological
dualism, which in its more extreme formulations entailed a virtual severance
of Forms from matter. Aristotle, by contrast, pointed to a vital composite
entity produced by the uniting of form with matter in a substance. Unless a
form is incorporated in a substance—as the form of a man is found in the
individual person Socrates—that form cannot be said to exist. Forms are not
beings, for they possess no independent existence. Rather, beings exist
through forms. Aristotle’s form thereby took on several roles—as intrinsic
pattern, as intelligible structure, as governing dynamic, and as end or
purpose. He eliminated the numinosity and independence of Plato’s Forms,
yet gave them new functions to make possible a rational analysis of the
world and enhance the power of scientific explanation.
The early foundations of science had already been established by, on the
one side, the Ionian and atomistic philosophies of matter, and, on the other,
the Pythagorean and Platonic philosophies of form and mathematics. But by
directing his Platonically educated attention to the empirical world, Aristotle
placed a new and fruitful stress on the value of observation and classification
within a Platonic framework of form and purpose. More emphatically than
Plato, Aristotle considered both the lonians’ focus on material causes and the
64 

Pythagoreans’ focus on formal causes necessary for a full understanding of
nature. It was this unique comprehensiveness that distinguished much of
Aristotle’s achievement. The Greek sense of confidence in the power of
human thought to comprehend the world rationally, a confidence begun
with Thales, now found in Aristotle its fullest expression and climax.
Aristotle’s universe possessed a remarkable logical consistency throughout
its complex and multifaceted structure. All motion and process in the world
was explicable by his formal teleology: Every being is moved from
potentiality to actuality according to an inner dynamic dictated by a specific
form. No potentiality is brought into actuality unless there exists an already
actual being, a being that has already realized its form: a seed must have
been produced by a mature plant, as a child must have a parent. Hence the
dynamism and structured development of any entity requires an external
cause—a being that serves simultaneously as efficient cause (initiating the
motion), formal cause (giving the entity form), and final cause (serving as
goal of the entity’s development). To account for the entire universe’s order
and movement, therefore, especially for the great movement of the heavens
(and here he faulted Democritus and the atomists for not dealing adequately
with the first cause of motion), Aristotle posited a supreme Form—an
already existing actuality, absolute in its perfection, the only form existing
entirely separate from matter. Since the greatest universal motion is that of
the heavens, and since that circular motion is eternal, this prime mover
must also be eternal.
Aristotle’s logic could be represented in the following way: (a) All motion
is the result of the dynamism impelling potentiality to formal realization, (b)
Since the universe as a whole is involved in motion, and since nothing
moves without an impulse toward form, the universe must be moved by a
supreme, universal form, (c) Since the highest form must already be
perfectly realized—i.e., not in a potential state—and since matter is by
definition the state of potentiality, the highest form is both entirely
immaterial and without motion: hence the Unmoved Mover, the supreme
perfect Being that is pure form, God.
This absolute Being, here posited by logical necessity rather than religious
65 

conviction, is the first cause of the universe. Yet this Being is wholly self-
absorbed, since for it to take any heed of physical nature would diminish its
perfect undisturbed character and immerse it in the flux of potentialities. As
perfect actuality, the Unmoved Mover is characterized by a state of eternal
unhindered activity—not the struggling process (kinesis) of moving from
potential to actual, but the forever enjoyable activity (energeia) made
possible only in a state of complete formal realization. For the supreme
Form, that activity is thought: eternal contemplation of its own being,
unqualified by the change and imperfection of the physical world it
ultimately motivates. Aristotle’s God is thus pure Mind, with no material
component. Its activity and pleasure is simply that of eternal consciousness
of itself.
In its absolute perfection, the primary Form moves the physical universe
by drawing nature toward itself. God is the goal of the universe’s aspirations
and movement—a more conscious goal for man, a less conscious instinctual
dynamism for other forms of nature. Every individual being in the universe
is striving to imitate, each in its specific limited way, the perfection of the
supreme Being. Each seeks to fulfill its purpose, to grow and mature, to
achieve its realized form. God “moves as the object of desire.” But of all living
things, man alone shares in God’s nature, by virtue of his possessing
intelligence, the nous. Because the supreme Form is so removed from the
world, there is considerable distance between man and God. Yet because
man’s highest faculty, his intellect, is divine, he can by cultivating that
intellect—that is, by imitating the supreme Form in the way most
appropriate to man—bring himself into a kind of communion with God. The
Prime Mover is not the creator of the world (which Aristotle considered
eternal and coeval with God). Rather nature, in its movement toward
imitating this supreme immaterial Form, is involved in an eternal process of
creating itself. Although there is no beginning or end to this striving,
Aristotle suggested the existence of regular cycles that depended on the
movements of the heavens, which, like Plato, he considered divine.
In Aristotle, Greek cosmology achieved its most comprehensive and
systematic development. His view of the cosmos was a synthesis of his many
predecessors’ insights, from the Ionians’ and Empedocles’s ideas concerning
natural elements to Plato’s astronomy and the problem of the planets. The
66 

Earth was the stationary center of the universe, around which the heavenly
bodies rotated. The whole cosmos was finite and circumscribed by a perfect
sphere, within which were set the fixed stars. Aristotle based the Earth’s
uniqueness, centrality, and immobility not only on self-evidence and
common sense, but also on his theory of the elements. The heavier elements,
earth and water, moved according to their intrinsic nature toward the
universe’s center (the Earth), while the lighter elements, air and fire,
intrinsically moved upward away from the center. The lightest element was
aether—transparent, purer than fire, and divine—the substance of which
the heavens were composed, and its natural motion, unlike that of the
terrestrial elements, was circular.
One of Plato’s pupils and Aristotle’s contemporaries, the mathematician
Eudoxus, had taken up the problem of the planetary movements and
provided its first answer. To preserve the ideal of perfect circularity while
also saving the appearances of the erratic motions, Eudoxus devised a
complex geometrical scheme whereby each planet was set in the inner
sphere of a group of interconnected rotating spheres, with the fixed stars at
the universe’s periphery constituting the outermost sphere. Although every
sphere was centered on the Earth, each one had a different rate and axis of
rotation, by which means Eudoxus was able to construct—using three
spheres each for the Sun and Moon, and four each for the more complex
movements of the other planets—an ingenious mathematical solution
accounting for the planetary movements, including their retrograde periods.
Eudoxus thus achieved the first scientific explanation of the irregular
motions of the planets, providing an influential initial model for the
subsequent history of astronomy.
It was this solution, somewhat elaborated by Eudoxus’s successor
Callippus, that Aristotle integrated into his cosmology. Each of the aetheric
spheres, beginning with the outermost one, communicated its motion to the
next one by means of a frictional drive, so that the motions of the inner
spheres were the combined product of the peripheral sphere along with the
relevant adjoining ones. (Aristotle also added intermediate counteracting
spheres to separate properly the planetary motions from each other, while
maintaining the overall motion of the heavens.) In turn, the celestial spheres
affected the other, sublunary elements—fire, air, water, and earth—which
67 

because of those movements did not remain purely separated in what would
be their natural state in successive spheres around the Earth, but instead
were pushed into varying admixtures, thereby creating the great multiplicity
of natural substances on the Earth. The ordered movement of the heavens
was caused ultimately by the primary Unmoved Mover, and the other
movements of the planetary spheres from Saturn down through the Moon
were caused in turn by other timeless, immaterial, and self-thinking
intellects. These heavenly bodies Aristotle considered to be gods, a fact he
considered to have been accurately conveyed by the ancient myths
(although in other matters he believed the myths were an unreliable source
of knowledge). All terrestrial processes and change were therefore caused by
the celestial movements, which were ultimately caused by the highest formal
and final cause, God.
It was especially in regard to his theories concerning astronomy and the
supreme Form that Aristotle approached a Platonic sort of idealism, and in
some respects went even further than Plato. By so strongly emphasizing the
transcendent quality of mathematical Forms, Plato had occasionally
portrayed even the heavens as only an approximate reflection of the perfect
divine geometry—a judgment also reflecting Plato’s notion of anankē, the
imperfect irrationality shadowing the physical creation. But for Aristotle,
Mind was in a sense more fully omnipotent and immanent in nature, and in
his earlier years he concluded that the ordered mathematical perfection of
the heavens and the existence of the astral deities affirmed the heavens
themselves as a visible embodiment of the divine. In so doing, he joined
together more explicitly the Platonic focus on the eternal and mathematical
with the tangible world of physical reality within which man found himself.
He upheld the natural world as a worthy expression of the divine, and not,
as Plato often strongly implied, something merely to be seen through or left
behind altogether as an encumbrance to absolute knowledge. Despite the
generally secular cast of his thought, Aristotle defined the role of philosophy
in his influential work De Philosophia (extant now only in fragments), which
was to mold the ancient conception of the philosopher’s profession: to move
from the material causes of things, as in natural philosophy, to the formal
and final causes, as in divine philosophy, and thus to discover the intelligible
essence of the universe and the purpose behind all change.
68 

Yet as distinguished from Plato’s idealism and stress on the need for
immediate intuitions of a spiritual reality, the overall thrust of Aristotle’s
philosophy was decidedly naturalistic and empiricist. The world of nature
was of primary interest to Aristotle, who was the son of a physician and
early exposed to biological science and medical practice. In this sense his
thought could be said to reflect the Homeric and Ionian sense of life
characteristic of the heroic age, in which the present life was the preferred,
more real realm of existence (in contrast to shadowy Hades, where the
disembodied soul lacked virtually all vitality), and the physical body’s active
involvement in love, war, and feasting was recognized as the essence of a
good life. Concerning such matters as the body’s worth, the soul’s
immortality, and man’s relation to God, Plato’s sensibility was less Homeric
and Ionian, and more reflective of the mystery religions and the
Pythagoreans. Aristotle’s attention to and high valuation of the body more
directly reflected the widespread classical Greek appreciation for the human
body as expressed in athletic prowess, personal beauty, or artistic creation.
Plato’s attitude in this regard, while often genuinely admiring, was distinctly
ambivalent. In the end, Plato’s loyalty lay with the transcendent archetype.
Aristotle’s renunciation of self-subsistent Ideas also had major
implications for his ethical theory. For Plato, a person could properly direct
his actions only if he knew the transcendent basis of any virtue, and only the
philosopher who had attained knowledge of that absolute reality would be
capable of judging the virtue of any action. Without the existence of an
absolute Good, morality would have no certain basis, and so for Plato ethics
was derived from metaphysics. For Aristotle, however, the two fields were of
fundamentally different character. What actually existed was not an Idea of
the Good relevant to all situations, but only good persons or good actions in
many varying contexts. One could not attain absolute knowledge in ethical
matters as one could in scientific philosophy. Morality lay in the realm of the
contingent. The best one could do would be to derive rules empirically for
ethical conduct that held probable value in meeting the complexities of
human existence.
The proper aim in ethics was not to determine the nature of absolute
virtue, but to be a virtuous person. That task was necessarily complex and
69 

ambiguous, evading final definition, and required practical solutions to
specific problems rather than absolute principles that were universally true.
For Aristotle, the goal of human life was happiness, the necessary
precondition for which was virtue. But virtue itself had to be defined in
terms of rational choice in a concrete situation, where virtue lay in the mean
between two extremes. Good is always a balance between two opposite evils,
the midpoint between excess and defect: temperance is a mean between
austerity and indulgence, courage a mean between cowardice and
foolhardiness, proper pride a mean between arrogance and abasement, and
so forth. Such a mean can be found only in practice, in individual cases
relative to their specific conditions.
In each of Aristotle’s concepts in contrast to Plato’s—yet always within
the Platonic framework of form and purpose—there was a new stress on
this world and this life, on the visible, the tangible, and the particular.
Although both Aristotle’s ethics and his politics were founded on definitions
and goals, they remained linked to the empirical, the contingent and
individual. Although his universe was teleological and not randomly
mechanical, his was generally an unconscious natural teleology, based on
the empirical perception that nature draws forward each individual thing to
its formal realization, “doing nothing in vain.” Form was still the determining
principle in Aristotle’s universe, but it was primarily a natural principle.
Similarly, Aristotle’s God was essentially the logical consequence of his
cosmology, a necessary existent on physical grounds, rather than the
mystically apprehended supreme Good of Platonic thought. Aristotle
assumed the power of reason strenuously forged by Socrates and Plato, and
applied it systematically to the many kinds of phenomena that existed in the
world; but while Plato employed reason to overcome the empirical world
and discover a transcendent order, Aristotle employed reason to discover an
immanent order within the empirical world itself.
The Aristotelian legacy was thus predominantly one of logic, empiricism,
and natural science. The Lyceum, the school which Aristotle founded in
Athens and where he conducted his peripatetic discussions, reflected this
legacy, being more a center for scientific research and data collection than a
semireligious philosophical school like Plato’s Academy. Although in ancient
times Plato was generally judged the greater master, that evaluation would
70 

be dramatically counterbalanced in the high Middle Ages, and in many
respects it would be Aristotle’s philosophical temperament that would come
to define the dominant orientation of the Western mind. So considerable was
his encyclopedic system of thought that most scientific activity in the West
until the seventeenth century was carried out on the basis of his fourth-
century B.C. writings, and even when moving beyond him modern science
would continue his orientation and use his conceptual tools. Yet in the last
analysis, it was in the spirit of his master Plato, though in a decisively new
direction, that Aristotle proclaimed the power of the developed human
intellect to comprehend the world’s order.
In Aristotle and Plato together, then, we find a certain elegant balance and
tension between empirical analysis and spiritual intuition, a dynamic
beautifully rendered in Raphael’s Renaissance masterpiece The School of
Athens. There, in the center of the many Greek philosophers and scientists
gathered in lively discussion, stand the elder Plato and the younger Aristotle,
with Plato pointing upward to the heavens, to the invisible and
transcendent, while Aristotle motions his hand outward and down to the
earth, to the visible and immanent.
71 

The Dual Legacy
This, then, was the achievement of classical Greek thought: Reflecting the
archaic mythological consciousness from which it emerged, informed by the
artistic masterworks that preceded and accompanied it, influenced by the
mystery religions with which it was contemporaneous; forged through a
dialectic with skepticism, naturalism, and secular humanism; and in its
commitment to reason, empiricism, and mathematics conducive to the
development of science in succeeding centuries—the thought of the great
Greek philosophers was an intellectual consummation of all the major
cultural expressions of the Hellenic era. It was a global metaphysical
perspective, intent on encompassing both the whole of reality and the
multiple sides of the human sensibility.
Above all, it was an attempt to know. The Greeks were perhaps the first to
see the world as a question to be answered. They were peculiarly gripped by
the passion to understand, to penetrate the uncertain flux of phenomena
and grasp a deeper truth. And they established a dynamic tradition of critical
thought to pursue that quest. With the birth of that tradition and that quest
came the birth of the Western mind.
Let us now attempt to distinguish some of the principal elements in the
classical Greek conception of reality, especially as these influenced Western
thought from antiquity through the Renaissance and Scientific Revolution.
For our present purposes, we may describe two very general sets of
assumptions or principles inherited by the West from the Greeks. The first
set of tenets formulated below represents that unique synthesis of Greek
72 

rationalism and Greek religion which played such a significant role in
Hellenic thought from Pythagoras through Aristotle, and which was most
fully embodied in the thought of Plato:
(1)   The world is an ordered cosmos, whose order is akin to an order
within the human mind. A rational analysis of the empirical world is
therefore possible.
(2)   The cosmos as a whole is expressive of a pervasive intelligence that
gives to nature its purpose and design, and this intelligence is directly
accessible to human awareness if the latter is developed and focused to a
high degree.
(3)   Intellectual analysis at its most penetrating reveals a timeless order
that transcends its temporal, concrete manifestation. The visible world
contains within it a deeper meaning, in some sense both rational and
mythic in character, which is reflected in the empirical order but which
emanates from an eternal dimension that is both source and goal of all
existence.
(4)   Knowledge of the world’s underlying structure and meaning entails
the exercise of a plurality of human cognitive faculties—rational,
empirical, intuitive, aesthetic, imaginative, mnemonic, and moral.
(5)   The direct apprehension of the world’s deeper reality satisfies not
only the mind but the soul: it is, in essence, a redemptive vision, a
sustaining insight into the true nature of things that is at once
intellectually decisive and spiritually liberating.
The immense influence on the subsequent evolution of Western thought
exerted by these remarkable convictions, at once idealist and rationalist in
character, can scarcely be exaggerated. But the Hellenic legacy was a dual
one, for the Greek mind also fathered a very different, equally influential set
of intellectual assumptions and tendencies, which to some degree
overlapped the first set but to a crucial extent acted in tense counterpoint to
it. This second set of principles can be summarized roughly as follows:
(1)   Genuine human knowledge can be acquired only through the
rigorous employment of human reason and empirical observation.
73 

(2)   The ground of truth must be sought in the present world of human
experience, not in an undemonstrable otherworldly reality. The only truth
that is humanly accessible and useful is immanent rather than
transcendent.
(3)   The causes of natural phenomena are impersonal and physical, and
should be sought within the realm of observable nature. All mythological
and supernatural elements should be excluded from causal explanations
as anthropomorphic projections.
(4)   Any claims to comprehensive theoretical understanding must be
measured against the empirical reality of concrete particulars in all their
diversity, mutability, and individuality.
(5)   No system of thought is final, and the search for truth must be both
critical and self-critical. Human knowledge is relative and fallible and
must be constantly revised in the light of further evidence and analysis.
Very generally speaking, both the evolution and the legacy of the Greek
mind can be said to have resulted from the complex interaction of these two
sets of assumptions and impulses. While the first set was especially visible in
the Platonic synthesis, the second set gradually evolved out of the bold,
many-sided intellectual development that dialectically impelled that
synthesis—namely, the Presocratic philosophical tradition of naturalistic
empiricism from Thales, of rationalism from Parmenides, of mechanistic
materialism from Democritus, and of skepticism, individualism, and secular
humanism from the Sophists. Both of these sets of tendencies in Hellenic
thought had deep nonphilosophical roots in the Greek religious and literary
traditions, from Homer and the mysteries to Sophocles and Euripides, with
each set drawing on different aspects of those traditions. Moreover, these
two impulses shared a common ground in their uniquely Greek affirmation,
often only implicit, that the final measure of truth was found not in
hallowed tradition, nor in contemporary convention, but rather in the
autonomous individual human mind. Most consequentially, both impulses
found their paradigmatic embodiment in the richly ambiguous figure of
Socrates, both found vivid contrapuntal expression in the Platonic dialogues,
and both found a brilliant and seminal compromise in the philosophy of
Aristotle.
74 

The constant interplay of these two partly complementary and partly
antithetical sets of principles established a profound inner tension within the
Greek inheritance, which provided the Western mind with the intellectual
basis, at once unstable and highly creative, for what was to become an
extremely dynamic evolution lasting over two and a half millennia. The
secular skepticism of the one stream and the metaphysical idealism of the
other provided a crucial counterbalance to each other, each undermining
the other’s tendency to crystallize into dogmatism, yet the two in
combination eliciting new and fertile intellectual possibilities. The Greek
search for and recognition of universal archetypes in the chaos of
particulars was fundamentally countered by an equally robust impulse to
value the concrete particular in and for itself—a combination that resulted
in the profoundly Greek tendency to perceive the empirical individual in all
its concrete exceptionality as something that could itself reveal new forms of
reality and new principles of truth. An often problematic yet immensely
productive polarization thereby emerged in the Western mind’s
understanding of reality, a division of allegiance between two radically
different kinds of world view: on the one hand, to a sovereignly ordered
cosmos; on the other, to an unpredictably open universe. It was with this
unresolved bifurcation at its very basis, with the accompanying creative
tension and complexity, that the Greek mind flourished and endured.
The West has never ceased to admire the extraordinary vitality and
profundity of the Greek mind, even when subsequent intellectual
developments have placed in question one aspect or another of Hellenic
thought. The Greeks were supremely articulate in the service of their
evolving vision, and in cases beyond counting, what may have long been
considered a peculiar error or confusion in Greek thought has later, in the
light of new evidence, been discovered to be an astonishingly accurate
intuition. Perhaps the Greeks, coming at the dawn of our civilization,
perceived the world with a certain innate clarity that authentically reflected
the universal order they were seeking. Certainly the West continues to turn
again and again to its ancient progenitors, as to a fount of immortal insight.
As Finley remarked, “Whether the Greeks saw things most freshly because
they came first or it is pure good luck that, having come first, they answered
75 

life with unmatched alertness, they in either case keep ageless sparkle, as of
the world lit by a kind of six-o’clock-in-the-morning light and the dew
imperishably on the grass. The Greek mind remains in ours, because this
untarnished freshness leaves it, like youth itself, our first exemplar.”10
It is as if, for the Greeks, heaven and earth had not yet been fully rent
asunder. But instead of our now attempting to sort out what is permanently
valuable and what problematic in the Hellenic vision, let us observe history
engage that task as the Western culture that Greece initiated moved forward
—building upon the Greek legacy, transforming it, criticizing it, amplifying
it, disregarding it, reintegrating it, negating it . . . yet never, in the end, truly
leaving it.
76 

J
II
The Transformation of the Classical Era
ust when the Greek intellectual achievement had reached its climax
during the fourth century B.C., Alexander the Great swept down from
Macedonia through Greece and onward to Persia, conquering lands and
peoples from Egypt to India and creating an empire that was to encompass
most of the known world. The very qualities that had served Greece’s
brilliant evolution—restless individualism, proud humanism, critical
rationalism—now helped precipitate its downfall, for the divisiveness,
arrogance, and opportunism that shadowed the Greeks’ nobler qualities left
them myopic and fatally unprepared for the Macedonian challenge. Yet the
Hellenic achievement was not fated for extinction. Tutored by Aristotle as a
youth in his father’s court and inspired by the Homeric epics and Athenian
ideals, Alexander carried with him and disseminated the Greek culture and
language throughout the vast world he conquered. Thus Greece fell just as it
culminated, yet spread triumphantly just as it submitted.
As planned by Alexander, the large cosmopolitan cities of the empire—
above all Alexandria, which he founded in Egypt—became vital centers of
cultural learning, in whose libraries and academies the classical Greek
inheritance survived and flourished. Alexander seems also to have been
inspired by a vision of mankind’s universal kinship beyond all political
divisions, and he attempted to bring about such a unity, a massive cultural
fusion, by means of his immense military ambition. After his early death,
however, Alexander’s empire did not hold together. Following a long period
of dynastic struggles and shifting sovereignties, Rome emerged as the center
of a new empire, with both its focal point and its outlying regions now
further west.
Despite the Roman conquest, Greek high culture still presided over the
77 

educated classes of the greater Mediterranean world and was rapidly
absorbed by the Romans. The most significant scientists and philosophers
continued to work within the Greek intellectual framework. The Romans
modeled their Latin works on the Greek masterpieces and carried on the
development and expansion of a sophisticated civilization, but their more
pragmatic genius lay in the realm of law, political administration, and
military strategy. In philosophy, literature, science, art, and education,
Greece remained the most compelling cultural force in the ancient world. As
the Roman poet Horace noted, the Greeks, captive, took the victors captive.
78 

Crosscurrents of the Hellenistic Matrix
The Decline and Preservation of the Greek Mind
Despite Greece’s continuing cultural power after Alexander’s conquest and
throughout the period of Roman hegemony, the original cast of the classical
Greek mind did not hold under the impact of so many new forces. With the
Hellenistic world extending all the way from the western Mediterranean to
central Asia, the reflective individual of the later classical era was exposed to
an enormous multiplicity of viewpoints. The initial expansion of Greek
culture eastward was in time complemented by a strong influx of Oriental
(from east of the Mediterranean) religious and political currents to the West.
In important respects Greek culture was as enriched by this new influx as
were the non-Greek cultures by the Hellenic expansion. Yet in other
respects the polis-centered Greek mind lost something of its earlier
confident lucidity and bold originality. Just as the critical individualism of
classical Greece had produced its great art and thought yet also contributed
to the disintegration of its social order, rendering it vulnerable to
Macedonian subjugation, so too did the centrifugal vitality of Greek culture
lead not only to its successful propagation but also to its eventual dilution
and fragmenting as the classical polis vas opened to the contrasting
influences of a much larger, heterogeneous cultural environment. The
unprecedented cosmopolitanism of the new civilization, the breakup of the
old order of small city-states, and the succeeding centuries of constant
political and social upheaval were profoundly disorienting. Both individual
freedom in and responsibility to the polis community were undermined by
the massiveness and confusion of the new political world. Personal destinies
79 

appeared to be determined more by large impersonal forces than by
individual volition. The old clarity no longer seemed available, and many felt
they had lost their bearings.
Philosophy reflected and attempted to address these changes. While Plato
and Aristotle continued to be studied and followed, the two dominant
philosophical schools originating in the Hellenistic era, the Stoic and
Epicurean, were of a different character. Though owing much to the earlier
Greeks, these new schools were primarily ethical and exhortatory, noble
philosophical defenses with which to endure troubled and uncertain times.
This shift in the nature and function of philosophy was partly a consequence
of a new intellectual specialization in the wake of Aristotle’s expansion and
classification of the sciences, a specialization that gradually separated science
from philosophy, narrowing the latter to moral positions backed by relevant
metaphysical or physical doctrines. Yet beyond this insulation of philosophy
from broader intellectual concerns, the characteristic philosophical impulse
of the Hellenistic schools arose less from the passion to comprehend the
world in its mystery and magnitude, and more from the need to give human
beings some stable belief system and inner peace in the face of a hostile and
chaotic environment. The result of this new impulse was the emergence of
philosophies more limited in scope and more prone to fatalism than their
classical predecessors. Disengagement from the world or from one’s own
passions was the principal choice, and in either case philosophy took on a
more dogmatic tone.
Yet Stoicism, the most broadly representative of the Hellenistic
philosophies, possessed a loftiness of vision and moral temper that would
long leave its mark on the Western spirit. Founded in Athens in the early
third century B.C. by Zeno of Citium, who had studied at the Platonic
Academy, and later systematized by Chrysippus, Stoicism would be especially
influential in the Roman world of Cicero and Seneca, Epictetus and Marcus
Aurelius. In the Stoic view, all reality was pervaded by an intelligent divine
force, the Logos or universal reason which ordered all things. Man could
achieve genuine happiness only by attuning his life and character to this all-
powerful providential wisdom. To be free was to live in conformity with
God’s will, and what mattered finally in life was the virtuous state of the
soul, not the circumstances of the outer life. The Stoic sage, marked by inner
80 

serenity, sternness in self-discipline, and conscientious performance of duty,
was indifferent to the vagaries of external events. The existence of the
world-governing reason had another important consequence for the Stoic.
Because all human beings shared in the divine Logos, all were members of a
universal human community, a brotherhood of mankind that constituted the
World City, or Cosmopolis, and each individual was called upon to
participate actively in the affairs of the world and thereby fulfill his duty to
this great community.
At heart, Stoicism was a development of central elements of Socratic and
Heraclitean philosophy, transposed to the less circumscribed and more
ecumenical Hellenistic period. By contrast, its contemporary rival
Epicureanism distinguished itself from the Stoic devotion to moral virtue
and the world-governing Logos, as well as from traditional religious notions,
by asserting the primary value of human pleasure—defined as freedom from
pain and fear. Mankind must overcome its superstitious belief in the fickle,
anthropomorphic gods of popular tradition, Epicurus taught, for it is above
all this belief, and the anxiety about divine retribution after death, that
caused human misery. One need not fear the gods, for they do not concern
themselves with the human world. Nor need one fear death, for it is merely
the extinction of consciousness and not a prelude to a painful punishment.
Happiness in this life can best be achieved through withdrawal from the
world of affairs to cultivate a quiet existence of simple pleasure in the
company of friends. The physical cosmology from which the Epicurean
system drew was Democritus’s atomism, with material particles forming the
substance of the world, including the mortal human soul. Such a cosmology
and contemporary human experience were not unrelated, for citizens of the
Hellenistic era, deprived of the defined, centered, organically ordered world
of the polis—the general character of which was not unlike the Aristotelian
cosmos—may well have sensed a certain parallel between their own fate
and that of Democritean atoms, moving randomly at the behest of
impersonal forces in the centerless void of a disorientingly expanded
universe.
A more radical reflection of the era’s intellectual shift was the systematic
Skepticism represented by thinkers such as Pyrrho of Elis and Sextus
Empiricus, who held that no truths could be known to be certain and that
81 

the only appropriate philosophical stance was the complete suspension of
judgment. Developing powerful arguments to refute all dogmatic claims to
philosophical knowledge, Skeptics pointed out that any conflict between two
apparent truths could be settled only by appeal to some criterion; yet that
criterion could itself be justified only by appeal to some further criterion,
which would thereby require an infinite regress of such criteria, none
foundational. “Nothing is certain, not even that,” said Arcesilaus, a member
of the Platonic Academy (which, significantly, also embraced Skepticism at
this time, renewing a central aspect of its Socratic origins). It is true that in
Hellenistic philosophy, logic was often skillfully employed to demonstrate
the futility of much of the human enterprise, particularly the pursuit of
metaphysical truth. Yet Skeptics such as Sextus argued that people who
believed they could know reality were subject to constant frustration and
unhappiness in life. If they would genuinely suspend judgment, recognizing
that their beliefs about reality were not necessarily valid, they would achieve
peace of mind. Neither affirming nor denying the possibility of knowledge,
they should remain in a state of open-minded equanimity, waiting to see
what might emerge.
While important and attractive in their different ways, these several
philosophies did not entirely satisfy the Hellenistic spirit. Divine reality was
seen as either insensitive and irrelevant to human affairs (Epicureanism),
implacably deterministic if providential (Stoicism), or altogether beyond
human cognition (Skepticism). Science too became more thoroughly
rationalistic, shedding the virtually religious impetus and goal of divine
comprehension formerly visible in Pythagoras, Plato, and even Aristotle.
Hence the culture’s emotional and religious demands were met most directly
by the various mystery religions—Greek, Egyptian, Oriental—which offered
salvation from the imprisonment of the world, and which flourished
throughout the empire with ever-increasing popularity. But these religions,
with their festivals and secret rites devoted to their different deities, failed to
compel the allegiance of many in the educated classes. For them, the old
myths were dying, good at best as allegorical instruments for reasonable
discourse. And yet the austere rationalism of the dominant philosophies left
a certain spiritual hunger. That uniquely creative unity of intellect and
feeling of earlier times had now bifurcated. In the midst of an
82 

extraordinarily sophisticated cultural milieu—busy, urbanized, refined,
cosmopolitan—the reflective individual was often without compelling
motivation. The classical synthesis of pre-Alexandrian Greece had come
apart, its potency spent in the process of diffusion.
Yet the Hellenistic era was an exceptionally rich age with several
remarkable and, from the perspective of the modern West, indispensable
cultural accomplishments to its credit. Not least was its recognition of the
earlier Greek achievement and its consequent preservation of the classics
from Homer to Aristotle. The texts were now collected, systematically
examined, and painstakingly edited to prepare a definitive canon of
masterworks. Humanistic scholarship was founded. New disciplines of
textual and literary criticism were developed, interpretive analyses and
commentaries produced, and the great works set forth as revered cultural
ideals for the enrichment of future generations. In Alexandria, the Greek
translation of the Hebrew Bible, the Septuagint, was similarly compiled,
edited, and canonized with the same meticulous scholarship as that accorded
to the Homeric epics and Platonic dialogues.
Education itself became systematized and widespread. Large and
elaborately organized academic institutions were established for the pursuit
of scholarly research in the major cities—Alexandria with its Museum,
Pergamum with its Library, and Athens with its still-thriving philosophical
academies. The royal rulers of the major Hellenistic empire-states subsidized
the public institutions of learning, employing scientists and scholars as
salaried officials of the state. Public educational systems existed in almost
every Hellenistic city, gymnasia and theaters were plentiful, and advanced
instruction in Greek philosophy, literature, and rhetoric became widely
available. The Greek paideia flourished. Thus the earlier Hellenic
achievement was scholastically consolidated, geographically extended, and
vitally sustained for the remainder of the classical era.
Astronomy
As for original contributions, it was in the field of natural science that the
Hellenistic period especially excelled. The geometer Euclid, the geometer-
83 

astronomer Apollonius, the mathematical physicist Archimedes, the
astronomer Hipparchus, the geographer Strabo, the physician Galen, and
the geographer-astronomer Ptolemy all produced scientific advances and
codifications that would remain paradigmatic for many centuries. The
development of mathematical astronomy was particularly consequential.
The problem of the planets had found its first solution in Eudoxus’s
interconnected homocentric spheres, which both explained retrograde
motion and gave approximately accurate predictions. It did not, however,
explain the variations of brightness when the planets were retrograde, since
the rotating spheres necessarily kept the planets at constant distance from
the Earth. It was this theoretical failing that provoked subsequent
mathematicians and astronomers to explore alternative geometrical systems.
A few, such as the Pythagoreans, made the radical suggestion that the
Earth moved. Heraclides, a member of Plato’s Academy, proposed that the
diurnal movement of the heavens was actually caused by the Earth’s rotating
on its axis, and that Mercury and Venus, which always appeared close to the
Sun, did so because they revolved about the Sun rather than the Earth. A
century later, Aristarchus went so far as to hypothesize that the Earth and all
the planets revolved around the Sun, and that the Sun, like the outer sphere
of stars, remained stationary.1
These various models were generally rejected, however, for sound
mathematical and physical reasons. No annual stellar parallax was ever
observed, and such a shift should have occurred if the Earth revolved
around the Sun and thus traveled such vast distances relative to the stars
(unless, as Aristarchus suggested, the outer sphere of stars was inconceivably
large). Moreover, a moving Earth would entirely disrupt the comprehensive
coherence of Aristotelian cosmology. Aristotle had definitively treated the
physics of falling bodies, demonstrating that heavy objects move toward the
Earth because it is the universe’s fixed center. If the Earth moved, then this
well-reasoned and virtually self-evident account of falling bodies would be
undermined with no theory of comparable power to replace it. Perhaps
even more fundamentally, a planetary Earth would contravene the ancient
and also self-evident terrestrial-celestial dichotomy based on the
transcendent majesty of the heavens. Finally, theoretical and religious issues
aside, common sense dictated that a moving Earth would force objects and
84 

persons on it to be knocked about, clouds and birds would be left behind,
and so forth. The unambiguous evidence of the senses argued for a stable
Earth.
On the basis of such considerations, the majority of Hellenistic
astronomers decided in favor of an Earth-centered universe, and continued
working with various geometrical models for explaining the planetary
positions. The cumulative result of these efforts was codified in the second
century A.D. by Ptolemy, whose synthesis established the working paradigm
for astronomers from that time through the Renaissance. The essential
challenge presented to Ptolemy remained as before: how to account for the
numerous discrepancies between, on the one hand, the basic structure of
the Aristotelian cosmology, which demanded that the planets move
uniformly in perfect circles around a central immobile Earth, and, on the
other hand, astronomers’ actual observations of the planets, which appeared
to move with varying speeds, directions, and degrees of brightness. Building
on the recent advances of Greek geometry, on the Babylonians’ continued
observations and linear computational techniques, and on the work of the
Greek astronomers Apollonius and Hipparchus, Ptolemy outlined the
following scheme: The outermost revolving sphere of the fixed stars daily
carried the entire heavens westward about the Earth. Within that sphere,
however, each planet, including the Sun and Moon, revolved eastward at
varying slower rates, each in its own large circle called a deferent. For the
more complex movements of the planets other than the Sun and Moon,
another smaller circle, called an epicycle, was introduced, which rotated
uniformly around a point that continued to rotate on the deferent. The
epicycle solved what Eudoxus’s spheres could not, since the rotating
epicycle automatically brought the planet closer to the Earth whenever it
was retrograde, and thus made the planet appear brighter. By adjusting the
different rates of revolution for each deferent and epicycle, astronomers
could approximate the variable movements of each planet. The simplicity of
the deferent-epicycle scheme, plus its explanation of variable brightness,
made it the acknowledged victor in the quest for a viable astronomical
model.
Yet when applied, this scheme revealed further minor irregularities, to
explain which Ptolemy employed further geometrical devices: eccentrics
85 

(circles whose centers were displaced from the center of the Earth), minor
epicycles (additional smaller circles that rotated about a major epicycle or
deferent), and equants (which further explained variable speeds by positing
another point away from the circle’s center about which motion was
uniform). Ptolemy’s elaborate model of compound circles was able to give
the first systematic quantitative account of all the celestial motions.
Moreover, its versatility, whereby new conflicting observations could be met
by adding new geometrical modifications (e.g., adding another epicycle to an
epicycle, or an eccentric to an eccentric), gave the model a flexible power
that sustained its reign throughout the classical and medieval periods. The
Aristotelian cosmology, with its fixed central Earth, its circling aetheric
spheres, and its elemental physics, had provided the basic framework for
Hellenistic astronomers to forge this scheme, and the synthesized Ptolemaic-
Aristotelian universe in turn became the fundamental world conception
informing the West’s philosophical, religious, and scientific vision for most
of the subsequent fifteen centuries.
Astrology
In the classical world, however, mathematical astronomy was not an entirely
secular discipline. For the ancient understanding of the heavens as the locus
of the gods was inextricably wedded to the rapidly developing astronomy to
form what was considered the science of astrology, of which Ptolemy was
the classical era’s culminating systematizer. Indeed, a large part of the
impetus for the development of astronomy derived directly from its ties to
astrology, which employed those technical advances to improve its own
predictive power. In turn, the widespread demand for astrological insight—
whether in the imperial courts, the public marketplace, or the philosopher’s
study—encouraged astronomy’s further evolution and continued social
significance, the two disciplines forming essentially one profession from the
classical era through the Renaissance.
With the greatly increased precision of astronomical computations, the
ancient Mesopotamian conception of celestial events indicating terrestrial
events—the doctrine of universal sympathy, “as above, so below”—was now
86 

placed into a more sophisticated and systematic Greek framework of
mathematical and qualitative principles. This system was then applied by
Hellenistic astrologers to render predictions not only for large collectivities
such as nations and empires, but also for individual persons. By calculating
the exact positions of the planets at the moment of a person’s birth, and by
drawing out archetypal principles from the perceived correspondence of
specific mythic deities to specific planets, astrologers derived conclusions
concerning the individual’s character and destiny. Further insights emerged
by employing various Pythagorean and Babylonian principles pertaining to
the structure of the cosmos and its intrinsic relation to the microcosm, man.
Platonists elaborated on the means by which specific planetary alignments
could bring about an assimilation of the planet’s character with the
individual, an archetypal unity between agent and receiver. In turn,
Aristotelian physics, with its impersonal terminology and its mechanical
explanation of celestial influence on terrestrial phenomena via the elemental
spheres, provided an appropriate scientific framework for the developing
discipline. The accumulated elements of classical astrological theory were
brought by Ptolemy into a unified synthesis, in which he catalogued the
meanings of the planets, their positions and geometrical aspects, and their
various effects on human affairs.
With the emergence of the astrological perspective, it was widely believed
that human life was ruled not by capricious chance, but by an ordered and
humanly knowable destiny defined by the celestial deities according to the
movements of the planets. Through such knowledge it was thought that
man could understand his fate and act with a new sense of cosmic security.
The astrological conception of the world closely reflected the essential Greek
concept of kosmos itself, the intelligibly ordered patterning and
interconnected coherence of the universe, with man an integral part of the
whole. In the course of the Hellenistic era, astrology became the one belief
system that cut across the boundaries of science, philosophy, and religion,
forming a peculiarly unifying element in the otherwise fragmented outlook
of the age. Radiating outward from the cultural center of Alexandria, belief
in astrology pervaded the Hellenistic world and was embraced alike by Stoic,
Platonic, and Aristotelian philosophers, by mathematical astronomers and
medical physicians, by Hermetic esotericists and members of the various
87 

mystery religions.
Yet the central basis of the astrological understanding was interpreted in
different ways by the different groups, each according to its own world
view. For Ptolemy and his colleagues, astrology seems to have been regarded
primarily as a useful science—a straightforward study of how specific
planetary positions and combinations coincided with specific events and
personal qualities. Ptolemy noted that astrology could not claim to be an
exact science like astronomy, since astronomy dealt exclusively with the
abstract mathematics of the perfect celestial movements, while astrology
applied that knowledge to the necessarily less predictable imperfect arena of
terrestrial and human activity. But while its inherent inexactness and
susceptibility to error left astrology open to criticism, Ptolemy and his era
believed it worked. It shared with astronomy the same focus on the orderly
motions of the heavens, and because of the powers of causation exercised by
the celestial spheres, astrology possessed a rational foundation and firm
principles of operation, which Ptolemy undertook to define.
In a more philosophical spirit, the astrological correspondences were
interpreted by the Greek and Roman Stoics as signifying the fundamental-
determinism of human life by the celestial bodies. Hence astrology was
regarded as the best method for interpreting the cosmic will and aligning
one’s life with the divine reason. With their conviction that a cosmic fate
ruled all things, and with their belief in a universal sympathy or law unifying
all parts of the cosmos, the Stoics found astrology highly congenial to their
world view. The mystery religions expressed a similar understanding of the
planets’ dominion over human life, but perceived in addition a promise of
liberation: beyond the last planet, Saturn (the deity of fate, limitation, and
death), presided the all-encompassing sphere of a greater Deity whose
divine omnipotence could lift the human soul out of the bound determinism
of mortal existence into eternal freedom. This highest God ruled all the
planetary deities, and could thus suspend the laws of fate and liberate the
devout individual from the web of determinism.2 Platonists similarly held the
planets to be under the ultimate government of the supreme Good, but
tended to view the celestial configurations as indicative rather than causal,
and not absolutely determining for the evolved individual. A less fatalistic
view was also implicit in Ptolemy’s approach, in which he stressed the
88 

strategic value of such studies and suggested that man could play an active
role in the cosmic scheme. But whatever the particular interpretation, the
belief that the planetary movements possessed an intelligible significance for
human life exercised an immense influence on the cultural ethos of the
classical era.
Neoplatonism
One other field of thought sought to bridge the Hellenistic schism between
the rational philosophies and the mystery religions. During the several
centuries following Plato’s death in the mid-fourth century B.C., a continuing
stream of philosophers had developed his thought by focusing on and
amplifying its metaphysical and religious aspects. In the course of this
development, the highest transcendent principle began to be called “the
One”; new emphasis was placed on “the flight from the body” as necessary
for the soul’s philosophical ascent to the divine reality; the Forms began to
be located within the divine mind; and increased concern was shown for the
problem of evil and its relation to matter. This stream found its culmination
in the third century A.D. in the work of Plotinus, who, by integrating a more
explicitly mystical element into the Platonic scheme while incorporating
certain aspects of Aristotelian thought, formulated a “Neoplatonic”
philosophy of considerable intellectual power and universal scope. In
Plotinus, Greek rational philosophy reached its end point and passed over
into another, more thoroughly religious spirit, a suprarational mysticism.
The character of a new era, with a psychological and religious sensibility
fundamentally different from that of classical Hellenism, was becoming
apparent.
For in Plotinus’s thought, the rationality of the world and of the
philosopher’s quest is but the prelude to a more transcendent existent
beyond reason. The Neoplatonic cosmos is the result of a divine emanation
from the supreme One, which is infinite in being and beyond all description
or categories. The One, also called the Good, in an overflow of sheer
perfection produces the “other”—the created cosmos in all its variety—in a
hierarchical series of gradations moving away from this ontological center
89 

to the extreme limits of the possible. The first creative act is the issuing forth
from the One of the divine Intellect or Nous, the pervasive wisdom of the
universe, within which are contained the archetypal Forms or Ideas that
cause and order the world. From the Nous comes the World Soul, which
contains and animates the world, is the source for the souls of all living
beings, and constitutes the intermediate reality between the spiritual
Intellect and the world of matter. The emanation of divinity from the One is
an ontological process which Plotinus compared to the light that moves
gradually outward from a candle until it at last disappears into darkness. The
several gradations, however, are not separate realms in a temporal or spatial
sense, but are distinct levels of being timelessly present in all things. The
three “hypostases”—One, Intellect, and Soul—are not literal entities but
rather spiritual dispositions, just as the Ideas are not distinct objects but
rather different states of being of the divine Mind.
The material world, existing in time and space and perceptible to the
senses, is the level of reality furthest from unitary divinity. As the final limit
of creation, it is characterized in negative terms as the realm of multiplicity,
restriction, and darkness, as lowest in ontological stature—holding the least
degree of real being—and as constituting the principle of evil. Yet it is also,
despite its deep imperfection, characterized in positive terms as a creation of
beauty, an organic whole produced and held together by the World Soul in a
universal harmony. It imperfectly reflects on the spatiotemporal level the
glorious unity in diversity that exists on a higher level in the spiritual
Intellect’s world of Forms: The sensible is a noble image of the intelligible.
Although evil exists within this harmony, that negative reality plays a
necessary role in a larger design, and ultimately affects neither the
perfection of the One nor the well-being of the philosopher’s highest self.
Man, whose nature is soul-in-body, has potential access to the highest
intellectual and spiritual realms, though this is dependent on his liberation
from materiality. Man can rise to the consciousness of the World Soul—
thereby becoming in actuality what he already is potentially—and thence to
the universal Intellect; or he can remain bound to the lower realms. Because
all things emanate from the One through the Intellect and the World Soul,
and because the human imagination at its highest participates in that primal
divinity, man’s rational soul can imaginatively reflect the transcendent
90 

Forms and thus, through this insight into the ultimate order of things, move
toward its spiritual emancipation. The entire universe exists in a continual
outflow from the One into created multiplicity, which is then drawn back to
the One—a process of emanation and return always moved by the One’s
superfluity of perfection. The philosopher’s task is to overcome the human
bondage to the physical realm by moral and intellectual self-discipline and
purification, and to turn inward to a gradual ascent back to the Absolute.
The final moment of illumination transcends knowledge in any usual sense,
and cannot be defined or described, for it is based on an overcoming of the
subject-object dichotomy between the seeker and the goal: it is a
consummation of contemplative desire that unites the philosopher with the
One.
Thus Plotinus articulated an elaborately coherent rationalist and idealist
metaphysics which found its fulfillment in a unitary mystical apprehension
of the supreme Godhead. With confident and meticulous precision, and in
often startlingly beautiful prose, Plotinus described the complex nature of
the universe and its participation in the divine. Basing his philosophy on the
Platonic doctrine of transcendent Ideas, he then added or drew out several
new, defining features—teleological dynamism, hierarchy, emanation, and a
suprarational mysticism. In this form, Neoplatonism became the final
expression of classical pagan philosophy, and it assumed the role of
Platonism’s historical carrier in subsequent centuries.
Both Neoplatonism and astrology transcended the intellectual bifurcation
of the Hellenistic era, and, like much else in classical culture, both were the
result of Greek thought-forms’ penetrating and intermingling with non-
Hellenic cultural impulses. Each in its own way would have an enduring, if
sometimes hidden, influence on later Western thought. Yet despite
astrology’s near-universal popularity in the Hellenistic world, and despite
Neoplatonism’s well-received renovation of pagan philosophy in the last
years of the academies, by the late classical era new, powerful forces had
begun to impinge on the Greco-Roman consciousness. In the end, the
restless spirit of the Hellenistic era was to seek its redemption in a new
quarter altogether.
With the several important exceptions already cited, the later efforts of
Hellenic culture in the classical period appeared to lack the daring
91 

intellectual optimism and curiosity that had been characteristic of the earlier
Greeks. At least on the surface, Hellenistic civilization seemed remarkable
more for its variety than its force, more for its worldly intelligence than its
inspired genius, more for its sustaining and elaboration of past cultural
achievements than its origination of new ones. Many significant currents
were at work, but the whole did not cohere. The cultural outlook was
unsettled, alternately skeptical and dogmatic, syncretistic and fragmented.
The highly organized centers of learning seemed to have a discouraging
effect on individual genius. Already by the time of Rome’s conquest of
Greece in the second century B.C., the Hellenic impulse was fading, displaced
by the more Oriental view of human subordination to the overwhelming
powers of the supernatural.
Rome
In Rome, however, classical civilization experienced an expansive autumnal
flowering, spurred first by the Republic’s militaristic and libertarian ethos,
and then nourished by the Pax Romana established during the long imperial
reign of Caesar Augustus. With political shrewdness and steadfast patriotism,
and fortified by belief in their guiding deities, the Romans succeeded not
only in conquering the entire Mediterranean basin and a large part of
Europe, but also in fulfilling their perceived mission of extending their
civilization throughout the known world. Without that conquest, made
possible by the ruthless military tactics and ambitious political genius of
leaders like Julius Caesar, it is unlikely the positive legacy of classical culture
would have survived, in the West or the East, the pressures of later
barbarian and Oriental assaults.
Roman culture itself contributed significantly to the classical achievement.
Cicero, Virgil, Horace, and Livy brought the Latin language, under the
influence of the Greek masters, to an eloquent maturity. The Greek paideia
found new life in the Roman aristocracy’s humanitas (Cicero’s Latin
translation of paideia), the liberal education founded on the classics. Greek
mythology was conflated with and preserved in Roman mythology, and
through the works of Ovid and Virgil passed on to Western posterity.
92 

Roman legal thought, containing a new sense of objective rationality and
natural law derived from the Greek concept of the universal Logos,
introduced systematic clarity into commercial and legal interactions
throughout the empire, cutting through the welter of divergent local
customs and evolving principles of contract law and property ownership
crucial for the West’s later development.
The sheer energy and massiveness of the Roman enterprise commanded
the awe of the ancient world. But Rome’s cultural splendor was an imitatio,
albeit inspired, of Greece’s glory, and its magnitude alone could not
indefinitely sustain the Hellenic spirit. Although nobility of character often
evidenced itself in the turmoil of political life, the Roman ethos gradually lost
its vitality. The very success of the empire’s inordinate military and
commercial activity, divorced from deeper motivations, was weakening the
fiber of the Roman citizenry. Most scientific activity, let alene genius,
radically diminished in the empire soon after Galen and Ptolemy in the
second century, and the excellence of Latin literature began to wane in the
same period. Faith in human progress, so broadly visible in the cultural
florescence of fifth-century B.C. Greece, and sporadically expressed, usually
by scientists and technologists, in the Hellenistic age, virtually disappeared in
the final centuries of the Roman Empire. Classical civilization’s finest hours
were by then all in the past, and the various factors that brought on Rome’s
fall—oppressive and rapacious government, overambitious generals,
constant barbarian incursions, an aristocracy grown decadent and effete,
religious crosscurrents undermining the imperial authority and military
ethos, drastic sustained inflation, pestilential diseases, a dwindling population
without resilience or focus—all contributed further to the apparent death of
the Greek-inspired world.
Yet beneath the glittering decay of classical culture, and from within the
wellspring of the Hellenistic religious matrix, a new world had been slowly
and inexorably taking form.
93 

The Emergence of Christianity
Considered as a single entity, classical Greco-Roman civilization arose,
flourished, and declined in the course of a thousand years. At about the
midpoint of this millennium, in the remote districts of Galilee and Judaea on
the periphery of the Roman Empire, the young Jewish religious leader Jesus
of Nazareth lived, taught, and died. His radical religious message was
embraced by a small but fervently inspired group of Jewish disciples, who
believed that after his death by crucifixion, Jesus had risen again and
revealed himself as the Christ (“the anointed one”), the world’s Lord and
Savior. A new stage in the religion was reached with the advent of Paul of
Tarsus, who was Jewish by birth, Roman by citizenship, and Greek by
culture. While on his way to Damascus to restrain further spread of what he
viewed as a heretical sect dangerous to Judaic orthodoxy, Paul was
overwhelmed by a vision of the risen Christ. He then ardently espoused the
very religion of which he had been the most forceful opponent, and indeed
became its preeminent missionary and foundational theologian. Under Paul’s
leadership, the small religious movement rapidly spread to the other parts of
the empire—Asia Minor, Egypt, Greece, to Rome itself—and began to
constitute itself as a world church.
In the course of the unsettled Hellenistic era, something like a spiritual
crisis appears to have arisen in the culture, its members impelled by newly
conscious needs for personal significance in the cosmos and personal
knowledge of life’s meaning. To these needs the various mystery religions,
public cults, esoteric systems, and philosophical schools all spoke, but it was
Christianity that, after intermittent periods of severe persecution by the
Roman state, gradually emerged as the victor. The turning point of this
94 

process came in the early fourth century with the epochal conversion of the
Roman emperor Constantine, who thereafter committed himself and his
imperial power to Christianity’s propagation.3
The classical world was drastically transformed in its final centuries by the
influx of the Christian religion from the east and the massive invasions of
the Germanic barbarians from the north. By the end of the fourth century,
Christianity had become the official state religion of the Roman Empire, and
by the end of the fifth, the last Roman emperor in the West had been
deposed by a barbarian king. On the face of it, classical civilization had been
snuffed out in the West, its great works and ideas left to the Byzantines and
later the Moslems to be preserved as in a museum. As Edward Gibbon would
pointedly epitomize his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
“I have described the triumph of barbarism and religion.” But from a long
view of the West’s complex evolution, these new forces did not entirely
eliminate or supplant the Greco-Roman culture as much as they engrafted
their own distinctive elements onto the highly developed and deeply rooted
classical foundation.4
Despite the decline of Europe into cultural isolation and inactivity during
the following centuries (especially as compared with the flourishing
Byzantine and Islamic empires), the restless enterprising vigor of the
Germanic peoples combined with the civilizing influence of the Roman
Catholic Church to forge a culture that was, in another thousand years, to
give birth to the modern West. These “Middle” Ages between the classical era
and the Renaissance were thus a gestation period of considerable
consequence. The Church served as the one institution uniting the West and
sustaining a connection with classical civilization. The barbarians for their
part did two remarkable things: they converted to Christianity, while they
simultaneously set about the enormous task of learning and integrating the
rich intellectual heritage of the classical culture they had just conquered.
This great scholastic labor, slowly carried out over the thousand-year period
first in the monasteries and later in the universities, encompassed not only
Greek philosophy and letters as well as Roman political thought, but also the
now impressive body of theological writings by the ancient Christian fathers
culminating in the work of Augustine—who wrote in the early fifth century
just as the Roman Empire was collapsing around him under the impact of
95 

the barbarian invasions. It was from this complex fusion of racial, political,
religious, and philosophical elements that there gradually arose a
comprehensive world view common to Western Christendom. Succeeding
that of the classical Greeks as the governing vision of the culture, the
Christian outlook would inform and inspire the lives and thinking of
millions until the modern era—and, for many, continues to do so.
96 

O
III
The Christian World View
ur next task is to attempt an understanding of the Christian belief
system. Any recapitulation of our cultural and intellectual history
must address this task with care, for Christianity has presided over
Western culture for most of the latter’s existence, not only bearing its
central spiritual impulse for two millennia but also influencing its
philosophical and scientific evolution well on through the Renaissance and
Enlightenment. Even now, in less obvious but no less significant ways, the
Christian world view still affects—indeed, permeates—the Western cultural
psyche, even when the latter is most apparently secular in disposition.
Precisely what the historical Jesus of Nazareth said, did, or believed
himself to be cannot now be ascertained. Like Socrates, Jesus wrote nothing
for posterity. It is relatively well established by historical studies and
scriptural exegesis that he preached, within the Judaic religious tradition, a
call for repentance in anticipation of the imminent coming of God’s
Kingdom, that he saw this dawning Kingdom as already present in his own
words and deeds, and that for these claims he was put to death under the
Roman procurator Pontius Pilate in about 30 A.D. Whether he knew himself
to be the Son of God is not unequivocally established, and many of the other
major elements of Jesus’s life held sacred by the Christian faith—the
dramatic nativity narrative, the various miracle stories, Jesus’s knowledge of
the Trinity, his intention to found a new religion—cannot be conclusively
verified from the historical and textual evidence.
It was not until the later part of the first century that the four Gospels of
the New Testament were composed and the foundations of Christian belief
laid out by the descendants of Jesus’s immediate followers, and by then an
97 

elaborate and at times inconsistent belief structure had developed. This
structure involved not only the remembered facts of Jesus’s life, but also
various oral traditions, legends, parables and sayings, subsequent visions and
prophecies, hymns and prayers, apocalyptic beliefs, the young Church’s
didactic requirements, interpolated parallels with the Hebrew Scriptures,
other Jewish, Greek, and Gnostic influences, and a complex redemptive
theology and view of history—all unified by the biblical authors’
commitment of faith to the new religion. How much this final compound
reflected the actual events and teachings of Jesus’s life remains problematic.
The earliest extant Christian documents are the letters of Paul, who never
met Jesus. Hence the Jesus that history came to know is the Jesus portrayed
—recalled, reconstructed, interpreted, embellished, vividly imagined—in the
New Testament by writers living one or two generations after the period
covered by their narratives, the authorship of which they ascribed to Jesus’s
original disciples.
Even these writings were gradually selected as God’s authentic revelation
by the early Church hierarchy out of a larger group of such materials, some
of which (generally composed later) offered radically different perspectives
on the events in question. The orthodox Church that made these judgments,
so decisive for the subsequent formation of the Christian belief system,
understood itself to be an authority founded with the first apostles and
divinely sanctioned by Holy Scripture. The Church was God’s representative
on earth, a sacred institution whose continuing tradition would serve as the
exclusive interpreter of God’s revelation to humanity. With the Church’s
gradual emergence as the dominant structure and influence in the early
Christian religion, the writings that now constitute the New Testament,
added to the Hebrew Bible, were established as the canonical basis for the
Christian tradition, and these effectively determined the parameters of the
evolving Christian world view.
These writings will therefore serve as the basis for our present study of
the Christian phenomenon. Because our topic is the nature of and dynamic
relationship between the dominant world views of Western civilization, our
main concern here is with the tradition of Christianity that held cultural
sway over the West from the fall of Rome to the modern era. What the
Christian West believed to be true about the world and the human being’s
98 

place in it is our specific interest, and that world view was grounded in the
canonical revelation, and gradually modified, developed, and extended by
various subsequent factors largely under the authoritative guidance of
Church tradition. That it was the Church that established the divine
authority of the scriptural canon, and the scriptural canon that established
the divine authority of the Church, may appear circuitous, but that
symbiotic mutual endorsement, affirmed in faith by the continuing Church
community, effectively ruled the formation of the Christian outlook. This
tradition, then, both in its foundational biblical form and in its later
developments, is the subject of our inquiry.
To begin, let us turn our attention to that from which Christianity
emerged—the intensely focused, morally rigorous, richly religious tradition
of the Israelites, the descendants of Abraham and Moses.
99 

Judaic Monotheism and the Divinization of
History
Theology and history were inextricably conjoined in the Hebrew vision. Acts
of God and the events of human experience constituted one reality, and the
biblical narrative of the Hebrew past was intended rather to reveal its divine
logic than to reconstruct an exact historical record. As with Christianity,
legend and fact in the early history of Judaism cannot now be clearly
distinguished. Nevertheless, although later biblical interpolations obscure
the precise emergence in the ancient Near East of a specific people with a
monotheistic religion out of an earlier background (extending to the
patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the early second millennium B.C.) of
seminomadic tribes with elements of polytheism in their worship, there
would appear to be a definite historical core to the traditional Judaic self-
understanding.
Certainly the history and mission of the Hebrew people and its religion
were unlike any other in the ancient world. In the midst of many nations,
often more powerful and advanced than their own, the Hebrews came to
experience themselves as the Chosen People, singled out as a nation whose
history would have weighty spiritual consequences for the entire world. In
the midst of a land where a multiplicity of nature deities were worshiped by
surrounding tribes and nations, the Hebrews came to believe that they
existed in a unique and direct relationship to the one absolute God who
stood above and beyond all other beings as both creator of the world and
director of its history. Indeed, the Hebrews perceived their own history as
continuous with and reflective of the very beginnings of Creation, when
God had made the world and, in his own image, man. With Adam and Eve’s
100 

primal disobedience and expulsion from the Garden of Eden, the drama of
man’s exile from divinity had begun, to be renewed again and again—Cain
and Abel, Noah and the Flood, the Tower of Babel—until Abraham was
called forth in faith to follow God’s plan for his people.
It was in the course of the Exodus, when Moses led the Hebrews out of
bondage from Egypt, that the sacred covenant was established by which
Israel identified itself and recognized its God, Yahweh, as the saving Lord of
history.1 On this historical foundation rested the Israelites’ continuing faith
in God’s promise for their future fulfillment. By accepting the divine
commandments revealed on Mount Sinai, the Hebrews betrothed
themselves in obedience to their God and his insuperable and inscrutable
will. For the God of the Hebrews was a God of miracle and purpose, who
saved nations or crushed them at will, who brought forth water from rocks,
food from heaven, children from the barren womb, to accomplish his plan
for Israel. Their God was not only creator but liberator, and had assured his
people a glorious destiny if they would remain faithful and obedient to his
law.
The imperative of trust in the Lord, and fear of the Lord, dominated Jewish
life as the prerequisite for enjoying his saving power in the world. Here was
the overriding sense of moral urgency, of ultimate fate’s being decided by
present human actions, of the individual’s direct accountability to the all-
seeing and all-just God. Here too was the denunciation of an unjust society,
the contempt for hollow secular success, the prophetic call for moral
regeneration. A divine summons had been given to the Jews to recognize
God’s sovereignty over the world, and to aid in the realization of his purpose
—to bring peace, justice, and fulfillment to all mankind. This final design
became explicit in the later centuries of ancient Israel’s fluctuating history,
during the Babylonian captivity (sixth century B.C.) and afterward, when
there developed an increasing sense of the coming “Day of the Lord.” Then
the Kingdom of God would be established, the righteous would be elevated
and the wicked punished, and Israel would be honored as the spiritual light
of mankind. Then the present sufferings of the Chosen People would bring
forth a new era of universal justice, true piety, and the revelation of God’s
full glory to the world. After the centuries of anguish and defeat, a messianic
figure would appear, through whose divine power history itself would find
101 

its triumphant end. Israel’s “Promised Land,” flowing with milk and honey,
had now expanded to become Israel’s bringing the Kingdom of God to all
humanity. It was this faith, this hope in the future, this unique historical
impulse carried forward by the prophets and compellingly recorded in the
poetry and prose of the Bible, that had sustained the Jewish people for two
millennia.
When Jesus of Nazareth began his ministry, he did so in a Jewish cultural
ambiance in which expectations of a messiah and an apocalyptic
denouement of history had reached extreme proportions. Such a context
gave singularly dramatic weight to Jesus’s announcement to his fellow
Galileans that in his person the time had at last arrived for the fulfillment of
the biblical prophecies: “The Kingdom of God is at hand.” But it was not just
Jesus’s teachings about the dawning Kingdom that inspired the new faith,
nor the eschatological expectations aroused by wandering preachers like
John the Baptist. Most decisive was the reaction by Jesus’s disciples to his
death by crucifixion and their fervent belief in his resurrection. For in that
resurrection, the Christian faithful perceived the triumph of God over
mortality and evil, and recognized the type and promise of their own
resurrection. Whatever the basis for that belief—the intense conviction of
which can scarcely be overestimated—it would seem that not long after
Jesus’s death his followers had achieved a remarkably rapid and
comprehensive recasting of their religious faith that exploded old
assumptions and initiated a new understanding of God and humanity.
This new vision emerged soon after the crucifixion from a series of
revelatory experiences, through which a number of Jesus’s followers
became convinced their master was again alive. These “appearances,” later
bolstered by Paul’s visionary experience of the risen Christ, led the disciples
to believe that Jesus in some sense had been wholly restored by God’s power,
and reunited in glory with God to share his eternal life in heaven. Jesus,
then, was not just a man, nor even a great prophet, but was the Messiah
himself the Son of God, the long awaited divine savior whose passion and
death had inaugurated the world’s redemption and the birth of a new aeon.
The Judaic biblical prophecies could now be properly understood: The
Messiah was not a mundane king but a spiritual one, and God’s Kingdom not
102 

a political victory for Israel but a divine redemption for humanity, bringing
a new life suffused with God’s Spirit. Thus the bitterly disappointing event of
their leader’s crucifixion was mysteriously transformed in the minds of his
disciples into the basis for a seemingly unlimited faith in the ultimate
salvation of mankind, and an extraordinarily dynamic impulse to propagate
that faith.
Jesus had challenged his fellow Jews to accept God’s saving activity in
history, an activity visible in his own person and ministry. This challenge was
paralleled—developed, reformulated, magnified—by the early Church in its
call to recognize Jesus as the Son of God and Messiah.2 Thus did Christianity
claim to be the fulfillment of the Judaic hopes: The longed for future of God
had now entered history in Christ. In a paradoxical combination of the
linear and the timeless, Christianity declared that Christ’s presence in the
world was the presence of God’s promised future, just as God’s future lay in
the full realization of the presence of Christ. The Kingdom of God was now
already present, and yet was just dawning, to be fulfilled at the end of history
with Christ’s triumphant return. For in Christ, the world had been
reconciled, but it had not yet been fully redeemed. Christianity thereby both
culminated the Judaic hope and yet also continued a hope for a cosmic
spiritual triumph in the imminent future, when there would come a new
creation and a new humanity enjoying the unhindered presence of God.
Just as the Exodus provided the historical root of the Judaic hope in the
future Day of the Lord, so too did Christ’s resurrection and reunion with
God provide the foundation for the Christian hope in mankind’s future
resurrection and reunion with God. And just as the Jewish Bible, with its
revelation of God’s law and promises in counterpoint with the history of his
people, had sustained the Jews through the centuries and permeated their
lives with its principles and its hopes, so now the sustaining basis for the
new religion and its traditions became the Christian Bible, with a “New
Testament” joined to the “Old” (the Jewish Bible). The Church was the new
Israel. Christ was the new covenant. Thus it was that the character of the
new age ushered in with Christianity was stamped with the altogether un-
Hellenic character of the small nation of Israel.
Of all the characteristics of the new religion, Christianity’s claims to
universality and historical fulfillment were pivotal, and those claims derived
103 

from Judaism. The Judaeo-Christian God was not one tribal or polis deity
among many, but was the one true supreme God—the Maker of the
universe, the Lord of history, the omnipotent and omniscient King of Kings
whose unequaled reality and power justly commanded the allegiance of all
nations and all mankind. In the history of the people of Israel, that God had
entered decisively into the world, spoken his Word through the prophets,
and called forth humanity to its divine destiny: what would be born of Israel
would have world-historic significance. To the quickly growing numbers of
Christians who now proclaimed their message far and wide in the Roman
Empire, what was born of Israel was Christianity.
104 

Classical Elements and the Platonic Inheritance
Considering the singular nature of its essential doctrine and message,
Christianity spread at an astonishing rate from its tiny Galilean nucleus
eventually to encompass the Western world. Within a generation after
Jesus’s death, his followers had forged a religious and intellectual synthesis
within the framework of their new faith that not only inspired many to
undertake the often dangerous mission of extending that faith into the
surrounding pagan environment, but also was capable of addressing, and
eventually fulfilling, the religious and philosophical aspirations of a
sophisticated urbanized world empire. Yet Christianity’s self-conception as a
world religion was profoundly facilitated by its relation to the larger
Hellenistic world. While Christianity’s claim ‘to religious universality
originated in Judaism, both its effective universality—its success in
propagation—and its philosophical universality owed much to the Greco-
Roman milieu of its birth. Ancient Christians did not consider it accidental
that the Incarnation occurred at the historical moment of conjunction
between the Jewish religion, Greek philosophy, and the Roman Empire.
Significantly, it was not the Galilean Jews who had been closest to Jesus,
but Paul, the Roman citizen of Greek cultural background, who effectively
turned Christianity toward its universal mission. Although virtually all of the
earliest Christians were Jewish, only a relatively small fraction of Jews
eventually became Christian. In the long run, the new religion appealed
much more broadly and successfully to the larger Hellenistic world.3 The
Jews had long awaited a messiah, but had expected either a political
monarch, like their ancient king David, who would assert Israel’s
sovereignty in the world, or a manifestly spiritual “prince—the “Son of
105 

man“—who would arrive from the heavens in angelic glory at the dramatic
end of time. They did not expect the apolitical, unmilitant, manifestly human,
suffering and dying Jesus. Moreover, although the Jews understood their
special relation to God would have important consequences for all mankind,
the Judaic religion was by character intensely nationalistic and separatist,
almost wholly centered on the people of Israel—a spirit that continued in
those early Christian Jews in Jerusalem who opposed the full inclusion of
non-Jews into the community of faith until all of Israel was awakened.
While the Jerusalem Christians, under the leadership of James and Peter,
continued for some time to require the observance of traditional Jewish
rules against common eating, thus circumscribing the new religion into the
Judaic framework, Paul asserted, amidst much opposition, that the new
Christian freedom and hope for salvation was already universally present,
for Gentiles without the Judaic Law as well as Jews within it. All of mankind
needed, and could embrace, the divine Savior. In that first fundamental
doctrinal controversy within the early Church, it was Paul’s universalism
that prevailed over Judaic exclusivism, with large repercussions for the
classical world.
For the reluctance on the part of most Jews to embrace the Christian
revelation, and the success of Paul’s reaction—bringing Christianity to the
Gentiles—combined with political events to shift the new religion’s center of
gravity from Palestine to the larger Hellenistic world. After Jesus’s death, the
messianic political revolutionary movements led by the Zealot party
continued among the Jews against the Romans, reaching a critical peak a
generation later in a widespread Palestinian revolt. In the ensuing war,
Roman troops crushed the rebellion, captured Jerusalem, and destroyed the
Jewish Temple (70 A.D.). The Christian community in Jerusalem and Palestine
was thereby dispersed, and the closest link of the Christian religion to
Judaism—maintained and symbolized by the Jerusalem Christians—was
severed. Christianity thereafter was more a Hellenistic than a Palestinian
phenomenon.
It must also be noted that, compared with Judaism, Greco-Roman culture
was in many respects more consistently nonsectarian and universal in both
its practice and its vision. The Roman Empire and its laws transcended all
nationalities and previous political boundaries, granting citizenship and
106 

rights to conquered peoples as well as to Romans. The cosmopolitan
Hellenistic age, with its great urban centers and trade and travel, joined
together the civilized world as never before. The Stoic ideal of the
brotherhood of mankind and the Cosmopolis, or World City, affirmed that
all human beings are free and equal children of God. The universal Logos of
Greek philosophy transcended all apparent oppositions and imperfections—
the divine Reason ruling all humanity and the cosmos yet immanent in
human reason and potentially available to every individual of whatever
nation or people. But above all, a universal Christian religion of world
proportions was made feasible by the prior existence of the Alexandrian and
Roman empires, without which the lands and peoples surrounding the
Mediterranean would still have been divided into an enormous multiplicity
of separate ethnic cultures with widely diverging linguistic, political, and
cosmological predispositions. Despite the understandable antagonism felt by
many early Christians toward their Roman rulers, it was precisely the Pax
Romana that afforded the freedom of movement and communication that
was indispensable to the propagation of the Christian faith. From Paul, at the
start of Christianity, to Augustine, its most influential protagonist at the end
of the classical era, the character and aspirations of the new religion were
decisively molded by its Greco-Roman context.
These considerations apply not only to the practical side of Christianity’s
dissemination but also to the elaborated Christian world view as it came to
rule the Western mind. Although the Christian outlook may be imagined as
an entirely independent and monolithic structure of belief, we may more
accurately distinguish not only opposing tendencies within the whole, but
also a historical continuity with the metaphysical and religious conceptions
of the classical world. It is true that, with the rise of Christianity, the
pluralism and syncretism of Hellenistic culture, with its various
intermingling philosophical schools and polytheistic religions, were replaced
by an exclusive monotheism derived from the Judaic tradition. It is also true
that Christian theology established the biblical revelation as absolute truth
and demanded strict conformity to Church doctrine from any philosophical
speculations. Within these limits, however, the Christian world view was
fundamentally informed by its classical predecessors. Not only did there exist
crucial parallels between the tenets and rituals of Christianity and those of
107 

the pagan mystery religions, but in addition, as time passed, even the most
erudite elements of Hellenic philosophy were absorbed by, and had their
influence on, the Christian faith. Certainly Christianity began and triumphed
in the Roman Empire not as a philosophy but as a religion—eastern and
Judaic in character, emphatically communal, salvational, emotional, mystical,
depending on revelatory statements of faith and belief, and almost fully
independent of Hellenic rationalism. Yet Christianity soon found Greek
philosophy to be not just an alien pagan intellectual system with which it
was forced to contend, but, in the view of many early Christian theologians,
a divinely prearranged matrix for the rational explication of the Christian
faith.
The essence of Paul’s theology lay in his belief that Jesus was not an
ordinary human being but was the Christ, the eternal Son of God, who
incarnated as the man Jesus to save mankind and bring history to its glorious
denouement. In Paul’s vision, God’s wisdom ruled all of history in a hidden
manner, but had at last become manifest in Christ, who reconciled the world
with the divine. All things had been made in Christ, who was the very
principle of divine wisdom. Christ was the archetype of all creation, which
was patterned after him, converged in him, and found its triumphant
meaning in his incarnation and resurrection. Christianity thus came to
understand the entire movement of human history, including all of its
various religious and philosophical strivings, as an unfolding of the divine
plan that was fulfilled in the coming of Christ.
The correspondences between this conception of Christ and that of the
Greek Logos did not go unnoticed by Hellenistic Christians. The remarkable
Hellenistic Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria, an older contemporary of
Jesus and Paul, had already broached a Judaic-Greek synthesis pivoted on
the term “Logos.”4 But it was with the opening words of the Gospel
according to John, “In the beginning was the Logos,” that Christianity’s
relationship to Hellenic philosophy was potently initiated. Soon afterward,
an extraordinary convergence of Greek thought and Christian theology was
in progress that would leave both transformed.
Faced with the fact that there already existed in the greater
Mediterranean culture a sophisticated philosophical tradition from the
Greeks, the educated class of early Christians rapidly saw the need for
108 

integrating that tradition with their religious faith. Such an integration was
pursued both for their own satisfaction and to assist the Greco-Roman
culture in understanding the Christian mystery. Yet this was considered no
marriage of convenience, for the spiritually resonant Platonic philosophy
not only harmonized with, it also elaborated and intellectually enhanced, the
Christian conceptions derived from the revelations of the New Testament.
Fundamental Platonic principles now found corroboration and new
meaning in the Christian context: the existence of a transcendent reality of
eternal perfection, the sovereignty of divine wisdom in the cosmos, the
primacy of the spiritual over the material, the Socratic focus on the “tending
of the soul,” the soul’s immortality and high moral imperatives, its
experience of divine justice after death, the importance of scrupulous self-
examination, the admonition to control the passions and appetites in the
service of the good and true, the ethical principle that it is better to suffer an
injustice than to commit one, the belief in death as a transition to more
abundant life, the existence of a prior condition of divine knowledge now
obscured in man’s limited natural state, the notion of participation in the
divine archetype, the progressive assimilation to God as the goal of human
aspiration. Despite its having entirely distinct origins from the Judaeo-
Christian religion, for many ancient Christian intellectuals the Platonic
tradition was itself an authentic expression of divine wisdom, capable of
bringing articulate metaphysical insight to some of the deepest of Christian
mysteries. Thus as Christian culture matured during its first several
centuries, its religious thought developed into a systematic theology, and
although that theology was Judaeo-Christian in substance, its metaphysical
structure was largely Platonic. Such a fusion was advanced by the major
theologians of the early Church—first by Justin Martyr, then more fully by
Clement of Alexandria and Origen, and finally, most consequentially, by
Augustine.
In turn, Christianity was regarded as the true consummation of
philosophy, with the gospel as the great meeting ground of Hellenism and
Judaism. The Christian proclamation that the Logos, the world Reason itself,
had actually taken human form in the historical person of Jesus Christ
compelled widespread interest in the Hellenistic cultural world. In their
understanding of Christ as the incarnate Logos, early Christian theologians
109 

synthesized the Greek philosophical doctrine of the intelligible divine
rationality of the world with the Judaic religious doctrine of the creative
Word of God, which manifested a personal God’s providential will and gave
to human history its salvational meaning. In Christ, the Logos became man:
the historical and the timeless, the absolute and the personal, the human and
the divine became one. Through his redemptive act, Christ mediated the
soul’s access to the transcendent reality and thus satisfied the philosopher’s
ultimate quest. In terms strongly reminiscent of Platonism with its
transcendent Ideas, Christian theologians taught that to discover Christ was
to discover the truth of the cosmos and the truth of one’s own being in one
unitary illumination.
The Neoplatonic philosophical structure, developing simultaneously
alongside early Christian theology in Alexandria, seemed to offer an
especially fitting metaphysical language within which could be better
comprehended the Judaeo-Christian vision. In Neoplatonism, the ineffable
transcendent Godhead, the One, had brought forth its manifest image—the
divine Nous or universal Reason—and the World Soul. In Christianity, the
transcendent Father’ had brought forth his manifest image—the Son or
Logos—and the Holy Spirit. But Christianity now brought dynamic
historicity into the Hellenic conception by asserting that the Logos, the
eternal truth which had been present from the creation of the world, had
now been sent forth into world history in human form to bring that
creation, by means of the Spirit, back to its divine essence. In Christ, heaven
and earth were reunited, the One and the many reconciled. What had been
the philosopher’s private spiritual ascent was now, through the Incarnation
of the Logos, the historical destiny of the entire creation. The Word would
awaken all mankind. Through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit would occur
the world’s return to the One. That supreme Light, the true source of reality
shining forth outside Plato’s cave of shadows, was now recognized as the
light of Christ. As Clement of Alexandria announced, “By the Logos, the
whole world is now become Athens and Greece.”
It is indicative of this intimacy between Platonism and Christianity that
Plotinus and Origen, the central thinkers, respectively, of the last school of
pagan philosophy and the first school of Christian philosophy, shared the
same teacher in Alexandria, Ammonius Saccas (a mysterious figure about
110 

whom virtually nothing is known). Plotinus’s philosophy, in turn, was
pivotal in Augustine’s gradual conversion to Christianity. Augustine saw
Plotinus as one in whom “Plato lived again,” and regarded Plato’s thought
itself as “the most pure and bright in all philosophy,” so profound as to be in
almost perfect concordance with the Christian faith. Thus Augustine held
that the Platonic Forms existed within the creative mind of God and that the
ground of reality lay beyond the world of the senses, available only through
a radical inward-turning of the soul. No less Platonic, although thoroughly
Christian, was Augustine’s paradigmatic statement that “the true
philosopher is the lover of God.” And it was Augustine’s formulation of
Christian Platonism that was to permeate virtually all of medieval Christian
thought in the West. So enthusiastic was the Christian integration of the
Greek spirit that Socrates and Plato were frequently regarded as divinely
inspired pre-Christian saints, early communicators of the divine Logos
already present in pagan times—“Christians before Christ,” as Justin Martyr
claimed. In ancient Christian icons, Socrates and Plato were portrayed
among the redeemed whom Christ led forth from the underworld after his
storming of Hades. In itself classical culture may have been finite and
perishable, but from this view it was being reborn through Christianity,
endowed with new life and new meaning. Thus Clement declared that
philosophy had prepared the Greeks for Christ, just as the Law had prepared
the Jews.
Yet however profound this metaphysical affinity with Platonic thought,
the essential thrust of Christianity derived from its Judaic foundation. In
contrast to the Greeks’ atemporal balancing of many archetypal beings with
different qualities and areas of dominance, Judaic monotheism bestowed to
Christianity a particularly forceful sense of the divine as a single supreme
personal being with a specific historical plan of salvation for mankind. God
acted in and through history with definite intent and direction. In
comparison with the Greeks, Judaism condensed and intensified the sense of
the holy or sacred, regarding it as emanating from a single omnipotent Deity
who was both Creator and Redeemer. Although monotheism certainly
existed in various Platonic conceptions of God—the universal Mind, the
Demiurge, the highest Form of the Good, and especially the Neoplatonic
supreme One—the God of Moses was by his own declaration unequivocally
111 

unique in his divinity, and was more personal in his relationship to
humanity and more freely active in human history than was the
transcendent Platonic absolute. Although the Judaic tradition of exile and
return bore a striking resemblance to the Neoplatonic doctrine of the
cosmos’s outgoing and return to the One, the former possessed a
communally witnessed historical concreteness and ritually consecrated
emotional passion that were not characteristic of the latter’s more interior,
intellectual, and individualized approach.
While the Hellenic sense of history was generally cyclical, the Judaic was
decisively linear and progressive, the gradual fulfillment in time of God’s
plan for man.5 While Hellenic religious thought tended toward the abstract
and analytic, Judaism’s mode was more concrete, dynamic, and apodictic.
And where the Greek conception of God leaned toward the idea of a
supreme ruling intelligence, the Judaic conception emphasized that of a
supreme ruling will. For the essence of the Judaic faith rested on a burning
expectation that God would actively renew his sovereignty over the world in
a dramatic transfiguration of human history, and by Jesus’s time this
expectation centered on the appearance of a personal messiah. Christianity
integrated the two traditions by proclaiming, in effect, that the true and
highest divine reality—God the Father and Creator, the Platonic eternal
transcendent—had fully penetrated the imperfect and finite world of nature
and human history through the flesh-and-blood incarnation of his Son Jesus
Christ, the Logos, whose life and death had commenced a liberating reunion
of the two previously separate realms—transcendent and mundane, divine
and human—and thus a rebirth of the cosmos through man. The world
Creator and Logos had broken anew into history with fresh creative power,
inaugurating a universal reconciliation. In the transition from Greek
philosophy to Christian theology, the transcendent was made immanent, the
eternal was made historical, and human history itself was now spiritually
significant: “And the Logos became flesh and dwelt among us.”
112 

The Conversion of the Pagan Mind
In the course of the Hellenistic period, even Jewish culture had been
penetrated by Hellenic influences. The broad geographical dispersion of
Jewish communities throughout the Mediterranean empire had accelerated
this influence, reflected in later Jewish religious literature such as the
Wisdom books, in the Septuagint and the biblical scholarship of Alexandria,
and in the Platonic religious philosophy of Philo. But with Christianity, and
particularly with Paul’s mission to expand its gospel beyond the confines of
Judaism, the Judaic impulse in turn began a countervailing movement that
radically transformed the Hellenic contribution to the Christian world view
emerging in the later centuries of the classical era. The powerful currents of
Greek metaphysics, epistemology, and science, the characteristic Greek
attitudes toward myth, religion, philosophy, and personal fulfillment—all
were transfigured in the light of the Judaeo-Christian revelation.
The status of the transcendent Ideas, so central to the Platonic tradition
and widely recognized by the pagan intelligentsia, was now significantly
altered. Augustine agreed with Plato that the Ideas constituted the stable and
unchangeable forms of all things and provided a solid epistemological basis
for human knowledge. But he pointed out that Plato lacked an adequate
doctrine of creation to explain the participation of particulars in the Ideas.
(Plato’s reator, the Demiurge of the Timaeus, was not an omnipotent
supreme being, since the chaotic world of becoming upon which he
imposed the Ideas already existed, as did the Ideas themselves; nor was he
omnipotent vis-à-vis anankē, the errant cause.) Augustine therefore argued
that Plato’s metaphysical conception could be fulfilled by the Judaeo-
Christian revelation of the supreme Creator, who freely wills the creation
113 

into existence ex nihilo, yet who does so in accordance with the seminal
ordering patterns established by the primordial Ideas residing in the divine
mind. Augustine identified the Ideas as the collective expression of God’s
Word, the Logos, and viewed all archetypes as contained within and
expressive of the being of Christ. Here the emphasis was placed more on
God and his creation, rather than on the Ideas and their concrete imitation,
with the former framework employing and subsuming the latter much as
Christianity in general employed and subsumed Platonism.
To this metaphysical correction of Plato, Augustine added an
epistemological modification. Plato had based all human knowledge on two
possible sources, the first derived from sense experience, which is unreliable,
and the second derived from direct perception of the eternal Ideas,
knowledge of which is innate but forgotten and requires recollection, and
which provide the only source of certain knowledge. Augustine agreed with
this formulation, asserting that man can have no intellectual ideas arise in
his mind that are not illuminated there by God, as by an inner spiritual Sun.
Thus the soul’s only genuine teacher is an inner one, and is God. But
Augustine added one more source for human knowledge—Christian
revelation—a source necessitated by man’s fall from grace and bestowed on
man with the coming of Christ. This truth, revealed in the biblical testaments
and taught by Church tradition, fulfilled Platonic philosophy just as it
fulfilled the Judaic Law, both preparations for the new order.
Although in theory Augustine’s Platonism was definite, in practice
Christianity’s emphatic monotheism reduced the metaphysical significance
of the Platonic Ideas. A direct relationship to God based on love and faith
was more important than an intellectual encounter with the Ideas. Any
reality possessed by the Ideas was contingent on God and thus less significant
in the Christian scheme of things. The Christian Logos, the active Word—
creating, ordering, revealing, redeeming—ruled all. The fact of the
archetypes’ plurality argued further against their playing a major role in
Christianity’s generally monistic spiritual reality. Moreover, the Neoplatonic
doctrine of a hierarchy of being, with reality stratified into successively
diminishing levels of divinity, was countered by certain aspects of the
primitive Christian revelation (from the first century A.D.), which stressed a
fundamental unification and divinization of all creation, a democratic
114 

explosion of all former categories and hierarchies. Conversely, other
elements of the Judaeo-Christian tradition emphasized the absolute
dichotomy between God and his creation, a dichotomy that Neoplatonism
attenuated in favor of the One’s emanation of divinity through intermediate
levels—such as the Ideas—to the entire cosmos. But perhaps most
important, the biblical revelation provided a more accessible and readily
grasped truth for the body of the Christian faithful than did any subtle
philosophical arguments regarding the Platonic Ideas.
Yet Christian theologians employed archetypal thinking in many of the
most important doctrines of the Christian religion: the participation of all
mankind in the sin of Adam, who was thus the primal archetype of
unredeemed man; Christ’s passion as encompassing the totality of human
suffering, with his redemptive act, as the second Adam, effecting redemption
for all; Christ as the archetype of perfect humanity, with every human soul
potentially participating in the universal being of Christ; the invisible
universal Church as fully existing in all the individual churches; the single
supreme God as fully existing in each of the three persons of the Trinity;
Christ as the universal Logos, constituting the entirety and essence of the
creation. And biblical archetypes such as the Exodus, the Chosen People, and
the Promised Land never ceased to play a significant role in the cultural
imagination. Although the Platonic Ideas per se were not central to the
Christian belief system, the ancient and medieval mind was generally
predisposed toward thinking in terms or types, symbols, and universals, and
Platonism offered the most philosophically sophisticated framework for
comprehending that mode of thought. Indeed the existence of the Ideas and
the issue of their independent reality would become matters of intense
debate in later Scholastic philosophy—a debate whose outcome would have
lasting repercussions beyond philosophy proper.
The pagan deities were more explicitly antithetical to biblical monotheism,
and thus more forcefully dispensed with. First viewed as real forces, though
as lesser demon-like beings, they were eventually rejected altogether and
regarded as false gods, multiple idols of pagan fantasy, the active belief in
which was not only foolishly superstitious but dangerously heretical. The old
115 

rituals and mysteries constituted a widespread impediment to the
propagation of the Christian faith and were therefore combated by Christian
apologists in terms not unlike those of the skeptical philosophers of classical
Athens, but in a new context and with different intent. As Clement reasoned
with the pagan intellectuals of Alexandria, the world was not a mythological
phenomenon full of gods and daimones, but was rather a natural world
providentially governed by the one supreme self-subsistent God. In truth,
the pagan statues of deities were no more than stone idols, the myths merely
primitive anthropomorphic fictions. Only the one invisible God and the one
biblical revelation were authentic. The Presocratic philosophies, like those of
Thales or Empedocles with their deification of the material elements, were
no better than the primitive myths. Matter should not be worshiped, but
rather the Maker of matter. The heavenly bodies were not divine, but rather
the Creator of those bodies. Now man could be liberated from the old
superstitions and illuminated by the true divine light of Christ. The myriad
sacred objects of the primitive imagination could now be recognized as
nothing more than natural things naively endowed with nonexistent
supernatural powers. Men—not animals or birds, trees or planets—were
the true messengers of divine communication, chosen as God’s prophets.
The supremely just Judaeo-Christian God, not the fickle Hellenic Zeus, was
the true universal ruler. The historical Christ, not the mythological Dionysus
or Orpheus or Demeter, was the true saving deity. The darkness of paganism
was now dispelled by the Christian dawn. Clement described the late pagan
Greco-Roman world as being like the seer Tiresias—old, wise, but blind and
dying—and exhorted him to shed his decaying life and ways, cast off the old
revels and divinations of paganism, and be initiated into the new mystery of
Christ. If he would now discipline himself for God, he could see again, see
heaven itself, and become the ever-new child of Christianity.
And so the old gods died and the one true Christian God was revealed and
glorified. Yet a more subtle and differentiated process of assimilation
occurred in the conversion of paganism, for in the process of the Hellenistic
world’s adoption of Christianity, many essential features of the pagan
mystery religions now found successful expression in the Christian religion:
the belief in a savior deity whose death and rebirth brought immortality to
man, the themes of illumination and regeneration, the ritual initiation with a
116 

community of worshipers into the salvational knowledge of cosmic truths,
the preparatory period before initiation, demands for cultic purity, fasting,
vigils, early morning ceremonies, sacred banquets, ritual processions,
pilgrimages, the giving of new names to initiates. But while some of the
mystery religions emphasized the evil imprisonment of matter, which only
initiates could transcend, early Christianity heralded Christ as inaugurating
the redemption of even the material world. Christianity further introduced
an essential public and historical element into the mythological framework:
Jesus Christ was not a mythical figure but an actual historical person who
fulfilled the Judaic messianic prophecies and brought the new revelation to
a universal audience, with potentially all of mankind as the new initiates
rather than a select few. What was to the pagan mysteries an esoteric
mythological process—the death-rebirth mystery—had in Christ become
concrete historical reality, enacted for all humanity to witness and openly
participate in, with a consequent transformation of the entire movement of
history. From this viewpoint, the pagan mysteries were not so much an
impediment to the growth of Christianity as they were the soil from which it
could more readily spring.
But unlike the mystery religions, Christianity was proclaimed and
recognized as the exclusively authentic source of salvation, superseding all
previous mysteries and religions, alone bestowing the true knowledge of the
universe and a true basis for ethics. Such a claim was decisive in the triumph
of Christianity in the late classical world. Only thus were the anxieties of the
Hellenistic era, with its conflicting religious and philosophical pluralism, and
with its large amorphous cities filled with the rootless and dispossessed,
resolved in the new certitudes. Christianity offered mankind a universal
home, an enduring community, and a clearly defined way of life, all of which
possessed a scriptural and institutional guarantee of cosmic validity.
The Christian assimilation of the mysteries extended to the various pagan
deities as well, for as the Greco-Roman world gradually embraced
Christianity, the classical gods were consciously or unconsciously absorbed
into the Christian hierarchy (as later would occur with the Germanic deities
and those of other cultures penetrated by the Christian West). Their
characters and properties were retained but were now understood and
subsumed in the Christian context, as in the figures of Christ (Apollo and
117 

Prometheus, for example, as well as Perseus, Orpheus, Dionysus, Hercules,
Atlas, Adonis, Eros, Sol, Mithra, Attis, Osiris), God the Father (Zeus, Kronos,
Ouranos, Sarapis), the Virgin Mary (Magna Mater, Aphrodite, Artemis, Hera,
Rhea, Persephone, Demeter, Gaia, Semele, Isis), the Holy Spirit (Apollo,
Dionysus, Orpheus, as well as aspects of the procreative feminine deities),
Satan (Pan, Hades, Prometheus, Dionysus), and a host of angels and saints
(the conflation of Mars with Michael the archangel, Atlas with Saint
Christopher). As the Christian religious understanding emerged out of the
classical polytheistic imagination, the different aspects of a single complex
pagan deity were applied to corresponding aspects of the Trinity, or, in the
case of a pagan deity’s shadow aspect, to Satan. Apollo as the divine Sun god,
the luminous prince of the heavens, was now seen as a pagan precursor of
Christ, while Apollo as the bringer of sudden illumination and the giver of
prophecy and oracles was now recognized as the presence of the Holy
Spirit. Prometheus as the suffering liberator of mankind was now subsumed
by the figure of Christ, while Prometheus as the hubristic rebel against God
was subsumed by the figure of Lucifer. The spirit of ecstatic possession once
ascribed to Dionysus was now ascribed to the Holy Spirit, Dionysus as the
self-sacrificing redemptive deity of death and rebirth was now transfigured
into Christ, and Dionysus as the unleashed erotic and aggressive instincts,
the demonic deity of unregenerate elemental energy and mass frenzy, was
now recognized as Satan.
Thus the ancient mythic deities were transformed into the doctrinally
established figures that constituted the Christian pantheon. A new
conception of spiritual truth arose as well. The narratives and descriptions of
divine reality and divine beings, that which had been myth in the pagan era
—malleable, undogmatic, open to imaginative novelty and creative
transformation, subject to conflicting versions and multiple interpretations
—were now characteristically understood as absolute, historical, and literal
truths, and every effort was made to clarify and systematize those truths into
unchanging doctrinal formulae. In contrast to the pagan deities, whose
characters tended to be intrinsically ambiguous—both good and evil, Janus-
faced, variable according to context—the new Christian figures, in official
doctrine at least, possessed no such ambiguity and maintained solid
characters definitely aligned with good or evil. For the core drama of
118 

Christianity, like that of Judaism (and its seminal Persian relative, the
prototypically dualistic religion of Zoro-astrianism), centered on the
historical confrontation between the primeval opposing principles of good
and evil. And ultimately Christianity’s dualism of good and evil, God and
Satan, was a derivation of its final monism, since Satan’s existence was finally
contingent upon God, supreme Creator and Lord of all.
Compared with the pagan outlook, the Christian world view was still
structured by a transcendent principle, but it was now a decisively
monolithic structure, absolutely governed by one God. Among the Greeks,
Plato had been one of the most monotheistic, yet even for him “God” and
“the gods” were often interchangeable. For Christians, there was no such
ambiguity. The transcendent was still primary, as with Plato, but no longer
pluralistic. The Ideas were derivative, and the gods anathema.
Despite the influence of Platonism and Augustine’s intellectuality, the
Christian approach to truth was substantially different from that of the
classical philosophers. Certainly reason played a role in Christian spirituality,
for, as Clement emphasized, it was by virtue of man’s reason that he was
capable of receiving the revealed Logos. Human reason was itself the gift of
God’s original creation, in which the Logos was agent of the creative
principle. And it was Christianity’s superior welding of intellect and cult,
compared with paganism’s more ambivalent dichotomy, that played such a
crucial role in Christianity’s ascendance in the late classical era. Yet in
contrast to the Greeks’ philosophical program of independent intellectual
self-development in relation to the empirical world and to the transcendent
sphere of absolute knowledge which ordered that world, the Christian
approach centered on the revelation of one person, Jesus Christ, and thus
the devout Christian sought enlightenment by reading Holy Scripture.
Intellectuality alone was not sufficient to grasp cosmic truth, as it had been
for many Greek philosophers such as Aristotle, not even if supplemented by
the moral purity stressed by Plato or Plotinus. In the Christian
understanding, the pivotal role was played by faith—the soul’s active, freely
willed embrace of Christ’s revealed truth, with man’s commitment of belief
and trust working in mysterious interaction with God’s freely bestowed
119 

grace. For Christianity proclaimed a personal relation to the transcendent.
The Logos was not just an impersonal Mind, but a divinely personal Word,
an act of love by God, revealing to all the numinous essence of man and
cosmos. The Logos was God’s saving Word; to believe was to be saved.
Hence faith was the primary means, and reason a distant second, for
comprehending the deeper meaning of things. Augustine experienced his
final conversion as an overcoming of his sophisticated intellectual
pretensions and a humble embrace of Christian faith. Except for Platonism,
the effects of a purely philosophical development of his rational intellect had
only increased Augustine’s skepticism concerning the possibility of
discovering truth. For Augustine, even Neoplatonic philosophy, the most
religiously profound of pagan thought systems, had its fundamental
imperfections and unfulfilling aspects, for nowhere in it could he find that
personal intimacy with God he so desired, nor that miraculous revelation
that the transcendent Logos had become flesh.6 It was, by contrast, reading
the letters of Paul that awakened in Augustine the knowledge he
experienced as spiritually liberating. From that point, he held a new strategy
for acquiring truth: “I have faith in order to understand.” Here Augustine’s
theory of knowledge displayed its Judaic foundation, for right knowledge
utterly depended on man’s right relation to God. Without the initial
commitment to God, the entire track of intellectual inquiry and
comprehension could not avoid being thrown off into disastrously
erroneous directions.
In the Christian view, human reason might once have been sufficient
when, in the paradisiacal state, it still possessed its original resonance with
divine intelligence. But after man’s rebellion and fall from grace, his reason
was increasingly obscured and the need for revelation became absolute.
Relying on and developing an exclusively human reason was bound to result
in dangerous ignorance and error. Indeed, man’s fall itself was caused by his
stealing the fruit from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, his first and
fatal step toward intellectual independence and proud self-reliance, and a
moral transgression of God’s exclusive sovereignty. By grasping such
knowledge out of the divine order, man had instead been intellectually
blinded, and could now be illuminated only by God’s grace. Thus was the
secular rationality so esteemed by the Greeks considered of doubtful value
120 

for salvation, with empirical observation largely irrelevant except as an aid
to moral improvement. In the context of the new order, the simple faith of a
child was superior to the abstruse reasonings of a worldly intellectual.
Christian theologians continued to philosophize, to study the ancients, and
to debate doctrinal subtleties—but all within the defined boundaries of
Christian dogma. All learning was subservient to theology, now the most
important of all studies, and theology found its unshakable basis in faith.
In a sense, the Christian focus was more narrow and sharp than the
Greek, and entailed less need for educational breadth. The highest
metaphysical truth was the fact of the Incarnation: the miraculous divine
intervention into human history, the effect of which was to liberate
humanity and reunite the material world with the spiritual, the mortal with
the immortal, creature with Creator. The mere grasp of that stupendous fact
was enough to satisfy the philosophical quest, and that fact was fully
described in the Church scriptures. Christ was the exclusive source of truth
in the cosmos, the all-comprehending principle of Truth itself. The Sun of
the divine Logos illuminated everything. Moreover, in the new self-
awareness of the late classical and early Christian era, most acutely
epitomized in Augustine, the individual soul’s concern for its spiritual
destiny was far more significant than the rational intellect’s concern with
conceptual thinking or empirical study. Faith alone in the miracle of Christ’s
redemption was enough to bring the deepest saving truth to man. Despite
his erudition and appreciation for the intellectual and scientific
achievements of the Greeks, Augustine proclaimed:
When, then, the question is asked what we are to believe in regard to
religion, it is not necessary to probe into the nature of things, as was
done by those whom the Greeks call physici; nor need we be in alarm
lest the Christian should be ignorant of the force and number of the
elements; the motion, and order, and eclipses of the heavenly bodies;
the form of the heavens; the species and the natures of animals, plants,
stones, fountains, rivers, mountains; about chronology and distances;
the signs of coming storms; and a thousand other things which those
philosophers either have found out, or think they have found out. . . . It
is enough for the Christian to believe that the only cause of all created
121 

things, whether heavenly or earthly, whether visible or invisible, is the
goodness of the Creator, the one true God; and that nothing exists but
Himself that does not derive its existence from Him.7
With the rise of Christianity, the already decadent state of science in the
late Roman era received little encouragement for new developments. Early
Christians experienced no intellectual urgency to “save the phenomena” of
this world, since the phenomenal world held no significance compared with
the transcendent spiritual reality. More precisely, the all-redeeming Christ
had already saved the phenomena, so there was little need for mathematics
or astronomy to perform that task. The study of astronomy in particular,
being tied to astrology and the cosmic religion of the Hellenistic era, was
discouraged. The monotheistic Hebrews had already had occasion to
condemn foreign astrologers, and this attitude persisted in the Christian
context. With its planetary deities and aura of polytheistic paganism, and
with its proneness to a determinism antithetical to both divine grace and
human responsibility, astrology was officially condemned by Church
councils (with Augustine especially seeing the need for confuting the
astrological “mathematicians”), as a result of which it gradually declined
despite its occasional theological defenders. In the Christian world view, the
heavens were devoutly perceived as the expression of God’s glory and, more
popularly, as the abode of God and his angels and saints, and the realm from
which Christ would return at the Second Coming. The world as a whole was
understood simply and preeminently as God’s creation, and thus efforts at
scientifically penetrating nature’s inherent logic no longer seemed necessary
or appropriate. Its true logic was known to God, and what man could know
of that logic was revealed in the Bible.
God’s will ruled every aspect of the universe. Because miraculous
intervention was always possible, the processes of nature were at all times
subservient to divine providence rather than to merely natural laws. The
scriptural testaments were thus the final and unchanging repository of
universal truth, and no subsequent human efforts were going to enhance or
modify, let alone revolutionize, that absolute statement. The relationship of
the good Christian to God was that of child to father—typically a very young
and naive child to the infinitely greater, omniscient and omnipotent Father.
122 

Because of the great distance between Creator and creature, the human
capacity to comprehend the creation’s inner workings was radically
circumscribed. Truth was therefore approached primarily not through self-
determined intellectual inquiry, but through Scripture and prayer, and faith
in the teachings of the Church.
Both Paul and Augustine testified to the overwhelming power and
supremacy of God’s will, in the potential spiritual devastation of God’s
damning judgment of an impure soul, but also most benignly in Christ’s
redemptive act for mankind by his death on the cross. Both men had
experienced their own religious conversions—Paul on the road to
Damascus, Augustine in the garden at Milan—as dramatic biographical
turning points, forcefully impelled by the intervention of divine grace. Only
by such intervention were they saved from continuing a life the self-defined
direction of which could now be seen as futile and destructive. In light of
these experiences, all merely human activity, whether independent
willfulness or intellectual curiosity, now appeared secondary—superfluous,
misleading, even sinful—except as it might lead to fully God-directed
activity. God was the exclusive source of all good and of man’s salvation. All
heroism, so central to the Greek character, was now concentrated in the
figure of Christ. The human surrender to the divine was the only existential
priority. All else was vanity. Martyrdom, the ultimate surrender of the self to
God, represented the highest Christian ideal. As Christ was self-giving in the
highest degree, so should all Christians strive to be like their Redeemer.
Humility, not pride, was the distinguishing Christian virtue, requisite for
salvation. Selflessness in action and thought, devotion to God and service to
others: only through such an emptying of self would the power of God’s
grace fully enter and transform the soul.
Yet humanity was not considered diminished by such an asymmetrical
relationship, for God’s grace and love alone were all-sufficient for
humanity’s true needs and deepest desires. In comparison with these divine
gifts, all worldly satisfactions were pale imitations, of no ultimate value.
Indeed, here was the astounding proclamation made by Christians to the
world: God loved mankind. God was not only the source of the world order,
123 

not only the goal of philosophical aspiration, not only the first cause of all
that exists. Nor was he just the inscrutable ruler of the universe and stern
judge of human history. For in the person of Jesus Christ, God had reached
out from his transcendence and displayed for all time and all humanity his
infinite love for his creatures. Here was the basis for a new way of life,
grounded in the experience of God’s love, the universality of which created
a new community in mankind.
Thus Christianity bequeathed to its members a pervasive sense of a
personal God’s direct interest in human affairs and vital concern for every
human soul, no matter what level of intelligence or culture was brought to
the spiritual enterprise, and without regard to physical strength or beauty or
social status. In contrast to the Hellenic focus on great heroes and rare
philosophers, Christianity universalized salvation, asserting its availability to
slaves as well as kings, to simple souls as well as profound thinkers, to the
ugly as well as the beautiful, to the sick and suffering as well as the strong
and fortunate, even tending to reverse the former hierarchies. In Christ, all
divisions of humanity were overcome—barbarian and Greek, Jew and
Gentile, master and slave, male and female—all were now as one. The
ultimate wisdom and heroism of Christ made redemption possible for all, not
just the few: Christ was the Sun, who shone alike on all mankind.
Christianity therefore placed high value on each individual soul as one of
God’s children, but in this new context the Greek ideal of the self-
determining individual and the heroic genius was diminished in favor of a
collective Christian identity. This elevation of the communal self, the human
reflection of the Kingdom of Heaven, founded on the shared love of God and
faith in Christ’s redemption, encouraged an altruistic sublimation, and at
times subjugation, of the individual self in favor of a greater allegiance to the
good of others and the will of God. Yet on the other hand, by granting
immortality and value to the individual soul, Christianity encouraged the
growth of the individual conscience, self-responsibility, and personal
autonomy relative to temporal powers—all decisive traits for the formation
of the Western character.
In its moral teachings, Christianity brought to the pagan world a new
sense of the sanctity of all human life, the spiritual value of the family, the
spiritual superiority of self-denial over egoistic fulfillment, of unworldly
124 

holiness over worldly ambition, of gentleness and forgiveness over violence
and retribution; a condemnation of murder, suicide, the killing of infants,
the massacre of prisoners, the degradation of slaves, sexual licentiousness
and prostitution, bloody circus spectacles—all in the new awareness of
God’s love for humanity, and the moral purity that love required in the
human soul. Christian love, whether divine or human, was not so much the
realm of Aphrodite, nor even primarily the Eros of the philosophers, but was
the love, epitomized in Christ, that expressed itself through sacrifice,
suffering, and universal compassion. This Christian ethical ideal of goodness
and charity was strongly promulgated and at times widely observed, an ideal
certainly not lacking in the moral imperatives of Greek philosophy—
particularly in Stoicism, which in several ways anticipated Christian ethics—
but now having a more pervasive influence on the mass culture in the
Christian era than had Greek philosophical ethics in the classical world.
The more formidable intellectualized quality of the Greek notion of the
Godhead and the philosopher’s individual ascent (however passionate that
process was for Plato or Plotinus) was replaced in Christianity by the
emotional and communally shared intimacy of a personal, familial
relationship with the Creator, and by the pious embrace of revealed
Christian truth. In contrast to the previous centuries of metaphysical
perplexity, Christianity offered a fully worked out solution to the human
dilemma. The potentially distressing ambiguities and confusions of a private
philosophical search without religious guideposts were now replaced by an
absolutely certain cosmology and an institutionally ritualized system of
salvation accessible to all.
But again, with the truth so firmly established, philosophical inquiry was
seen by the early Church as less vital to spiritual development, and
intellectual freedom, basically irrelevant, was carefully circumscribed.8 True
freedom was found not in unlimited intellectual speculation but in Christ’s
saving grace. The Christian religion was not to be considered on a par with
Hellenic philosophy, let alone with the pagan religions, for its unique
revelation held the utmost significance for man and the world. The Christian
mystery was not the arguable result of ingenious metaphysical reasoning,
nor another viable alternative to the various pagan mysteries and
mythologies. Rather, Christianity was the authentic proclamation of the
125 

supreme God’s absolute truth, belief in which would change not only the
individual’s personal fate but the destiny of the world. A sacred doctrine had
been entrusted to Christians, and fidelity to that trust, as well as the integrity
of that doctrine, needed to be maintained at all costs. Eternal salvation was at
stake for all humanity.
Safeguarding the faith was thus the first priority in any question of
philosophical or religious dialogue; hence that dialogue was often curtailed
altogether lest the devil of doubt or unorthodoxy gain a foothold in the
vulnerable minds of the faithful. The more intellectually esoteric and
doctrinally unconstrained forms of early Christianity, such as the widespread
Gnostic movements, were condemned and eventually suppressed with as
much intense antagonism as was shown to paganism. It was especially the
antihierarchical Gnostics who pressed the orthodox Church to a firm
definition of Christian doctrine in the second and third centuries. For to
protect what was perceived by the postapostolic Church as the unique and,
in a sense, fragile essence of the Christian revelation—the simultaneous
humanity and divinity of Christ, the simultaneous unity and trinity of God,
the original goodness of the Creation yet its need for redemption, the New
Testament as the dialectical fulfillment of the Old—against a growing
number of conflicting sects and doctrines, leading early Christians concluded
that the beliefs of the faithful must be established, disseminated, and
sustained by an authoritative Church structure. Thus the institutional
Church, as the living embodiment of the Christian dispensation, became the
official guardian of the final truth and the highest court of appeal in any
matters of ambiguity—indeed, not only the court, but also the prosecuting
and punitive arm of the religious law.
The shadow side of the Christian religion’s claim to universality was its
intolerance. The Church’s view of Christian conversion as a private religious
experience fully contingent on individual freedom and spontaneous faith
stood in stark counterpoint to a not infrequent policy of forcibly imposed
religious conformity. With the final ascendance of Christianity at the end of
the classical era, the pagan temples were systematically demolished and the
philosophical academies officially closed.9 Just as the strict ethical puritanism
that Christianity had inherited from Judaism opposed the unrestrained
sensuality and immorality it perceived in pagan culture, so too with equal
126 

stringency did Christianity develop a theological puritanism that posited
itself against the teachings of pagan philosophy and any unorthodox
conceptions of Christian truth. There were not many true paths, nor many
gods and goddesses, differing from one place to the next and from one
person to the next. There was but one God and one Providence, one true
religion, one plan of salvation for the entire world. All mankind deserved to
know and have this one saving faith. And so it was that the pluralism of
classical culture, with its multiplicity of philosophies, its diversity of
polytheistic mythologies, and its plethora of mystery religions, gave way to
an emphatically monolithic system—one God, one Church, one Truth.
127 

Contraries Within the Christian Vision
Here we may begin to recognize the outlines of two significantly different
aspects of the Christian world view. Indeed, on first impression one might
discern two entirely distinct world views that coexisted and overlapped
within Christianity, and that were in continual tension with each other:
whereas the one outlook was rapturously optimistic and all-embracing, its
complement was sternly judgmental, restrictive, and prone to a dualistic
pessimism. But in fact the two outlooks were inextricably united, two sides
of the same coin, light and shadow. For the Church contained both
perspectives, and at its essence was their effective point of intersection. Both
views were enunciated in the Bible, in both New and Old Testaments, and
both found simultaneous expression, in varying ratios, in all the major
theologians, councils, and doctrinal syntheses of the Church. Yet it will be
useful for us to distinguish the two perspectives and define them separately,
thereby clarifying some of the complexities and paradoxes of the Christian
vision. Let us attempt first to describe this internal dichotomy, and then to
understand how the Church endeavored to resolve it.
The emphasis of the first view considered here was on Christianity as an
already existent spiritual revolution that was now progressively
transforming and liberating both he individual soul and the world in the
dawning light of God’s revealea love. In this understanding, Christ’s self-
sacrifice had initiated the fundamental reunion of humanity and the created
world with God, a reunion prefigured and commenced by Christ and
reaching fulfillment in a coming age with Christ’s return. The stress here
was on the inclusiveness of redemption, the breadth and power of the Logos
and the Spirit, God’s present immanence in man and the world, and the
128 

resulting joy and freedom of the Christian faithful who constituted the
Church, the living body of Christ.
The other side of the Christian vision focused more emphatically on the
present alienation of man and the world from God. It therefore stressed the
futurity and otherworldliness of redemption, the ontological finality of God’s
“otherness,” the need for strict inhibition of worldly activities, a doctrinal
orthodoxy defined by the institutional Church, and a salvation narrowly
limited to the small portion of mankind constituting the Church faithful.
Underlying and consequent to these tenets was a pervasive negative
judgment regarding the present status of the human soul and the created
world, especially relative to the omnipotence and transcendent perfection of
God.
Again, neither side of this inner polarity within the Christian framework
was ever separated from the other. Both Paul and Augustine, the first and
last of the ancient theologians who defined the Christian religion passed on
to the West, were strongly expressive of both views in an indissoluble
though somewhat uneasy compound. Yet because the differences in
emphasis between the two sides were so marked, and because the two
perspectives often seemed to derive from entirely different psychological
sources and religious experiences, it will be valuable to treat them with
separate and highly dichotomized descriptions, as if they were in fact fully
distinguished from each other.
The first side examined here found its primary articulation in the letters of
Paul to the early Christian communities and in the Gospel according to John.
The other three Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles often supported this
view as well, however, and no one source encompassed this perspective in
its entirety. The dominant insight expressed in this understanding was that
in Christ the divine had entered the world, and that the redemption of
humanity and nature was now already dawning. If the Judaic religion was a
great yearning, Christianity was its glorious fulfillment. The Kingdom of
Heaven had broken into the field of history and was now actively
transforming it, progressively impelling humanity toward a new and
previously inconceivable perfection. The life, death, and resurrection of
Christ had attained the miracle of the ages, and the resulting emotion was
therefore one of ecstatic joy and gratitude. The greatest battle had already
129 

been won. The cross was the sign of victory. Christ had liberated a mankind
held captive by its own ignorance and error. Because the principle of
divinity was already present in the world and working its wonders, the pivot
of the spiritual quest was to acknowledge in faith the reality of that sublime
fact and, in the light of this new faith, to participate directly in the divine
unfolding. The coming Kingdom’s redemptive potency shone forth in the
person of Christ, whose charismatic power brought all human beings
together into a new community. Christ had introduced a new life into the
world: He was himself that new life, the breath of the eternal. By means of
Christ’s passion, a new creation had been given birth, now taking place
within and through man. Its climax would be the establishment of a new
heaven and a new earth, and the merging of finite time with eternity.
The peculiar sense of cosmic joy and immense thanksgiving expressed in
early Christianity seemed to derive from the belief that God, in a gratuitous
overflow of love for his creation, had miraculously broken through the
imprisonment of this world and poured forth his redeeming power into
humanity. The divine essence had fully reentered into materiality and
history, initiating their radical transformation. Because God himself, in the
person of Jesus Christ, had become fully human—experiencing within
himself all the suffering to which mortal flesh is heir, taking on the universal
burden of human guilt, and overcoming within himself the moral errancy to
which the free human will is subject—God had thereby ransomed mankind
from its state of alienation from the divine. The meaning of Jesus’s life was
not just that he had brought new teachings and spiritual insight to the
world. Rather, by sacrificing his divine transcendence to a full immersion in
the agonies of human life and death, within the definite historical conditions
of a specific time and place—“suffered under Pontius Pilate”—Christ had
forged a fundamentally new reality. Within this new historical aeon, a new
human destiny could unfold in communion with divine wisdom and love.
Christ’s death had seeded the world with God’s Spirit, whose continuing
presence in mankind would bring about its divine transfiguration.
In this view, the “repentance” Jesus called for was not so much a
prerequisite as it was a consequence of the experience of the dawning
Kingdom of Heaven. It was less a backward-moving and paralyzing regret
for past sinfulness than a progressive embrace of the new order, which
130 

made one’s old life appear inauthentic and misdirected by comparison. It
was a returning to the divine source from which flowed all innocence and
new beginnings. The Christian experience of redemption was an inner
transformation based on an awakening to what was already being born—
within the individual and within the world. In the eyes of many early
Christians, the time for rejoicing was already present.
Nevertheless, as the second pole of the Christian vision made clear, this
same revelation led to other, very different consequences, in which Christ’s
redemptive action in an alienated world was perceived as part of a dramatic
battle between good and evil whose outcome was by no means already
accomplished, nor assured for all. As a counterbalance to the more positive,
exultant, and unitive element in Christianity, much of the New Testament
put emphasis not so much on an already realized redemptive transformation
as on the demand for a taut watchfulness and heightened moral rectitude in
expectation of Christ’s return, especially in consideration of the perils of the
present corrupt world and the risks of eternal damnation. Such a view was
expressed not only in the three Synoptic Gospels—the Gospels of Matthew,
Mark, and Luke—but in Paul’s and John’s writings as well. Here was stressed
how completely humanity’s final salvation awaited God’s external activity in
the future, through an apocalyptic end of history and the Second Coming.
The battle between Christ and Satan was still continuing, and the
tremendous dangers and sufferings of the present time were lightened by
faith in the historical Jesus, the risen Lord, and in his saving return—rather
than by the confident Johannine sense of Christ’s already decisive victory
over evil and death, God’s new immanence in the world, and the believer’s
already present share in the eternal life of the glorified Christ. Hope in the
Redeemer was paramount in both sides of the Christian polarity, but in this
second understanding, the present suffered an imprisonment of spiritual
darkness that made the redemptive hope more urgent, even desperate, and
pressed the locus of redemption more exclusively into the future and into
God’s external activity.
This more fully anticipatory side of Christianity bore resemblance to
certain dominant elements of Judaism, which thereby continued to structure
the Christian vision. The experience of evil pervading man and nature, the
deep alienation between human and divine, the sense of grimly waiting for a
131 

definitive sign of God’s redeeming presence in the world, the need for
fastidious adherence to the Law, the attempt to preserve a pure and faithful
minority against incursions from a hostile and contaminating environment,
the expectation of an apocalyptic punishment—all these elements of the
Judaic sensibility emerged anew in the Christian understanding. That tone of
religious vision was, in turn, reinforced and given a new context by the
continued delay of Christ’s Second Coming, and by the Church’s historical
and theological evolution accompanying that delay.
In its more extreme form, which was not uncharacteristic of the
mainstream Christian tradition in the West after Augustine, this more
dualistic understanding emphasized mankind’s inherent unworthiness and
consequent inability to experience the potency of Christ’s redemption in this
life, except in a proleptic manner through the Church. Reflecting and
magnifying the Judaic conception of Adam’s fall and the resultant separation
between God and man, the Christian Church inculcated a pronounced sense
of sin and guilt, the danger or even likelihood of damnation, and
consequently a need for strict observance of religious law and an
institutionally defined justification of the soul before God. The exultant
image of God as both an immanent and transcendent being mysteriously
unifying man, nature, and spirit was here juxtaposed by the image of an
entirely transcendent juridical authority separate from and even
antagonistic toward man and nature. The stern and often ruthless God of the
Old Testament, Yahweh, was now embodied in Christ the Judge, who
damned the disobedient as readily as he redeemed the obedient. And the
Church itself—here understood more as hierarchical institution than as
mystical community of the faithful—took on that judicial role with
considerable cultural authority. The unitive early Christian ideal of
becoming one with the resurrected Christ and with the Christian
community, and the Hellenic-inspired mystical philosophical union with the
divine Logos, receded as explicit religious goals in favor of the more Judaic
concept of strict obedience to the will of God—and, by extrapolation,
obedience to the decisions of the Church hierarchy. Christ’s suffering and
death were here often portrayed as further cause for human guilt, rather
than as effecting the removal of that guilt. The crucifixion in its horrific
aspect became the dominant image, rather than the resurrection or the two
132 

together. The relationship of guilty child to stern father, as in much of the
Old Testament, largely overshadowed the happy reconciliation with the
divine essence proclaimed in the other side of early Christianity.
Yet the two poles of the Christian vision were not as unrelated as these
distinctions might suggest, and the Church not only carried the meaning of
both sides, it understood itself to be the resolution of that dichotomy. To
comprehend how such apparently divergent messages could have been
united in the same religion, we must attempt to grasp the process by which
the Christian Church evolved, both in its self-conception and in history, and
the pressure of those events, personalities, and movements which governed
that evolution. Even that investigation, however, depends on first grasping,
or at least glimpsing, the primitive Christian proclamation in something like
its first-century form.
133 

Exultant Christianity
In the New Testament, especially in certain passages of Paul’s letters and
John’s Gospel, it was clear that the infinite schism between the human and
divine had in some sense already been bridged. The guilt and pain of that
separation (caused by Adam’s sin) had been overcome by the victory of
Christ (the “second Adam”), and the believing Christian directly participated
in the new union. That option, so to speak, was now at last open to
humanity. Christ had sacrificed himself so that mortal man could attain
immortal life: God united himself with man so that man could now unite
himself with God. With Christ’s departure from the world, his Spirit had
descended and was now immanent in humanity, effecting humanity’s
spiritual transformation—indeed, its deification.
The new Christian perception of God was different from the traditional
Judaic image. Not only was Christ the Messiah foretold by the Hebrew
prophets, fulfilling the Jewish religious mission in history. He was also the
Son of God, one with God; and with his self-sacrifice, the righteous Yahweh
of the Old Testament, who demanded justice and exacted vengeance, had
become the loving Father of the New Testament, who bestowed grace and
forgave all sins. Early Christians also affirmed the new immediacy and
intimacy of God, who was further transfigured from the remote severity of
Yahweh into the human Jesus Christ, and who now acted less as vengeful
judge than as compassionate liberator.
The coming of Christ was therefore a break from, as well as a fulfillment
of, the Judaic tradition. (Hence the conscious distinction made by early
Christians between the “Old” Testament and the “New“—with the latter’s
declaration of the “new life,” the “new man,” the “new nature,” the “new
134 

way,” the “new heaven and the new earth.”) Christ’s confrontation with and
triumph over death, suffering, and evil had made possible that triumph for
all human beings, and allowed them to perceive their own tribulations in a
greater context of rebirth. To die with Christ was to rise with him into the
new life of the Kingdom. Christ was here understood as a point of perpetual
newness, a boundless birth of divine light in the world and in the soul. His
crucifixion represented the birth pangs of a new humanity and a new
cosmos. A process of divine transfiguration had been initiated in both man
and nature by Christ’s redemption, here seen as a cosmic event affecting the
whole universe. Instead of condemnation of a sinful humanity in a fallen
world, there was here a greater emphasis on God’s limitless grace, the
Spirit’s presence, the Logos’s love of man and the world, sanctification,
deification, and universal rebirth. On the evidence of their writings, it was as
if many early Christians had experienced a sudden cosmic reprieve from
certain death, a reversal of certain damnation, an unexpected gift of new life
—indeed, not only new life, but eternal life. Under the impact of this
miraculous revelation, they set out to spread the “good news” of humanity’s
salvation.
So fully was Christ’s redemption here viewed as an absolute and positive
fulfillment of human history and of all human suffering that Adam’s original
sin, the archetypal origin of human alienation and mortality, was
paradoxically celebrated as “O felix culpa!” (“O blessed sin!”) in the Easter
liturgy. The Fall—man’s primal error bringing the dark knowledge of good
and evil, the moral perils of freedom, the experience of alienation and death
—was here viewed not so much as an unmitigatedly heinous and tragic
disaster, but as an early and, in retrospect, integral part of man’s existential
development caused by his infantile lack of discerning awareness, his naive
susceptibility to deception. In the misuse of his God-given freedom, choosing
to love and elevate himself over God, man had ruined the perfection of
creation and divorced himself from the divine unity. Yet it was just through
a painfully acute consciousness of this sin that man could now experience
the infinite joy of God’s forgiveness and embrace of his lost soul. Through
Christ, the primal separation was being healed and the perfection of
creation restored on a new and more comprehensive level. Human
weakness thus became the occasion for God’s strength. Only from man’s
135 

sense of defeat and finitude could he open himself freely to God. And only by
man’s fall could God’s inconceivable glory and love fully reveal itself by
righting the unrightable. Even God’s apparent wrath could now be
understood as a necessary element in his infinite benevolence, and human
suffering seen as the necessary prelude to unbounded happiness.10
For in Christ’s overcoming of death, in man’s recognition of his potential
rebirth into the eternal, all temporal evil and suffering ceased to have
ultimate significance except as a preparation for redemption. The negative
element in the universe rather served to bring about, according to the logic
of a divine mystery, the birth of a greater positive state of being which all
Christian believers could enjoy. One could place absolute trust in the
Almighty, abandoning all anxiety for the future to live with the simplicity of
“the lilies of the field.” Just as the hidden seed was brought forth from
winter’s cold shadow to flower into the warm light and life of spring, so
even in the darkest hour was God’s mysterious wisdom working its exalted
design. The whole drama from the Creation to the Second Coming could
now be recognized as the sublime product of the divine plan, the unfolding
of the Logos. Christ was both the beginning and the end of the Creation, “the
Alpha and the Omega,” its original wisdom and its final consummation.
What was hidden had become manifest. In Christ the meaning of the cosmos
was fulfilled and revealed. All this was celebrated by early Christians in
ecstatic metaphor: With Christ’s incarnation, the Logos had reentered the
world and created a celestial song, tuning the discords of the universe into
perfect harmony, sounding the joy of the cosmic wedding between heaven
and earth, God and humanity.
This primitive Christian proclamation of redemption was at once mystical,
cosmic, and historical. On the one hand was the experience of fundamental
interior transformation: To experience God’s dawning Kingdom was to be
inwardly grasped by divinity, suffused by an inner light and love. Through
Christ’s grace the old, separate and false self died to allow the birth of a new
self, the true self at one with God. For Christ was the true self, the deepest
core of the human personality. His birth in the human soul was not so much
an external arrival as an emergence from within, an awakening to the real,
an unanticipatedly radical irruption of divinity into the heart of human
experience. Yet on the other hand, in association with this inner
136 

transfiguration, the entire world was being transformed and restored to its
divine glory—not just as if by subjective illumination but in some essential
ontological way that was historically and collectively significant.
Here an unprecedented cosmic optimism was asserted. In its physicality
and historicity, Christ’s resurrection held forth the promise that everything
—all history both of individuals and of mankind, all striving, all mistakes and
sins and imperfections, all materiality, the entire drama and reality of Earth
—would somehow be swept up and perfected in a final victorious reunion
with the infinite Godhead. All that was cruel and absurd would then be
made meaningful in the full revelation of Christ, the hidden meaning of
creation. Nothing would be left out. The world was not an evil
imprisonment, not a dispensable illusion, but the bearer of God’s glory.
History was not an endless cycle of deteriorating stages, but the matrix of
humanity’s deification. Through God’s omnipotence, grim Fate itself was
miraculously transmuted into benevolent Providence. Human anguish and
despair could now find not just respite, but divine fulfillment. The Gates of
Paradise, implacably closed at the Fall, had been reopened by Christ. The
infiniteness of God’s compassion and power would inevitably conquer, and
thereby consummate, the entire universe.
Many early Christians appear to have lived in a state of continuous
astonishment at the miraculous historical redemption they believed had just
taken place. The unification of the cosmos was now dawning, and the
finality of the old dualisms—man and God, nature and spirit, time and
eternity, life and death, self and other, Israel and the rest of mankind—had
been overcome. While they eagerly anticipated Christ’s Second Coming, the
Parousia (“Presence”), when he would return from the heavens in full glory
before the entire world, their awareness was centered on the liberating fact
that Christ had already initiated the redemptive process—a triumphant
process in which they could directly participate. On this basis was
constituted the overriding Christian attitude of hope. Through the Christian
faithful’s continuing act of hope in God’s compassionate power and plan for
humanity, the trials and terrors of the present could be transcended.
Humanity could now look forward, in humble confidence, to a glorious
future fulfillment which its own attitude of hope was in some way helping
to realize.
137 

Of especial importance here was the belief that in Christ, God had become
man—that the all-encompassing infinite Creator had fully become an
individual human person in history. For this merging in Christ had brought
humanness and divinity into a fundamentally new relationship, a redemptive
unity in which the value of humanity itself was exalted. The language about
the coming Christ used by Paul, John, and early Christian theologians such as
Irenaeus seemed to suggest not only that Christ’s return was going to take
place as an external event, a descent from heaven at some unspecified time
in the future, but that it would also take the form of a progressive birth from
within the natural and historical development of all human beings, who
were being perfected in and through Christ. Here Christ was seen both as
the heavenly bridegroom, who had impregnated humanity with the seed of
divinity, and as the goal of human evolution, the realization of that seed’s
promise. In his continuing and progressive incarnation into humanity and
into the world, Christ would bring the creation to its fruition. The seed
might be hidden now in the ground, but it was already at work, active,
slowly growing, moving toward perfection in a glorious unfolding of the
divine mystery. As Paul wrote in his Letter to the Romans, “the whole
creation groaneth in travail” for the birth of this divine being, just as all
Christians were pregnant with the Christ within—pregnant with a new self
that would be born to a new and more authentic life in the full
consciousness of God. Human history was an immense education into
divinity, a leading forth of man’s being to God. Indeed, not only was man to
be fulfilled in God, but God was to be fulfilled in man, achieving a self-
revelation through his realization in human form. For God had chosen man
as the vessel of his image, in which his divine essence could be most fully
incarnate.
In this perspective, man was a noble participant in God’s creative
unfolding. In his alienation from God the least happy of creatures, man
could yet play the central role in repairing the riven state of creation and
restoring its divine image. The Logos had descended into man so that man,
by participating in Christ’s passion and now containing the Logos himself,
could ascend to God. Because Christ had freely given himself to man and
fully experienced the humiliation and weakness of the human condition, he
had given to man the capacity to share in God’s own power and glory.
138 

Hence there was no limit as to what man’s future in God might become. In
the doctrinal formulation of the fourth-century theologian Athanasius, the
ideal of human deification found in Paul and John was made explicit: “God
became man in order that we become God.” In the light of the evolutionary
deification heralded in the New Testament, all the historical traumas and
devastations, the wars and famines and earthquakes, the immeasurable
sufferings of humanity, were comprehensible as the necessary birth labor of
the divine in man. In the new light of Christian revelation, mankind’s labors
were not in vain. Man was to bear affliction, Christ’s cross, so that he could
bear God. Jesus Christ was the new Adam who had initiated a new humanity,
evolving new powers of spiritual awareness and freedom that would be
fulfilled in the future—but the divine was already gloriously immanent and
active in man and in the present world.
139 

Dualistic Christianity
Paul warned, however, that the exultant element in Christianity, though
valid in itself, could easily lead to negative spiritual consequences should its
stress swing too far away from Christ and toward man, away from the future
and toward the present, away from faith and toward knowledge. Such a
distortion he perceived, and hastened to correct, in certain “enthusiasts” or
proto-Gnostics among the early Church congregations he had helped found.
In Paul’s eyes, their beliefs and moral behavior revealed the dangers of a
too-exultant interpretation of the Christian message, which could thereby
degenerate into a sinful overestimation of the self, an irresponsible
indifference to the world and its still-present evil, and an inflated elevation
of personal spiritual powers and esoteric knowledge over love, humility, and
practical moral discipline. Christ had indeed commenced a new age and a
new humanity, but these had not yet arrived, and man deceived himself if he
thought anyone but God could effect that sublime transfiguration whose full
reality still lay ahead. The world was pregnant with the divine and was in the
throes of labor, but it had not yet given birth. Although Christ’s activity was
already present in man, Paul’s own persecutions and personal sufferings (his
“thorn in the flesh”) were evidence that fulfillment lay in the future, and that
the true way of glory was the way of the cross. One must suffer with Christ
to be glorified with Christ.
Paul especially combated the enthusiasts’ tendency to lose what he
regarded as the proper balance between the religious aspirations of the
individual and those of the larger Christian community. For to lose that
balance was to lose the essence of the true Christian gospel. Their assertion
of an already realized personal redemption in a world that clearly remained
140 

unredeemed could lead to spiritual elitism, to licentiousness in behavior,
even to denial of a future collective resurrection because personal
resurrection was already deemed present. Human hubris, rather than divine
compassion, was the effect of such teachings. It was necessary for man to
know his limits and his faults, and to put his faith in Christ. For the present,
the true Christian’s mandate was to labor with his fellow believers in
building up a community of love and moral purity worthy of God’s glorious
future. Joy in what had already been experienced through Christ was in
order, but so too was moral rigor, personal sacrifice, and humble faith in the
future transformation.
Thus Paul taught a partial dualism in the present to affirm a greater
cosmic unity in the future, lest a premature claim of redemption now
preclude the greater salvation of the world later. These corrective teachings
by Paul were supported as well by the religious vision contained in the three
Synoptic Gospels of Mark, Matthew, and Luke. As a group, and in contrast to
the Gospel according to John, these narratives tended to emphasize Jesus’s
humanity, his historical life and suffering, and the satanic dangers of the
present time prior to the apocalyptic end time, with less of the Johannine
sense of Christ’s spiritual glory already suffus ing the present age. The
perspective expressed in the Synoptic Gospels therefore encouraged an
intense anticipation of divine activity that would relieve the trials of the
present time, and suggested a more critical opinion of man’s present
spiritual position. Such a view lent itself to a dualism between the present
world and the coming Kingdom of Heaven, and between God’s omnipotence
and man’s helplessness. That dualism, however, was mitigated by God’s gift
of the Spirit to mankind, and would soon be overcome altogether with
Christ’s Second Coming.
Yet, paradoxically, that dualism was enhanced and given a different
significance by certain elements of John’s Gospel, the last of the four Gospels
to be written (near the end of the first century), and the most theologically
developed. Since the Second Coming did not arrive as soon as the first-
generation Christians had expected, the dualism that had an anticipatory
form in the Synoptics took on a more mystical and ontological dimension
under the influence of John’s Gospel. The Johannine vision was permeated
by the theme of light versus darkness, of good versus evil, a cosmic division
141 

that was readily applicable to a dualism between spirit and matter which
concretized and reinforced the distinction between Christ’s transcendent
kingdom and the world under Satan. Although John’s “realized
eschatology”—his teaching that the salvational end of history was already
being actualized in the wake of the resurrection—affirmed man’s present
participation in Christ’s glorification, this was increasingly understood as a
spiritual participation that transcended the material world and the physical
body, which thereby became irrelevant to the redemptive process and even
inhibitory. Such a mystical and ontological dualism was supported and
amplified by the Gnostics, as well as by the Neoplatonist stream within
Christian theology, and was further confirmed by the continued historical
delay of the Parousia. But while for the Gnostics esoteric knowledge was
thought to mediate that transcendence, and while for the Neoplatonists
mystical illumination could do so, for the larger mainstream Christian
tradition, which had anticipated the Second Coming as the necessary
solution, that mediating role would be fulfilled by the ongoing sacramental
Church.
Thus John’s Gospel affirmed a present unity of Christ and believer, but at
the expense of an implied ontological dualism. Moreover, despite the
fundamental Johannine proclamation that “the Logos became flesh,” the
sheer magnitude of luminous divinity possessed by the Christ of John’s
Gospel—portrayed there in glory as the exalted Lord from the beginning of
his ministry—seemed to far transcend the present potentialities of all other
human beings, and consequently tended to highlight the spiritual inferiority
and darkness of the natural man and the natural world. It would be the
Church that would fill that gap, as the numinous representation of Christ’s
continuing presence in the world and the vehicle of humanity’s
sacramentalization. The Johannine Christ was opened to man’s being in a
mystical way: those who obeyed his commandment of love and who knew
him as the Son could participate in his unitary relationship with the
transcendent Father. But this special relationship was viewed in contrast
with the rest of those who were “of the world,” thereby establishing another
division—as the Gnostic elite were distinct from the irredeemable majority
of mankind, or the enlightened philosopher was distinct from the
unenlightened, or, most broadly for the Christian tradition, those within the
142 

Church were distinct from everyone outside it. This division sustained and
strengthened that tendency throughout the Old and New Testaments to
view salvation in terms of an elect minority of believers who alone were
dear to God, and who would be gratuitously saved from the masses of a
mankind that was by nature opposed to God and destined for damnation.
It was this general trend—an unusually potent and durable compound of
the anticipatory view of redemption found in the Synoptic Gospels, Paul’s
moral admonitions, and John’s mystical dualism, with all these combined
with the continuing impact of pre-Christian Judaic themes, the delay of the
Second Coming, and the requirements of the developing institutional
Church—that encouraged the other side of the Christian vision, the
character of which in the long run would significantly redefine the
primitive Christian message. With a moderate shift or intensification of
emphasis, the same Gospels and Epistles that together proclaimed the
exultant Christian message could lend themselves to another synthesis of
strikingly different hue, especially as the historical context changed and cast
a different light on the revelation. At its root, this understanding reflected a
heightened sense of the divisions of existence—between God and man,
heaven and earth, good and evil, the faithful and the damned. Here was
stressed the corruption to which both man and this world had succumbed
and, in consequence, the transcendent divine activity necessary to save
human souls. On this scriptural foundation, and on the basis of their own
experience of the present world’s negative condition and their own spiritual
longing, devout Christians focused their attention more exclusively on the
future and the unworldly, in the form either of the promised Second
Coming or of a Church-mediated redeemed afterlife. In either case there
resulted a pronounced tendency to negate the intrinsic value of the present
life, the natural world, and humanity’s status in the divine hierarchy.
Only God’s intervention could save the righteous remnant of mankind, an
intervention that in the first generations after Christ was expected to take
the form of an apocalyptic irruption that would end history. Such an
expectation was possibly encouraged by Jesus’s own words concerning the
imminence of such an event, although he was also reported to have
discouraged calculations concerning its precise timing or details. In any case
an urgent anticipation of the end time was then widespread among Jews and
143 

other religious sects critical of the evil contemporary world. But after
several generations had passed without such an apocalypse, and especially
after Augustine, salvation was seen less in such dramatic historical and
collective terms, and more as a Church-mediated process that could occur
only through the institutional sacraments, and could be fulfilled only when
the soul left behind the physical world and entered the celestial state. Such a
salvation, like that of the apocalypse, was perceived as due entirely to God’s
will rather than to human effort, though it required that the believer during
this lifetime strictly conform his actions and beliefs to those sanctioned by
the Church. In both instances, man’s positive role was diminished or negated
in favor of God’s, this world’s value was diminished or negated in favor of
the next, and only a scrupulous conformity to specific moral principles and
ecclesiastical regulations could preserve the believing soul from
condemnation. The struggle with overwhelming evil was of paramount
concern, making the authoritative activity of God and Church mandatory.
On such a basis most Christians, and the ongoing Christian tradition in the
West, while acknowledging in principle much of the exultant unitary
conception, in practice subscribed to a form of Christianity that was more
static, circumscribed, and dualistic. The cosmic dimension of primitive
Christianity—humanity and nature as the progressive bearer of Christ,
history as an emergent process of the birth of the divine in the world—was
attenuated in favor of a more dichotomized conception. In the latter view,
the ideal Christian was conceived as an obedient and relatively passive
receptor of the divine, whose presence could be fully known by the human
soul only in a radical break from this world—variously understood as taking
place through an externally effected apocalyptic Second Coming, through
ascetic monastic withdrawal from the world, through the sacramental
mediation of an unworldly or anti-worldly Church, or through a fully
transcendent, extramundane salvation in the afterlife.
In this sense it could be said that much of Christianity was still waiting for
its redeemer—not unlike Judaism, though now with a more after-worldly
emphasis. Here the spiritual significance of Christ’s Second Coming, or
Christ’s coming to the soul after death, tended to outweigh that of his first
coming, except as the latter initiated the Church, provided teachings and a
moral example, and brought hope for a future salvation. As regards the first
144 

coming, the suffering and crucified Jesus, bearing humanity’s guilt, tended to
displace the triumphant resurrected Christ, bearing humanity’s liberation.
For the world itself appeared to have undergone little essential change or
divinization. Indeed, it had crucified God when he had become man, thus
further defining its sinful fate. Humanity’s hope lay in the future, in God’s
transcendent power, in the afterworld, and, for the present, in the bulwark
of the Church.
Thus all the “immanence” of God’s Kingdom was now contained in the
Church. Yet that Church was perceived as decisively against the world in
which it existed, or rather with which it was forced to coexist. On a deeper
level, the immanent dynamism of the “new man” and “new creation” that
had characterized the primitive Christian awareness was here transformed
into an eager longing for an afterworldly newness, a radiantly celestial
future, an entirely transcendent illumination. The present world was an
alien stage, the relatively static context into which man had been placed at
creation and within which he was to work out his salvation via the Church.
That salvation, in turn, would consist in man’s being taken up by Christ into
heaven, where his earthly imperfections would be left behind. As destitute
and depraved as was the present world, so much the more exalted would be
the happiness of the redeemed condition in paradise. Painfully aware of
their own sinfulness and the world’s grave defects, most faithful Christians
conscientiously devoted their efforts to preparing for such an afterworldly
salvation, spurred by the belief that only a few elect would be saved, while
the vast majority of corrupt mankind would meet perdition.
In this perspective, the idea of human deification became either
meaningless or blasphemous. The human contribution to the salvational
enterprise was limited, and the nature of that salvation was defined less as
assimilation to God and more as ecclesiastical justification and inclusion in
God’s heavenly court. The believing Christian was not so much made divine
like God as he was made righteous in God’s eyes, freed from his personal and
hereditary guilt. Here the Christian concept of man’s nobility and freedom as
God’s greatest creation, made in God’s own image and exalted by Christ’s
uniting of divine and human, was largely overshadowed by the sense of
man’s unworthiness and absolute spiritual dependence on God and the
Church. Man was an intrinsically sin-permeated being who had willfully set
145 

himself in opposition to God. Hence his will was impotent against the evil
within and outside him, and his salvation lay solely in the possibility that God
might mercifully overlook the believer’s culpability, viewing his own Son’s
death as atonement, and save the believer from the damnation that, like the
rest of mankind, he genuinely deserved.
Because God’s action alone was spiritually potent, human pretensions to
heroism of the ancient Greek type could be viewed only as reprehensible
vainglory. It is true that for many primitive and later mystical Christians, one
could participate in the heroic to the extent that one directly participated in
Christ, the indwelling principle of universal divinity. Such a view often
underlay the testaments of martyrs in the early Church. Yet to later
mainstream Christianity, that ultimate heroism typically lay beyond human
capabilities altogether. In this perspective, Christ was an entirely external
figure, whose historical manifestation in Jesus was unique and whose divine
heroism was absolute, in comparison with which human beings were at best
indebted creatures, at worst wretched sinners. All good came from God and
was spiritual in origin, while all evil derived from man’s own sinful nature
and was carnal in origin. Here the ancient dualism was virtually as absolute
as before the birth of Christ, and the tragic image of the crucifixion served
to reinforce the sense of schism in the universe between God and man, and
between the present life in this world and a future life in the spiritual world.
The Church alone could bridge that great hiatus.
The existence of these two radically different though intertwined modes
of experiencing Christianity reflected a similar dichotomy within the Jewish
faith, the continuing influence of which in this respect constituted an
additional factor in the evolving Christian world view. The highly developed
Judaic sense of the divine and its potency was complemented by an equally
acute sense of the profane, the idolatrous, and the insignificance of the
merely human. Similarly, Israel’s special relationship to God, and special
historical responsibility for carrying out its mandate to renew God’s
sovereignty in the world, gave it a consciousness not only of its unique
spiritual importance, but also of its all-too-human failure and guilt. In the
spirit of Zoroastrianism’s cosmic dualism of good and evil, but with the
146 

historically consequential difference that it was man’s fall that caused the
cosmic fall rather than vice versa, the biblical tradition placed on man’s
shoulders a moral responsibility of universal dimensions. God’s Chosen
People were both exalted and burdened by their special role, and God’s
image varied accordingly.
On the one hand, many passages of the Hebrew Bible—such as in the
Psalms, Isaiah, or the Song of Songs—testified to the Judaic experience of
God’s mercy, goodness, and intimate love. Jewish religious literature was
distinguished above all for its pronounced sense of God’s personal relation to
and concern for man and his history. Yet on the other hand, so much of the
spirit and narrative of the Old Testament was dominated by the figure of a
jealous God of stern justice and ruthless vengeance—arbitrarily punitive,
obsessively self-referential, militantly nationalistic, patriarchal, moralistic,
“an eye for an eye” and so forth—that God’s cherished compassionate
qualities were often difficult to discern. Trust in God was constantly balanced
against fear of God. In certain crucial encounters with Yahweh, it was only
man’s plea for an equitable or merciful judgment that mitigated the full
brunt of God’s wrath against those he perceived as disobedient. On some
occasions it was as if the Jew’s own sense of moral justice surpassed that of
Yahweh; yet the former evidently emerged from the encounter with the
latter.11 The sacred covenant between God and man paradoxically required
both autonomy and compliance from the human partner, and on the basis of
that tension the Judaic ethos evolved.
Tension was central to the Judaic religious experience, for despite
significant exceptions, the Hebrew God generally disclosed himself as
intransigently “Other.” Duality pervaded the Judaic vision: God and man,
good and evil, sacred and profane. But God’s nearness, counterbalancing his
otherness, was visible in history. And in the Judaic vision, the presence of the
divine in the world was especially manifested through and measured by
Israel’s obedience to Yahweh, an obligation in which it alternately
triumphed and faltered. Everything rested on that drama. The Judaic
dialectic between God’s fearsome omnipotence and man’s ontological
separateness from God was resolved through God’s historical plan of
salvation, and this plan required man’s total submission. Thus the divine
command for unswerving obedience tended to outweigh the divine
147 

outpouring of reconciliatory love.
Yet that love was experienced nonetheless, especially as a perceived
numinous presence drawing forward the Jewish nation to fulfillment, to the
Promised Land in its various and constantly evolving forms. The redemptive
and unitary aspect of God’s love for man seemed to be more of a fervently
awaited condition that would be realized by a messiah in a future era, while
the present age was distressingly colored by the darkness and desolation of
man’s sin and God’s anger. The Jewish experience of divinity was
inextricably bound up with an unyielding sense of judgment, just as man’s
love for God was fully entwined with scrupulous obedience to God’s law.
This combination was in turn inherited and reasserted by Christianity, for
which Christ’s redemption did not altogether eliminate God’s vengeful
nature.
The writings of Paul, John, and Augustine all expressed a peculiar mixture
of the mystical and the juridical, and the Christian religion of which they
were principal shapers reflected those divergent tendencies. God was an
absolutely good supreme being, but that good God could act toward the
disobedient man, as in the apocalyptic Last Judgment of John’s Revelation,
with the most relentless and unforgiving severity. (It was not theologically
insignificant that the “O felix culpa!” passage of the Easter liturgy was
expunged by certain medieval churches and monasteries.) As in Judaism, the
Christian experience of God oscillated between that of a sublime love
relationship, indeed a divine romance, and that of a horrifically punitive
antagonism and juridical condemnation. Thus did Christian hope and faith
coexist with Christian guilt and fear.
148 

Further Contraries and the Augustinian Legacy
Matter and Spirit
The inner conflict in Christianity between redemption and judgment, and
between the unification of God with the world and a highly charged
dualistic distinction, was especially prominent in its attitudes toward the
physical world and the physical body—a fundamental ambivalence that
Christianity never entirely resolved. More explicitly than other religious
traditions, Judaism and Christianity asserted the full reality, grandeur,
beauty, and rightness of God’s original freely willed creation: not an illusion,
a falsehood, a divine error; not an imperfect imitation or a necessary
emanation. God created the world, and it was good. Moreover, man was
created, body and soul, in the image of God. But with man’s sin and fall, both
man and nature lost their divine inheritance, and thus began the Judaeo-
Christian drama of man’s vicissitudes in relation to God, amidst a backdrop
of a spiritually destitute and alienated world. As exalted as was the Judaeo-
Christian vision of the original pristine creation, so much the more tragic
was its view of the world’s fall.
The Christian revelation, however, asserted that in Christ, God had
become man, flesh and blood, and after his crucifixion had risen again in
what the apostles believed was a full spiritual transfiguration and renewal of
his physical body. In these central miracles of the Christian faith—the
Incarnation and Resurrection—was founded the belief not only in the soul’s
immortality, but even in the redemption and resurrection of the body, and of
nature itself. Because of Christ, not just the human soul but the human body
and its activities were being changed, spiritualized, and made holy again.
149 

Even the conjugal union was here seen as a reflection of Christ’s intimate
bond with humanity, and therefore as possessing sacred significance. Christ’s
incarnation had effected the restoration of God’s image in man. In Jesus, the
archetypal Logos had merged with its derivative image, man, thereby
restoring the latter’s full divinity. The redemptive triumph was a new man
in his entirety, not just a spiritual transcendence of his physicality. In its
teaching that “the Logos was made flesh,” and in its faith in the rebirth of the
whole man, lay an explicitly material dimension that distinguished
Christianity from other, more exclusively transcendent mystical conceptions.
This redemptive Christian understanding reaffirmed and brought new
meaning to the original Hebrew view of man as created body and soul in the
image of God, a conception parallel to the later Neoplatonic idea of man as
microcosm of the divine, but with Judaism’s decisively greater stress on man
—body and soul—as an integrated unit of vital power. The body was the
vessel of the spirit, its temple and incarnate expression. In addition, Jesus’s
ministry had been centrally involved with the act of healing, body and soul
considered together. In the early Church, there was repeated reference to
“Christ the physician,” and the apostles as well were often recognized as
charismatic healers. The primitive Christian faith perceived the nature of
spiritual salvation in explicitly psychosomatic terms. Paul’s dominant image
for mankind’s resurrection was that of the one body of Christ, all humanity
composing its members, matured into the fullness of Christ who was its head
and consummation. Yet not just man was being restored to divinity, but also
nature, which had been riven by man’s fall and longed for its salvation. Paul
wrote in his Letter to the Romans: “For the creation waits with eager longing
for the revealing of the children of God.” Early Church fathers believed that
as Christ would restore the severed relation between man and God, so would
he restore that between man and nature, which since the Fall and man’s
misuse of freedom had been subject to man’s selfish arrogation.
Christ’s incarnation into and redemption of the world were here seen not
just as exclusively spiritual events, but rather as an unparalleled
development within temporal materiality and world history, and as
representing the spiritual completion of nature—not nature’s antithesis, but
its fulfillment. For the Logos, the divine wisdom, had been present in the
creation from its beginning. Now Christ had made the implicit divinity of the
150 

world explicit. Creation was the ground of redemption, just as birth was the
precondition of rebirth. In this view, nature was regarded as God’s noble
handiwork and the present locus of his self-revelation, and was thus worthy
of reverence and understanding.
But equally characteristic of Christian thinking was an opposing view,
especially dominant in later Western Christianity, in which nature was
perceived as that which must be overcome to attain spiritual purity. Nature
as a whole was corrupt and finite. Only man, the head of creation, was
capable of salvation, and in man only his soul was essentially redeemable. In
this understanding, man’s soul was in direct conflict with the base instincts
of his own biological nature and was endangered by the potential
entrapment of carnal pleasures and the material world. Here the physical
body was often deplored as the residence of the devil and the occasion of sin.
The early Judaeo-Christian belief in redemption of the whole man and the
natural world shifted in emphasis, especially under the influence of the
Neoplatonist Christian theologians, to a belief in a purely spiritual
redemption in which man’s highest faculties alone—the spiritual intellect,
the divine essence of the human soul—would be reunited with God. While
the Platonic element in Christianity overcame the divine-human dualism by
conceiving of man as directly participating in the divine archetype, it
simultaneously encouraged a different dualism between body and spirit. The
focus for the Platonic divine-human identity was the nous, the spiritual
intellect; the physical body did not participate in this identity, but rather
impeded it. In its more extreme forms, Platonism encouraged in Christianity
a view of the body as the soul’s prison.
As with the physical body, so with the physical world. Plato’s doctrine of
the supremacy of the transcendent reality over the contingent material
world reinforced in Christianity a metaphysical dualism that in turn
supported a moral asceticism. Like Plato’s Socrates, the devout Christian
perceived himself as a citizen of the spiritual world, and his relation to the
transitory physical realm was that of a stranger and pilgrim. Man had once
possessed a blissful divine knowledge but had fallen into dark ignorance, and
only the hope of recovering that lost spiritual light motivated the Christian
soul while detained in this body and this world. Only when man awakened
from the present life would he attain true happiness. Death, as a spiritual
151 

liberation, was more highly valued than mundane existence. At best the
concrete natural world was an imperfect reflection of and preparation for
the higher spiritual kingdom to come. But more likely the mundane world,
with its deceptive attractions, its spurious pleasures and debasing arousal of
the passions, would pervert the soul and deprive it of its celestial reward.
Hence all human intellectual and moral effort was properly directed toward
the spiritual and the afterlife, away from the physical and this life. In all
these ways, Platonism gave an emphatic philosophical justification to the
potential spirit-matter dualism in Christianity.
Yet this later theological development had numerous antecedents:
Stoicism, Neopythagoreanism, Manichaeism, and other religious sects such
as the Essenes all possessed marked tendencies toward religious dualism and
asceticism that affected the Christian view. And Judaism itself, with its
characteristic imperative against worldly and fleshly defilement of the divine
and holy, lent support to such tendencies from the outset of the new
religion. But it was certain streams of dualistic Gnosticism, probably
originating from the penetration of mystical Judaism by Zoroastrian dualism,
that were the most extreme in this regard during Christianity’s first
centuries, holding an absolute division between an evil material world and a
good spiritual realm. The resulting syncretistic Gnostic theology radically
transformed the orthodox Christian conception by maintaining that the
creator of the physical world, the Old Testament Yahweh, was an imperfect
and tyrannical subordinate deity, who was overthrown by the spiritual
Christ and the compassionate Father of the New Testament revelation
(which the Gnostics augmented with other texts and edited to remove the
remnants of the Hebrew faith which they considered false). Man’s spirit was
entrapped in an alien body in an alien material world, which could be
transcended only by the esoterically knowledgeable, the Gnostic elect. Such a
vision amplified related tendencies in John’s Gospel stressing the divisions
between light and darkness, between Christ’s kingdom and the world under
Satan, between the spiritual elect and the worldly unredeemed, as well as
between Yahweh and Christ, Old Testament and New. Although the earliest
authoritative orthodox Christian theologians, such as Irenaeus, argued
forcefully for the continuity of the Old and New Testaments, for the divine
plan’s unity from Genesis to Christ, much of the tenor of Gnostic dualism left
152 

its traces in later Christian theology and piety.
For primitive Christianity itself, like its Judaic progenitor, tended
ambiguously toward a matter-spirit dualism and a negative view of nature
and this world. The New Testament referred to Satan as the prince of this
world; thus Christian trust in a world ruled by Providence was juxtaposed
with Christian fear of a world ruled by Satan. Moreover, to distance itself
from the highly sexualized contemporary pagan culture, much of early
Christianity stressed the need for a spiritual purity that held little room for
nature’s spontaneous instincts, particularly sexuality. Celibacy was the ideal
state, and marriage a necessary allowance for human cupidity so that it be
kept within defined boundaries. Communal and charitable forms of
Christian love were instead emphasized—agapē rather than eros. Especially
important here was the expectation of Christ’s imminent return, which
dominated the early Church sensibility and which made procreative and
marital considerations seem irrelevant. The arrival of the Kingdom of
Heaven, an event most early Christians expected would take place in their
own lifetime, would eliminate all material and social forms of the old order.
More generally, the desire to overcome the perceived materialistic excesses
of pagan culture, as well as Christianity’s repeated encounter with state-
sanctioned persecutions, impelled early Christians to negate the values of the
present world in favor of the next. Withdrawal from and transcendence of
this world, whether in the manner of the desert hermits or, more absolutely,
through martyrdom, held great attraction for the fervent Christian.
Apocalyptic expectations often arose from and engendered intensely
negative evaluations of the present world.
The need to keep holy and blameless in anticipation of Christ’s imminent
coming was the foremost imperative for the early Christian. And the nature
of that holiness and moral purity was defined in Paul’s radical opposition of
“flesh” to “spirit,” with the former evil and the latter good. It is true that Paul
made a distinction between “flesh” (sarx) as unredeemed nature, and “body”
(soma) as something connoting the whole man—less part of a Greek body-
soul dichotomy and more the biblical unity, susceptible to sin yet open to
redemption. He suggested a positive evaluation of “body” in such images as
the body of Christ, the body of Church members, the resurrection of the
body, the body as temple of the Holy Spirit. He often employed “flesh” to
153 

refer less to the physical per se than to man’s mortal weakness, and
specifically to a principle of narrow self-elevation that caused a moral
inversion of the proper human personality, a subjection of the human soul
and body to lower negative forces at the expense of a loving openness to the
greater spiritual reality of God. Sin was not so much mere carnality—though
the sinful life was carnal in its obsessions—as it was the perverse elevation
over God of that which, good in itself in proper measure, was rightly
subordinate to God.
Yet Paul’s flesh-body distinction was often ambiguous, both in his
doctrinal statements and in his practical ethics. And his choice of “flesh” as
the constellating term for such authoritative moral and metaphysical
disparagement was a consequential one. It was not without Paul’s assumed
support that many subsequent Christians characteristically viewed the
physical, the biological, and the instinctual as inherently prone to the
demonic and responsible for man’s fall and continued corruption. In Paul’s
flesh-spirit polarity, compounded by similar tendencies in other parts of the
New Testament, lay the seeds of an antiphysical dualism in Christianity that
Platonic, Gnostic, and Manichaean influences would later amplify.
Augustine
What was implicit in Paul was made explicit by Augustine. And here we
must focus more directly on that individual whose effect on Christianity in
the West would be uniquely pervasive and enduring. For in Augustine all
these factors—Judaism, Pauline theology, Johannine mysticism, early
Christian asceticism, Gnostic dualism, Neoplatonism, and the critical state of
late classical civilization—combined with the peculiarities of his own
character and biography to define an attitude toward nature and this world,
toward human history, and toward man’s redemption that would largely
mold the character of medieval Western Christianity.
Son of a pagan father and a devoutly Christian mother, Augustine was
endowed with a character the intensity of which further charged his
biographical polarities. Highly sensual by nature, living the life of a young
bon vivant in the libidinous environment of pagan Carthage, fathering an
154 

illegitimate child by his mistress, pursuing the worldly career of a professor
of rhetoric, he was nevertheless progressively drawn to the supersensible
and spiritual by philosophical preference and religious aspiration, and, not
least, by maternal concern. In a series of psychologically dramatic
experiences, Augustine moved away from his earlier, secularly oriented
existence through a sequence of stages holding considerable meaning for his
later religious understanding: first espousing the higher life of philosophy
after reading Cicero’s Hortensius; then a long involvement with the highly
dualistic semi-Gnostic sect of Manichaeism; followed by an increasing
attraction to philosophical Neoplatonism; and finally, after encountering
Ambrose, the Neoplatonist Christian bishop of Milan, ending his search in a
full embrace of the Christian religion and the Catholic Church. Each element
in this sequence left its mark on his mature vision, which in turn left its
mark on subsequent Christian thinking in the West through the medium of
his extraordinarily compelling writings.
Augustine’s self-consciousness as a volitional, responsible moral agent was
acute, as was his awareness of the burdens of human freedom—error and
guilt, darkness and suffering, severance from God. In a sense, Augustine was
the most modern of the ancients: he possessed an existentialist’s self-
awareness with his highly developed capacity for introspection and self-
confrontation, his concern with memory and consciousness and time, his
psychological perspicacity, his doubt and remorse, his sense of the solitary
alienation of the human self without God, his intensity of inner conflict, his
intellectual skepticism and sophistication. It was Augustine who first wrote
that he could doubt everything, but not the fact of the soul’s own experience
of doubting, of knowing, willing, and existing—thereby affirming the certain
existence of the human ego in the soul. Yet he also affirmed the absolute
contingency of that ego on God, without whom it could not exist, let alone
be capable of attaining knowledge or fulfillment. For Augustine was also the
most medieval of the ancients. His Catholic religiosity, his monolithic
predispositions, his otherworldly focus, and his cosmic dualism all
foretokened the succeeding age—as did his keen sense of the invisible, of
God’s will, of the Mother Church, of miracles, grace, and Providence, of sin,
evil, and the demonic. Augustine was a man of paradox and extremes, and
his legacy would be of the same character.
155 

It was certainly the quality and power of Augustine’s conversion—the
experience of an overwhelming influx of grace from God turning him away
from the corrupt and egoistic blindness of his natural self—that was the
culminating factor in his theological vision, imprinting in him a conviction
of the supremacy of God’s will and goodness and the imprisoned poverty of
his own. The luminous potency of Christ’s positive intervention in his life
left the human person in relative shadow. Yet what may have especially
influenced his religious understanding was the pivotal role played by
sexuality in Augustine’s religious quest. Although mindful of nature’s
inherently divine ordering (and often more unstinting in his praise of the
creation’s beauty and bounty than a Platonist), Augustine placed extreme
emphasis in his own life on the ascetic denial of his sexual instincts as the
prerequisite for full spiritual illumination—a point of view supported by his
encounters with both Neoplatonism and Manichaeism, yet reflective of
deeper roots in his own personality and experience.
Love of God was the quintessential theme and goal of Augustine’s
religiosity, and love of God could thrive only if love of self and love of the
flesh were successfully conquered. In his view, succumbing to the flesh was
at the heart of man’s fall; Adam’s eating the fruit from the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, the original sin in which all mankind
participated, was tied directly to concupiscence (and indeed the biblical
“knowing” had always possessed sexual connotations). For Augustine, the evil
character of fleshly lust was visible in the shame that attended its expression,
uncontrolled by the rational will, and that attended the mere nakedness of
the sexual organs. Procreation in Paradise before the Fall would not have
entailed such bestial impulsiveness and shame. Marriage now at least could
realize some good out of the inherited evil, since it brought offspring,
enduring commitment, and a limitation of sexuality to procreative purposes.
But the primal sin infected all born of carnal generation, so that all humanity
was condemned to pain in childbirth, to suffering and guilt in life, and to the
final evil of death. Only by Christ’s grace and with the resurrection of the
body would all traces of that sin be removed and man’s soul be freed from
the curse of his fallen nature.
It is true that Augustine held that the root of evil did not reside in matter,
as the Neoplatonists suggested, for matter was God’s creation and therefore
156 

good. Rather, evil was a consequence of man’s misuse of his free will. Evil lay
in the act of turning itself—of turning away from God—not in what was
turned to. Yet in Augustine’s linking of that sinful abuse of freedom to
concupiscence and sexuality, and to the pervasive corruption of nature
thereafter, the germ of the Neoplatonic and more extreme Manichaean
dualism lived on.
On this pivot rested the tenor of Augustine’s moral theology. Creation—
man as well as nature—was indeed an infinitely marvelous product of God’s
benevolent fecundity, but with man’s primal sin that creation was set so
fundamentally awry that only the next, heavenly, life would restore its
original integrity and glory. Man’s fall was precipitated by his willful
rebellion against the proper divine hierarchy, a rebellion founded in the
assertion of the values of the flesh against those of the spirit. He was now
enslaved to the passions of the lower order. Man was no longer free to
determine his life simply by virtue of his rational will, not only because
circumstances beyond his control presented themselves, but also because he
was unconsciously constrained by ignorance and emotional conditioning.
His initial sinful thoughts and actions had become ingrained habits and
finally ineluctable chains imprisoning him in a state of wretched alienation
from God. Only the intervention of divine grace could possibly break the
vicious spiral of sin. Man was so bound by his vanity and pride, so desirous
of imposing his will on others, as to be incapable of transforming himself by
his own powers. In his present, fallen state, positive freedom for man could
consist only in the acceptance of God’s grace. Only God could free man,
since no action by man on his own could be sufficient to move him toward
salvation. And God already knew for all time who were the elect and who
the damned based upon his omniscient foreknowledge of their different
responses to his grace. Although official Christian doctrine would not always
accept Augustine’s more extreme formulations of predestination or his
nearly complete denial of any active human role in the process of salvation,
the subsequent Christian view of man’s moral corruption and imprisonment
was one largely congruent with Augustine’s.
Thus it was that the man who so decisively declared God’s love and
liberating presence in his own life also recognized, with a potency that
never ceased to permeate the Western Christian tradition, the innate
157 

bondage and powerlessness of the human soul as perverted by Original Sin.
From this antithesis arose the necessity for Augustine of a divinely provided
means of grace in this world: an authoritative Church structure, within
which haven man could satisfy his overriding needs for spiritual guidance,
moral discipline, and sacramental grace.
Augustine’s critical view of human nature had its corollary in his
evaluation of secular history. As an influential bishop ir his own era,
Augustine was dominated in his later life by two pressing concerns—the
preservation of Church unity and doctrinal uniformity against the entropic
impact of several major heretical movements, and the historical
confrontation with the fall of the Roman Empire under the barbarian
invasions. Faced with the crumbling empire and the apparent demise of
civilization itself, Augustine saw little possibility for any genuine historical
progress in this world. With its manifest evils and cruelties, wars and
murders, with man’s greed and arrogance, licentiousness and vice, with the
ignorance and suffering all human beings were forced to experience, he
instead saw evidence of the absolute and enduring power of Original Sin,
which made of this life a torment, a hell on earth from which only Christ
could save man. Augustine answered the great criticism aimed at the
Christian religion by the surviving pagan Romans—that Christianity had
undermined the integrity of Roman imperial power and thereby opened the
way for barbarian triumph—with a different set of values and a different
vision of history: All true progress was necessarily spiritual and transcended
this world and its negative fate. What was important for man’s welfare was
not the secular empire but the Catholic Church. Because divine Providence
and spiritual salvation were the ultimate factors in human existence, the
significance of secular history, with its passing values and its fluctuating and
generally negative progress, was accordingly diminished.
Yet history, like all else in creation, was a manifestation of God’s will. It
embodied God’s moral purpose. Man could not fully grasp that purpose in
the present time of darkness and chaos, for its meaning would be vindicated
only at the end of history. But although world history was still under God’s
command and spiritual in design (indeed, Augustine compared it to a great
melody by some ineffable composer, with the parts of that melody being the
dispensations suitable to each epoch), its secular aspect was not positively
158 

progressive. Rather, because of Satan’s continuing power in this world,
history was destined to enact, as in the eternal Manichaean battle of good
versus evil, a deteriorating and divisive evolution of the spiritual elect and
the mass of the worldly damned. In the course of this drama, God’s motives
were often hidden but ultimately just. For whatever apparent successes or
defeats happened to individuals in this life, they were as nothing compared
with the eternal fates their souls had earned. The particulars and
achievements of secular history were of no ultimate importance in
themselves. Actions in this life were significant mainly for their afterworldly
consequences, divine reward or punishment. The individual soul’s search for
God was primary, while history and this world merely served as the stage for
that drama. Escape from this world to the next, from self to God, from flesh
to spirit, constituted the deepest purpose and direction of human life. The
one great saving grace in history was the Church founded by Christ.
Instead of the early Christian anticipation of an immanent, as well as
imminent, world change, Augustine gave up the field of this world, whose
fallen tendency was naturally negative. In Augustine’s vision, Christ had
indeed already defeated Satan, but in the transcendent spiritual realm, the
only realm that genuinely mattered. The true religious reality was not
subject to the vagaries of this world and its history, and that reality could be
known only through the individual’s interior experience of God as mediated
by the Church and its sacraments.
Here the Neoplatonic influence—inward, subjective, the individual
spiritual ascent—joined, and to an extent took precedence over, the Judaic
principle of a collective, exterior, historical spirituality. The penetration of
Christianity by Neoplatonism both augmented and explicated the mystical
and interior element of the Christian revelation, especially that of John’s
Gospel. But in so doing, it simultaneously diminished the historical and
collectively evolutionary element that primitive Christianity, especially Paul
and very early theologians like Irenaeus, had inherited and radically
developed from Judaism. Augustine’s strong sense of God’s government of
history—as in his dramatic scenario of the two invisible societies of the elect
and the damned, the city of God and the city of the world, battling
throughout creation’s history until the Last Judgment—still reflected the
Judaic ethical vision of God’s purposefulness in history. Indeed, the doctrine
159 

of the two cities would have much influence on subsequent Western history,
affirming the autonomy of the spiritual Church vis-à-vis the secular state.
But his fundamental depreciation of the secular, combined with his
philosophical background, his psychological predispositions, and his
historical context, transformed that vision in the direction of a personal and
interior otherworldly religiosity.
In other essential aspects of Augustine’s thought and the evolving
Christian world view—as in the dualism of an omnipotent transcendent God
versus the sin-enchained creaturely man, and the need for a doctrinally and
morally authoritative religious structure governing the community of
chosen believers—it was the Judaic sensibility that dominated. This was
particularly visible in the evolution of Christianity’s characteristic attitudes
toward God’s moral commandments.
Law and Grace
For the Jews, the Mosaic Law was a living guide, their pillar of existential
solidity, that which morally ordered their lives and retained them in good
relation to God. While the Judaic tradition, as represented in Jesus’s time by
the Pharisees, held forth the need for strict obedience to the Law, early
Christianity asserted what it believed was a fundamentally contrasting view:
The Law was made for man and was fulfilled in the love of God, which
eliminated the need for repressive obedience and instead called up a
liberating and wholehearted embrace of God’s will as one’s own. That union
of wills was mediated only by divine grace, the unearned gift of salvation
brought to mankind by Christ. In this view, the Law could establish, with its
negative precepts written in stone, only an imperfect obedience by fear. By
contrast, Paul declared, man could be genuinely justified only by faith in
Christ, through whose saving act all believers could know the freedom of
God’s grace. The Law’s strictures made man a sinner, divided against himself.
Instead of being in “slavery” under the Law, the Christian believer was free,
because by Christ’s grace he participated in Christ’s freedom.
Before his conversion, Paul himself had been a Pharisee and a fervid
defender of the Law. But after his conversion, he testified with self-
160 

deprecating zeal to the impotence of the Law compared with the power of
Christ’s love and the presence of the Spirit working within the human
person. Paul’s understanding of the Law, however, was viewed by Jews as a
parody of its true nature. For them, the Law was itself God’s gift and called
forth moral responsibility in man. It upheld human autonomy and good
works as necessary elements in the economy of salvation. Paul, too,
recognized a role for those elements, but asserted that his own life
exemplified the ultimate futility of a Law-governed religiosity. More than
human effort, even if divinely legislated, was required for something as
fundamental and suprahuman as the redemption of the human soul. Good
works and moral responsibility were necessary but not sufficient. Only the
supreme gift of Christ’s incarnation and self-sacrifice made possible that life
in harmony with God which the human soul so deeply desired. Faith in
Christ’s grace, rather than scrupulous conformity to ethical precepts, was
man’s surest path to salvation—and the evidence of that faith was the
Christian’s works of love and service that Christ’s grace made possible. For
Paul, the Law was no longer the binding authority, because the true end of
the Law was Christ.
Similarly underscoring the break from the Judaic Law, John’s Gospel
proclaimed, “For the law was given through Moses; but grace and truth
came through Jesus Christ.” The tension between God’s will and man’s,
between external regulation and inner inclination, could be dissolved in the
love of God, which would unite human and divine in one unitary spirit. To
awaken to this state of divine love was to experience the Kingdom of
Heaven. Because of Christ’s redemption, man could now attain true
righteousness in the eyes of God, not by constraint but in happy spontaneity.
Yet this contrast in the New Testament between moral restriction and
divinely graced freedom was not unambiguous. The Gospels’ concern with
interpersonal ethics was a dominant element in the Christian outlook, but its
character seemed open to both interpretations. On the one hand, the tone of
Jesus’s teachings was often extremely uncompromising and judgmental,
phrased in the hard dialectic of the Semitic manner, and intensified in the
light of the imminent end times. In Matthew’s Gospel, the Law is made even
more strict for Jesus’s followers—requiring purity of intention as well as act,
love of the enemy as well as friend, unceasing forgiveness, utter detachment
161 

from worldly things—and the demand for unconditional moral integrity is
pressed to the full under the urgency of the messianic transition. On the
other hand, Jesus’s emphasis was repeatedly on compassion over self-
righteousness, and on the inner spirit over the external letter of the law. His
demands for heightened, even absolute, moral purity—judging spontaneous
thoughts as well as deliberate acts—seemed to presuppose more than
human will to achieve such inner goodness, thus opening the way for faith
in God’s grace. Often his intention appeared to be that of lending comfort to
the poor, the desperate, the outcast and the sinful, while direly warning the
proud and self-satisfied, those secure in their spiritual and mundane status.
A humble openness to divine grace counted for more than legalistically
righteous behavior. The Law was constantly to be measured against God’s
higher commandment of love. According to the New Testament, the extent
to which a legalistic morality had overcome Jewish religious practice was
evidence that the Law had become entrenched and frozen in the course of
time, an end in itself that was now obscuring rather than mediating the
individual’s true relation to God and to others.
But even the new Christian revelation of God’s graciousness was open to
antithetical interpretations and consequences, especially under later
historical conditions. The Pauline and Augustinian stress on divine grace
over human works and self-dependent righteousness lent itself not just to
the unitary notion of human fulfillment in embrace of the immanent divine
will, but also to an emphatic reduction of man’s positive volitional freedom
relative to the omnipotence of God. In the struggle for salvation, man’s own
efforts w ˜e comparatively inconsequential; only God’s saving power could
be effective. The sole source of good was God, and only his mercy could save
mankind from the natural fallen human inclination toward blind perversity.
Because of Adam’s sin, all human beings were corrupt and guilty, and only
Christ’s death had atoned for that collective guilt. The resurrection Christ
brought to mankind was present in the Church, and the justification that
every human being required lest he be condemned was dependent on the
Church’s sacraments, access to which in turn demanded conformity to
specific ethical and ecclesiastical standards.
Since the Church and its sacred institutes were the divinely established
vehicles of God’s grace, the Church was suprahumanly significant, its
162 

hierarchy absolutely authoritative, its laws definitive. Because human beings
were intrinsically prone to sin and lived in a world of constant temptation,
they required stern Church-defined sanctions against uninhibited actions
and thoughts, lest their eternal souls fall to the same debased fate as their
temporal bodies. Especially in the West, under the historical exigencies of
the Church’s responsibility for the newly converted (and, from the Church’s
perspective, morally primitive) barbarian peoples, a pervasive verticality in
the institutional Church was established, with all spiritual authority flowing
downward from the supreme papal sovereign. Thus the characteristic tone
of the medieval Christian Church—with its absolutist moral precepts, its
complex legal-judicial structure, its accounting system of good works and
merits, its meticulous distinctions between different categories of sin, its
mandatory beliefs and sacraments, its power of excommunication, and its
forceful stress on the inhibition of the flesh against the continual threat of
damnation—often seemed more reminiscent of the older Judaic concept of
God’s law, indeed an exaggeration of that concept, than of the new unitary
image of God’s grace. Yet such elaborate safeguards appeared necessary in
the present world of moral waywardness and secular danger, to preserve a
genuine Christian morality and to guide the Church’s charges into the
eternal life.
Athens and Jerusalem
Another dichotomy within the Christian belief system involved the question
of its purity and integrity and how these should be preserved. For the Judaic
inclination toward religious exclusivism and doctrinal purity also passed
itself on to Christianity, maintaining a constant tension with the Hellenic
element, which sought and found evidence of a divine philosophy in the
works of diverse pagan thinkers, especially Plato. While Paul at times
stressed the need for complete differentiation of Christianity from the
deceptive ideas of pagan philosophy, which for that reason should be
carefully avoided, on other occasions he suggested a more liberal approach,
quoting from pagan poets and tacitly infusing elements of Stoic ethics into
his Christian teachings (Paul’s native city of Tarsus in Asia Minor was in his
163 

time a cosmopolitan university city, especially renowned for its Stoic
philosophers). Later Christian theologians in the classical era were often
imbued with Greek philosophy before converting to Christianity, and
subsequently continued to find value in the Hellenic tradition. A syncretistic
mysticism informed many early Christian thinkers as they eagerly
recognized identical patterns of meaning in other philosophies and religions,
often applying allegorical analysis to compare biblical and pagan literatures.
The Truth was one, wherever it was found, for the Logos was all-
comprehensive and boundlessly creative.
As early as the second century, Justin Martyr first advanced a theology
that saw both Christianity and Platonic philosophy as aspiring toward the
same transcendent God, with the Logos signifying at once the divine mind,
human reason, and the redemptive Christ who fulfills both the Judaic and
Hellenic historical traditions. Later, the Christian Platonist school in
Alexandria used as its basis the paideia, the classical Greek education system
from Plato’s time centered on the liberal arts and philosophy, but now with
theology as the highest and culminating science of the new curriculum. In
this framework, learning per se was a form of Christian discipline, even of
adoration. Such learning did not limit itself to the Judaeo-Christian tradition,
but moved beyond it to encompass a larger whole, to illuminate all
knowledge with the light of the Logos.
A characteristic compromise position, at once employing the admired
Greek culture for Christian apologetic purposes and yet keeping distance
from it, was presented by Clement of Alexandria in his use of Homer’s
Odyssey: Sailing by the island of the Sirens on his way home to Ithaca,
Odysseus tied himself to the mast of his ship so he could hear their seductive
singing (“have full knowledge”) without succumbing to their temptation and
destroying himself on their rocky shores. So too could the mature Christian
make his way through the sensual and intellectual enticements of the
secular world and pagan culture, having full knowledge of them while tying
himself to the cross—the mast of the Church—for spiritual security.
Just as often, however, Christianity more fully resembled its Judaic parent
in rejecting virtually all contact with non-Christian philosophical ideas and
systems, considering them not only profane but valueless. In this view, the
true core of the Christian mystery was so unique and luminous that it could
164 

only be blurred, distorted, or falsified by the infusion of other cultural
streams. For the Hellenic side of Christianity, the Logos (as God’s wisdom, the
universal Reason) was seen as operative in non-Christian wisdom preceding
the revelation, and in the larger framework of world history outside the
Judaeo-Christian tradition. But in the more exclusivist understanding, the
Logos (here understood more particularly as God’s Word) tended to be
recognized solely within the confines of Scripture, Church doctrine, and
biblical history. Compared with the secular sophistication of pagan
philosophy, the Christian gospel must seem mere foolishness, and any
dialogue between the two would be futile. Thus Tertullian in the late second
century emphatically questioned the relevance of the Hellenic tradition in
his dictum “What has Athens to do with Jerusalem?”
Theological variants and religious innovations—Gnosticism, Montanism,
Donatism, Pelagianism, Arianism—were especially abhorrent to Church
authorities, because they controverted matters close to the heart of
Christianity, and were therefore viewed as heretical, perilous, and requiring
effective condemnation. Christianity’s demand for uniformity of doctrine
and structure, with its attendant intolerance, found part of its basis in the
urgent primitive Christian imperative—seen especially in Paul—that the
body of Christ (the Church community) be pure and undivided in readiness
for the Parousia. Augustine presented, again, an influential stance containing
elements of both sides—knowledgeable and respectful concerning classical
culture and particularly Platonic philosophy, yet acutely conscious of
Christianity’s unique doctrinal superiority and, especially as he grew older,
forcefully active in repressing heresies. Christian thinking in the centuries
following Augustine generally reflected a similar position. Despite constant
influences, both conscious and unconscious, from other philosophical and
religious systems, the Church officially adopted a restrictive dogmatic stance
with little to.erance for other systems on their own terms.
Thus Augustine’s sense of the need for restraining or negating (in both
himself and others) the pluralistic and heretical, the biological, the worldly,
and the human, in favor of God, the spiritual, the one true Church and its
one true sacred doctrine, was crystallized in the final moments of the
ancient world, and, through his enduring influence on major Church figures
like Pope Gregory the Great, given institutional embodiment in the medieval
165 

Western Church. Because of the remarkable power of his thought, his
writings, and his personality, and because Augustine in some sense
articulated the nascent self-consciousness of an era, the development of the
Christian sensibility in the West took place largely through his mediation. By
the end of the classical period, the exultant and inclusive religious spirit
visible in primitive Christianity had taken on a different character: more
inward, otherworldly, and philosophically elaborate, yet also more
institutional, juridical, and dogmatic.
166 

The Holy Spirit and Its Vicissitudes
The fundamental tensions inhering in Christianity from its outset come to
clear focus in the extraordinary doctrine of the Holy Spirit, the third person
of the Christian Trinity with God the Father and Christ the Son. The New
Testament stated that before Jesus died, he had promised his disciples that
God would send the Holy Spirit to remain with them to continue and
complete his redemptive task. The subsequent “descent of the Holy Spirit”
into a group of the disciples who had gathered together on Pentecost in an
upper room in Jerusalem was reportedly experienced as a numinous
visitation of great intensity, accompanied by a sound “like the rush of a
mighty wind filling the house,” with “tongues as of fire” appearing above
each disciple. The event was interpreted by those present as an
overwhelming and indisputable revelation of Christ’s continuing presence
among them despite his death and ascension. Immediately afterward,
according to the report in Acts of the Apostles, the inspired disciples began
preaching ecstatically to the multitudes: Through the Spirit the Word was
spoken to the world; now the fruit of Christ’s passion could be disseminated
to all humanity. As Pentecost for the Jews had marked the revelation of the
Law on Mount Sinai, so now for the Christians it marked a new revelation,
the pouring forth of the Spirit. A new age had commenced with the Spirit’s
coming upon all the people of God. This Pentecostal experience—apparently
renewed in subsequent communal gatherings, and in other circumstances
involving charismatic phenomena such as unexpected healings and
prophetic ecstasies—later served as the basis for the Church’s doctrine of
the Holy Spirit.
This doctrine conceived of the Holy Spirit as the spirit of truth and
167 

wisdom (the Paraclete, or Counselor), as well as the divine principle of life
manifest in both material creation and spiritual rebirth. In the first, or
revelatory, aspect, the Holy Spirit was recognized as the divine source of
inspiration that had spoken through the Hebrew prophets. Now, however,
the Spirit was democratized, made accessible to all Christians and not just
the few. In the second, or procreative, aspect, the Holy Spirit was recognized
as the progenitor of Christ within Mary his mother, and as being present at
the beginning of Jesus’s ministry when he was baptized by John the Baptist.
Jesus had died that the Spirit might come to all: only thus could take place
humanity’s death and rebirth into the fullness of God. Through the
continuing influx of the Spirit, a progressive incarnation of God into
humanity was being effected, renewing and propelling the divine birth of
Christ in the continuing Christian community. Although a human being’s
mortal reasonings were valueless by themselves, with the inspiration of the
Spirit one could attain divine knowledge. Although on one’s own resources
a human being could not find sufficient love within oneself for others,
through the Spirit one could know an infinite love embracing all humanity.
The Holy Spirit was the Spirit of Christ, the agent of man’s restoration to
divinity, God’s spiritual force acting through and with the Logos. The
presence of the Holy Spirit made possible a sharing in the divine life, and a
state of communion within the Church that was in essence a participation in
God. Finally, because the Holy Spirit’s presence brought divine authority and
numinosity to the Church’s believing community, the Spirit was seen as the
basis for the Church itself, expressing itself in all aspects of the life of the
Church—its sacraments, prayer, and doctrine, its developing tradition, its
official hierarchy, and its spiritual authority.
The spontaneous experience of the Holy Spirit, however, soon came into
conflict with the conservative imperatives of the institutional Church. The
New Testament described the Spirit as like a wind that blows “where it wills.”
But as such, the Spirit possessed inherently spontaneous and revolutionary
qualities that placed it, by definition, beyond any control. Individuals
claiming the presence of the Spirit tended to produce unpredictably variable
revelations and charismatic phenomena. Too often such manifestations—
unrestrained and inappropriate activities in Church services, wandering
preachers with diverse and unorthodox messages—seemed unconducive to
168 

the positive pursuit of the Church’s mission. For such phenomena, the
Church did not consider the authority of the Holy Spirit to be genuinely
present. If not more circumspectly defined, the principle of the Holy Spirit
in its more extreme manifestations seemed to lend itself to a blasphemous, or
at best premature, human deification that would threaten the traditional
separation between Creator and creature, and would contravene the
supreme uniqueness of Christ’s redemptive act.
In view of these tendencies toward the disruptive and heretical, and
mindful of the need to preserve an orderly structure of belief and ritual, the
Church came to adopt a generally negative response to self-proclaimed
outbursts of the Holy Spirit. The charismatic and irrational expressions of
the Spirit—spontaneous spiritual ecstasies, miraculous healings, speaking in
tongues, prophecies, new assertions of divine revelation—were increasingly
discouraged in favor of more ordered, rational manifestations, such as
sermons, organized religious services and rituals, institutional authority, and
doctrinal orthodoxy. A fixed canon of specific apostolic writings was
carefully selected and permanently established, with no new revelations
recognized as God’s infallible Word. The authority of the Holy Spirit,
invested by Christ in the original apostles, now passed on in a sacredly
established order to the bishops of the Church, with the ultimate authority
in the West claimed by the Roman pontiff, the successor to Peter. The notion
of the Holy Spirit as a divine principle of revolutionary spiritual power,
immanent in the human community and moving it toward deification,
diminished in Christian belief in favor of a notion of the Holy Spirit as solely
invested in the authority and activities of the institutional Church. The
stability and continuity of the Church were thereby maintained, though at
the expense of more individualistic forms of religious experience and
revolutionary spiritual impulses.
The relation of the Holy Spirit to the Father and Son was not precisely
defined in the New Testament. The first Christians were plainly more
concerned with God’s presence among them than with meticulous
theological formulations. Later Church councils defined the Holy Spirit as
the third person of the triune God, with Augustine describing the Spirit as
the mutual spirit of love uniting the Father and Son. For a time in early
Christian worship, the Holy Spirit was imaged in feminine terms
169 

(symbolized, as it would be later as well, by a dove), and was sometimes
referred to as the divine Mother. In the long run, the Holy Spirit was
conceived rather in more general and impersonal terms as a mysterious and
numinous power, whose intensity seemed to have radically diminished as
time grew more distant from the generation of the first apostles, and whose
continuing presence, activity, and authority were lodged chiefly in the
institutional Church.
170 

Rome and Catholicism
The Judaic influence on Christianity in the West—the sense of a divinely
mandated historical mission, the stress on obedience to the will of God, the
moral rigor, the doctrinal conformity and exclusiveness—was further
amplified and modulated by the influence of Rome. The Church’s conception
of humanity’s relationship to God as a judicial one strictly defined by moral
law was partly derived from Roman law, which the Catholic Church, based
in Rome, inherited and integrated. The effectiveness of the Roman state’s
religious cult was based upon meticulous observance of a multitude of
regulations. More fundamentally, Roman legal theory and practice were
founded on the idea of justification; transposed to the religious sphere, sin
was a criminal violation of a legal relationship established by God between
himself and man. The doctrine of justification—of sin, guilt, repentance,
grace, and restitution—was set forth by Paul in his Letter to the Romans,12
and was taken up again by Augustine as the foundation of man’s
relationship to God. Similarly, the Judaic imperative of subordinating the
highly developed but refractory human will to that of divine authority found
supporting cultural patterns in the political subordination demanded by the
immense authoritarian structure of the Roman Empire. God himself was
generally conceived in terms reflective of the contemporary political
environment—as commander and king, lord and master, inscrutably and
unquestionably just, a stern ruler of all who was ultimately generous to his
favorites.
The Christian Church, mindful of its spiritual mission and the great
responsibility it bore for the religious guardianship of mankind, required an
unusually durable form to ensure its survival and influence in the late
171 

classical world. The established cultural patterns and structures of both the
Roman state and the Judaic religion—psychological, organizational,
doctrinal—were particularly suited to the development of a strong and self-
conscious institutional entity capable of guiding the faithful and enduring
through time. As the Christian religion evolved in the West, its Judaic
foundation readily assimilated the kindred juridical and authoritarian
qualities of the Roman imperial culture, and much of the Roman Church’s
distinctive character was molded in those terms: a powerful central
hierarchy, a complex judicial structure governing ethics and spirituality, the
binding spiritual authority of priests and bishops, the demand for obedience
from Church members and its effective enforcement, formalized rituals and
institutionalized sacraments, a strenuous defense against any divergence
from authorized dogma, a centrifugal and militant expansiveness aimed at
converting and civilizing the barbarians, and so forth. The bishop’s authority
was declared to be God-ordained and unquestionable. He was the living
representative of God’s authority on earth, a ruler and judge whose
decisions regarding sin, heresy, excommunication, and other vital religious
matters were considered binding in heaven. Christian truth itself under
Rome’s influence became a matter for legislative battles, power politics,
imperial edicts, military enforcement, and eventually assertions of divinely
infallible authority by the new Roman sovereign, the pope. The fluid and
communal forms of the primitive Church gave way to the definitively
hierarchical institution of the Roman Catholic Church. Yet within such a
firm and comprehensive structure, Christian doctrine was preserved, the
Christian faith disseminated, and a Christian society maintained throughout
medieval Europe.
In the period after Constantine’s conversion in the early fourth century,
the relationship of Rome to Christianity had undergone a complete reversal:
Rome the persecutor had become Rome the defender, progressively uniting
itself with the Church. The Church’s boundaries now coincided with those
of the Roman state, and its role was now allied with the state in maintaining
public order and ruling the activities and beliefs of its citizenry. By the time
of Pope Gregory the Great—the exemplar and architect of the medieval
papacy, who reigned at the turn of the sixth century—Western society had
changed so drastically that what had been Augustine’s dialectical statement
172 

against the spirit of the late pagan era had now become the governing norm
of the culture.13 The public theater, circuses, and festal holidays of paganism
had been replaced by Christian sacramental celebrations and processions,
holy days and feast days. A new sense of public responsibility entered
Christianity as it moved onto the world stage with an unprecedented
consciousness of its mission to spiritually master the world. The centralized
and hierarchical institution of the Church, the religious counterpart to the
Roman Empire, increasingly absorbed and controlled the focus of the
Christian spiritual quest. As the Roman Empire became Christian,
Christianity became Roman.
The decision by Constantine to move the capital of the Roman Empire
eastward from Rome to Byzantium (renamed Constantinople) also had
immense consequences for the West, for after the empire’s division into an
eastern and western sector, and after the western empire’s collapse in the
wake of the barbarian migrations, a political and cultural vacuum occurred
in much of Europe. The Church became the only institution capable of
sustaining some semblance of social order and civilized culture in the West,
and the bishop of Rome, as the traditional spiritual head of the imperial
metropolis, gradually absorbed many of the distinctions and roles previously
possessed by the Roman emperor. The Church took over a variety of
governmental functions and became the sole patron of knowledge and the
arts, its clergy became the West’s sole literate class, and the pope became the
supreme sacred authority, who could anoint or excommunicate emperors
and kings. The new states of Europe that were founded on the ruins of the
Western empire, which were successively converted to Christianity,
inevitably perceived papal Rome as the sovereign spiritual center of
Christendom. In the course of the first millennium, the Western Church not
only concentrated its power in the Roman bishop, it also gradually but
decisively asserted its independence from the Eastern churches centered in
Byzantium and allied there with the still-reigning Eastern emperor. The
geographical distances, the differences in language, culture, and political
circumstances, the differing effects of the barbarian and Moslem incursions,
various major doctrinal conflicts, and finally the West’s own autonomous
tendencies—all widened the separation between the Latin church of Rome
and the Greek church of Byzantium.14
173 

In these circumstances, Christianity in the West experienced a unique
historical opportunity. Freed from both the church and the state of the East,
unimpeded by the previous civil and secular structures of the old empire in
the West, and empowered by the religiosity of its peoples and their rulers,
the Western church assumed an extraordinarily universal authority in
medieval Europe. The Roman Church became not just the Empire’s religious
counterpart, but its historical successor. The ideal self-image of the ensuing
medieval Church was that of a spiritual Pax Romana reigning over the
world under the guidance of a wise and beneficent priestly hierarchy.
Augustine himself had envisioned the fall of the old Rome, the temporal
empire, in the light of a new Rome, the spiritual empire of the Christian
Church, which began with the apostles and would continue throughout
history as a reflection in this world of God’s divine Kingdom. In doing so,
Augustine mediated that momentous transition taken by Christianity as it
reconceived the nature of the promised Kingdom of Heaven in terms of the
existing Church.15 As the Middle Ages progressed and the Church gradually
consolidated its authority in Rome, the Roman Catholic Church definitively
emerged as the one, true, universally authoritative institution ordained by
God to bring salvation to mankind.
174 

The Virgin Mary and the Mother Church
The large-scale conversion of the pagan masses in the late Roman Empire
brought about one other remarkable development in the Christian religion.
Although the New Testament gave relatively little information about Mary,
the mother of Jesus, and little explicit support for any substantial role she
might have in the Church’s future, in the course of the later classical period
and the Middle Ages an extraordinary cult of Mary as the numinous Mother
of God spontaneously arose and asserted itself as a dominant element in the
popular Christian vision. Both Old and New Testaments were almost
uniformly patriarchal in their monotheism, but when the pagan multitudes
converted to Christianity in the post-Constantinian empire, they brought
with them a deeply ingrained tradition of the Great Mother Goddess (as well
as several mythological examples of divine virgins and virgin births of divine
heroes), the infusion of which into Christian piety significantly expanded the
Church’s veneration of Mary. Yet Mary fundamentally differed from the
pagan goddesses in being the unique human mother of the Son of God, the
pivotal historical figure in the unrepeatable act of Christ’s incarnation,
rather than a nature goddess governing timeless cycles of death and rebirth.
From the pagan mythological ground sprung an intensified devotion to
Mary, whose role and character, however, were developed within a
specifically Christian understanding.
Given the scriptural background alone, the elevation of Mary to such an
exalted role in Christian piety was an unexpected development. References
to Mary in the Gospels are not extensive, nor are they entirely congruent.
When in Luke’s Gospel she receives the angelic announcement that she is to
conceive the Son of God, she is portrayed as graciously obedient to God’s
175 

will, conscious of the special role she is to play in the divine plan, uniquely
fitted for that role because of her profound purity in body and soul. Yet
passages in the Gospel according to Mark, probably based on an older
tradition, portray a more typically human character, suggesting that she may
have been unaware of Jesus’s divine role during much of his lifetime. In
Mark as well are references to Jesus’s having several close relatives, possibly
brothers and sisters, who, like his mother, seem to have opposed Jesus in the
earlier stages of his self-perceived mission. Even the Gospel according to
John contains signs of definite tension between Mary and her son. The
scriptural evidence for Mary’s being a virgin when she conceived and gave
birth is also ambiguous. Two Gospels, Mark and John, do not mention the
subject at all, nor do Paul’s letters. The two Gospels that do, Matthew and
Luke, are implicitly inconsistent, since both accounts also present
genealogical tables demonstrating Jesus to be from the direct line of David
(and, in Luke’s case, of Adam), ending in Mary’s husband, Joseph, not in
Mary.
But with her recognition by the faithful as the virginal Mother of God,
and with the theologians’ portrayal of her as vessel for the incarnation of the
divine Logos, Mary was soon venerated in the early Church as the mediator
between humanity and Christ and even as “Coredemptrix” with Christ.
Within Mary had taken place the first merging of the divine and the human.
As Christ was seen as the second Adam, so Mary was the second Eve,
through her obedient virginal conception bringing redemption to humanity
and nature, rectifying the original Eve’s primal disobedience. Mary stood as
supreme exemplar for all those virtues so characteristic of the Christian
ethos—purity and chasteness, tenderness and modesty, simplicity, meekness,
immaculate blessedness, inner beauty, moral innocence, unselfish devotion,
surrender to the divine will.
The infusion via Mary of the feminine nurturing element from the pagan
Great Mother Goddess, as well as the latter’s fundamental relation to nature,
served to soften the more austerely transcendent and masculine Judaic God.
Mary’s elevation to the virtual status of divine Mother also provided a
necessary (for the converted pagans) complement to the otherwise
inexplicably solitary and absolute God the Father. The recognition and
worship of the Virgin Mother made the Christian pantheon more congenial
176 

to the classical world’s sensibility and served as an effective link between
Christianity and the pagan nature religions of rebirth. But where earlier
matriarchal goddesses presided over nature, the Virgin Mary’s role was in
the context of human history. It was of the greatest importance to early
theologians that the human Mary’s maternal relation to Christ guaranteed
the latter’s authentic humanity, against some Gnostic claims that Christ was
exclusively a superhuman divine being.
At times, the massive popular veneration of Mary seemed from the
Church’s viewpoint to exceed the bounds of theological justifiability. That
problem was resolved, however, both by the Church and in the popular
imagination, through the identification of the Virgin Mary with the Church.
As Mary was the first believer in Christ upon her acceptance of the divine
annunciation of his birth, and the first human to receive Christ within her,
she represented the prototype of the entire Church community. In relation
to Mary’s receptive and virginal aspect, the Church was viewed as the “bride
of Christ,” to be united in sacred marriage with Christ when humanity
would receive the full divine influx at the end of time. But even more
significant was the identification of Mary’s maternal qualities with the
Church: The “Holy Mother Church,” under the immanent guardianship of
Mary, became not only the embodiment of Christian humanity but also the
nourishing matrix within which all Christians could be encompassed,
protected, and guided.16
Christians thus conceived of themselves as children of the Mother Church
as well as children of God the Father. The nurturing maternal image of the
Virgin Mary and the Mother Church thereby complemented and
ameliorated not only the stern patriarchal image of the biblical Yahweh but
also the Church’s own tendencies toward strict legalism and patriarchal
authoritarianism.17 Even the architecture of church buildings, with their
luminous interiors and sacral uterine structures, culminating in the great
medieval cathedrals, re-created this tangible sense of the virginal Mother’s
numinous womb. And the Catholic Church as a whole took on the universal
cultural role of an all-encompassing spiritual, intellectual, moral, and social
womb, gestating the nascent Christian community, the mystical body of
Christ, prior to its rebirth in the heavenly Kingdom. It would seem to have
been particularly in this form—the veneration of Mary and the transference
177 

of her maternal numinosity onto the Church—that the unitive element of
Christianity was most successfully sustained in the collective Christian
psyche.
178 

A Summing Up
Thus the primitive Christian revelation took on various cultural and
intellectual inflections—Judaic, Greek and Hellenistic, Gnostic and
Neoplatonist, Roman and Near Eastern—which Christianity brought into an
often contradictory but singularly durable synthesis. Pluralistic in its origins
but monolithic in its developed form, that synthesis would effectively govern
the European mind until the Renaissance.
Let us attempt to draw a few summary distinctions between this outlook
and that of the Greco-Roman era, focusing particularly here on the
character of the Christian vision in the West from the later classical period
through the early Middle Ages. Within this frame of reference, and allowing
for the inevitable imprecision of such generalities, one may say that the
overall effect of Christianity on the Greco-Roman mind was as follows:
(1) to establish a monotheistic hierarchy in the cosmos through the
recognition of one supreme God, the triune Creator and Lord of history,
thereby absorbing and negating the polytheism of pagan religion while
depreciating, though not eliminating, the metaphysics of archetypal
Forms;
(2) to reinforce Platonism’s spirit-matter dualism by infusing it with the
doctrine of Original Sin, the Fall of man and nature, and collective human
guilt; by largely severing from nature any immanent divinity, whether
polytheistic or pantheistic, though leaving the world an aura of
supernatural significance, either theistic or satanic; and by radically
polarizing good and evil;
(3) to dramatize the relation of the transcendent to the human in terms of
179 

God’s rulership of history, the narrative of the Chosen People, the
historical appearance of Christ on earth, and his eventual reappearance to
save mankind in a future apocalyptic age—thus introducing a new sense
of historical dynamism, a divine redemptive logic in history that was
linear rather than cyclical; yet gradually relocating this redemptive force
in the ongoing institutional Church, thereby implicitly restoring a more
static understanding of history;18
(4) to absorb and transform the pagan Mother Goddess mythology into a
historicized Christian theology with the Virgin Mary as the human
Mother of God, and into a continuing historical and social reality in the
form of the Mother Church;
(5) to diminish the value of observing, analyzing, or understanding the
natural world, and thus to deemphasize or negate the rational and
empirical faculties in favor of the emotional, moral, and spiritual, with all
human faculties encompassed by the demands of Christian faith and
subordinated to the will of God; and
(6) to renounce the human capacity for independent intellectual or
spiritual penetration of the world’s meaning in deference to the absolute
authority of the Church and Holy Scripture for the final definition of
truth.
It has been said that a Manichaean cloud overshadowed the medieval
imagination. Both popular Christian piety and much medieval theology
evidenced a decisive depreciation of the physical world and the present life,
with “the world, the flesh, and the devil” frequently grouped together as a
satanic triumvirate. Mortification of the flesh was a characteristic spiritual
imperative. The natural world was the vale of sorrow and death, a
stronghold of evil from which the believer would be mercifully released at
the end of this life. One entered the world reluctantly, as would a knight
who entered a realm of shadow and sin hoping only to resist, overcome, and
pass beyond it. For many early medieval theologians, direct study of the
natural world and the development of an autonomous human reason were
seen as pernicious threats to the integrity of religious faith. It is true that
180 

according to official Christian doctrine the goodness of God’s material
creation was not ultimately denied, but in itself the world was not
considered a worthy focus of human endeavor. If it was not altogether evil,
it was, in spiritual terms, largely irrelevant.
The fate of the human soul was divinely preordained, known by God
before time began, a belief paralleled and psychologically supported by the
apparent powerlessness of early medieval men and women in the face of
nature, history, and traditional authority. The drama of human life may have
been the central focus of God’s will, but the human role was a weak and
inferior one. Compared with, say, Homer’s Odysseus, the medieval individual
could be seen as relatively impotent in the face of evil and the world, a lost
soul without the constant guidance and protection of the Church.
(“Wandering” in this view was less likely to be a heroic adventure than a
heretical slipping into ungodly ways.) Compared with, for example, Socrates,
the medieval Christian could be seen as laboring under considerable
intellectual confinement. (“Doubt” in this view was less a primary intellectual
virtue than a serious spiritual failing.) The assertion of human individuality
—so conspicuous, say, in Periclean Athens—now seemed largely negated in
favor of a pious acceptance of God’s will and, in more practical terms,
submission to the Church’s moral, intellectual, and spiritual authority. It thus
might appear to be the great paradox of Christianity’s history that a message
whose original substance—the proclamation of the divine rebirth of the
cosmos, the turning point of the aeons through the human incarnation of
the Logos—had unprecedentedly elevated the significance of human life,
human history, and human freedom eventually served to enforce a
somewhat antithetical conception.
Yet the Christian world view, even in its medieval form, was not as simple
or one-sided as these distinctions might suggest. Both impulses—optimistic
and pessimistic, dualistic and unitive—constantly intermingled in
inextricable synthesis. Indeed, it was held by the Church that one side of the
polarity necessitated the other—that, for example, the great celestial destiny
of the Christian faithful and the supreme beauty of the Christian truth
demanded such formidab measures of institutional control and doctrinal
rigor. In the eyes of many conscientious Christians, the fact that the
continuity of sacred revelation and ritual had been successfully maintained
181 

century after century far outweighed the passing evils of contemporary
Church politics or the temporary distortions of popular belief and
theological doctrine. From such a perspective, the Church’s saving grace lay
finally in the cosmic significance of its earthly mission. The manifest faults of
the mundane Church were merely inevitable side effects of the imperfect
human attempt to carry out a divine plan the scope of which was
inconceivably great. On similar grounds, Christian dogma and ritual were
perceived as standing above and beyond the independent judgment of
individual Christians—as if all Christians were to absorb themselves in
symbolic representations of cosmic truths, the sublimity and magnitude of
which were not now directly accessible to the believer, but which eventually
might be grown into and comprehended in the course of humanity’s
spiritual progress. And whatever medieval Christians’ apparent existential
diminution, they knew themselves to be the potential recipients of Christ’s
redeeming grace through the Church, which elevated them beyond all other
peoples in history and vitiated any negative comparisons with the pagan
cultures.
But such religious defenses aside, in comparing one era with another, we
have been implicitly contrasting the average person in early medieval
Western Christendom with a relatively small group of brilliant Greeks who
flourished during a relatively brief period of unique cultural creativity at the
start of the classical era. The medieval West was not without its geniuses,
even if in the earlier centuries they were few and only occasionally
influential. To claim that this dearth was due more to Christianity than to
other historical factors would be rash, especially considering not only the
decline of classical culture well before the ascendance of Christianity, but
also the extraordinary achievements of later Christian culture. And we
should not forget that Socrates was put to death by the Athenian democracy
for “impiety”; nor was he the only philosopher or scientist of antiquity to be
indicted for unorthodox opinions. Conversely, the medieval Arthurian
knights of the Holy Grail were not unworthy successors to their Homeric
forebears. Adventurousness and dogmatism certainly exist in every age, even
if the balance between them shifts, and in the long run one no doubt spurs
the other. In any case, a more general psychological comparison between
the medieval and classical ages would be more just and perhaps show less
182 

disparity.
It certainly could be argued that some cumulative moral and social
benefits accrued to the pagan and barbarian peoples who converted to
Christianity, and who were instructed week after week, year after year, to
place new value on the sanctity of individual life, on concern for the welfare
of others, on patience, humility, forgiveness, and compassion. While in
classical times the introspective life was characteristic of a few philosophers,
the Christian focus on personal responsibility, awareness of sin, and
withdrawal from the secular world all encouraged an attentiveness to the
inner life among a much wider population. And in contrast to the previous
centuries of often distressing philosophical uncertainty and religious
alienation, the Christian world view offered a stable, unchanging womb of
spiritual and emotional nourishment in which every human soul was
significant in the greater scheme of things. An unquestioned sense of cosmic
order prevailed, and it would be difficult to overestimate the tremendous
charismatic potency contained in the supreme figure of Jesus Christ, binding
together the entire Christian universe. Whatever limitations medieval
Christians may have felt would seem to have been compensated by an
intense consciousness of their sacred status and potential for spiritual
redemption. Although human life might be a trial now, the divine plan of
history was bringing about a progressive movement of the faithful toward
final reunion with God. Indeed, the ultimate power of faith, hope, and love
was such that, in principle, nothing was impossible in the Christian universe.
In a long era that was often dark and chaotic, the Christian world view held
out the reality of an ideal spiritual realm in which all believers, the children
of God, might find sustenance.
Viewing now in retrospect the Roman Catholic Church at the height of its
glory in the high Middle Ages—with virtually all of Europe Catholic, with
the entire calendar of human history now numerically centered on the birth
of Christ, with the Roman pontiff regnant over the spiritual and often the
temporal as well, with the masses of the faithful permeated with Christian
piety, with the magnificent Gothic cathedrals, the monasteries and abbeys,
the scribes and scholars, the thousands of priests, monks, and nuns, the
widespread care for the sick and poor, the sacramental rituals, the great
feast days with their processions and festivals, the glorious religious art and
183 

Gregorian chant, the morality and miracle plays, the universality of the Latin
language in liturgy and scholarship, the omnipresence of the Church and
Christian religiosity in every sphere of human activity—all this can hardly
fail to elicit a certain admiration for the magnitude of the Church’s success
in establishing a universal Christian cultural matrix and fulfilling its earthly
mission.19 And whatever Christianity’s actual metaphysical validity, the
living continuity of Western civilized culture itself owed its existence to the
vitality and pervasiveness of the Christian Church throughout medieval
Europe.
But perhaps above all, we must be wary of projecting modern secular
standards of judgment back onto the world view of an earlier era. The
historical record suggests that for medieval Christians, the basic tenets of
their faith were not abstract beliefs compelled by ecclesiastical authority but
rather the very substance of their experience. The workings of God or the
devil or the Virgin Mary, the states of sin and salvation, the expectation of
the Kingdom of Heaven—these were living principles that effectively
underlay and motivated the Christian’s world. We must assume that the
medieval experience of a specifically Christian reality was as tangible and
self-evident as, say, the archaic Greek experience of a mythological reality
with its gods and goddesses, or the modern experience of an impersonal and
material objective reality fully distinct from a private subjective psyche. It is
for this reason we must attempt to view the medieval world view from
within if we are to approach an understanding of our cultural psyche’s
development. In a sense, we are talking here of a world as much as of a
world view. And, as with the Greeks, we are talking of a world view that the
West elaborated and transformed, criticized and negated, but never
altogether left.
Indeed, it was the profound contraries within the Christian vision itself—
the numerous inner tensions and paradoxes rooted both in Christianity’s
multiple sources and in the dialectical character of the Christian synthesis—
that would constantly subvert the Christian mind’s tendency toward
monolithic dogmatism, thereby ensuring not only its great historical
dynamism, but also, eventually, its radical self-transformation.
184 

W
IV
The Transformation of the Medieval Era
e now engage one of our central tasks: to follow the complex
evolution of the Western mind from the medieval Christian world
view to the modern secular world view, a long and dramatic
transformation in which classical thought would play a pivotal role.
The glories of classical civilization and the Roman Empire were a distant
memory for the early medieval West. The barbarian migrations had not only
destroyed the West’s system of civil authority, but had largely eliminated any
higher cultural life and, especially after the Islamic expansion, cut off its
access to the original Greek texts. Despite an awareness of their specially
graced spiritual status, intellectually conscious Christians of the early Middle
Ages knew themselves to be living in the dim aftermath of a golden age of
culture and learning. But in the Church’s monasteries, a few kept alive the
classical spark. In that politically and socially unsettled era, it was the
Christian cloister that provided a protected enclosure within which higher
pursuits could be safely sustained and developed.
Cultural progress for the medieval mind above all signified, and required,
the recovery of the ancient texts and their meaning. The ancient Christian
fathers had established an effective tradition according to which the classical
pagan achievements were not entirely rejected, but could be reinterpreted
and comprehended within the framework of Christian truth, and it was on
this basis that the early medieval monks continued some semblance of
scholarship. In monasteries, the copying of old manuscripts by many hands
became a typical form of manual labor. Boethius, a Christian aristocratic
statesman and philosopher in the dying hours of ancient Rome, attempted to
preserve the classical intellectual heritage for posterity, and partially
succeeded. After his death in the early sixth century, his Latin works and
185 

digests—of Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy as well as Christian theology
—were passed into the monastic tradition and studied by generations of
medieval scholars.1 Similarly, Charlemagne, after having united much of
Europe by military conquest to form a Western Christendom in the late
eighth century, encouraged a cultural renascence of scholarship that rested
as much on classical ideals as Christian.
But throughout the first half of the Middle Ages, scholars were rare,
resources for culture scarce, and original classical texts largely unavailable.
Under these conditions, intellectual progress for the newly amalgamated
Western peoples was a slow and painstaking process. Just learning the
vocabulary and grammar of the conquered empire’s language, mastering its
already highly developed modes of thinking, and establishing a sound
didactic methodology were considerable tasks requiring centuries of
scholastic effort.
Nor were these the only impediments, for the absolute primacy of
Christian faith over secular concerns discouraged any extensive
involvement with classical thought and culture on their own terms. The
intellectual energies of the leading monks were absorbed in meditation upon
Holy Scripture, whereby the mind could grasp the spiritual meaning of the
Word, moving the soul toward mystical union with the divine. This monastic
quest and discipline, rooted in the theology of the ancient Church fathers,
created little centrifugal desire for other intellectual pursuits that could only
have intruded upon the cloister of interior contemplation. The demands of
the next world occupied the attention of devout Christians, and so deterred
any compelling interest in nature, science, history, literature, or philosophy
for their own sake. Because the truths of Scripture were all-comprehensive,
the development of human reason was sanctioned and encouraged solely for
the purpose of better understanding the mysteries and tenets of Christian
doctrine.
But at the midpoint of the medieval period, around the year 1000, with
Europe finally attaining a measure of political security after centuries of
invasion and disorganization, cultural activity in the West began to quicken
on many fronts: population increased, agriculture improved, trade within
and beyond the continent grew, contacts with the neighboring Islamic and
Byzantine cultures became more frequent, cities and towns emerged along
186 

with a literate upper class, guilds of workmen formed, and a general rise in
the desire for learning led to the founding of universities. The fixed world of
the old feudal order was giving way to something new.
The new social formations—guilds, communes, fraternities—were based
on horizontal and fraternal lines rather than the earlier vertical and
paternalistic authority of lords and vassals, and their rites of agreement were
based on democratic consensus rather than the Church-sanctioned oaths of
feudal vassalage. Political rights and institutions were redefined, taking on a
more secular cast. Legal procedures moved toward rational proof rather
than trial by ordeal. The world of nature took on increased reality for the
medieval mind, visible as much in the new eroticism and realism of Jean de
Meun’s Roman de la Rose as in theologians’ widespread use of the word
universitas to signify the concrete universe as a single homogeneous
ensemble, a divine harmony of natural diversity. Ancient literature and
thought, from Plato’s Timaeus to Ovid’s Ars Amatoria, found appreciative
audiences. Troubadors and court poets celebrated a new ideal of soul-
transfiguring romantic love between free individuals, in implicit rebellion
against the widespread feudal convention of marriage as a social-political
arrangement ratified by the Church. A more profound sense of history and
historical dynamism was awakened, expressed not only in the new
chroniclers’ accounts of contemporary political events, but also in the
theologians’ new awareness of Christianity’s evolutionary progress over
time. On many planes at once, the medieval horizons were rapidly
expanding.
Of particular importance in this cultural revolution was the emergence of
several major technical innovations in agriculture and the mechanical arts,
above all the harnessing of new power sources (windmill, waterwheel, horse
collar, stirrup, heavy plow). With such inventions, the natural environment
began to be exploited with unprecedented skill and energy. Technical
advances highlighted the value of human intelligence for mastering the
forces of nature and acquiring useful knowledge. The world seemed to be
humanized by such use of the intellect, and Europeans showed themselves to
be extraordinarily resourceful in this realm. The resulting increased
productivity spurred the growth of a rudimentary agrarian society with a
subsistence economy into the dynamic and progressive culture of the
187 

European high Middle Ages. The young and barbarian Christian West was
emerging, through its own enterprise, as a vigorous center of civilization.
188 

The Scholastic Awakening
As Western culture as a whole transformed itself, the Catholic Church’s
attitude toward secular learning and pagan wisdom also underwent a
fundamental change. Christianity’s earlier need to distinguish and
strengthen itself by a more or less rigid exclusion of pagan culture lost some
of its urgency. With most of the European continent now Christian, the
Church’s spiritual and intellectual authority was supreme. Other sources of
learning and culture no longer posed such a threat, particularly if the
Church could integrate them into its own all-encompassing structure.
Moreover, with Europe’s increased prosperity, the Church clergy found
more time to pursue intellectual interests, which were in turn further
stimulated by increased contacts with the older Eastern centers of learning
—the Byzantine and Islamic empires—where the ancient manuscripts and
Hellenic heritage had been preserved during Europe’s darker ages. Under
these new circumstances, the Church began to sponsor a tradition of
scholarship and education of extraordinary breadth, rigor, and profundity.
Characteristic of this change in intellectual climate was the development
of a school in early twelfth-century Paris at the Augustinian Abbey of Saint-
Victor. Although working wholly within the tradition of monastic mysticism
and Christian Platonism, Hugh of Saint-Victor proposed the radical
educational thesis that secular learning, focused on the reality of the natural
world, constituted a necessary foundation for advanced religious
contemplation and even mystical ecstasy. “Learn everything,” Hugh declared;
“later you will see that nothing is superfluous.” The purpose of the seven
liberal arts—the trivium (grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic) and the
quadrivium (arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy)—was “to restore
189 

God’s image in us.” From this new commitment to learning arose the
composition of the great medieval summae, encyclopedic treatises aimed at
comprehending the whole of reality, of which Hugh wrote the first.2 This
same educational conception became the basis for the development of
universities throughout Europe, among which the University of Paris
(founded c. 1170) would be preeminent. The Greek paideia was again
springing forth in a new incarnation.
The West’s increasing interest in the natural world and in the human
mind’s capacity to understand that world thus found congenial institutional
and cultural support for its new enterprise. In this unprecedented context of
Church-sponsored learning, and under the impact of the larger forces
invigorating the cultural emergence of the West, the stage was set for a
radical shift in the philosophical underpinnings of the Christian outlook:
Within the womb of the medieval Church, the world-denying Christian
philosophy forged by Augustine and based on Plato began giving way to a
fundamentally different approach to existence, as the Scholastics in effect
recapitulated the movement from Plato to Aristotle in their own intellectual
evolution.
That shift was sparked in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries with the
West’s rediscovery of a large corpus of Aristotle’s writings, preserved by the
Moslems and Byzantines and now translated into Latin. With these texts,
which included the Metaphysics, the Physics, and De Anima (On the Soul),
came not only learned Arabic commentaries, but also other works of Greek
science, notably those of Ptolemy. Medieval Europe’s sudden encounter with
a sophisticated scientific cosmology, encyclopedic in breadth and intricately
coherent, was dazzling to a culture that had been largely ignorant of these
writings and ideas for centuries. Yet Aristotle had such extraordinary impact
precisely because that culture was so well prepared to recognize the quality
of his achievement. His masterly summation of scientific knowledge, his
codification of the rules for logical discourse, and his confidence in the
power of the human intelligence were all exactly concordant with the new
tendencies of rationalism and naturalism growing in the medieval West—
and were attractive to many Church intellectuals, men whose reasoning
powers had been developed to uncommon acuity by their long scholastic
education in the logical disputation of doctrinal subtleties. The arrival of the
190 

Aristotelian texts in Europe thus found a distinctly receptive audience, and
Aristotle was soon referred to as “the Philosopher.” This shift in the wind of
medieval thought would have momentous consequences.
Under the Church’s auspices, the universities were evolving into
remarkable centers of learning where students gathered from all over
Europe to study and hear public lectures and disputations by the masters. As
learning developed, the scholars’ attitude toward Christian belief became
less unthinking and more self-reflective. The use of reason to examine and
defend articles of faith, already exploited in the eleventh century by Anselm,
archbishop of Canterbury, and the discipline of logic in particular,
championed by the fiery twelfth-century dialectician Abelard, now rapidly
ascended in both educational popularity and theological importance. With
Abelard’s Sic et Non (Yes and No), a compilation of apparently contradictory
statements by various Church authorities, medieval thinkers became
increasingly preoccupied with the possible plurality of truth, with debate
between competing arguments, and with the growing power of human
reason for discerning correct doctrine. It is not that Christian truths were
called into question; rather, they were now subject to analysis. As Anselm
stated, “It seems to me a case of negligence if, after becoming firm in our
faith, we do not strive to understand what we believe.”
Moreover, after long struggle with local religious and political authorities,
the universities won the right from king and pope to form their own
communities. With the University of Paris’s receipt of a written charter from
the Holy See in 1215, a new dimension entered European civilization, with
the universities now existing as relatively autonomous centers of culture
devoted to the pursuit of knowledge. Although Christian theology and
dogma presided over this pursuit, these were in turn increasingly permeated
by the rationalist spirit. It was into this fertile context that the new
translations of Aristotle and his Arabic commentators were introduced.
Initially some ecclesiastical authorities resisted the sudden intrusion of the
pagan philosophers, especially their writings on natural philosophy and
metaphysics, lest Christian truth be violated. But their early bans on teaching
Aristotle quickened scholars’ curiosity and provoked deeper study of the
censored texts. Aristotle could not in any case be easily dismissed, for his
already known works on logic, passed on by Boethius, had been considered
191 

authoritative since the beginning of the Middle Ages, forming one of the
bases of Christian culture. Despite the misgivings of conservative
theologians, the culture’s intellectual interests were increasingly Aristotelian
in character if not yet in content, and in time the Church’s strictures became
lax. But the new attitudes were to transform drastically the nature and
direction of European thought.
The principal occupation of medieval philosophy had long been the
joining of faith with reason, so that the revealed truths of Christian dogma
could be explicated and defended with the aid of rational analysis.
Philosophy was the handmaid of theology, as reason was faith’s interpreter.
Reason was thus subordinate to faith. But with the introduction of Aristotle
and the new focus on the visible world, the early Scholastics’ understanding
of “reason” as formally correct logical thinking began to take on a new
meaning: Reason now signified not only logic but also empirical observation
and experiment—i.e., cognition of the natural world. With the increasingly
extended scope of the philosopher’s intellectual territory, the tension
between reason and faith was now radically heightened. A constantly
growing multiplicity of facts about concrete things had to be integrated with
the demands of Christian doctrine.
The resulting dialectic between this new reason and faith, between human
knowledge of the natural world and the inherited doctrines of divine
revelation, emerged fully in the thirteenth century’s culminating Scholastic
philosophers Albertus Magnus and his pupil Thomas Aquinas. Both men
were devoutly loyal to biblical theology, yet also concerned with the
mysteries of the physical world, and sympathetic to Aristotle’s affirmation of
nature, the body, and the human intellect. These scholars of Scholasticism’s
golden age could not have known the ultimate consequences of their
intellectual quest to comprehend all that exists. For by confronting so
directly this tension between divergent tendencies—Greek and Christian,
reason and faith, nature and spirit—the Scholastics prepared the way in the
late medieval universities for the massive convulsion in the Western world
view caused by the Scientific Revolution.
Albertus was the first medieval thinker to make the firm distinction
between knowledge derived from theology and knowledge derived from
science. The theologian is the expert in matters of faith, but in mundane
192 

matters the scientist knows more. Albertus asserted the independent value of
secular learning and the need for sense perceptions and empirical
observations on which to ground one’s knowledge of the natural world. In
this view, Aristotle’s philosophy was regarded as the greatest achievement of
the natural human reason working without benefit of Christian inspiration.
After Albertus had grasped the intellectual power of Aristotelianism and
established it as a necessary part of the university curriculum, Aquinas was
left the philosophical task of coherently integrating the Greek challenge.
Devout Dominican, son of Italian nobility, descendant of the Norman and
Lombard conquerors, student at Naples, Paris, and Cologne, advisor to Rome
—Aquinas knew the breadth and dynamism of European cultural life and
did his pivotal teaching at the University of Paris, at the epicenter of the
West’s intellectual ferment. In Aquinas, the forces at work in the
immediately previous centuries came to full articulation. In his relatively
brief life he would forge a world view that dramatically epitomized the high
Middle Ages’ turning of Western thought on its axis, to a new direction of
which the modern mind would be the heir and trustee.
193 

The Quest of Thomas Aquinas
The passion for synthesis that Albertus and Aquinas experienced was
perhaps inevitable for such men at that moment in history, standing
between the past and the future: drawn magnetically toward the opening of
the natural world and a new range of intellectual competence, yet imbued
with an unshakable, indeed renewed faith in Christian revelation. Moreover,
it was the peculiarity of that era, and of those men in particular, that these
two loyalties—to the gospel on the one hand, and to the natural world and
human reason on the other—were felt not as antithetical but as mutually
supportive. Albertus and Aquinas were both members of the Dominican
order and thus participants in a sustained and widespread influx of
evangelical fervor spearheaded a generation earlier by Dominic and Francis
of Assisi. The quickly flourishing Dominican and Franciscan mendicant
orders had brought not only new vitality but new values to medieval
Christianity.
Francis’s mystical joy in the sacred fellowship of nature, Dominic’s
cultivation of scholarship in the service of the gospel, their dissolution of
rigid boundaries between clerical and lay, their more democratic forms of
internal government granting greater individual autonomy, their call to
leave the monastic cloister to preach and teach actively in the world—all
these encouraged a new openness to nature and society, to human reason
and freedom. Above all, this fresh infusion of apostolic faith supported a
direct dialogue between Christian revelation and the secular world, while
recognizing anew an intimate relation between nature and grace. In the
eyes of the evangelicals, the Word of God was not a remote truth to be
cloistered far from humanity’s daily life, but was directly relevant to the
194 

immediate particularities of human experience. By its very nature, the
gospel required entrance into the world.3
Heirs to this religious rapprochement with the secular, Albertus and
Aquinas could more freely develop those aspects of the Christian theological
tradition, found even in Augustine, that affirmed the Creator’s providential
intelligence and the resulting order and beauty within the created world. It
was a short step to their conclusion that the more the world was explored
and understood, the greater knowledge of and reverence for God would
result. Since there could be only one valid truth derived from the one God,
nothing reason would uncover could ultimately contradict theological
doctrine. Nothing that was true and valuable, even if achieved by man’s
natural intellect, could ultimately be foreign to God’s revelation, for both
reason and faith derived from the same source. But Aquinas went still
further, asserting that nature itself could provide a deeper appreciation of
divine wisdom, and that a rational exploration of the physical world could
disclose its inherent religious value—not just as a dim reflection of the
supernatural but on its own terms, a rationally intelligible natural order
discovered in its profane reality.
Traditional theologians opposed the new scientific perspective because its
purported discovery of regular determining laws of nature seemed to
diminish God’s free creativity, while also threatening man’s personal
responsibility and need for faith in Providence. To assert the value of nature
seemed to usurp the supremacy of God. Basing their arguments on the
teachings of Augustine concerning nature’s fall and the need for God’s
redemptive grace, they viewed the new science’s positive and deterministic
conception of nature as a heretical threat to the essence of Christian
doctrine.
But Aquinas held that the recognition of nature’s order enhanced human
understanding of God’s creativity and in no way lessened divine
omnipotence, which he saw as expressing itself in a continuous creation
according to ordered patterns over which God remained sovereign. Within
this structure, God willed each creature to move according to its own
nature, with man himself given the greatest degree of autonomy by virtue of
his rational intelligence. Man’s freedom was not threatened either by natural
laws or by his relationship to God, but rather was built into the fabric of the
195 

divinely created order. And the fact of nature’s orderliness allowed man to
develop a rational science that would lead his mind to God.
For Aquinas, the natural world was not just an opaque material stage
upon which man briefly resided as a foreigner to work out his spiritual
destiny. Nor was nature governed by principles alien to spiritual concerns.
Rather, nature and spirit were intimately bound up with each other, and the
history of one touched the history of the other. Man himself was the pivotal
center of the two realms, “like a horizon of the corporeal and of the
spiritual.” To give value to nature did not, in Aquinas’s eyes, usurp God’s
supremacy. Rather, nature was valuable, as was man, precisely because God
gave it existence. To be a creature of the Creator did not signify a separation
from God, but rather a relationship to God. Moreover, divine grace did not
vitiate nature, but perfected it.
Aquinas was also convinced that human reason and freedom were
valuable on their own account, and that their actualization would further
serve the glory of the Creator. Man’s autonomy of will and intellect was not
limited by the fact of God’s omnipotence, nor would their full emergence be
an inappropriate presumption of powers by a creature against the Creator.
Rather, these special qualities were themselves founded in God’s own nature,
for man was made in God’s image. Man could, by his unique relationship
with the Creator, enjoy autonomous intellectual and volitional powers
modeled on those of God himself.
Influenced by Aristotle’s teleological concept of nature’s relation to the
highest Form and the Neoplatonic understanding of the all-pervasive One,
Aquinas declared a new basis for the dignity and potential of man: Within
human nature, as divinely posited, lay the potential for actively moving
toward perfect communion with the infinite ground of man’s being, God,
who was the source of all development toward perfection in nature. Even
human language incarnated the divine wisdom, and was therefore a worthy
instrument capable of approaching and elaborating the mysteries of
creation. Hence human reason could function within faith and yet according
to its own principles. Philosophy could stand on its own virtues apart from,
and yet complementary to, theology. Human intelligence and freedom
received their reality and value from God himself, for God’s infinite
generosity allowed his creatures to participate in his own being each
196 

according to its distinctive essence, and man could do so to the full extent of
his ever-developing humanness.
At the heart of Aquinas’s vision was his belief that to subtract these
extraordinary capacities from man would be to presume to lessen the
infinite capacity of God himself and his creative omnipotence. To strive for
human freedom and for the realization of specifically human values was to
promote the divine will. God had created the world as a realm with
immanent ends, and to reach his ultimate ends, man was intended to pass
through immanent ends: to be as God intended, man had fully to realize his
humanity. Man was an autonomous part of God’s universe, and his very
autonomy allowed him to make his return freely to the source of all. Indeed,
only if man were genuinely free could he be capable of freely loving God, of
freely realizing his exalted spiritual destiny.
Aquinas’s appreciation of human nature extended to the human body, an
appreciation that affected his distinctive epistemological orientation. In
contrast to Plato’s antiphysical stance, reflected in much of the tenor of
traditional Augustinian theology, Aquinas incorporated Aristotelian concepts
to assert a new attitude. In man, spirit and nature were distinguishable, but
they were also aspects of a homogeneous whole: The soul was the form of
man, the body was the matter. Man’s body was thus intrinsically necessary to
his existence.4 In epistemological terms, it was to man’s benefit that his soul
was united with a body, for it was only man’s physical observations that
could activate his potential understanding of things. Aquinas repeatedly
quoted from Paul’s Letter to the Romans, “the invisible things of God are
clearly seen . . . by the things that are made.” The divine invisibles, among
which Aquinas included the “eternal types” of Augustine and Plato, could be
approached only through the empirical, the observation of the visible and
particular. By experiencing the particular through the senses, the human
mind could then move toward the universal, which made intelligible the
particular. Therefore both sense experience and intellect were necessary for
cognition, each informing the other. In contrast to Plato’s implication, sense
and intellect for Aquinas were not opponents in the quest for knowledge,
but partners. Like Aristotle,. Aquinas believed that the human intellect could
197 

not have direct access to transcendent Ideas, but that it required sensory
experience to awaken its potential knowledge of universals.
Just as Aquinas’s epistemology more deeply stressed the value and even
necessity of this-world experience for human knowledge, so did his
ontology assert the essential worth and substantiality of this world’s
existence.5 Sensible things did not exist merely as relatively unreal images, as
shadowy replications of the Platonic Ideas; rather, they had a substantial
reality of their own, as Aristotle had maintained. The forms were genuinely
embedded in matter, united with matter to produce a composite whole. But
here Aquinas went beyond the Aristotelians’ tendency to view nature as
existing apart from God, arguing that a deeper philosophical understanding
of the meaning of existence would fully connect the created world with God.
To accomplish this, Aquinas reintroduced the Platonic notion of
“participation” in this new context: Created things have true substantial
reality because they participate in Existence, which is from God, the infinite
self-subsistent ground of all being. For God’s essence was precisely his
existence, his infinite act of being which underlay the finite existence of all
created things, each with its own particular essence.
The essence of each thing, its specific kind of being, is the measure of its
participation in the real existence communicated to it by God. What a thing
is and the fact that it is at all are two distinct aspects of any created being. In
God alone is there absolute simplicity, for what God is and the fact of his
being are one and the same: God is “be-ing” itself—unlimited, absolute,
beyond definition. Thus every creature is a compound of essence and
existence, while God alone is not a compound, for his essence is existence
per se. Creatures have existence; God is existence. Existence for creatures is
not self-given, and therein lay Aquinas’s fundamental philosophical tenet:
the absolute contingency of the finite world on an infinite giver of being.
Thus for Aquinas, God was not only the supreme Form drawing nature
forth, but was also the very ground of nature’s existence. For both Aristotle
and Aquinas, form was an active principle—not just a structure, but a
dynamism toward realization; and the entire creation was dynamically
moved relative to the highest Form, God. But whereas Aristotle’s God was
apart from and indifferent to the creation of which he was the unmoved
mover, for Aquinas God’s true essence was existence. God communicated his
198 

essence to his creation, each instance of which became real to the extent of
its reception of the act of existence communicated by God. Only in this way
was the Aristotelian Prime Mover genuinely connected to the creation he
motivated. And conversely, only thus was the Platonic transcendent
genuinely connected to the empirical world of multiplicity and flux.
Building on philosophical developments in the Arab and Christian
Neoplatonist traditions (which were, besides Augustine and Boethius, the
main sources for his knowledge of Plato), and particularly on the thought of
the ancient Eastern Christian mystic who used the name Dionysius the
Areopagite, Aquinas aspired to deepen Aristotle by using Platonic principles.
Yet he also saw Platonism’s need for Aristotelian principles. Indeed, for
Aquinas, the Platonic theory of participation made full metaphysical sense
only when it was deepened to reach the principle of existence itself, beyond
the various types of being that existence might lend itself to. And this
deepening required an Aristotelian context of a nature that possessed real
being—a reality achieved through nature’s constant process of becoming, its
dynamic movement from potentiality to actuality. Thus Aquinas showed the
complementarity of the two Greek philosophers, of Plato’s exalted spiritual
absolute and Aristotle’s dynamically real nature, an integration achieved by
using Plato’s participation relative not to the Ideas but to Existence. In doing
so, he further corrected Aristotle by showing that concrete individuals were
not just isolated substances, but were united both to each other and to God
by their common participation in existence. Yet he also corrected Plato by
arguing that divine Providence did not pertain just to the Ideas, but
extended directly to individuals, each of which was created in the image of
God and participated, each in its limited fashion, in God’s unlimited act of
existence.
Aquinas thus gave to God alone what Plato gave to Ideas in general, but by
doing so gave increased reality to the empirical creation. Since “to be” is to
participate in existence, and since existence is itself the gift of God’s own
being, then every created thing possesses a true reality founded in God’s
infinite reality. The Ideas are in a sense the exemplars of God’s creation, as
formal designs in God’s mind; but on the deepest level God is the true arid
ultimate exemplar of creation, and all the Ideas are inflections of that
supreme essence. All created beings participate firstly and most significantly
199 

in God’s nature, each in its own specific finite manner manifes ing a part of
God’s infinite variety and perfection. In Aquinas’s understanding, God was
not so much a thing, an entity that was the first of a series of other entities,
but was rather the infinite act of existence (esse) from which everything
derived its own being. In effect, Aquinas synthesized Plato’s transcendent
reality with Aristotle’s concrete reality by means of the Christian
understanding of God as the loving infinite Creator, giving freely of his own
being to his creation. Similarly, he synthesized the Aristotelian stress on
nature’s and man’s teleological dynamism, striving forward to more perfect
realization, with the Platonic emphasis on nature’s participation in a
superior transcendent reality, by conceiving the divine as standing in
absolute ineffable perfection and yet also as bestowing its essence—i.e.,
existence—to created things. These are then moved dynamically toward
realization precisely because they participate in being, which is by its nature
a dynamic tendency toward the Absolute. As in Neoplatonism, all creation
begins and ends with, goes forth from and returns to, the supreme One. But
for Aquinas, God created and gave being to the world not by necessary
emanation but by a free act of personal love. And the creature participated
not merely in the One as a distant semi-real emanation, but in “be-ing” (esse)
as a fully real individual entity created by God.
So Aquinas followed Aristotle in his regard for nature, for its reality and
dynamism, for individual beings, and for the epistemological necessity of
sense experience. Yet in his emphatic awareness of a superior transcendent
reality, his belief in the immortality of the individual soul, and his strongly
spiritual sensibility which focused on a loving God as the infinite source and
goal of being, he continued the Augustinian tradition of medieval theology
and thereby more nearly resembled Plato and Plotinus. But the distinction
Aquinas made against Plato and Augustine in relation to the Ideas and
human knowledge was an epistemologically significant one, for it sanctioned
the Christian intellect’s explicit recognition of the essential value of sensory
experience and empiricism, which Plato and Augustine had devalued in
favor of direct illumination from the transcendent Ideas. Aquinas did not
deny the existence of the Ideas. Rather, ontologically he denied their self-
subsistence apart from material reality (in keeping with Aristotle) and their
separate creative status apart from God (in keeping with Christian
200 

monotheism and Augustine’s placement of the Ideas within the creative
mind of God). And epistemologically he denied the human intellect’s
capacity to know the Ideas directly, asserting the intellect’s need for sensory
experience to activate an imperfect but meaningful understanding of things
in terms of those eternal archetypes. If man would know even imperfectly
what God knows perfectly, he would have to open his eyes to the physical
world.
For Aquinas, like Aristotle, we know concrete things first, then we can
know universals. For Plato and Augustine, the reverse was true. Augustine’s
theory of knowledge rested on the epistemological certainty that man could
know truth by being illuminated directly from within by the knowledge of
God’s transcendent Ideas. These Ideas constitute the Logos, Christ,
Augustine’s inward teacher, who contains all Ideas and who in an interior
manner illuminates the human intellect. Although Aquinas would retain
aspects of Augustine’s view, he could not embrace Plato’s epistemological
dependence on the Ideas alone. Man is matter as well as spirit, and human
cognition must reflect both principles: knowledge is derived from the
sensory experience of concrete particulars, from which universals can be
abstracted, and this knowledge has validity because in recognizing the
universal in singular things the human mind is intellectually participating,
however indirectly, in the original pattern by which God created that thing.
Here Aquinas again integrated Plato with Aristotle by identifying the soul’s
capacity for such participation with Aristotle’s active intellect, or nous—
though he strenuously opposed those interpreters of Aristotle who would
make the nous a single separate entity common to all mankind, which would
tend to deny individual intelligence and moral responsibility, as well as the
immortality of the individual soul.
Aquinas agreed that a kind of reality can be ascribed to the Ideas, as
eternal types in the divine intellect akin to the forms that exist in an
architect’s mind prior to his constructing a building, but he denied that
human beings can directly know them in this life. Only a more perfect (i.e.,
angelic) intelligence can enjoy intimate contact with God’s eternal notions
and grasp them directly. Earthly man, however, understands things in the
light of those eternal types in the same way that he sees things in the light of
the Sun. The mind without sensory experience is a blank slate, in a state of
201 

potentiality with regard to things intelligible. But sensory experience
without the active intellect would be unintelligible, and thus effectively
blind. In his present condition, man must focus his active intellect, which
contains within it the likeness of the divine light, onto his sensory
experience of the physical world if he is going to attempt to grasp truth, and
from that point he may proceed by means of discursive reasoning in the
Aristotelian manner. In Aquinas’s philosophy, the Ideas recede into the
background, and emphasis is instead placed on sensory experience as that
which provides the necessary particular sense images that the active
intellect illuminates so as to abstract intelligible species or concepts.
Aquinas thus offered a solution to one of the central and most enduring
problems of Scholastic philosophy, the problem of universals. The early
medieval doctrine of universals was characteristically that of “Realism“—i.e.,
the universal existed as a real entity. Since the time of Boethius, opinion was
divided as to whether the universal was real in the Platonic sense, as a
transcendent ideal independent of the concrete particular, or in the
Aristotelian sense, as an immanent form fully associated with its individual
material 
embodiment. 
Under 
Augustine’s 
influence, 
the 
Platonic
interpretation was usually favored. Yet in either case the reality of universals
was so generally affirmed that Anselm, for example, argued from the
existence of the Idea to the existence of the particular, the derivative of the
Idea. But Roscellinus, a contemporary of Anselm and teacher of Abelard,
criticized the belief in real universals, asserting that the latter were merely
words or names (nomina)—thus giving voice to the philosophical doctrine
of nominalism. Aquinas, using distinctions formulated by Albertus Magnus,
strove to resolve the dispute by suggesting that the Ideas had three kinds of
existence: as exemplars in the mind of God independent of things (ante rem),
as intelligible forms in things (in re), and as concepts in the human mind
formed by abstracting from things (post rem).
These meticulous epistemological distinctions and others like them were
important for Aquinas because for him the nature and processes of human
knowledge bore directly on matters of weighty theological concern. In
Aquinas’s view, man could strive to know things as they are because both
the things and man’s knowledge of them were determined by and, like man
himself, expressive of the same absolute being—God. Like Plato and
202 

Aristotle, Aquinas believed in the possibility of human knowledge because he
was convinced of an ultimate identity between being and knowledge. Man
could know an object by comprehending its formal, or universal, aspect.
Man possessed this capacity for comprehension not because his mind was
merely impressed by superior separated entities, the Ideas, but because his
own mind possessed a superior, “nobler” element by which it could abstract
valid universals from sense impressions. This capacity was the light of the
active intellect—lumen intellectus agentis. The light of human reason
derived its power from the divine Truth which contained the eternal types
of all things. In endowing man with this light, God had given him the
potential for knowledge of the world, just as God had endowed all beings, as
possible objects of knowledge, with intelligibility. Thus the human mind
could make true judgments.
Yet Aquinas held that, because of the relationship of being and
knowledge, something of deeper significance was involved in the process of
human cognition. To know a thing was in a sense to have that thing in the
knower. The soul received the form of an object into itself. The soul could
know a thing by receiving its universal aspect, that which represented every
instance of it—the thing’s form apart from its individuating material
embodiment. As Aristotle had said, the soul was in a sense all things, because
it had been created in such a way as to have the whole order of the universe
inscribed within it. But the highest condition of this knowledge Aquinas
recognized as the vision of God—not so much the state of philosophical
contemplation recognized by Aristotle as the final end of man, but rather the
supreme beatific vision of Christian mysticism. By expanding his own
knowledge, man was becoming more like God, and to be like God was man’s
true desired end. Because pure being and pure knowledge were both
expressive of God (with knowledge constituting the “being to itself” of being,
the self-illumination of being), and because a finite being participates, in a
partial way, in those absolutes, every act of knowing was not only an
expansion of one’s own being but an expanding participation in God’s
nature. And by knowing existence in created things, the mind could gain a
positive—though ever imperfect—knowledge of God, by virtue of the
analogy between finite being and Infinite Being. Thus for Aquinas, the
human effort to know was endowed with profound religious significance:
203 

The way of truth was the way of the Holy Spirit.
The extraordinary impact Aquinas had on Western thought lay especially
in his conviction that the judicious exercise of man’s empirical and rational
intelligence, which had been developed and empowered by the Greeks,
could now marvelously serve the Christian cause. For it was the human
intellect’s penetrating cognition of the multitude of created objects in this
world—their order, their dynamism, their directedness, their finiteness, their
absolute dependence on something more—that revealed, at the culmination
of the universe’s hierarchy, the existence of an infinite highest being, an
unmoved mover and first cause: the God of, Christianity. For God was the
sustaining cause of all that exists, the ultimate unconditioned condition for
the being of all things. The final result of the metaphysical quest, of which
the Greeks were the prime exemplars, was discovered to be identical to that
of the spiritual quest, of which Christianity was the definitive expression.
Faith transcended reason, but was not opposed by it; indeed, they enriched
each other. Rather than view the workings of secular reason as a
threatening antithesis to the truths of religious faith, Aquinas was convinced
that ultimately the two could not be in conflict and that their plurality would
therefore serve a deeper unity. Aquinas thereby fulfilled the challenge of
dialectic posed by the earlier Scholastic Abelard, and in so doing opened
himself to the influx of the Hellenic intellect.
It is true that rational philosophy could not on its own offer compelling
proof for all the spiritual truths revealed in Scripture and Church doctrine.
But it could enhance the spiritual understanding of theological matters, just
as theology could enhance the philosophical understanding of worldly
matters. Because God’s wisdom permeated all aspects of creation, knowledge
of natural reality could only magnify the profundity of Christian faith,
although in ways that might not be knowable in advance. Certainly the
philosophy of the natural mind alone could not penetrate fully into the
deepest meanings of the creation. For this, Christian revelation was
necessary. Human intelligence was imperfect, darkened by the Fall. To
approach the highest spiritual realities, human thought required the
illumination of the revealed Word; and only love could truly reach the
204 

infinite. But the philosophical enterprise was nevertheless a vital element in
the human search for spiritual understanding. And if Aristotle for Aquinas
(like Plato for Augustine) lacked an adequate conception of the Creator,
Aquinas saw how to build on Aristotle while correcting and deepening him
wherever necessary—whether by infusing Neoplatonic conceptions, by
employing the special insights of Christian revelation, or by drawing on his
own philosophical acuity. Thus Aquinas gave to Aristotelian thought a new
religious significance—or, as it has been said, Aquinas converted Aristotle to
Christianity and baptized him. Yet it is equally true that in the long run
Aquinas converted medieval Christianity to Aristotle and to the values
Aristotle represented.
Aristotle’s introduction into the medieval West as mediated by Aquinas
opened Christian thought to the intrinsic worth and autonomous dynamism
of this world, of man and nature, while not forsaking the Platonic
transcendent of Augustinian theology. In Aquinas’s view, an understanding
of Aristotle paradoxically allowed theology to become more fully “Christian,”
more resonant with the mystery of the Incarnation as the redemptive
reunion of nature and spirit, time and eternity, man and God. Rational
philosophy and the scientific study of nature could enrich theology and faith
itself while being fulfilled by them. The ideal was “a theologically based
worldliness and a theology open to the world.” For Aquinas the mystery of
being was inexhaustible, but that mystery opened up to man, radiantly if
never completely, through the devout development of his God-given
intelligence: so God drew man onward from within to seek perfection, to
know a fuller participation in the Absolute, to move beyond himself and
return to his source.6
Aquinas thus embraced the new learning, mastered all the available texts,
and 
committed 
himself 
to 
the 
Herculean 
intellectual 
task 
of
comprehensively uniting the Greek and Christian world views in one great
summa, wherein the scientific and philosophical achievements of the
ancients would be brought within the overarching vision of Christian
theology. More than a sum of its parts, Aquinas’s philosophy was a live
compound that brought the diverse elements of its synthesis to new
expression—as if he had recognized an implicit unity in the two streams and
then set about drawing it out by sheer force of intellect.
205 

Further Developments in the High Middle Ages
The Rising Tide of Secular Thought
Aquinas’s optimistic confidence in the conjunction of reason and revelation
was not shared by everyone. Other philosophers, influenced by Aristotle’s
greatest Arabic commentator, Averroës, taught Aristotle’s works without
seeing the need for or the possibility of consistently coordinating his
scientific and logical conclusions with the truths of Christian faith. These
“secularistic” philosophers, centered in the arts faculty at Paris and led by
Siger of Brabant, noted the apparent discrepancies between certain
Aristotelian tenets and those of Christian revelation—particularly such
Aristotelian concepts as the single intellect common to all mankind (which
implied the mortality of the individual human soul), the eternity of the
material world (which contradicted the creation narrative of Genesis), and
the existence of many intermediaries between God and man (which
overruled the direct workings of divine Providence). Siger and his colleagues
asserted that if philosophical reason and religious faith were in
contradiction, then the realm of reason and science must in some sense be
outside the sphere of theology. A “double-truth” universe was the
consequence. Aquinas’s desire for fundamental resolution between the two
realms thus found itself opposed not only to the position of the traditional
Augustinians, who rejected the intrusion of Aristotelian science altogether,
but also to the Averroists’ heterodox philosophy, which Aquinas viewed as
inimical to an integrated Christian world view and as undercutting the
potential of a genuine Christian interpretation of Aristotle. But with better
translations of Aristotle’s writings and with their gradual separation from
206 

the Neoplatonist interpretations with which they had long been conflated,
the Aristotelian outlook was increasingly recognized as a naturalistic
cosmology not readily combined with a straightforward Christian outlook.
Faced with this disturbing outbreak of intellectual independence in the
universities, ecclesiastical authorities condemned the new thought. Sensing
the secularizing threat of the pagan Aristotelian-Arabic science, of an
autonomous human reason and its embrace of profane nature, the Church
was pressed to take a stand against the antitheological thinking beginning to
spread. The truths of Christian faith were supernatural, and needed to be
safeguarded against the insinuations of a naturalistic rationalism. Aquinas
had not succeeded in resolving the heated differences between the opposing
camps, and after his early death in 1274 the rift grew more profound.
Indeed, three years later when the Church made its list of condemned
propositions, some of those taught by Aquinas were included. Thus the
division between the warring adherents of reason and faith was further
deepened, for by its initial censure of not only the secularists but also
Aquinas, the Church cut off communication between the scientific thinkers
and the traditional theologians, leaving the two camps increasingly aloof and
distrustful toward each other.
The Church’s prohibition did not stop the new thinking. In the eyes of
many philosophers, the die was already cast. Having tasted the power of the
Aristotelian intellect, they rejected a return to the previous status quo. They
recognized that their intellectual duty was to follow the critical judgments of
human reason wherever these led, even if that contradicted the traditional
verities of faith. Not that the truths of faith could ultimately be doubted; but
such truths could not necessarily be justified by pure reason, which had its
own logic and its own conclusions, and which found its application in a
realm perhaps irrelevant to faith. The potential divorce between theology
and philosophy was already visible. And once opened, the Pandora’s box of
scientific inquiry would not shut.
In these final centuries of the Middle Ages, however, the Church’s
authority was still secure and could accommodate itself to doctrinal shifts
without endangering its cultural hegemony. Despite repeated censure by the
Church, the new ideas were too attractive to be altogether suppressed, even
among devout Church intellectuals. Half a century after Aquinas’s death, his
207 

life and work were reevaluated by the Church hierarchy and he was
canonized, a scholar-saint. All Thomist teachings were removed from the list
of condemned propositions. Recognizing Aquinas’s prodigious achievement
in interpreting Aristotle in Christian terms, the Church began incorporating
this modulated Aristotelianism into ecclesiastical doctrine, with Aquinas as its
most authoritative expositor. Aquinas and his Scholastic followers and
colleagues thus legitimated Aristotle by working out in painstaking detail the
unification of his science, philosophy, and cosmology with Christian
doctrine. Without that synthesis, it is questionable whether the force of
Greek rationalism and naturalism could have been so fully assimilated into a
culture as pervasively Christian as the medieval West. But with the Church’s
gradual acceptance of that work, the Aristotelian corpus was elevated
virtually to the status of Christian dogma.
Astronomy and Dante
With the discovery of Aristotle came as well Ptolemy’s works on astronomy
explicating the classical conception of the heavens, with the planets
revolving around the Earth in concentric crystalline spheres, and with the
further mathematical refinements of epicycles, eccentrics, and equants.
Although disparities between observation and theory continued to arise and
demand new solutions, the Ptolemaic system still reigned as the most
sophisticated astronomy known, capable of modifying itself in details while
maintaining its basic structure. Above all, it provided a convincing scientific
account for the natural perception of the Earth as fixed with the heavens
moving around it. Taken together, the works of Aristotle and Ptolemy
offered a comprehensive cosmological paradigm representing the best
science of the classical era, one that had dominated Arabic science and that
now swept the universities in the West.
From the twelfth and thirteenth centuries even the classical astrology
codified by Ptolemy was being taught in the universities (often linked to
medical studies), and was integrated by Albertus and Aquinas into a Christian
context. Astrology in fact had never entirely disappeared during the
medieval era, periodically enjoying royal and papal patronage and scholarly
208 

repute, and constituting the cosmic framework for an ongoing and
growingly vital esoteric tradition. But with paganism no longer an
immediate threat to Christianity, theologians of the high Middle Ages more
freely and explicitly accepted the relevance of astrology in the scheme of
things, especially given its classical pedigree and Aristotelian-Ptolemaic
systematization. The traditional Christian objection to astrology—its implicit
negation of free will and grace—was met by Aquinas in his Summa
Theologica. There he affirmed that the planets influenced man, specifically
his corporeal nature, but that through the use of his God-given reason and
free will man could control his passions and achieve freedom from
astrological determinism. Because most individuals did not exercise this
faculty and were therefore subject to planetary forces, astrologers were able
to make accurate general predictions. In principle, however, the soul was
free to choose, just as, according to astrologers, the wise man ruled his stars.
Aquinas thus maintained the Christian belief in free will and divine grace
while acknowledging the Greek conception of the celestial powers.
Astrology, conjoined with astronomy, rose again to high status as a
comprehensive science, capable of disclosing the universal laws of nature.
The planetary spheres—Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn
—formed successive heavens surrounding the Earth and affecting human
existence. For underlying the restored classical cosmology was Aristotle’s
fundamental axiom, “The end of every movement must be one of the divine
bodies moving in the sky.” As the translations from the Arabic continued
during the succeeding generations, the esoteric and astrological conceptions
forged in the Hellenistic era, enunciated in the Alexandrian schools and
Hermetic tradition and carried forward by the Arabs, gradually achieved
widespread influence among the medieval intelligentsia.
But it was when the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology bestowed to
Christianity by the Scholastics was embraced by Dante that the ancient
world view fully reentered the Christian psyche and was there elaborated
and permeated with Christian meaning. Closely following Aquinas in time
and spirit, and similarly inspired by the scientific wisdom of Aristotle, Dante
realized in his epic poem La Divina Commedia what was in effect the moral,
religious, and cosmological paradigm of the medieval era. The Commedia
represented, on several counts, an unprecedented achievement in Christian
209 

culture. As a sustained act of the poetic imagination, Dante’s epic
transcended earlier medieval conventions—in its literary scphistication, in
its eloquent use of the vernacular, in its psychological insight and theological
innovations, in its expression of a deepening individualism, in its upholding
of poetry and learning as instruments of religious understanding, in its
implicit identification of the feminine with the mystical knowledge of God,
in its bold Platonic amplification of human eros in a Christian context. But
especially consequential for the history of the Western world view were
certain ramifications of the epic’s cosmological architecture. For by
integrating the scientific constructs of Aristotle and Ptolemy with a vividly
imagined portrayal of the Christian universe, Dante created a vast classical-
Christian mythology encompassing the whole of creation that would exert a
considerable—and complex—influence on the later Christian imagination.
In Dante’s vision, as in the medieval vision generally, the heavens were
both numinous and humanly meaningful. The human microcosm directly
reflected the macrocosm, and the planetary spheres embodied the various
forces influencing human destiny. Dante filled out this general conception
by poetically uniting the specific elements of Christian theology with the
equally specific elements of classical astronomy. In the Commedia, the
ascending elemental and planetary spheres that envelop the central Earth
culminate in the highest sphere, containing the throne of God, while the
circles of Hell, mirroring the celestial spheres in reverse, descend toward the
corrupt core of the Earth. The Aristotelian geocentric universe thus became
a massive symbolic structure for the moral drama of Christianity, in which
man was situated between Heaven and Hell, drawn between his ethereal and
earthly abodes, and balanced at the moral pivot between his spiritual and
corporeal natures. All of the Ptolemaic planetary spheres now took on
Christian references, with specific ranks of angels and archangels
responsible for each sphere’s motions, even for their various epicyclic
refinements. The Commedia portrayed the entire Christian hierarchy of
being—ranging from Satan and Hell in the dark depths of the material
Earth, out through the Mount of Purgatory, and on up through the
successive angelic hosts to the supreme God in Paradise at the highest
celestial sphere, with man’s earthly existence at the cosmological midpoint,
all carefully mapped onto the Ptolemaic-Aristotelian system. The resulting
210 

Christian universe was a divine macrocosmic womb in which humankind
was positioned securely in the center, enclosed on all sides by God’s
omniscient and omnipotent being. Thus Dante, like Aquinas, achieved an
extraordinarily comprehensive ordering of the cosmos, a medieval Christian
transfiguration of the cosmic order set forth by the Greeks.
But the very power and vividness of this Greek-Christian integration was
to encourage an unexpectedly critical turn of events in the cultural psyche.
The medieval mind perceived the physical world as symbolic to its core, and
that perception had gained new specificity with the embrace of Aristotle and
Greek science by Christian intellectuals. Dante’s use of the Ptolemaic-
Aristotelian cosmology as a structural foundation for the Christian world
view readily established itself in the collective Christian imagination, with
every aspect of the Greek scientific scheme now imbued with religious
significance. In the minds of Dante and his contemporaries, astronomy and
theology were inextricably conjoined, and the cultural ramifications of this
cosmological synthesis were profound: for if any essential physical change
were to be introduced into that system by future astronomers—such as, for
example, a moving Earth— the effect of a purely scientific innovation would
threaten the integrity of the entire Christian cosmology. The intellectual
comprehensiveness and desire for cultural universality so characteristic of
the Christian mind in the high Middle Ages, bringing even the details of
classical science into its fold, were leading it into directions that would later
prove intensely problematic.
The Secularization of the Church and the Rise of Lay
Mysticism
In the high Middle Ages, the Christian world view was still beyond question.
The status of the institutional Church, however, had become considerably
more controversial. Having consolidated its authority in Europe after the
tenth century, the Roman papacy had gradually assumed a role of immense
political influence in the affairs of Christian nations. By the thirteenth
century, the Church’s powers were extraordinary, with the papacy actively
intervening in matters of state throughout Europe, and with enormous
211 

revenues being reaped from the faithful to support the growing
magnificence of the papal court and its huge bureaucracy. By the early
fourteenth century the results of such wor dly success were both clear and
unsettling. Christianity had become powerful but compromised.
The Church hierarchy was visibly prone to financial and political
motivation. The pope’s temporal sovereignty over the Papal States in Italy
involved it in political and military maneuverings that repeatedly
complicated the Church’s spiritual self-understanding. Moreover, the
Church’s extravagant financial needs were placing constantly augmented
demands on the masses of devout Christians. Perhaps worst of all, the
secularism and evident corruption of the papacy were causing it to lose, in
the eyes of the faithful, its spiritual integrity. (Dante himself had made the
distinction between spiritual merit and the ecclesiastical hierarchy, and felt
compelled to consign more than one high Church official to the Inferno for
betraying the Church’s apostolic mission.) The very success of the Church’s
striving for cultural hegemony, at first spiritually motivated, was now
undermining its religious foundations.
In the meantime, the secular monarchies of the European nation-states
had gradually gained power and cohesion, creating a situation in which the
papal claim to universal authority was inevitably leading toward serious
conflict. At the height of its wealth and worldly expansiveness, the Church
suddenly found itself caught up in a century of extreme institutional
disruption—first with the transfer of the papacy to Avignon under French
control 
(the 
“Babylonian 
captivity”) 
and 
subsequently 
with 
the
unprecedented situation of having two, and then three, popes
simultaneously claiming primacy (the “Great Schism”). With the sacred papal
authority so obviously at the mercy of wayward political forces, worldly
pomp, and personal ambition, the Church’s actual spiritual role was
becoming increasingly obscured and the unity of Western Christendom
dangerously threatened.
During these same years of the Church’s accelerating secularization, in
the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, an extraordinary wave of
mystical fervor swept through much of Europe, especially the Rhineland,
involving thousands of men and women—laypersons as well as priests,
monks, and nuns. Intensely devotional, Christ-centered, and aimed at
212 

achieving a direct inner union with the divine, this religious outpouring
took place largely without regard to the established structures of the
Church. The Christian mystical impulse that found in Aquinas and Dante a
theological expression of considerable intellectual complexity took a more
purely affective and devotional character in the central European lay
population. Intellectuality of great subtlety played a role here too in the
person of Meister Eckhart, the movement’s leading teacher, whose
metaphysical vision derived philosophical support from Aquinas and
Neoplatonism, and whose original formulations of the mystical experience
sometimes appeared to threaten the limits of orthodoxy: “The eye with
which God sees me is the eye with which I see him; my eye and his are one.”
Yet the impact of his widely heard sermons, and of the teachings of his
disciples Johann Tauler and Heinrich Suso, was not primarily intellectual or
rational but moral and religious. Above all, their concern was with direct
religious illumination and a sanctified life of Christian love and service.
But with such an emphasis on internal communion with God, rather than
on the need for the Church’s institutionalized sacraments and collective
forms of worship, the Church itself was seen as less mandatory for the
spiritual enterprise. With advanced religious experience now perceived as
directly available to lay people as much as to clergy, the priest and bishop
were no longer regarded as necessary mediators of spiritual activity.
Similarly, the relative unimportance of words and reason in the context of
the soul’s relationship to God made the highly rationalist development of
theology and the contentious subtleties of Church doctrine seem
superfluous. From the opposite side of the issue from Scholasticism, but with
identical effect, reason and faith were growing ever further apart.
Of greater immediate import was the growing divergence between the
ideal of Christian spirituality and the reality of the institutional Church. In
the view of the new mystical preachers and lay brotherhoods, personal piety
took precedence over ecclesiastical office, just as internal experience
superseded external observance. The true Church, the body of Christ, was
now increasingly identified with the humble souls of the faithful and the
graciously illuminated, rather than with the officially sanctioned Church
hierarchy. A new stress on the Bible and faith in God’s Word as the basis of
that true Church began to displace the institutional Church’s stress on
213 

dogma and papal sovereignty. A life of renunciation and simplicity was
upheld as the authentic path to God, in contrast to the life of wealth and
power enjoyed by the privileged officeholders of the ecclesiastical
establishment.
All of these widely experienced dichotomies suggested a potential break
from the traditional structure of the medieval Church. Yet that break did not
occur. Those involved were devout Christians who generally recognized no
need for active rebellion against the Church. Where reform and renewal
were sought, as these were by several major religious movements in the
later Middle Ages, it was still generally within the existing Church
framework. But a seed was sown. The life of Christ and the apostles was
acknowledged as the paradigm of spiritual existence, but that life appeared
to be neither represented nor mediated by the contemporary structures of
the Catholic Church. And the new spiritual autonomy embraced by the
Rhineland mystics, as well as by others in England and the Low Countries,
tended to place the Church in a secondary role in the realm of authentic
spirituality. Already at the turn of the thirteenth century, Joachim of Fiore
had set forth his influential mystical vision of history as divided into three
eras of increasing spirituality—the Age of the Father (the Old Testament),
the Age of the Son (the New Testament and Church), and a coming Age of
the Spirit, when the whole world would be suffused with the divine and the
institutional Church would no longer be necessary.
With the new emphasis given to the individual’s direct and private
relation to God, the elaborate institutional forms and regulations of the
Church were devalued at the same moment that the secularization of the
Church made its spiritual mission appear increasingly open to question. As
the medieval era reached its final stages, the earnest cries for reform, always
present in Church history, found strong voice in a growing diversity of
figures—Dante, Marsilius of Padua, Dietrich of Niem, John Wycliffe, Jan Hus
—and became, from the hierarchy’s perspective, ever more heretical in
character.
214 

Critical Scholasticism and Ockham’s Razor
While one cultural stream, represented by the new lay mysticism, moved
toward religious autonomy, the Scholastic stream continued its remarkable
development of the Western intellect under Aristotle’s tutelage. And if the
Church’s spiritual role was now ambiguous, its intellectual role was no less
so. On the one hand, the Church was supporting the whole academic
enterprise in the universities, where Christian doctrine was explicated with
unprecedentedly rigorous logical method and increasingly greater scope. On
the other hand, it attempted to keep that enterprise under control, either by
condemnation and suppression, or by giving doctrinal status to certain
innovations such as those of Aquinas—as if to say, “This far and no further.”
But within this ambivalent atmosphere, the Scholastic inquiry went on, with
increasingly weighty implications.
The Church had largely accepted Aristotle. But the culture’s new interest
in Aristotle did not stop with the study of his writings, for that interest
signified a broader, and ever-broadening, interest in the natural world and a
growing confidence in the power of human reason. Aristotelianism in the
late Middle Ages was more symptom than cause of the developing scientific
spirit in Europe. Already Scholastics in England such as Robert Grosseteste
and his pupil Roger Bacon were performing concrete scientific experiments
(moved in part by esoteric traditions such as alchemy and astrology),
applying the mathematical principles held supreme by the Platonic tradition
to the observation of the physical world recommended by Aristotle. This new
focus on direct experience and reasoning was beginning to undermine the
Church’s exclusive investment in the authoritativeness of the ancient texts
—now Aristotelian as well as biblical and patristic. Aristotle was being
215 

questioned on his own terms, in specifics if not in overall authority. Some of
his principles were compared with experience and found lacking, logical
fallacies in his proofs were pinpointed, and the corpus of his works was
subjected to minute examination.
The Scholastics’ exhaustive critical discussions of Aristotle and their often
shrewd suggestions of alternative hypotheses were forging a new
intellectual spirit, increasingly perceptive, skeptical, and open to
fundamental change. In particular, their probings were creating an
intellectual climate that not only encouraged a more empirical, mechanistic,
and quantitative view of nature, but would in time more easily
accommodate the radical shift of view necessary for the conception of a
moving Earth. By the fourteenth century, a leading Scholastic such as the
Parisian scholar and bishop Nicole d’Oresme could defend the theoretical
possibility of a rotating Earth (even while personally rejecting it), out of
sheer logical vigor proposing ingenious arguments against Aristotle
concerning optical relativity and falling bodies—arguments that would later
be used by Copernicus and Galileo to support the heliocentric theory. To
solve difficulties presented by Aristotle’s theory of projectile motion,
Oresme’s teacher, Jean Buridan, developed an impetus theory, applying it to
both celestial and terrestrial phenomena, which would lead directly to
Galileo’s mechanics and Newton’s first law of motion.7
Aristotle continued to provide the terminology, the logical method, and
the increasingly empiricist spirit of the developing Scholastic philosophy.
But ironically, it was Aristotle’s very authority that, by inviting such intense
examination, was contributing to his eventual overthrow. And it was the
meticulous and energetic attempt to synthesize Aristotelian science with the
indubitable tenets of Christian revelation that was bringing forth all the
critical intelligence that would ultimately turn against both the ancient and
the ecclesiastical authorities. In retrospect, Aquinas’s summa had been one
of the final steps of the medieval mind toward full intellectual independence.
This new autonomy was portentously asserted in the fourteenth century
in the paradoxical figure of William of Ockham, a man at once strangely
modern and yet altogether medieval. A British philosopher and priest born
216 

soon after Aquinas’s death, Ockham looked at matters with the same passion
for rational precision as Aquinas, but arrived at sharply different
conclusions. In the service of upholding Christian revelation, he employed
both a highly developed logical method and an augmented empiricism. Yet
in the wake of the Church’s condemnation of the Parisian secularists,
Ockham strove above all to limit the presumed competence of the natural
human reason to grasp universal truths. Although his intentions were
entirely to the contrary, Ockham proved to be the pivotal thinker in the late
medieval movement toward the modern outlook. And although the modern
mind itself would largely dismiss the intellectual conflicts that concerned
him as the insignificant quibblings of a decadent and overwrought
Scholasticism, it would be precisely those recondite conceptual battles that
had to be fought before modern thought could establish its radical revision
of human knowledge and the natural world.
The central principle of Ockham’s thought, and the most consequential,
was his denial of the reality of universals outside of the human mind and
human language. Driving Aristotle’s stress on the ontological primacy of
concrete particulars over Platonic Forms to its logical extreme, Ockham
argued that nothing existed except individual beings, that only concrete
experience could serve as a basis for knowledge, and that universals existed
not as entities external to the mind but only as mental concepts. In the last
analysis, what was real was the particular thing outside the mind, not the
mind’s concept of that thing. Since all knowledge had to be based on the
real, and since all real existence was that of individual beings, then
knowledge must be of particulars. Human concepts possessed no
metaphysical foundation beyond concrete particulars, and there existed no
necessary correspondence between words and things. Ockham thereby gave
new force and vitality to the philosophical position of nominalism (in its
conceptualist version), which held that universals were only names or
mental concepts and not real entities. Roscellinus had argued a similar
position in the eleventh century, but it was from the time of Ockham that
nominalism would play a central role in the evolution of the Western mind.
In the generation before Ockham, another prominent Scholastic known
as the “subtle doctor,” Duns Scotus, had already modified classical Form
theories in the direction of the concrete individual by asserting that each
217 

particular had its own individual “thisness” (haeccitas), which possessed a
positive reality of its own apart from the particular’s participation in the
universal—or, more precisely, apart from its sharing in a common nature.
This added formal quality of individuation Scotus saw as necessary to allow
the individual an intelligibility on its own terms, apart from its universal
form (otherwise the individual in itself would be unintelligible, perhaps even
to the divine mind). He also saw this principle of individuation as a necessary
recognition of the individual human free will and especially of God’s
freedom to choose how he created each individual, rather than God’s or
man’s being bound by the determinism of eternally fixed universals and
necessary emanations from the First Cause. These modifications away from
fixed universals and determinism in turn encouraged attention to
observation and experiment—i.e., to study the unpredictable creation of a
free God—and heightened the distinction between rational philosophy and
religious truth.
But whereas Scotus, like most of his predecessors back to Augustine, had
assumed a direct and real correspondence between human concept and
metaphysical existent, Ockham denied that correspondence altogether. Only
concrete individual beings were real, and common natures (Scotus),
intelligible species (Aquinas and Aristotle), or transcendent Forms (Plato)
were conceptual fictions derived from that primary reality. A universal for
Ockham was a term signifying some conceptualized aspect of a real,
concrete individual being, and did not constitute a metaphysical entity in
itself. A separate, independent order of reality populated by universals or
Forms was expressly denied. Ockham thus moved to eliminate the last
vestige of Platonic Forms in Scholastic thought: Only the particular existed,
and any inference about real universals, whether transcendent or immanent,
was spurious. So often and with such force did Ockham use the
philosophical principle that “entities are not to be multiplied beyond
necessity” (non sunt multiplicanda entia praeter necessitatem) that the
principle came to be known as “Ockham’s razor.”8
Hence, according to Ockham, universals exist only in the human mind,
not in reality. They are concepts abstracted by the mind on the basis of its
empirical observations of more or less similar individuals. They are not God’s
pre-existing Ideas governing his creation of individuals, for God was
218 

absolutely free to create anything in any way he pleased. Only his creatures
exist, not Ideas of creatures. For Ockham, the issue was no longer the
metaphysical question as to how ephemeral individuals came from real
transcendent Forms, but the epistemological question as to how abstract
universal concepts came from real individuals. “Man” as a species signified
not a distinct real entity in itself, but a shared similarity in many individual
human beings as recognized by the mind. It was a mental abstraction, not a
real entity. The problem of universals was therefore a matter of
epistemology, grammar, and logic— not of metaphysics or ontology.
Ockham, again following leads established by Scotus, also denied the
possibility of moving from a rational apprehension of the facts of this world
to any necessary conclusions about God or other religious matters. The
world was utterly contingent on God’s omnipotent and indefinable will.
Hence man’s only certainty derived from direct sensory observation or from
self-evident logical propositions, not from rational speculations about
invisible realities and universal essences. Because God was free to create or
determine things according to his will, any human claim to certain
knowledge of the cosmos as a rationally ordered expression of transcendent
essences was altogether relativized. God could have created things in any
way he arbitrarily wished, without the use of intermediaries such as the
celestial intelligences of Aristotelianism and Thomism. There were two
realities given to man: the reality of God, given by revelation, and the reality
of the empirical world, given by direct experience. Beyond those, or
between them, man could not legitimately claim cognitive access, and
without revelation he could not know of God. Man could not empirically
experience God in the same way he could the material object in front of
him. Since all human knowledge was founded on the sensory intuition of
concrete particulars, something beyond the senses, such as the existence of
God, could only be revealed by faith, it could not be known by reason. The
concept of an absolute divine being was only a subjective human
construction, and could not therefore serve as a secure foundation for
theological reasoning.
In Ockham’s understanding, the determinism and necessary causes of
Greek philosophy and science, which Aquinas sought to integrate with
Christian faith, placed arbitrary limits on God’s infinitely free creation, and
219 

this Ockham vigorously opposed. Such a philosophy failed to recognize the
real limits of human rationality. For Ockham, all knowledge of nature arose
solely from what comes through the senses. Reason was a powerful tool, but
its power lay only in relation to the empirical encounter with the concrete
facts of “positive” reality. The human mind possessed no divine light, as
Aquinas taught, by which the active intellect could move beyond the senses
to a valid universal judgment grounded in absolute being. Neither the mind
nor the world could be said to be ordered in such a coherently
interconnected fashion that the mind knows the world by means of real
universals that govern both knower and known. Because only particulars
demonstrably exist, and not any transcendent relation or coherence between
them, speculative reason and metaphysics lacked any real foundation.
Without interior illumination or some other means of epistemological
certainty such as Aquinas’s light of the active intellect, a newly skeptical
attitude toward human knowledge was both inevitable and mandatory. Since
only direct evidence of individual existents provided a basis for knowledge,
and since those existents were contingent on a divine omnipotence that
knew no determined bounds to its creative activity— anything was possible
for God—then human knowledge was limited to the contingent and
empirical, and was, finally, not necessary and universal knowledge at all.
God’s will was not limited by the structures of human rationality, for his
absolute volitional freedom and omnipotence could allow him to make what
was evil good, and vice versa, if he so wished. There was no mandatory
relation between God’s freely created universe and the human desire for a
world of rational intelligibility. At best, only arguments of probability were
legitimate. The human mind could make strict logical demonstrations on the
basis of immediate experience, but that experience, being contingent on
God’s free will, necessarily relativized the absolute certainty of the logic. And
because Ockham’s ontology was exclusively of concrete individuals, the
empirical world had to be viewed from an exclusively physical standpoint.
The metaphysical organizing principles of Aristotle or Plato could not be
derived from immediate experience.
Ockham therefore attacked the earlier Scholastics’ speculative theological
rationalism as inappropriate to logic and science (employing unverifiable
and superfluous entities like the Forms to explain individual beings), and
220 

dangerous to religion (presuming to know God’s reasons or to put limits of
order and intermediate causes onto his direct free creation, while elevating
pagan metaphysics vis-à-vis Christian faith). He thereby severed the unity so
painstakingly constructed by Aquinas. For Ockham, there was one truth
described by Christian revelation, which was both beyond doubt and beyond
rational comprehension, and there was another truth comprising the
observable particular facts described by empirical science and rational
philosophy. The two truths were not necessarily continuous.
In a sense, Ockham both opposed and fulfilled the secularistic movement
of the previous century. He forcefully proclaimed a new form of the double-
truth universe, with a religious truth and a scientific truth, effectively
cutting the link between theology and philosophy. But the earlier secularists
had argued for such a division because they were unwilling to restrict Greek
and Arabic philosophy to a subordinate position when it conflicted with
Christian belief. Ockham, by contrast, wished to preserve the preeminence
of Christian doctrine—especially God’s absolute freedom and omnipotence
as Creator—by firmly defining the limits of the natural reason. In doing so,
however, Ockham negated Aquinas’s confidence that God’s creation would
be warmly open to human efforts at universal understanding. For both
Aquinas and Ockham, the human mind had to accommodate its intellectual
aspirations to the fact that God’s reality and man’s rational knowledge were
infinitely distant from each other. But where Aquinas left room for a rational
knowledge that approached the divine mystery and enhanced theological
understanding, Ockham saw the necessity of defining a more absolute limit.
A positivist reason could be carefully and modestly employed in approaching
the empirical world, but only revelation could illuminate the greater realities
of God’s will, his creation, and his gratuitously bestowed salvation. There was
no humanly intelligible continuity between the empirical and the divine.
Ockham’s logical rigor was matched by his moral rigor. Against the
worldly magnificence of the Avignon papacy, he endorsed a life of total
poverty for true Christian spiritual perfection, following the example of
Jesus, the apostles, and Francis of Assisi. For Ockham was himself a fervent
Franciscan, whose religious conviction moved him even to risk
excommunication by the pope if the latter’s policies seemed to conflict with
Christian truth. In a series of fateful encounters with the papacy, Ockham
221 

not only upheld radical poverty against the secular wealth of the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, he also defended the right of the English king to tax
Church property (as Jesus, in “rendering unto Caesar,” had submitted to
temporal authority), condemned the Church’s infringement on individual
Christian freedom, denied the legitimacy of papal infallibility, and outlined
the various circumstances in which a pope could be rightfully deposed. In
the personal drama between Ockham and the Church were foreshadowings
of an epochal drama to come.
But it was on the philosophical level that Ockham’s impact was to be most
immediately potent, for in his emphatic assertion of nominalism, the
growing medieval tension between reason and faith began to snap.
Faradoxically, the very intensity of Ockham’s allegiance to God’s omnipotent
freedom, combined with his acute sense of logical precision, led him to
formulate a philosophical position remarkable for its modernity. In
Ockham’s view, one could not assume that man’s mind and God’s were
fundamentally connected. Empiricism and reason could give a limited
knowledge of the world in its particulars, but no certain knowledge of God,
for which only God’s Word could be a source. Revelation offered certainty,
but could be affirmed only through faith and grace, not through natural
reason. Reason should rightly focus on nature rather than God, because only
nature provided the senses with concrete data upon which reason could
ground its knowledge.
Ockham left no bridge between human reason and divine revelation,
between what man knows and what he believes. Yet his uncompromising
emphasis on the individual concrete things of this world, his trust in the
power of human reason and logic to ascertain necessary entities and to
differentiate evidence and degrees of probability, and his skeptical attitude
toward traditional and institutionally sanctioned ways of thinking all directly
encouraged the scientific enterprise. Indeed, from such a dualistic starting
point, science could be free to develop along its own lines with less fear of
potential doctrinal contradiction—at least until the entire cosmology was
called into question. It was not accidental that both Buridan and Oresme,
two of the most original scientific thinkers of the late Middle Ages, worked
in the Parisian nominalist school in which Ockham had been a central
influence. Although Ockham’s interests lay principally in philosophy rather
222 

than natural science, his elimination of the fixed correspondence between
human concept and metaphysical reality, and his assertion that all genuine
existence was individual existence, helped open the physical world to fresh
analysis. Now direct contact with concrete particulars could overcome the
metaphysical mediation by abstract universals. Significantly, as the alliance
of nominalism and empiricism represented in Ockham’s ideas spread
through the universities in the fourteenth century (despite papal censure),
Ockham’s way of philosophy was known as the via moderna, in contrast to
Aquinas’s and Scotus’s via antiqua. The traditional Scholastic enterprise,
committed to joining faith with reason, was coming to an end.
Thus with the fourteenth century, the long-assumed metaphysical unity
of concept and being began to break down. The assumption that the human
mind knows things by intellectually grasping their inherent forms—whether
through interior illumination by transcendent Ideas, as in Plato and
Augustine, or through the active intellect’s abstraction of immanent
universals from sense-perceived particulars, as in Aristotle and Aquinas—
was now challenged. In the absence of that basic epistemological
presupposition, the ambitiously comprehensive systems constructed by the
thirteenth-century Scholastics were no longer possible. With the
displacement of abstract speculation by empirical evidence as the basis of
knowledge, 
the 
earlier 
metaphysical 
systems 
seemed 
increasingly
implausible. The underlying medieval world view—Christian and
Aristotelian—continued intact, but new, more critical interpretations now
arose, thereby undoing the earlier synthesis and engendering a new
intellectual pluralism. In many matters, probability replaced certainty, as
empiricism, grammar, and logic began to supersede metaphysics.
Ockham’s vision prefigured the path subsequently taken by the Western
mind. For just as he believed the Church must be politically separated from
the secular world for the integrity and rightful freedom of both, so he
believed God’s reality must be theologically distinguished from empirical
reality. Only thus would Christian truth preserve its transcendent
sacrosanctness, and only thus would the world’s nature be properly
comprehended on its own terms, in its full particularity and contingency.
Herein lay the embryonic foundations—epistemological and metaphysical as
well as religious and political—for coming changes in the Western world
223 

view to be wrought by the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution, and the
Enlightenment.
And so it was that just as the medieval vision had attained its
consummation in the work of Aquinas and Dante, the altogether different
spirit of a new epoch began to arise, propelled by the very forces that had
achieved the earlier synthesis. The great medieval masterworks had
culminated an intellectual development that was starting to break into new
territories, even if that meant stepping out of the Church’s established
structure of education and belief. But Ockham’s precocious modernism was
still ahead of its time. Paradoxically, the culture of this new era would
receive its major initiating impulse not from the line of medieval
Scholasticism, natural science, and Aristotle, but from the other pole of
classical Humanism, belles lettres, and a revived Plato. For just as Aquinas
had his contrasting philosophical successor in Ockham, so did Dante have
his contrasting literary successor in Petrarch, born in the same decade Dante
began writing La Divina Commedia, at the start of the fourteenth century.
224 

The Rebirth of Classical Humanism
Petrarch
It was a pivotal moment in Western cultural history when Petrarch looked
back on the thousand years since the decline of ancient Rome and
experienced that entire period as a decline of human greatness itself, a
diminishment of literary and moral excellence, a “dark” age. In contrast to
this impoverishment, Petrarch beheld the immense cultural wealth of
Greco-Roman civilization, a seeming golden age of creative genius and
human expansiveness. For centuries, medieval schoolmen had been
gradually rediscovering and integrating the ancient works, but now
Petrarch radically shifted the focus and tone of that integration. Instead of
Scholasticism’s concern with logic, science, and Aristotle, and with the
constant imperative of Christianizing the pagan conceptions, Petrarch and
his followers saw value in all the literary classics of antiquity— poetry,
essays, letters, histories and biographies, philosophy in the form of elegant
Platonic dialogues rather than dry Aristotelian treatises—and embraced
these on their own terms, not as needing Christian modification, but as noble
and inspirational just as they stood in the radiance of classical civilization.
Ancient culture was a source not just for scientific knowledge and rules for
logical discourse, but for the deepening and enrichment of the human spirit.
The classical texts provided a new foundation for the appreciation of man;
classical scholarship constituted the “humanities.” Petrarch set about the task
of finding and absorbing the great works of ancient culture—Virgil and
Cicero, Horace and Livy, Homer and Plato—not just to inculcate a sterile
imitation of the past masters, but to instill in himself the same moral and
225 

imaginative fire that they had so superbly expressed. Europe had forgotten
its noble classical heritage, and Petrarch called for its recollection. A new
sacred history was being established, a Greco-Roman testament to be placed
alongside the Judaeo-Christian.
Thus Petrarch began the reeducation of Europe. Direct intercourse with
the great masters of Latin and Greek literature was to be the key to the
radical expansion of the contemporary European mind. Not just Christian
theology but classical litterae humaniores could now be recognized as a
source of spiritual insight and moral development. While Church learning
had become increasingly intellectualized and abstract, Petrarch felt the need
for a learning that would better reflect the conflicts and vagaries of man’s
emotional and imaginative depths. Rather than doctrinal formulae for
describing man and clerical austerities for educating him, Petrarch turned to
undogmatic introspection and observation for his insights into the human
condition, and a full life of literature and action, as well as monastic solitude,
for his education. Studia humanitatis were differentiated from, and elevated
to the level of, studia divinitatis. Now, under the revived classical model,
poetry and rhetoric, style, eloquence, and persuasiveness again became
worthy ends in themselves, the necessary accompaniments of moral power.
For Petrarch, grace and clarity of literary expression reflected grace and
clarity of the soul. In the slow, meticulous labor of working with words and
ideas, in the sensitive exploration of each nuance of emotion and perception,
the literary discipline became a spiritual discipline, a striving for artistic
perfection that demanded a parallel perfecting of the soul.
While Dante’s sensibility had in a sense culminated and summed up the
medieval era, Petrarch’s looked forward to and impelled a future age,
bringing a rebirth of culture, creativity, and human greatness. While Dante’s
poetic work was done in the reverent spirit of the anonymous artisans and
craftsmen who built the medieval cathedrals, inspired by God and created
for his greater glory, Petrarch’s work was motivated by a new spirit, inspired
by the ancients and created for the enrichment and greater glory of man
himself, the noble center of God’s creation. While Dante and the Scholastics
were focused on theological precision and scientific knowledge of the
natural world, Petrarch was instead engaged by the depths and complexities
of his own consciousness. Rather than spiritual and scientific system
226 

building, his focus was psychological, humanist, and aesthetic.
Not that Petrarch was unspiritual or even unorthodox; in the end, his
Christianity was as devout and firmly rooted as his classicism. Augustine was
as important as Virgil for Petrarch, and like all the other notable synthesizers
of the two traditions, he believed Christianity to be the divine fulfillment of
the classical promise. Petrarch’s highest ideal was docta pietas, learned piety.
Piety was Christian, directed to God, yet learning enhanced that piety, and
learning derived from knowledge of the ancient classics. The two streams—
Christianity and classical culture—formed a deep harmony, and man
achieved a larger spiritual vision when he drank from both. In Petrarch’s
view, when Cicero spoke of “one single God as the governor and maker of
all things,” he did so “not in a merely philosophical but in an almost Catholic
manner of phrasing it, so that sometimes you would think you were hearing
not a pagan philosopher but an apostle.”
What was new in the late Middle Ages was not any lack of spirituality in
Petrarch, but rather the overall character of his approach to human life. The
demands of his religious temperament were in continuous creative battle
with his desire for romantic and sensuous love, for secular activity in
diplomatic and courtly circles, for literary greatness and personal glory. It
was this new self-reflective awareness of human life’s richness and
multidimensionality, and his recognition of a kindred spirit in the great
writers of antiquity, that made Petrarch the first man of the Renaissance.
The Return of Plato
Inspired by Petrarch’s call, large numbers of scholars took up the search for
the lost manuscripts of antiquity. Whatever they discovered was then
carefully collated, edited, and translated to provide as accurate and
substantial a basis as possible for their humanistic mission. This activity
coincided with more frequent contacts with the Byzantine world, which had
preserved much of the Greek heritage intact, and whose scholars started
leaving Constantinople for the West under the threat of the Turkish
invasion. Western scholars began to study and master the Greek language,
and there soon arrived in Italy the Greek Dialogues of Plato, the Enneads of
227 

Plotinus, and other major works of the Platonic tradition and classical Greek
culture.
The West’s sudden access to these writings precipitated a Platonic revival
not unlike the earlier rediscovery of Aristotle. Platonism, of course, had
permeated Christian thought in the West from the earliest years of the
Middle Ages, passed on first by Augustine and Boethius, and later through
the ninth-century philosopher John Scotus Erigena and his translation of
and commentaries on the works of Dionysius the Areopagite. Platonism was
revivified in the schools at Chartres and Saint-Victor in the twelfth-century
renascence, and was plainly visible in the mystical philosophy of Meister
Eckhart. Even the high Scholastic tradition of Albertus and Aquinas,
although necessarily focused on the challenge of integrating Aristotle, was
nevertheless still deeply Platonic in disposition. But this had always been an
indirect Plato, highly Christianized, modified through Augustine and the
other Church fathers: a Plato known from afar, largely untranslated, passed
on by digests and references in another language and mind-set and seldom
in his own words. Petrarch himself, eager for a Platonic revival on the basis
of allusions in Cicero and Augustine, did not in the fourteenth century have
the necessary translators. The recovery of the original Greek works was a
fresh revelation for fifteenth-century Western Europe, and Humanists such
as Marsilio Ficino and Pico della Mirandola devoted themselves
wholeheartedly to the transmission of this stream to their contemporaries.
The Platonic tradition provided the Humanists with a philosophical basis
highly compatible with their own intellectual habits and aspirations. Rather
than the syllogistic hairsplitting and cerebral abstractness of the later
Scholastics in the universities, Platonism offered a richly textured tapestry of
imaginative depth and spiritual exaltation. The notion that beauty was an
essential component in the search for the ultimate reality, that imagination
and vision were more significant in that quest than logic and dogma, that
man could attain a direct knowledge of things divine—such ideas held much
attraction for the new sensibility growing in Europe. Moreover, Plato’s
dialogues were themselves refined literary masterpieces, not the stodgy
treatises of the Aristotelian-Scholastic tradition, and thus appealed to the
Humanists’ passion for rhetorical eloquence and aesthetic persuasiveness.
Both Aristotle and Aquinas had been rigidified by the late Scholastics,
228 

losing much of their allure for the new Humanists. Late Scholasticism
thrived in an academic atmosphere marked by qualities that often
exaggerated to the point of caricature Aquinas’s almost superhuman
intellectual precision and analytical rigor. The open-ended intellectual
curiosity displayed by Aristotle and Aquinas in their own times had produced
bodies of thought that were eventually transformed by their respectful
successors into closed, complete, and inflexible systems. The very success and
breadth of Aquinas’s work left little for his followers to do but replow the
same ground. A too reverential awe of the master’s words inevitably
lessened the possibility of creative scholarship. Even where conflict and
criticism existed, as between Thomists, Scotists, and Ockhamists, the
Scholastic dialogue seemed to outsiders to have degenerated into ceaseless
argument over sterile subtleties. The via moderna initiated by Ockham was
especially prone to such minute controversy, where the search for
terminological accuracy and the concern with formal logic displaced the via
antiqua’s interest in metaphysical comprehensiveness. And after the
brilliance of Ockham, Buridan, Oresme, and their contemporaries in the
fourteenth century, the via moderna itself had lost much of its original
impetus. By the fifteenth century, Scholasticism’s intellectual nerve was
failing. The influx of the Platonic tradition thus signified a fresh and
expansive wind revitalizing European thought. With the universities
trapped in a backwater of intellectual orthodoxy, a Platonic Academy was
founded in Florence in the second half of the fifteenth century, under the
patronage of Cosimo de Medici and the leadership of Ficino, and this became
the flourishing center of the Platonic revival.
In Platonism and Neoplatonism the Humanists discovered a non-Christian
spiritual tradition possessing a religious and ethical profundity seemingly
comparable to that of Christianity itself. The Neoplatonic corpus implied the
existence of a universal religion, of which Christianity was perhaps the
ultimate but not the only manifestation. Erasmus, pressing further the spirit
of Petrarch’s view of Cicero, wrote of his difficulty in refraining from
praying to Socrates as to a saint. The Humanists’ suddenly expanded reading
lists gave evidence of a tradition of learning, of intellectual, spiritual, and
imaginative insight, that found expression not only in the classical Greeks
but throughout civilized history—in the Hermetic corpus, in Zoroastrian
229 

oracles, in the Hebrew Kaballah, in Babylonian and Egyptian texts—a cross-
cultural revelation that bespoke a Logos that manifested itself continually
and universally.
With the influx of this tradition came a new vision of man, nature, and
the divine. Neoplatonism, based on Plotinus’s conception of the world as an
emanation from the transcendent One, portrayed nature as permeated by
divinity, a noble expression of the World Soul. Stars and planets, light, plants,
even stones possessed a numinous dimension. Neoplatonist Humanists
declared the light of the Sun to be the light of God, as Christ was the light of
the world, with all of creation thereby bathed in divinity and with the Sun
itself, the source of light and life, possessing divine attributes. The ancient
Pythagorean vision of a universe ordered according to transcendent
mathematical forms received an intense renewal of interest, and promised to
reveal nature as permeated by a mystical intelligence whose language was
number and geometry. The garden of the world was again enchanted, with
magical powers and transcendent meanings implicit in every part of nature.
The Humanists’ Neoplatonic conception of man was equally exalted.
Possessing a divine spark, man was capable of discovering within himself the
image of the infinite deity. He was a noble microcosm of the divine
macrocosm. Ficino asserted in his Platonic Theology that man not only was
“the vicar of God” in the great extent of his earthly powers, but was of
“almost the same genius as the Author of the heavens” in the range of his
intelligence. The devoutly Christian Ficino even went on to praise man’s soul
for being capable “by means of the intellect and will, as by those twin
Platonic wings. . . of becoming in a sense all things, and even a god.”
With man now attaining, in the light of the revivified classical past, a new
consciousness of his noble role in the universe, a new sense of history arose
as well. The Humanists embraced the ancient Greco-Roman conception of
history as cyclical, rather than only linear as in the traditional Judaeo-
Christian vision; they saw their own period as a rebirth out of the barbarian
darkness of the Middle Ages, a return to ancient glory, the dawn of another
golden age. In the vision of the Neoplatonic Humanists, this world was not
so fallen as it had been for Moses or Augustine, and neither was man.
Perhaps the young and brilliant Pico della Mirandola best summed up this
new spirit of religious syncretism, broad scholarship, and optimistic
230 

reclamation of man’s potential divinity. In 1486, at the age of twenty-three,
Pico announced his intention to defend nine hundred theses derived from
various Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Arabic writers, invited scholars from all
over Europe to Rome for a public disputation, and composed for the event
his celebrated Oration on the Dignity of Man. In it Pico described the
Creation using both Genesis and the Timaeus as initial sources, but then
went further: When God had completed the creation of the world as a
sacred temple of his divine wisdom, he at last considered the creation of
man, whose role would be to reflect on, admire, and love the immense
grandeur of God’s work. But God found he had no archetypes remaining
with which to make man, and he therefore said to his last creation:
Neither an established place, nor a form belonging to you alone, nor
any special function have We given to you, O Adam, and for this
reason, that you may have and possess, according to your desire and
judgment, whatever place, whatever form, and whatever functions you
shall desire. The nature of other creatures, which has been determined,
is confined within the bounds prescribed by Us. You, who are confined
by no limits, shall determine for yourself your own nature, in
accordance with your own free will, in whose hand I have placed you. I
have set you at the center of the world, so that from there you may
more easily survey whatever is in the world. We have made you neither
heavenly nor earthly, neither mortal nor immortal, so that, more freely
and more honorably the molder and maker of yourself, you may
fashion yourself in whatever form you shall prefer. You shall be able to
descend among the lower forms of being, which are brute beasts; you
shall be able to be reborn out of the judgment of your own soul into the
higher beings, which are divine.9
To man had been given freedom, mutability, and the power of self-
transformation: thus Pico affirmed that, in the ancient mysteries, man had
been symbolized as the mythic figure of Prometheus. God had bestowed to
man the ability to determine freely his position in the universe, even to the
point of ascending to full union with the supreme God. The classical Greeks’
sense of man’s own glory, of man’s intellectual powers and capacity for
spiritual elevation seemingly uncontaminated by a biblical Original Sin, was
231 

now emerging anew in the breast of Western man.
The new mode of attaining knowledge of the universe was different as
well. Imagination now rose to the highest position on the epistemological
spectrum, unrivaled in its capacity to render metaphysical truth. Through
the disciplined use of imagination man could bring to his consciousness
those transcendent living Forms that ordered the universe. Thus could the
mind recover its own deepest organization and reunite itself with the
cosmos. In contrast to the Scholastics, with their increasing empiricism and
concretism, the Neoplatonic Humanists saw archetypal meaning in each
concrete fact, used myths as vehicles for communicating metaphysical and
psychological insights, and were ever observant for the hidden significance
of things.
Following Neoplatonism’s integration of astrology and inclusion of the
pagan gods in the hierarchy of reality, Renaissance Humanists began
employing the pantheon of planetary deities as modes of imaginative
discourse. Prominent Scholastics such as the fourteenth-century nominalist
Oresme had opposed astrologers’ predictive claims, but with the Humanists’
influence astrology again flourished—in the Florentine Academy, in royal
courts and aristocratic circles, in the Vatican. The Judaeo-Christian God still
reigned supreme, but the Greco-Roman gods and goddesses were now given
new life and value in the scheme of things. Horoscopes abounded, and
references to the planetary powers and zodiacal symbols became ubiquitous.
It is true that mythology, astrology, and esotericism had never been absent
from even orthodox medieval culture: allegories and artistic images, the
planetary names for the days of the week, the classification of the elements
and humors, and many other aspects of the liberal arts and sciences all
reflected their continuing presence. But now they were rediscovered in a
new light that served to revivify their classical status. The gods regained a
sacred dignity, their forms portrayed in paintings and sculptures with a
beauty and sensuousness resembling that of the ancient images. Classical
mythology began to be regarded as the noble religious truth of those who
lived before Christ, as a theology in itself, so that its study became another
form of docta pietas. The pagan Venus, goddess of beauty, was restored as
the symbol of spiritual beauty, an archetype in the divine Mind that
mediated the soul’s awakening to divine love—and as such could be
232 

identified as an alternative manifestation of the Virgin Mary. Platonic images
and doctrines were reconceived in Christian terms, the Greek deities and
daimones seen as Christian angels, Socrates’s teacher in the Symposium,
Diotima, recognized as inspired by the Holy Spirit. A flexible syncretism was
emerging, encompassing diverse traditions and perspectives, with Platonism
espoused as a new gospel.
Thus while Scholasticism had energetically forwarded the rational mind in
the Aristotelian tradition, and while the evangelical orders and Rhineland
mystics had nurtured the spiritual heart in the primitive Christian tradition,
Humanism now evoked the imaginative intelligence of the Platonic tradition,
all of these developments directed in their different ways toward
reestablishing man’s relation to the divine. Humanism gave man new
dignity, nature new meaning, and Christianity new dimensions—and yet less
absoluteness. Indeed, man, nature, and the classical heritage were all
divinized in the Humanist perception, which provoked a radical expansion
of human vision and activity far beyond the medieval horizon, threatening
the old order in ways the Humanists did not fully anticipate.
For with the rediscovery of such a sophisticated and viable yet non-
Christian spiritual tradition, the absolute uniqueness of the Christian
revelation was relativized and the Church’s spiritual authority implicitly
undermined. Moreover, the Humanists’ celebration of interiority and the
riches of the individual human imagination overstepped the dogmatic
bounds of the Church’s traditional forms of spirituality, which abjured an
unrestrained private imagination as dangerous in favor of institutionally
defined ritual, prayer, and meditation on the mysteries of Christian doctrine.
Similarly, Neoplatonism’s assertion of the immanent divinity of all nature
confronted the orthodox Judaeo-Christian tendency to uphold God’s
absolute transcendence, his utterly unique divinity which was revealed only
in special places like Mount Sinai or Golgotha in a distant biblical past. And
especially disturbing were the polytheistic implications of Neoplatonic
Humanist writings, in which references to Venus, Saturn, or Prometheus
seemed to signify something more than allegorical conveniences.
Equally uncongenial to conservative theologians was the Neoplatonic
belief in the uncreated divine spark in man, whereby divine genius could
overtake the human personality and exalt man to the summits of spiritual
233 

illumination and creative power. While this conception, as well as the
ancient polytheistic mythologies, provided a foundation and stimulus for the
emerging Renaissance artistic genius (Michelangelo, for example, was
Ficino’s student in Florence), it also undercut the Church’s traditional
limitation of divinity to God alone and to the sacramental institutions of the
Church. The elevation of man to a God-like status, as described by Ficino and
Pico, seemed to contravene the more strictly defined orthodox Christian
dichotomy between Creator and creature, and the doctrine of the Fall. Pico’s
statement in the Oratio to the effect that man could freely determine his
being at any level of the cosmos, including union with God, without any
mention of a mediating savior, could easily be interpreted as a heretical
breach of the established sacred hierarchy.
It is not surprising, then, that a papal commission condemned several of
Pico’s propositions, or that the pope forbade the international public
assembly Pico had planned. Yet the Church hierarchy in Rome largely
tolerated and even embraced the classical revival, especially as men like the
Florentine Medici made their way into papal power and began using
Church resources to underwrite the enormous artistic masterworks of the
Renaissance (establishing indulgences, for example, to help pay for them).
The Renaissance popes were sufficiently enamored of the new cultural
movement, with its classical and secular enrichments of life, that the
Church’s spiritual guardianship of the larger body of Christian souls often
seemed altogether neglected. It was the Reformation that would recognize
all the infringements on orthodox Christian dogma that the Humanist
movement was encouraging—nature as immanent divinity, pagan
sensuousness and polytheism, human deification, universal religion—and
would therefore call a halt to the Renaissance’s Hellenization of Christianity.
Yet the Protestants would simultaneously build on those same Humanists’
criticisms of the Church and demands for spiritual and institutional reform.
The new religious sensibility of the Humanists revitalized the spiritual life of
Western culture just as it was decaying under the secularization of the
Church and the extreme rationalism of the late medieval universities. Yet by
emphasizing Hellenic and trans-Christian religious values, it was also to
provoke a purist Judaeo-Christian reaction against this pagan intrusion into
the traditional sacrosanct religion based solely on biblical revelation.
234 

The scientific ramifications of the Platonic revival were no less significant
than the religious. The Humanists’ anti-Aristotelianism strengthened the
culture’s movement toward intellectual independence from the increasingly
dogmatic authority of the Aristotelian tradition dominating the universities.
More particularly, the influx of the Pythagorean theory of mathematics, in
which quantitative measurement of the world could reveal a numinous
order emanating from the supreme intelligence, would directly inspire
Copernicus and his successors through Galileo and Newton in their efforts
to penetrate nature’s mysteries. Neoplatonist mathematics, added to the
rationalism and nascent empiricism of the late Scholastics, provided one of
the final components necessary for the emergence of the Scientific
Revolution. It was Copernicus’s and Kepler’s tenacious Neoplatonic faith
that the visible universe conformed to and was illuminated by simple,
precise, and elegant mathematical forms that impelled them to overthrow
the complex and increasingly unworkable geocentric system of Ptolemaic
astronomy.
The development of the Copernican hypothesis was also influenced by the
Neoplatonists’ sacralization of the Sun, as celebrated by Ficino in particular.
The intellectual force that Copernicus and especially Kepler brought to bear
on transforming the Earth-centered universe received an important impetus
from their Neoplatonic apprehension of the Sun as reflecting the central
Godhead, with the other planets and the Earth revolving around it (or as
Kepler put it, moving in adoration around it). Plato’s Republic had declared
that the Sun played the same role in the visible realm as did the supreme
Idea of the Good in the transcendent realm. Given the boundless gifts of
light, life, and warmth that emanated from the Sun, the most brilliant and
creative entity in the heavens, no other body seemed equally appropriate for
the role of center of the universe. Moreover, in contrast to the finite
Aristotelian universe, the infinite nature of the Neoplatonic supreme
Godhead, and its infinite fecundity in creation, suggested a corresponding
expansion of the universe that further mediated the break from the
traditional architectural structure of the medieval cosmos. Accordingly,
Nicholas of Cusa, the erudite Church cardinal and Neoplatonic philosopher-
mathematician of the mid-fifteenth century, proposed a moving Earth as
part of a centerless (or omnicentered) infinite Neoplatonic universe.
235 

And so the Humanists’ Platonic revival extended momentously into the
creation of the modern era, not only through its inspiration of the
Renaissance proper—with the latter’s artistic achievements, philosophical
syncretism, and cult of human genius—but also through its direct and
indirect consequences for the Reformation and Scientific Revolution. With
the recovery of the direct sources of the Platonic line, the medieval
trajectory was in a sense complete. Something like the ancient Greek
balance and tension between Aristotle and Plato, between reason and
imagination, immanence and transcendence, nature and spirit, .external
world and interior psyche, was again emerging in Western culture—a
polarity further complicated and intensified by Christianity itself with its
own internal dialectic. From this unstable but fertile balance would issue
forth the next age.
236 

At the Threshold
In the course of the long medieval era, a potent maturation had occurred
within the Christian matrix on every front—philosophical, psychological,
religious, scientific, political, artistic. By the later high Middle Ages, this
development was beginning to challenge the limits of that matrix.
Extraordinary social and economic growth had provided an ample basis for
such cultural dynamism, which was further provoked by the consolidation
of political authority by the secular monarchies in competition with that of
the Church. Out of the feudal order had grown towns, guilds, leagues, states,
international commerce, a new merchant class, a mobile peasantry, new
contractual and legal structures, parliaments, corporate liberties, and early
forms of constitutional and representative government. Important
technological advances were made and disseminated. Scholarship and
learning progressed, both in and out of the universities. Human experience
in the West was reaching new levels of sophistication, complexity, and
expansiveness.
The character of this evolution was visible on a philosophical level in
Aquinas’s affirmation of the human being’s essential dynamic autonomy, of
the natural world’s ontological significance, and of the value of empirical
knowledge, all as intrinsic elements in the unfolding of the divine mystery.
More generally, it was evidenced in the Scholastics’ long and polemical
development of naturalism and rationalism, and in their encyclopedic
summae integrating Greek philosophy and science into the Christian
framework. It was visible in the unparalleled architectural achievement of
the Gothic cathedrals and in Dante’s great Christian epic. It was conspicuous
in the early experimental science advanced by Bacon and Grosseteste, in
237 

Ockham’s assertion of nominalism and the bifurcation of reason and faith,
and in Buridan’s and Oresme’s critical advances in Aristotelian science. It
could be seen in the rise of lay mysticism and private religiosity, in the new
realism and romanticism in society and the arts, in the secularization of the
sacred found in the celebration of redemptive amor by the troubadors and
poets. It could be measured by the emergence of sensibilities as complex,
subtle, and aesthetically refined as that of Petrarch, and especially in his
articulation of a highly individualized temperament at once religious and
secular in orientation. It was evident in the Humanists’ revival of classical
letters, their recovery of the Platonic tradition, and their establishment in
Europe of an autonomous secular education for the first time since the fall
of the Roman Empire. And perhaps most tellingly, that evolution was visible
in the new Promethean image of man proclaimed by Pico and Ficino. A new
and growing independence of spirit was everywhere apparent, expressed in
often divergent but always expanding directions. Slowly, painfully, but
wondrously and with ineluctable force, the Western mind was opening to a
new universe.
The medieval gestation of European culture had approached a critical
threshold, beyond which it would no longer be containable by the old
structures. Indeed, the thousand-year maturation of the West was about to
assert itself in a series of enormous cultural convulsions that would give
birth to the modern world.
238 

T
V
The Modern World View
he modern world view was the outcome of an extraordinary convergence
of events, ideas, and figures which, for all their conflicting variety,
engendered a profoundly compelling vision of the universe and of the
human being’s place in it—a vision radically novel in character and
paradoxical in its consequences. Those same factors also reflected, and
wrought, a fundamental change in the Western character. To understand
the historical emergence of the modern mind, we shall now examine the
complexly intermingled cultural epochs known as the Renaissance, the
Reformation, and the Scientific Revolution.
239 

The Renaissance
The phenomenon of the Renaissance lay as much in the sheer diversity of its
expressions as in their unprecedented quality. Within the span of a single
generation, Leonardo, Michelangelo, and Raphael produced their
masterworks, Columbus discovered the New World, Luther rebelled against
the Catholic Church and began the Reformation, and Copernicus
hypothesized a heliocentric universe and commenced the Scientific
Revolution. Compared with his medieval predecessors, Renaissance man
appeared to have suddenly vaulted into virtually superhuman status. Man
was now capable of penetrating and reflecting nature’s secrets, in art as well
as science, with unparalleled mathematical sophistication, empirical
precision, and numinous aesthetic power. He had immensely expanded the
known world, discovered new continents, and rounded the globe. He could
defy traditional authorities and assert a truth based on his own judgment. He
could appreciate the riches of classical culture and yet also feel himself
breaking beyond the ancient boundaries to reveal entirely new realms.
Polyphonic music, tragedy and comedy, poetry, painting, architecture, and
sculpture all achieved new levels of complexity and beauty. Individual
genius and independence were widely in evidence. No domain of
knowledge, creativity, or exploration seemed beyond man’s reach.
With the Renaissance, human life in this world seemed to hold an
immediate inherent value, an excitement and existential significance, that
balanced or even displaced the medieval focus on an afterworldly spiritual
destiny. Man no longer appeared so inconsequential relative to God, the
Church, or nature. On many fronts, in diverse realms of human activity,
Pico’s proclamation of man’s dignity seemed fulfilled. From its beginnings
240 

with Petrarch, Boccaccio, Bruni, and Alberti, through Erasmus, More,
Machiavelli, and Montaigne, to its final expressions in Shakespeare,
Cervantes, Bacon, and Galileo, the Renaissance did not cease producing new
paragons of human achievement. Such a prodigious development of human
consciousness and culture had not been seen since the ancient Greek
miracle at the very birth of Western civilization. Western man was indeed
reborn.
Yet it would be a deep misjudgment to perceive the emergence of the
Renaissance as all light and splendor, for it arrived in the wake of a series of
unmitigated disasters and thrived in the midst of continuous upheaval.
Beginning in the mid-fourteenth century, the black plague swept through
Europe and destroyed a third of the continent’s population, fatally
undermining the balance of economic and cultural elements that had
sustained the high medieval civilization. Many believed that the wrath of
God had come upon the world. The Hundred Years’ War between England
and France was an interminably ruinous conflict, while Italy was ravaged by
repeated invasions and internecine struggles. Pirates, bandits, and
mercenaries were ubiquitous. Religious strife grew to international
proportions. Severe economic depression was nearly universal for decades.
The universities were sclerotic. New diseases entered Europe through its
ports and took their toll. Black magic and devil worship flourished, as did
group flagellation, the dance of death in cemeteries, the black mass, the
Inquisition, tortures and burnings at the stake. Ecclesiastical conspiracies
were routine, and included such events as a papally backed assassination in
front of the Florentine cathedral altar at High Mass on Easter Sunday.
Murder, rape, and pillage were often daily realities, famine and pestilence
annual perils. The Turkish hordes threatened to overwhelm Europe at any
moment. Apocalyptic expectations abounded. And the Church itself, the
West’s fundamental cultural institution, seemed to many the very center of
decadent corruption, its structure and purpose devoid of spiritual integrity.
It was against this backdrop of massive cultural decay, violence, and death
that the “rebirth” of the Renaissance took place.
As with the medieval cultural revolution several centuries earlier,
technical inventions played a pivotal role in the making of the new era. Four
in particular (all with Oriental precursors) had been brought into
241 

widespread use in the West by this time, with immense cultural
ramifications: the magnetic compass, which permitted the navigational feats
that opened the globe to European exploration; gunpowder, which
contributed to the demise of the old feudal order and the ascent of
nationalism; the mechanical clock, which brought about a decisive change
in the human relationship to time, nature, and work, separating and freeing
the structure of human activities from the dominance of nature’s rhythms;
and the printing press, which produced a tremendous increase in learning,
made available both ancient classics and modern works to an ever-
broadening public, and eroded the monopoly on learning long held by the
clergy.
All of these inventions were powerfully modernizing and ultimately
secularizing in their effects. The artillery-supported rise of separate but
internally cohesive nation-states signified not only the overthrow of the
medieval feudal structures but also the empowerment of secular forces
against the Catholic Church. With parallel effect in the realm of thought, the
printing press allowed the rapid dissemination of new and often
revolutionary ideas throughout Europe. Without it, the Reformation would
have been limited to a relatively minor theological dispute in a remote
German province, and the Scientific Revolution, with its dependence on
international communication among many scientists, would have been
altogether impossible. Moreover, the spread of the printed word and
growing literacy contributed to a new cultural ethos marked by increasingly
individual and private, noncommunal forms of communication and
experience, thereby encouraging the growth of individualism. Silent reading
and solitary reflection helped free the individual from traditional ways of
thinking, and from collective control of thinking, with individual readers
now having private access to a multiplicity of other perspectives and forms
of experience.
Similarly progressive in its consequences was the development of the
mechanical clock, which with its precisely articulated system of wheels and
gears became the paradigm of modern machines, accelerating the advance
of mechanical invention and machine building of all kinds. Equally
important, the new mechanical triumph provided a basic conceptual model
and metaphor for the new era’s emerging science—indeed, for the entire
242 

modern mind—profoundly shaping the modern view of the cosmos and
nature, of the human being, of the ideal society, even of God. Likewise, the
global explorations made possible by the magnetic compass greatly impelled
intellectual innovation, reflecting and encouraging the new scientific
investigation of the natural world and further affirming the West’s sense of
being at the heroic frontier of civilized history. By unexpectedly revealing
the errors and ignorance of the ancient geographers, the discoveries of the
explorers gave the modern intellect a new sense of its own competence and
even superiority over the previously unsurpassed masters of antiquity—
undermining, by implication, all traditional authorities. Among these
discredited geographers was Ptolemy, whose status in astronomy was
therefore affected as well. The navigational expeditions in turn required
more accurate astronomical knowledge and more proficient astronomers,
out of whose number would emerge Copernicus. Discoveries of new
continents brought new possibilities for economic and political expansion,
and hence the radical transformation of European social structures. With
those discoveries came also the encounter with new cultures, religions, and
ways of life, introducing into the European awareness a new spirit of
skeptical relativism concerning the absoluteness of its own traditional
assumptions. The West’s horizons—geographical, mental, social, economic,
political—were changing and expanding in unprecedented ways.
Concurrent with these advances was an important psychological
development in which the European character, beginning in the peculiar
political and cultural atmosphere of Renaissance Italy, underwent a unique
and portentous transformation. The Italian city-states of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries—Florence, Milan, Venice, Urbino, and others—were in
many ways the most advanced urban centers in Europe. Energetic
commercial enterprise, a prosperous Mediterranean trade, and continual
contact with the older civilizations of the East presented them with an
unusually concentrated inflow of economic and cultural wealth. In addition,
the weakening of the Roman papacy in its struggles with the incohesive
Holy Roman Empire and with the rising nation-states of the north had
produced a political condition in Italy of marked fluidity. The Italian city-
states’ small size, their independence from externally sanctioned authority,
and their commercial and cultural vitality all provided a political stage upon
243 

which a new spirit of bold, creative, and often ruthless individualism could
flourish. Whereas in earlier times, the life of the state was defined by
inherited structures of power and law imposed by tradition or higher
authority, now individual ability and deliberate political action and thought
carried the most weight. The state itself was seen as something to be
comprehended and manipulated by human will and intelligence, a political
understanding making the Italian city-states forerunners of the modern
state.
This new value placed on individualism and personal genius reinforced a
similar characteristic of the Italian Humanists, whose sense of personal
worth also rested on individual capacity, and whose ideal was similarly that
of the emancipated man of many-sided genius. The medieval Christian ideal
in which personal identity was largely absorbed in the collective Christian
body of souls faded in favor of the more pagan heroic mode—the individual
man as adventurer, genius, and rebel. Realization of the protean self was best
achieved not through saintly withdrawal from the world but through a life
of strenuous action in the service of the city-state, in scholarly and artistic
activity, in commercial enterprise and social intercourse. Old dichotomies
were now comprehended in a larger unity: activity in the world as well as
contemplation of eternal truths; devotion to state, family, and self as well as
to God and Church; physical pleasure as well as spiritual happiness;
prosperity as well as virtue. Forsaking the ideal of monastic poverty,
Renaissance man embraced the enrichments of life afforded by personal
wealth, and Humanist scholars and artists flourished in the new cultural
climate subsidized by the Italian commercial and aristocratic elites.
The combined influences of political dynamism, economic wealth, broad
scholarship, sensuous art, and a special intimacy with ancient and eastern
Mediterranean cultures all encouraged a new and expansively secular spirit
in the Italian ruling class, extending into the inner sanctum of the Vatican.
In the eyes of the pious a certain paganism and amorality was becoming
pervasive in Italian life. Such was visible not only in the calculated
barbarities and intrigues of the political arena, but also in the unabashed
worldliness of Renaissance man’s interests in nature, knowledge, beauty, and
luxury for their own sakes. It was thus from its origins in the dynamic
culture of Renaissance Italy that there developed a distinctive new Western
244 

personality. Marked by individualism, secularity, strength of will, multiplicity
of interest and impulse, creative innovation, and a willingness to defy
traditional limitations on human activity, this spirit soon began to spread
across Europe, providing the lineaments of the modern character.
Yet for all the secularism of the age, in a quite tangible sense the Roman
Catholic Church itself attained a pinnacle of glory in the Renaissance. Saint
Peter’s Basilica, the Sistine Chapel, the Stanza della Segnatura in the Vatican
all stand as astonishing monuments to the Church’s final moments as
undisputed sovereign of Western culture. Here the full grandeur of the
Catholic Church’s self-conception was articulated, encompassing Genesis
and the biblical drama (the Sistine ceiling), classical Greek philosophy and
science (the School of Athens), poetry and the creative arts (the Parnassus),
all culminating in the theology and supreme pantheon of Roman Catholic
Christianity (La Disputa del Sacramento, The Triumph of the Church). The
procession of the centuries, the history of the Western soul, was here given
immortal embodiment. Under the guidance of the inspired albeit thoroughly
unpriestlike Pope Julius II, protean artists like Raphael, Bramante, and
Michelangelo painted, sculpted, designed, and constructed works of art of
unsurpassed beauty and power to celebrate the majestic Catholic vision.
Thus the Mother Church, mediatrix between God and man, matrix of
Western culture, now assembled and integrated all her diverse elements:
Judaism and Hellenism, Scholasticism and Humanism, Platonism and
Aristotelianism, pagan myth and biblical revelation. With Renaissance artistic
imagery as its language, a new pictorial Summa was written, integrating the
dialectical components of Western culture in a transcendent synthesis. It
was as if the Church, subconsciously aware of the wrenching fate about to
befall it, called forth from itself its most exalted cultural self-understanding
and found artists of seemingly divine stature to incarnate that image.
Yet this efflorescence of the Catholic Church in the midst of an era that
was so decidedly embracing the secular and the present world was the kind
of paradox that was altogether characteristic of the Renaissance. For the
unique position in cultural history held by the Renaissance as a whole
derives not least from its simultaneous balance and synthesis of many
opposites: Christian and pagan, modern and classical, secular and sacred, art
and science, science and religion, poetry and politics. The Renaissance was
245 

both an age to itself and a transition. At once medieval and modern, it was
still highly religious (Ficino, Michelangelo, Erasmus, More, Savonarola,
Luther, Loyola, Teresa of Avila, John of the Cross), yet undeniably worldly
(Machiavelli, Cellini, Castiglione, Montaigne, Bacon, the Medici and Borgias,
most of the Renaissance popes). At the same time that the scientific
sensibility arose and flourished, religious passions surged as well, and often
in inextricable combination.
The Renaissance integration of contraries had been foreshadowed in the
Petrarchian ideal of docta pietas, and was now fulfilled in religious scholars
like Erasmus and his friend Thomas More. With the Christian Humanists of
the Renaissance, irony and restraint, worldly activity and classical erudition
served the Christian cause in ways the medieval era had not witnessed. A
literate and ecumenical evangelism here seemed to replace the dogmatic
pieties of a more primitive age. A critical religious intellectuality sought to
supersede naive religious superstition. The philosopher Plato and the apostle
Paul were brought together and synthesized to produce a new philosophia
Christi.
But perhaps it was the art of the Renaissance that best expressed the era’s
contraries and unity. In the early Quattrocento, only one in twenty paintings
could be found with a nonreligious subject. A century later, there were five
times as many. Even inside the Vatican, paintings of nudes and pagan deities
now faced those of the Madonna and Christ Child. The human body was
celebrated in its beauty, formal harmony, and proportion, yet often in the
service of religious subjects or as a revelation of God’s creative wisdom.
Renaissance art was devoted to the exact imitation of nature, and was
technically capable of an unprecedented naturalistic realism, yet was also
singularly effective in rendering a sublime numinosity, depicting spiritual
and mythic beings and even contemporary human figures with a certain,
ineffable grace and formal perfection. Conversely, that capacity for
rendering the numinous would have been impossible without the technical
innovations—geometrical mathematization of space, linear perspective,
aerial perspective, anatomical knowledge, chiaroscuro, sfumato—that
developed from the striving for perceptual realism and empirical accuracy.
In turn, these achievements in painting and drawing propelled later
scientific advances in anatomy and medicine, and foreshadowed the
246 

Scientific Revolution’s global mathematization of the physical world. It was
not peripheral to the emergence of the modern outlook that Renaissance art
depicted a world of rationally related solids in a unified space seen from a
single objective viewpoint.
The Renaissance thrived on a determined “decompartmentalization,”
maintaining no strict divisions between different realms of human
knowledge or experience. Leonardo was the prime exemplar—as committed
to the search for knowledge as for beauty, artist of many mediums who was
continuously and voraciously involved in scientific research of wide range.
Leonardo’s development and exploitation of the empirical eye for grasping
the external world with fuller awareness and new precision were as much
in the service of scientific insight as of artistic representation, with both
goals jointly pursued in his “science of painting.” His art revealed an
uncanny spiritual expressiveness that accompanied, and was nurtured by,
extreme technical accuracy of depiction. It was uniquely characteristic of
the Renaissance that it produced the man who not only painted the Last
Supper and The Virgin of the Rocks, but also articulated in his notebooks the
three fundamental principles— empiricism, mathematics, and mechanics—
that would dominate modern scientific thinking.
So too did Copernicus and Kepler, with Neoplatonic and Pythagorean
motivations, seek solutions to problems in astronomy that would satisfy
aesthetic imperatives, a strategy which led them to the heliocentric universe.
No less significant was the strong religious motivation, usually combined
with Platonic themes, impelling most of the major figures in the Scientific
Revolution through Newton. For implicit in all these activities was the half-
inarticulate notion of a distant mythical golden age when all things had been
known—the Garden of Eden, ancient classical times, a past era of great
sages. Mankind’s fall from this primal state of enlightenment and grace had
brought about a drastic loss of knowledge. Recovery of knowledge was
therefore endowed with religious significance. And so once again, just as in
classical Athens the religion, art, and myth of the ancient Greeks met and
interacted with the new and equally Greek spirit of rationalism and science,
this paradoxical conjunction and balance was attained in the Renaissance.
Although the Renaissance was in many senses a direct outgrowth of the
rich and burgeoning culture of the high Middle Ages, by all accounts,
247 

between the mid-fifteenth and early seventeenth centuries, an unmistakable
quantum leap was made in the cultural evolution of the West. The various
contributing factors can be recognized in retrospect and listed—the
rediscovery of antiquity, the commercial vitality, the city-state personality,
the technical inventions, and so forth. But when all these “causes” of the
Renaissance have been enumerated, one still senses that the essential thrust
of the Renaissance was something larger than any of these factors, than all of
them combined. Instead, the historical record suggests there was
concurrently on many fronts an emphatic emergence of a new
consciousness—expansive, rebellious, energetic and creative, individualistic,
ambitious and often unscrupulous, curious, self-confident, committed to this
life and this world, open-eyed and skeptical, inspired and inspirited—and
that this emergence had its own raison d’etre, was propelled by some
greater and more subsuming force than any combination of political, social,
technological, religious, philosophical, or artistic factors. It was not
accidental to the character of the Renaissance (nor, perhaps, unrelated to its
new sense of artistic perspective) that, while medieval scholars saw history
divided into two periods, before and after Christ, with their own time only
vaguely separated from the Roman era of Christ’s birth, Renaissance
historians achieved a decisively new perspective on the past: history was
perceived and defined for the first time as a tripartite structure—ancient,
medieval, modern—thus sharply differentiating the classical and medieval
eras, with the Renaissance itself at the vanguard of the new age.
The events and figures converged on the Renaissance stage with amazing
rapidity, even simultaneity. Columbus and Leonardo were both born in the
same half decade (1450–55) that brought the development of the
Gutenberg press, the fall of Constantinople with the resulting influx of
Greek scholars to Italy, and the end of the Hundred Years’ War through
which France and England each forged its national consciousness. The same
two decades (1468–88) that saw the Florentine Academy’s Neoplatonic
revival at its height during the reign of Lorenzo the Magnificent also saw
the births of Copernicus, Luther, Castiglione, Raphael, Dürer, Michelangelo,
Giorgione, Machiavelli, Cesare Borgia, Zwingli, Pizarro, Magellan, and More.
In the same period, Aragon and Castille were joined by the marriage of
Ferdinand and Isabella to form the nation of Spain, the Tudors succeeded to
248 

the throne in England, Leonardo began his artistic career with his painting
of the angel in Verrocchio’s Baptism of Christ, then his own Adoration of the
Magi, Botticelli painted Primavera and The Birth of Venus, Ficino wrote the
Theologia Platonica and published the first complete translation of Plato in
the West, Erasmus received his early Humanist education in Holland, and
Pico della Mirandola composed the manifesto of Renaissance Humanism, the
Oration on the Dignity of Man. More than “causes” were operative here. A
spontaneous and irreducible revolution of consciousness was taking place,
affecting virtually every aspect of Western culture. Amidst high drama and
painful convulsions, modern man was born in the Renaissance, “trailing
clouds of glory.”
249 

The Reformation
It was when the spirit of Renaissance individualism reached the realm of
theology and religious conviction within the Church, in the person of the
German Augustinian monk Martin Luther, that there erupted in Europe the
momentous Protestant Reformation. The Renaissance had accommodated
both classical culture and Christianity in one expansive if unsystematic
vision. But the continued moral deterioration of the papacy in the south
now encountered a new surge of rigorous religiosity in the north. The
relaxed cultural syncretism displayed by the Renaissance Church’s embrace
of Greco-Roman pagan culture (including the immense expense of
patronage this embrace demanded) helped precipitate the collapse of the
Church’s absolute religious authority. Armed with the thunderous moral
power of an Old Testament prophet, Luther defiantly confronted the Roman
Catholic papacy’s patent neglect of the original Christian faith revealed in
the Bible. Sparked by Luther’s rebellion, an insuperable cultural reaction
swept through the sixteenth century, decisively reasserting the Christian
religion while simultaneously shattering the unity of Western Christendom.
The proximate cause of the Reformation was the papacy’s attempt to
finance the architectural and artistic glories of the High Renaissance by the
theologically dubious means of selling spiritual indulgences. Tetzel, the
traveling friar whose sale of indulgences in Germany provoked Luther in
1517 to post his Ninety-five Theses, had been so authorized by the Medici
Pope Leo X to raise money for building Saint Peter’s Basilica. An indulgence
was the remission of punishment for a sin after guilt had been sacramentally
forgiven—a Church practice influenced by the pre-Christian Germanic
custom of commuting the physical penalty for a crime to a money payment.
250 

To grant such an indulgence, the Church drew from the treasury of merits
accumulated by the good works of the saints, and in return the recipient
made a contribution to the Church. A voluntary and popular arrangement,
the practice allowed the Church to raise money for financing crusades and
building cathedrals and hospitals. At first applied only to penalties imposed
by the Church in this life, by Luther’s time indulgences were being granted
to remit penalties imposed by God in the afterlife, including immediate
release from purgatory. With indulgences effecting even the remission of
sins, the sacrament of penance itself was seemingly compromised.
But beyond the matter of indulgences lay more fundamental sources of
the Protestant revolution—the long-developing political secularism of the
Church hierarchy, undermining its spiritual integrity while embroiling it in
diplomatic and military struggles; the prevalence of both deep piety and
poverty among the Church faithful, in contrast to an often irreligious but
socially and economically privileged clergy; the rise of monarchical power,
nationalism, and local Germanic insurgency against the universal ambitions
of the Roman papacy and the Habsburgs’ Holy Roman Empire. Yet the more
immediate cause, the Church’s expensive patronage of high culture, does
illuminate a deeper factor behind the Reformation—namely, the anti-
Hellenic spirit with which Luther sought to purify Christianity and return it
to its pristine biblical foundation. For the Reformation was not least a purist
“Judaic” reaction against the Hellenic (and Roman) impulse of Renaissance
culture, of Scholastic philosophy, and of much postapostolic Christianity in
general. Yet perhaps the most fundamental element in the genesis of the
Reformation was the emerging spirit of rebellious, self-determining
individualism, and particularly the growing impulse for intellectual and
spiritual independence, which had now developed to that crucial point
where a potently critical stand could be sustained against the West’s highest
cultural authority, the Roman Catholic Church.
Luther desperately sought for a gracious God’s redemption in the face of
so much evidence to the contrary, evidence both of God’s damning
judgment and of Luther’s own sinfulness. He failed to find that grace in
himself or in his own works, nor did he find it in the Church—not in its
sacraments, not in its ecclesiastical hierarchy, and assuredly not in its papal
indulgences. It was, finally, the faith in God’s redeeming power as revealed
251 

through Christ in the Bible, and that alone, which rendered Luther’s
experience of salvation, and upon that exclusive rock he built his new
church of a reformed Christianity. Erasmus, by contrast, the devoutly critical
Humanist, wished to save the Church’s unity and mission by reforming it
from within. But the Church hierarchy, absorbed in other matters, remained
intransigently insensitive to such needs, while Luther, with equal
intransigence, declared the necessity of complete schism and independence
from an institution he now viewed as the seat of the Antichrist.
Pope Leo X considered Luther’s revolt merely another “monk’s quarrel,”
and long delayed any response adequate to the problem. When, almost three
years after the Ninety-five Theses were posted, Luther finally received the
papal bull to submit, he publicly burned it. At the ensuing meeting of the
imperial Diet, the Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor Charles V declared
himself certain that a single friar could not be right in denying the validity of
all Christianity during the previous thousand years. Wishing to preserve the
unity of the Christian religion, yet faced with Luther’s obstinate refusal to
recant, he placed an imperial ban on Luther as a heretic. But empowered by
the rebellious German princes and knights, Luther’s personal theological
insurgency rapidly expanded to an international upheaval. In retrospect, the
post-Constantinian welding of the Christian religion to the ancient Roman
state had proved to be a two-edged sword, contributing both to the
Church’s cultural ascendance and to its eventual decline. The overarching
cultural union maintained in Europe for a thousand years by the Catholic
Church was now irrevocably split asunder.
But it was Luther’s personal religious dilemma that was the sine qua non
of the Reformation. In his acute sense of alienation and terror before the
Omnipotent, Luther saw it was the whole man who was corrupt and needed
God’s forgiveness, not just particular sins that one by one could be erased by
proper Church-defined actions. The particular sins were but symptoms of a
more fundamental sickness in man’s soul that required healing. One could
not purchase redemption, step by step, through good works or through the
legalisms of penance or other sacraments, not to mention the infamous
indulgences. Only Christ could save the whole man, and only man’s faith in
Christ could justify man before God. Only thus could the terrible
righteousness of an angry God, who justly damns sinners to eternal
252 

perdition, be transformed into the merciful righteousness of a forgiving God,
who freely rewards the faithful with eternal bliss. As Luther exultantly
discovered in Paul’s Letter to the Romans, man did not earn salvation; rather,
God gave it freely to those who have faith. The source of that saving faith
was Holy Scripture, where God’s mercy revealed itself in Christ’s crucifixion
for mankind. There alone could the Christian believer find the means to his
salvation. The Catholic Church—with its cynical marketplace practice of
claiming to be dispensing God’s grace, distributing the merits of the saints,
forgiving men’s sins, and releasing them from debts owed in the afterlife, in
return for money garnered for its own often irreligious purposes,
meanwhile claiming papal infallibility—could only be an impostor. The
Church could no longer be reverenced as the sacred medium of Christian
truth.
All the accretions brought into Christianity by the Roman Church that
were not found in the New Testament were now solemnly questioned,
criticized, and often expelled altogether by the, Protestants: the centuries’
accumulation of sacraments, rituals, and art, the complex organizational
structures, the priestly hierarchy and its spiritual authority, the natural and
rational theology of the Scholastics, the belief in purgatory, papal infallibility,
clerical celibacy, the eucharistic transubstantiation, the saints’ treasury of
merits, the popular worship of the Virgin Mary, and finally the Mother
Church herself. All these had become antithetical to the individual
Christian’s primary need for faith in Christ’s redemptive grace: Justification
occurred by faith alone. The Christian believer had to be liberated from the
obscuring clutches of the old system, for only by being directly responsible
to God could he be free to experience God’s grace. The only source of
theological authority now lay in the literal meaning of Scripture. The
complicated doctrinal developments and moral pronouncements of the
institutional Church were irrelevant. After centuries of possessing relatively
indisputable spiritual authority, the Roman Catholic Church, with all its
accoutrements, was suddenly no longer considered mandatory for
humanity’s religious well-being.
In defense of the Church and its continued unity, Catholic theologians
argued that the Church’s sacramental institutions were both valuable and
necessary, and that its doctrinal tradition, which interpreted and elaborated
253 

the original revelation, held genuine spiritual authority. Moral and practical
reforms in the present Church certainly needed to be made, but its inherent
sanctity and validity were still sound. Without Church tradition, they held,
God’s Word would be less potent in the world and less understood by the
Christian faithful. Through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit invested in the
institutes of the Church, the latter could draw out and affirm elements of
Christian truth not fully explicit in the biblical text. For indeed, the Church
in its earliest apostolic stages had preceded the New Testament, produced it,
and later canonized it as God’s inspired Word.
But the reformers countered that the Church had replaced faith in the
person of Christ with faith in the doctrine of the Church. It had thereby
vitiated the potency of the original Christian revelation and placed the
Church opaquely in the middle of man’s relation to God. Only direct contact
with the Bible could bring the human soul direct contact with Christ.
In the Protestant vision, true Christianity was founded on “faith alone,”
“grace alone,” and “Scripture alone.” While the Catholic Church agreed that
those indeed were the fundaments of the Christian religion, it maintained
that the institutional Church, with its sacraments, priestly hierarchy, and
doctrinal tradition, was intrinsically and dynamically related to that
foundation—faith in God’s grace as revealed in Scripture—and served the
propagation of that faith. Erasmus also argued against Luther that man’s free
will and virtuous actions were not to be entirely discounted as elements in
the process of salvation. Catholicism held that divine grace and human merit
were both instrumental in redemption and did not have to be viewed in
opposition, with exclusively one or the other operative. Most important, the
Church argued, institutional tradition and the Scripture-based faith were
not in opposition. On the contrary, Catholicism provided the living vessel
for the Word’s emergence in the world.
But for the reformers, the Church’s actual practice too much belied its
ideal, its hierarchy was too manifestly corrupt, its doctrinal tradition too
remote from the original revelation. To reform such a degenerate structure
from within would be both practically futile and theologically erroneous.
Luther argued persuasively for God’s exclusive role in salvation, man’s
spiritual helplessness, the moral bankruptcy of the institutional Church, and
the exclusive authority of Scripture. The Protestant spirit prevailed in half of
254 

Europe, and the old order was broken. Western Christianity was no longer
exclusively Catholic, nor monolithic, nor a source of cultural unity.
The peculiar paradox of the Reformation was its essentially ambiguous
character, for it was at once a conservative religious reaction and a radically
libertarian revolution. The Protestantism forged by Luther, Zwingli, and
Calvin proclaimed an emphatic revival of a Bible-based Judaic Christianity—
unequivocally monotheistic, affirming the God of Abraham and Moses as
supreme, omnipotent, transcendent, and “Other,” with man as fallen,
helpless, predestined for damnation or salvation, and, in the case of the
latter, fully dependent on God’s grace for his redemption. Whereas Aquinas
had posited every creature’s participation in God’s infinite and free essence,
and asserted the positive, God-given autonomy of human nature, the
reformers perceived the absolute sovereignty of God over his creation in a
more dichotomous light, with man’s innate sinfulness making the
independent human will inherently ineffective and perverse. While
Protestantism was optimistic concerning God, the gratuitously merciful
preserver of the elect, it was uncompromisingly pessimistic concerning man,
that “teeming horde of infamies” (Calvin). Human freedom was so bound to
evil that it consisted merely in the ability to choose among different degrees
of sin. For the reformers, autonomy suggested apostasy. Man’s true freedom
and joy lay solely in obedience to God’s will, and the capacity for such
obedience arose solely from God’s merciful gift of faith. Nothing man did on
his own could bring him closer to salvation. Nor could his illumination be
achieved through the rational ascents of a Scholastic theology contaminated
by Greek philosophy. Only God could provide genuine illumination, and
only Scripture revealed the authentic truth. Against the Renaissance’s
dalliance with a more flexible Hellenized Christianity, with pagan
Neoplatonism and its universal religion and human deification, Luther, and
more systematically Calvin, reinstituted the more strictly defined, morally
rigorous, and ontologically dualistic Augustinian Judaeo-Christian view.
Moreover, this reassertion of “pure” traditional Christianity was given
further impetus throughout European culture by the Catholic Counter-
Reformation when, beginning in the mid-sixteenth century with the Council
255 

of Trent, the Catholic Church finally awakened to the crisis and vigorously
reformed itself from within. The Roman papacy again became religiously
motivated, often austerely so, and the Church restated the basics of Christian
belief (while maintaining the Church’s essential structure and sacramental
authority) in just as militantly dogmatic terms as the Protestants it opposed.
Thus on both sides of the European divide, in the Catholic south and the
Protestant north, orthodox Christianity was energetically reestablished in a
conservative religious backlash against the Renaissance’s pagan Hellenism,
naturalism, and secularism.
Yet for all the Reformation’s conservative character, its rebellion against
the Church was an unprecedentedly revolutionary act in Western culture—
not only as a successful social and political insurgency against the Roman
papacy and ecclesiastical hierarchy, with the reformers supported by the
secular rulers of Germany and other northern countries, but first and
foremost as an assertion of the individual conscience against the established
Church framework of belief, ritual, and organizational structure. For the
fundamental question of the Reformation concerned the locus of religious
authority. In the Protestant vision, neither the pope nor the Church councils
possessed the spiritual competence to define Christian belief. Luther taught
instead the “priesthood of all believers”: religious authority rested finally and
solely in each individual Christian, reading and interpreting the Bible
according to his own private conscience in the context of his personal
relationship to God. The presence of the Holy Spirit, in all its liberating,
directly inspirational, noninstitutional freedom, was to be affirmed in every
Christian against the quenching constrictions of the Roman Church. The
individual believer’s interior response to Christ’s grace, not the elaborate
ecclesiastical machinery of the Vatican, constituted the true Christian
experience.
For it was the very unflinchingness of Luther’s individual confrontation
with God that had revealed both God’s omnipotence and his mercy. The two
contraries characteristic of Protestantism, independent human self and all-
powerful Deity, were inextricably interconnected. Hence the Reformation
marked the standing forth of the individual in two senses— alone outside
the Church, and alone directly before God. Luther’s impassioned words
before the imperial Diet declared a new manifesto of personal religious
256 

freedom:
Unless I am convinced by Scripture and plain reason—I do not accept
the authority of popes and councils, for they have contradicted each
other—my conscience is captive to the Word of God. I cannot and I will
not recant anything, for to go against conscience is neither right nor
safe. God help me. Amen.
The Reformation was a new and decisive assertion of rebellious
individualism—of personal conscience, of “Christian liberty,” of critical
private judgment against the monolithic authority of the institutional
Church—and as such further propelled the Renaissance’s movement out of
the medieval Church and medieval character. Although the conservative
Judaic quality of the Reformation was a reaction against the Renaissance in
the latter’s Hellenic and pagan aspects, on another level, the Reformation’s
revolutionary declaration of personal autonomy served as a continuation of
the Renaissance impulse—and was thus an intrinsic, if partially antithetical,
element of the overall Renaissance phenomenon. An era that saw both
Renaissance and Reformation was revolutionary indeed, and it was perhaps
on account of this Promethean Zeitgeist that the force of Luther’s rebellion
rapidly amplified far past what he had anticipated or even desired. For in the
end, the Reformation was but one particularly salient expression of a much
larger cultural transformation taking place in the Western mind and spirit.
Here we encounter the other extraordinary paradox of the Reformation.
For while its essential character was so intensely and unambiguously
religious, its ultimate effects on Western culture were profoundly
secularizing, and in multiple, mutually reinforcing ways. By overthrowing
the theological authority of the Catholic Church, the internationally
recognized supreme court of religious dogma, the Reformation opened the
way in the West for religious pluralism, then religious skepticism, and finally
a complete breakdown in the until then relatively homogeneous Christian
world view. Although various Protestant authorities would attempt to
reinstitute their particular form of Christian belief as the supreme and
exclusively correct dogmatic truth, the first premise of Luther’s reform—the
257 

priesthood of all believers and the authority of the individual conscience in
the interpretation of Scripture—necessarily ‘undercut the enduring success
of any efforts to enforce new orthodoxies. Once the Mother Church had
been left behind, no new claims to infallible insight could long be regarded
as legitimate. The immediate consequence of the liberation from the old
matrix was a manifest liberation of fervent Christian religiosity, permeating
the lives of the new Protestant congregations with fresh spiritual meaning
and charismatic power. Yet as time passed, the average Protestant, no longer
enclosed by the Catholic womb of grand ceremony, historical tradition, and
sacramental authority, was left somewhat less protected against the vagaries
of private doubt and secular thinking. From Luther on, each believer’s belief
was increasingly self-supported; and the Western intellect’s critical faculties
were becoming ever more acute.
Moreover, Luther had been educated in the nominalist tradition, leaving
him distrustful of the earlier Scholastics’ attempt to bridge reason and faith
with rational theology. There was for Luther no “natural revelation,” given
by the natural human reason in its cognition and analysis of the natural
world. Like Ockham, Luther saw the natural human reason as so far from
comprehending God’s will and gratuitous salvation that the rationalist
attempts to do so by Scholastic theology appeared absurdly presumptuous.
No genuine coherence between the secular mind and Christian truth was
possible, for Christ’s sacrifice on the cross was foolishness to the wisdom of
the world. Scripture alone could provide man with the certain and saving
knowledge of God’s ways. These assertions held significant and
unanticipated consequences for the modern mind and its apprehension of
the natural world.
The Reformation’s restoring of a predominantly biblical theology against a
Scholastic theology helped to purge the modern mind of Hellenic notions in
which nature was permeated with divine rationality and final causes.
Protestantism thus provided a revolution of theological context that
solidified the movement begun by Ockham away from the outlook of
classical Scholasticism, thereby supporting the development of a new
science of nature. The increased distinction made by the reformers between
Creator and creature—between God’s inscrutable will and man’s finite
intelligence, and between God’s transcendence and the world’s contingency
258 

—allowed the modern mind to approach the world with a new sense of
nature’s purely mundane character, with its own ordering principles that
might not directly correspond to man’s logical assumptions about God’s
divine government. The reformers’ limiting of the human mind to a this-
worldly knowledge was precisely the prerequisite for the opening up of that
knowledge. God had graciously and freely created the world, fully distinct
from his own infinite divinity. Hence that world could now be apprehended
and analyzed not according to its assumed sacramental participation in static
divine patternings, in the manner of Neoplatonic and Scholastic thought, but
rather according to its own distinct dynamic material processes, devoid of
direct reference to God and his transcendent reality.
By disenchanting the world of immanent divinity, completing the process
initiated by Christianity’s destruction of pagan animism, the Reformation
better allowed for its radical revision by modern science. The way was then
clear for an increasingly naturalistic view of the cosmos, moving first to the
remote rationalist Creator of Deism, and finally to secular agnosticism’s
elimination of any supernatural reality. Even the Reformation’s renewal of
the biblical subjection of nature to man’s dominion as found in Genesis
contributed to this process, encouraging man’s sense of being the knowing
subject against the object of nature, and of being divinely authorized to
exercise his sovereignty over the natural—hence nonspiritual—world. As
God’s magnitude and distinctness relative to his creation was affirmed, so too
was man’s magnitude and distinctness relative to the rest of nature.
Subduing nature for man’s benefit could be seen as a religious duty,
eventually taking on a secular momentum of its own as man’s sense of self-
worth and autonomy, and his powers of dominion, continued to increase in
the course of the modern era.
A further and similarly ambiguous effect of the Reformation on the
modern mind involved a new attitude to truth. In the Catholic view, the
deepest truths were first divinely revealed as recorded in the Bible, and these
then became the basis for a continuing growth of truth through Church
tradition—each generation of Church theologians inspired by the Holy
Spirit, creatively acting upon that tradition and forging a more profound
Christian doctrine. Much as Aquinas’s active intellect took sense impressions
and from them formed intelligible concepts, so did the Church’s active
259 

intellect take the basic tradition and from it render more penetrating
formulations of spiritual truth. But from the Protestant perspective, the
truth lay finally and objectively in the revealed Word of God, and fidelity to
that unalterable truth alone could render theological certainty. In this view,
the Roman Catholic tradition was a long and ever-worsening exercise in
subjective distortion of that primal truth. Catholic “objectivity” was nothing
other than the establishment of doctrines conforming to the subjective
demands of the Catholic mind, not to the external sacrosanct truth of the
Word. And the Catholic mind had become especially distorted by its
theological integration of Greek philosophy, a system of thought intrinsically
alien to biblical truth.
Protestantism’s reclamation of the unalterable Word of God in the Bible
thus fostered in the emerging modern mind a new stress on the need to
discover unbiased objective truth, apart from the prejudices and distortions
of tradition. It thereby supported the growth of a critical scientific mentality.
To confront entrenched doctrines courageously, to subject all beliefs to fresh
criticism and direct testing, to come face-to-face with objective reality
unmediated by traditional preconceptions or vested authorities—such a
passion for disinterested truth informed the Protestant mind and thence the
modern mind generally. But in time, the Word itself would become subject
to that new critical spirit, and secularism would triumph.
Indeed, the very foundation for the reformers’ appeal to objective truth
would provoke its dialectical collapse. Luther’s stress on the literal meaning
of Scripture as the exclusive reliable basis for knowledge of God’s creation
was to present the modern mind with an impossible tension as it confronted
the distinctly unbiblical revelations soon to be established by secular science.
Two apparently contradictory—or at least incongruent—truths had to be
maintained simultaneously, one religious and one scientific. The
fundamentalist’s Bible was to hasten the long-developing schism between
faith and reason experienced by the Western mind as it attempted to
accommodate science. The Christian faith was far too deeply ingrained to be
readily sloughed off altogether, but neither could the scientific discoveries be
denied. Eventually the latter would far outweigh the former in both
intellectual and practical significance. In the process of that shift, the West’s
“faith” would itself be radically realigned and transferred to the victor. In the
260 

long term, Luther’s zealous reinstatement of a Scripture-based religiosity
was to help precipitate its secular antithesis.
The Reformation had another effect on the modern mind contrary to
Christian orthodoxy. For Luther’s appeal to the primacy of the individual’s
religious response would lead gradually but inevitably to the modern mind’s
sense of the interiority of religious reality, the final individualism of truth,
and the pervasive role in determining truth played by the personal subject.
As time passed, the Protestant doctrine of justification through the
individual’s faith in Christ seemed to place more emphasis on the
individual’s faith than on Christ—on the personal relevance of ideas, as it
were, rather than on their external validity. The self increasingly became the
measure of things, self-defining and self-legislating. Truth increasingly
became truth-as-experienced-by-the-self. Thus the road opened by Luther
would move through Pietism to Kantian critical philosophy and Romantic
philosophical idealism to, finally, the philosophical pragmatism and
existentialism of the late modern era.
The Reformation was secularizing too in its realignment of personal
loyalties. Previously, the Roman Catholic Church had maintained the
general, if sometimes controversial, allegiance of virtually all Europeans. But
the Reformation had succeeded not least because it coincided with the
potent rise of secular nationalism and German rebelliousness against the
papacy and the Holy Roman Empire, especially against the letter’s attempts
to assert a European-wide authority. With the Reformation, the universal
ambition and dream of the Catholic imperium was finally defeated. The
resulting empowerment of the various separate nations and states of Europe
now displaced the old ideal unity of Western Christendom, and the new
order was marked by intensely aggressive competition. There was now no
higher power, international and spiritual, to which all individual states were
responsive. Moreover, the individual national languages, already spurred
forward by the Renaissance literatures, were further strengthened against
Latin, the previously universal language of the educated, by the compelling
new vernacular translations of the Bible, above all Luther’s translation into
German and the King James committee’s into English. The individual secular
261 

state now became the defining unit of cultural, as well as political, authority.
The medieval Catholic matrix unifying Europe had disintegrated.
No less significant were the Reformation’s complex effects on political-
religious dynamics, both within the individual and within the state. With
secular rulers now defining the religion of their territories, the Reformation
unintentionally moved power from church to state, just as it did from priest
to layman. And because many of the principal monarchs chose to remain
Catholic, their continuing attempts to centralize and absolutize political
power caused Protestantism to be allied with resisting bodies—aristocrats,
clergy, universities, provinces, cities—that sought to maintain or increase
their separate liberties. Hence the cause of Protestantism became associated
with the cause of political freedom. The Reformation’s new sense of personal
religious self-responsibility and the priesthood of all believers also abetted
the growth of political liberalism and individual rights. At the same time, the
religious fragmentation of Europe necessarily promoted a new intellectual
and religious diversity. From all these factors ensued a succession of
increasingly secularizing political and social consequences: first the
establishment of individual state-identified churches, then the division of
church and state, religious toleration, and finally the predominance of the
secular society. Out of the exceedingly illiberal dogmatic religiosity of the
Reformation eventually emerged the pluralistic tolerant liberalism of the
modern era.
The Reformation had still other unexpected and paradoxically
secularizing effects. Despite the reformers’ Augustinian demotion of man’s
inherent spiritual power, they had also given human life in this world new
significance in the Christian scheme of things. When Luther eliminated the
traditional hierarchical division between clerical and lay, and, in blatant
defiance of Catholic law, decided to marry a former nun and father a family,
he endowed the activities and relationships of ordinary life with a religious
meaning not previously emphasized by the Catholic Church. Holy
matrimony replaced chastity as the Christian ideal. Domestic life, the raising
of children, mundane work, and the tasks of daily existence were now
upheld more explicitly as important areas within which the spirit could
grow and deepen. Now occupational work of every variety was a sacred
calling, not just monasticism as in the Middle Ages. With Calvin, a Christian’s
262 

worldly vocation was to be pursued with spiritual and moral fervor in order
to realize the Kingdom of God on earth. The world was to be regarded not as
the inevitable expression of God’s will, to be passively accepted in pious
submission, but rather as the arena in which man’s urgent religious duty
was to fulfill God’s will through questioning and changing every aspect of
life, every social and cultural institution, in order to help bring about the
Christian commonwealth.
Yet in time this religious uplifting of the secular was to take on an
autonomous, nonreligious character. Marriage, for example, freed from
Church control as a Catholic sacrament and now regulated by civil law, in
time became an essentially secular contract, more easily entered into or
dissolved, more easily subject to losing its sacramental character. On a larger
social scale, the Protestant call to take this world more seriously, to revise
society and to embrace change, served to overcome the traditional religious
antipathy both to this world and to change, and thereby gave the embryonic
modern psyche the religious sanction and internal restructuring it required
to propel the progress of modernity and liberalism in many spheres, from
politics to science. Eventually, however, this powerful impulse to make over
the world became autonomous, not only becoming independent of its
originally religious motivation, but finally turning against the religious
bulwark itself as yet another, and especially profound, form of oppression to
be overcome.
Important social consequences of the Reformation also became evident in
its complex relationship to the economic development of the northern
European nations. The Protestant affirmation of moral discipline and the
holy dignity of one’s work in the world seems to have combined with a
peculiarity in the Calvinist belief in predestination, whereby the striving
(and anxious) Christian, deprived of the Catholic’s recourse to sacramental
justification, could find signs of his being among the elect if he could
successfully and unceasingly apply himself to disciplined work and his
worldly calling. Material productivity was often the fruit of such effort,
which, compounded by the Puritan demand for ascetic renunciation of
selfish pleasure and frivolous spending, readily lent itself to the
accumulation of capital.
Whereas traditionally the pursuit of commercial success was perceived as
263 

directly threatening to the religious life, now the two were recognized as
mutually beneficial. Religious doctrine itself was at times selectively
transformed or intensified in accord with the prevailing social and economic
temper. Within a few generations, the Protestant work ethic, along with the
continued emergence of an assertive and mobile individualism, had played a
major role in encouraging the growth of an economically flourishing middle
class tied to the rise of capitalism. The latter, already developing in the
Renaissance Italian city-states, was further propelled by numerous other
factors—the accumulation of wealth from the New World, the opening up
of new markets, expanding populations, new financial strategies, new
developments in industrial organizations and technologies. In time, much of
the originally spiritual orientation of the Protestant discipline had become
focused on more secular concerns, and on the material rewards realized by
its productivity. Thus religious zeal yielded to economic vigor, which pressed
forward on its own.
The Counter-Reformation, for its part, similarly brought on unforeseen
developments in a direction opposite from that intended. The Catholic
Church’s crusade to reform itself and oppose the spread of Protestantism
took many forms, from the revival of the Inquisition to the practical reforms
and mystical writings of John of the Cross and Teresa of Avila. But the
Counter-Reformation was spearheaded above all by the Jesuits, a Roman
Catholic order that established itself as militantly loyal to the pope and
attracted a considerable number of strong-willed and intellectually
sophisticated men. Among their various activities in the secular world
designed to accomplish their Catholic mission, which ranged from heroic
missionary work overseas to assiduous censorship and Byzantine political
intrigue in the courts of Europe, the Jesuits took on the responsibility of
educating the young, especially those of the ruling class, to forge a new
Catholic elite. Jesuits soon became the most celebrated teachers on the
Continent. Their educational strategy, however, involved not only the
teaching of the Catholic faith and theology, but also the full humanistic
program from the Renaissance and classical era—Latin and Greek letters,
rhetoric, logic and metaphysics, ethics, science and mathematics, music,
264 

even the gentlemanly arts of acting and fencing—all in the service of
developing a scholarly “soldier of Christ”: a morally disciplined, liberally
educated, critically intelligent Christian man capable of outwitting the
Protestant heretics and furthering the great Western tradition of Catholic
learning.
Hundreds of educational institutions were founded by the Jesuits
throughout Europe, and were soon replicated by Protestant leaders similarly
mindful of the need to educate the faithful. The classical humanistic tradition
based on the Greek paideia was thereby broadly sustained during the
following two centuries, offering the growing educated class of Europeans a
new source of cultural unity just as the old source, Christianity, was
fragmenting. But as a consequence of such a liberal program, with its
exposure of students to many eloquently articulate viewpoints, pagan as well
as Christian, and with its disciplined inculcation of a critical rationality, there
could not but emerge in educated Europeans a decidedly nonorthodox
tendency toward intellectual pluralism, skepticism, and even revolution. It
was no accident that Galileo and Descartes, Voltaire and Diderot all received
Jesuit educations.
And here was the final and most drastic secularizing effect of the
Reformation. For with the revolt of Luther, Christianity’s medieval matrix
split into two, then into many, then seemingly commenced destroying itself
as the new divisions battled each other throughout Europe with unbridled
fury. The resulting chaos in the intellectual and cultural life of Europe was
profound. Wars of religion reflected violent disputes between ever-
multiplying religious sects over whose conception of absolute truth would
prevail. The need for a clarifying and unifying vision capable of
transcending the irresolvable religious conflicts was urgent and broadly felt.
It was amidst this state of acute metaphysical turmoil that the Scientific
Revolution began, developed, and finally triumphed in the Western mind.
265 

The Scientific Revolution
Copernicus
The Scientific Revolution was both the final expression of the Renaissance
and its definitive contribution to the modern world view. Born in Poland and
educated in Italy, Copernicus lived during the height of the Renaissance.
Though it was destined to become an unquestioned principle of existence
for the modern psyche, the central tenet of his vision was inconceivable to
most Europeans in his own lifetime. More than any other single factor, it
was the Copernican insight that provoked and symbolized the drastic,
fundamental break from the ancient and medieval universe to that of the
modern era.
Copernicus sought a new solution to the age-old problem of the planets:
how to explain the apparently erratic planetary movements by means of a
simple, clear, elegant mathematical formula. To recapitulate, the solutions
proposed by Ptolemy and all his successors, solutions based on the
geocentric Aristotelian cosmos, had required the employment of increasingly
numerous mathematical devices—deferents, major and minor epicycles,
equants, eccentrics—in the attempt to make sense of the observed positions
while maintaining the ancient rule of uniform circular motion. When a
planet’s movement did not appear to move in a perfect circle, another,
smaller circle was added, around which the planet hypothetically moved
while it continued moving around the larger circle. Further discrepancies
were solved by compounding the circles, displacing their centers, positing
yet another center from which motion remained uniform, and so on. Each
new astronomer, faced with newly revealed irregularities that contradicted
266 

the basic scheme, attempted to resolve them by adding more refinements—
another minor epicycle here, another eccentric there.
By the Renaissance, the Ptolemaic strategy had produced, in Copernicus’s
words, a “monster“—an inelegant and overburdened conception which,
despite all the complicated ad hoc corrective devices, still failed to account
for or predict observed planetary positions with reliable accuracy. The
original conceptual economy of the Ptolemaic model no longer existed.
Moreover, different Greek, Arabic, and European astronomers used different
methods and principles, different combinations of epicycles, eccentrics, and
equants, so that there now existed a confusing multiplicity of systems based
on Ptolemy. The science of astronomy, lacking any theoretical homogeneity,
was riddled with uncertainty. Further, the accumulation of many centuries
of observations since Ptolemy’s time had revealed more and worse
divergences from the Ptolemaic predictions, so that it seemed to Copernicus
increasingly unlikely that any new modification of that system would be
tenable. The continued maintenance of the ancient assumptions was making
it impossible for astronomers to compute accurately the actual movements
of heavenly bodies. Copernicus concluded that classical astronomy must
contain, or even be based upon, some essential error.
Renaissance Europe urgently needed a better calendar, and the Church,
for which the calendar was indispensable in administrative and liturgical
matters, undertook its reform. Such reform depended on astronomical
precision. Copernicus, asked to advise the papacy on the problem,
responded that the existing confused state of astronomical science precluded
any immediate effective reform. Copernicus’s technical proficiency as an
astronomer and mathematician enabled him to recognize the inadequacies
of the existing cosmology. Yet this alone would not have forced him to
devise a new system. Another, equally competent astronomer might well
have perceived the problem of the planets as intrinsically insoluble, too
complex and refractory for any mathematical system to comprehend. It
would seem to be above all Copernicus’s participation in the intellectual
atmosphere of Renaissance Neoplatonism—and specifically his embrace of
the Pythagorean conviction that nature was ultimately comprehensible in
simple and harmonious mathematical terms of a transcendent, eternal
quality—that pressed and guided him toward innovation. The divine
267 

Creator, whose works were everywhere good and orderly, could not have
been slipshod with the heavens themselves.
Provoked by such considerations, Copernicus painstakingly reviewed all
the ancient scientific literature he could acquire, much of which had
recently become available in the Humanist revival and the transfer of Greek
manuscripts from Constantinople to the West. He found that several Greek
philosophers, notably of Pythagorean and Platonist background, had
proposed a moving Earth, although none had developed the hypothesis to its
full astronomical and mathematical conclusions. Hence Aristotle’s geocentric
conception had not been the only judgment of the revered Greek
authorities. Armed with this sense of kinship with an ancient tradition,
inspired by the Neoplatonists’ exalted conception of the Sun, and further
supported by the university Scholastics’ critical appraisals of Aristotelian
physics, Copernicus hypothesized a Sun-centered universe with a planetary
Earth and mathematically worked out the implications.
Despite the innovation’s apparent absurdity, its application resulted in a
system Copernicus believed to be qualitatively better than Ptolemy’s. The
heliocentric model readily explained the apparent daily movement of the
heavens and annual motion of the Sun as due to the Earth’s daily rotation on
its axis and its annual revolution around the central Sun. The appearance of
the moving Sun and stars could now be recognized as deceptively created by
the Earth’s own movements. The great celestial motions were then nothing
but a projection of the Earth’s motion in the opposite direction. To the
traditional objection that a moving Earth would be disruptive to itself and
objects on it, Copernicus countered that the geocentric theory necessitated
an even swifter movement by the immensely greater heavens, which would
constitute a patently worse disruption.
Many particular problems that had long haunted the Ptolemaic tradition
seemed more elegantly solved by a heliocentric system. The apparent
backward and forward movements of the planets relative to the fixed stars,
and their varying degrees of brightness, to explain which astronomers had
employed innumerable mathematical contrivances, could now be
understood more simply as the result of viewing those planets from a
moving Earth—which would produce the retrograde appearances without
the hypothetical use of major epicycles. A moving Earth would automatically
268 

make regular planetary orbits around the Sun appear to the terrestrial
observer as irregular movements around the Earth. Nor were equants any
longer necessary, a Ptolemaic device that Copernicus found especially
objectionable on aesthetic grounds because it violated the rule of uniform
circular motion. Copernicus’s new ordering of the planets outward from the
Sun—Mercury, Venus, Earth and Moon, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn—
replaced the traditional Earth-centered order, and provided a simple and
coherent solution to the previously ill-resolved problem of why Mercury
and Venus always appeared close to the Sun. The explanation for these
problems and others like them strongly suggested to Copernicus the
superiority of the heliocentric theory over the Ptolemaic system. The
appearances were saved (albeit still approximately), and with greater
conceptual elegance. Despite the obvious commonsense evidence to the
contrary, not to mention almost two millennia of scientific tradition,
Copernicus was convinced the Earth truly moved.
Having set down a first version of his thesis in a short manuscript, the
Commentariolus, Copernicus circulated it among his friends as early as
1514. Two decades later, a lecture on the principles of his new system was
given in Rome before the pope, who approved. Subsequently, a formal
request to publish was made. Yet throughout most of his life, Copernicus
held back from full publication of his extraordinary idea. (Later, in his
preface to the De Revolutionibus, dedicated to the pope, Copernicus
confessed his reluctance to reveal publicly his insight into nature’s mysteries
lest it be scorned by the uninitiated—invoking the Pythagorean practice of
strict secrecy in such matters.) But his friends and particularly his closest
student, Rheticus, prevailed upon him, and finally Rheticus was allowed to
take the completed manuscript from Poland to Germany to be printed. On
the last day of his life, in the year 1543, a copy of the published work was
brought to Copernicus.
But on that day, and even during the following several decades, there was
little indication in Europe that an unprecedented revolution in the Western
world view had been initiated. For most who heard of it, the new conception
was so contradictory to everyday experience, so patently false, as not to
require serious discussion. But as a few proficient astronomers began to find
Copernicus’s argument persuasive, the opposition began to mount; and it
269 

was the religious implications of the new cosmology that quickly provoked
the most intense attacks.
The Religious Reaction
In the beginning, that opposition did not come from the Catholic Church.
Copernicus was a canon in good standing at a Catholic cathedral and an
esteemed consultant to the Church in Rome. His friends urging publication
included a bishop and a cardinal. After his death, Catholic universities did
not avoid using the De Revolutionibus in astronomy classes. Moreover, the
new Gregorian calendar instituted by the Church was based on calculations
according to Copernicus’s system. Nor was this apparent flexibility
altogether unusual, for throughout most of the high Middle Ages and
Renaissance, Roman Catholicism had allowed considerable latitude in
intellectual speculation. Indeed, such latitude was a major source of
Protestant criticism of the Church. By tolerating and even encouraging the
exploration of Greek philosophy, science, and secular thinking, including
the Hellenistic metaphorical interpretation of Scripture, the Church had, in
Protestant eyes, allowed pristine Christianity and the literal truth of the Bible
to be contaminated.
It was antagonism from the Protestant reformers that arose first and most
forcefully, and understandably so: the Copernican hypothesis contradicted
several passages in Holy Scripture concerning the fixity of the Earth, and
Scripture was Protestantism’s one absolute authority. To have biblical
revelation questioned by human science was just the kind of Hellenizing
intellectual arrogance and interpretive sophistry the reformers most
abhorred in Catholic culture. Protestants were therefore quick to recognize
the threat of Copernican astronomy and condemn the impiety. Even before
the publication of the De Revolutionibus, Luther called Copernicus an
“upstart astrologer” who foolishly wished to reverse the entire science of
astronomy while flagrantly contradicting the Holy Bible. Luther was soon
joined by other reformers like Melanchthon and Calvin, some of whom
recommended that stringent measures be taken to suppress the pernicious
heresy. Quoting a passage from the Psalms, “the world also is established,
270 

that it cannot be moved,” Calvin asked: “Who will dare to place the authority
of Copernicus above that of the Holy Spirit?” When Rheticus took
Copernicus’s manuscript to Nürnberg to be published, he was forced by
reformers’ opposition to go elsewhere. Even in Leipzig, where he left the
book with the Protestant Oslander to publish, the latter inserted an
anonymous preface without Copernicus’s knowledge, asserting that the
heliocentric theory was merely a convenient computational method and
should not be taken seriously as a realistic account of the heavens.
The ploy may have saved the publication, but Copernicus had indeed been
serious, as a close reading of the text revealed. And by Galileo’s time in the
early seventeenth century, the Catholic Church—now with a renewed sense
of the need for doctrinal orthodoxy—felt compelled to take a definite stand
against the Copernican hypothesis. While in an earlier century, Aquinas or
the ancient Church fathers might have readily considered a metaphorical
interpretation of the scriptural passages in question, thereby eliminating the
apparent contradiction with science, the emphatic literalism of Luther and
his followers had activated a similar attitude in the Catholic Church. Both
sides of the dispute now wished to secure an uncompromised solidity with
respect to the biblical revelation.
Moreover, guilt by association had recently hurt the reputation of
Copernicanism in the case of the mystical Neoplatonist philosopher and
astronomer Giordano Bruno. Bruno had widely promulgated an advanced
version of the heliocentric theory as part of his esoteric philosophy, but had
later been tried and executed by the Inquisition for heretical theological
views. His stated beliefs that the Bible should be followed for its moral
teachings rather than its astronomy, and that all religions and philosophies
should coexist in tolerance and mutual understanding, had received little
enthusiasm from the Inquisition. In the heated atmosphere of the Counter-
Reformation, such liberal views were unwelcome at best, and in the case of
Bruno, whose character was as refractory as his ideas were unorthodox,
they were scandalous. Certainly the fact that the same man who held
heretical views on the Trinity and other vital theological matters had also
taught the Copernican theory did not augur well for the latter. After Bruno
was burned at the stake in 1600 (though not for his heliocentric teachings),
Copernicanism seemed a more dangerous theory—both to religious
271 

authorities and to philosopher-astronomers, each for their different reasons.
Yet not only did the new theory conflict with parts of the Bible, it was
now apparent that Copernicanism posed a fundamental threat to the entire
Christian framework of cosmology, theology, and morality. Ever since the
Scholastics and Dante had embraced Greek science and endowed it with
religious meaning, the Christian world view had become inextricably
embedded in an Aristotelian-Ptolemaic geocentric universe. The essential
dichotomy between the celestial and terrestrial realms, the great
cosmological structure of Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, the circling planetary
spheres with angelic hosts, God’s empyrean throne above all, the moral
drama of human life pivotally centered between spiritual heavens and
corporeal Earth—all would be cast into question or destroyed altogether by
the new theory. Even discounting the elaborate medieval superstructure, the
most basic principles of the Christian religion were now being impugned by
the astronomical innovation. If the Earth truly moved, then no longer could
it be the fixed center of God’s Creation and his plan of salvation. Nor could
man be the central focus of the cosmos. The absolute uniqueness and
significance of Christ’s intervention into human history seemed to require a
corresponding uniqueness and significance for the Earth. The meaning of
the Redemption itself, the central event not just of human history but of
universal history, seemed at stake. To be a Copernican seemed tantamount to
atheism. In the eyes of the papal advisors, Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the
Two Chief World Systems, already being applauded throughout Europe,
threatened to have worse effects on Christian minds “than Luther and Calvin
put together.”
With religion and science in such apparent contradiction—and an upstart
science at that, a mere novel theory—there was little question for Church
authorities as to which system would prevail. Awakened to the dire
theological implications of Copernican astronomy, and further traumatized
into dogmatic rigidity by decades of Reformation conflict and heresy, the
Catholic Church mustered its considerable powers of suppression and
condemned in no uncertain terms the heliocentric hypothesis: the De
Revolutionibus and Dialogue placed on the Index of forbidden books; Galileo
interrogated by the Inquisition, forced to recant and placed under house
arrest; major Catholic Copernicans dismissed from their posts and banished;
272 

all teachings and writings upholding the motion of the Earth prohibited.
With the Copernican theory, Catholicism’s long-held tension between
reason and faith had finally snapped.
Kepler
But by the time of Galileo’s recantation, the scientific triumph of
Copernicanism was already in sight, and the attempts to suppress it by the
institutional religions, both Catholic and Protestant, would soon turn against
them. Nevertheless, in the early years of the heliocentric theory that
triumph did not seem assured. The notion of a moving Earth was generally
ridiculed, if noticed at all, by Copernicus’s contemporaries and throughout
the rest of the sixteenth century. Moreover, the De Revolutionibus was
obscure enough (perhaps intentionally) and so demanding of technical
mathematical proficiency that only a few astronomers could understand it,
and even fewer could accept its central hypothesis. But neither could they
overlook its technical sophistication, and its author was soon referred to as
“a second Ptolemy.” During the following decades, increasing numbers of
astronomers and astrologers found Copernicus’s diagrams and computations
useful, even indispensable. New astronomical tables based on more recent
observations were published employing his methods, and as these tables
were measurably superior to the old ones, the reputation of Copernican
astronomy was further enhanced. Yet major theoretical problems still
remained.
For Copernicus was a revolutionary who had maintained many traditional
assumptions that worked against the immediate success of his hypothesis. In
particular, he had continued to believe in the Ptolemaic dictum that the
planets must move with uniform circular motion, which forced his system
finally to have as much mathematical complexity as Ptolemy’s. For his theory
to match the observations, Copernicus still required minor epicycles and
eccentrics. He still retained the concentric crystalline spheres moving the
planets and stars, as well as other essential physical and mathematical
components of the old Ptolemaic system. And he had not adequately
answered obvious physical objections to a moving Earth, such as why
273 

terrestrial objects would not simply fall off the Earth as it swept through
space.
Despite the radical quality of the Copernican hypothesis, a planetary Earth
was the only major innovation in the De Revolutionibus, a work that was
otherwise solidly within the ancient and medieval astronomical tradition.
Copernicus had caused the first break from the old cosmology, and thereby
created all the problems that had to be solved by Kepler, Galileo, Descartes,
and Newton before they could offer a comprehensive scientific theory
capable of integrating a planetary Earth. As Copernicus had left it—a
moving Earth in a cosmos otherwise ruled by Aristotelian and Ptolemaic
assumptions—there were too many internal contradictions. And because of
its adherence to uniform circular motion, Copernicus’s system was finally no
simpler or even more accurate than Ptolemy’s. Yet despite the remaining
problems, the new theory possessed a certain harmonious symmetry and
coherence that appealed to a few subsequent astronomers—most
significantly, Kepler and Galileo. It was above all not utilitarian scientific
accuracy but aesthetic superiority that would attract those crucial
supporters to the Copernican cause. Without the intellectual bias created by
a Neoplatonically defined aesthetic judgment, the Scientific Revolution
might well not have occurred, certainly not in the form it took historically.
For Kepler, with his passionate belief in the transcendent power of
numbers and geometrical forms, his vision of the Sun as the central image of
the Godhead, and his devotion to the celestial “harmony of the spheres,” was
yet more impelled by Neoplatonic motivations than Copernicus. Writing to
Galileo, Kepler invoked “Plato and Pythagoras, our true preceptors.” He
believed that Copernicus had intuited something greater than the
heliocentric theory was presently capable of expressing, and that, if freed
from the Ptolemaic assumptions still resident in the De Revolutionibus, the
Copernican hypothesis would open up scientific understanding to a new,
spectacularly ordered and harmonious cosmos that would directly reflect
God’s glory. Kepler was also the inheritor of a vast body of unprecedentedly
accurate astronomical observations collected by Tycho de Brahe, his
predecessor as imperial mathematician and astrologer to the Holy Roman
Emperor.1 Armed both with these data and with his unwavering faith in the
Copernican theory, he set out to discover the simple mathematical laws that
274 

would solve the problem of the planets.
For almost ten years, Kepler laboriously attempted to fit against Brahe’s
observations every possible hypothetical system of circles he could devise,
focusing particularly on the planet Mars. After many failures, he was forced
to conclude that some geometrical figure other than the circle must be the
true form of planetary orbits. Having mastered the ancient theory of conic
sections developed by Euclid and Apollonius, Kepler at last discovered that
the observations precisely matched orbits shaped as ellipses, with the Sun as
one of the two foci, and with each planet moving at speeds varying
proportionately according to its distance from the Sun—fastest near the Sun,
slowest away from the Sun, with equal areas swept out in equal times. The
Platonic dictum for uniformity of motion had always been interpreted in
terms of measurement along the arc of the circular orbit—equal distance on
the arc in equal intervals of time. This interpretation had ultimately failed,
despite the ingenuity of astronomers for two thousand years. Kepler,
however, discovered a new and subtler form of uniformity which did fit the
data: If a line were drawn from the Sun to the planet on its elliptical orbit,
that line would sweep out equal areas of the ellipse in equal intervals of
time. Subsequently, he conceived and corroborated a third law, which
demonstrated that the different planetary orbits were exactly related to each
other by mathematical proportions—the ratio of the squares of the orbital
periods being equal to the ratio of the cubes of their average distance from
the Sun.
Thus Kepler at last solved the ancient problem of the planets and fulfilled
Plato’s extraordinary prediction of single, uniform, mathematically ordered
orbits—and in so doing vindicated the Copernican hypothesis. With
elliptical orbits replacing the Ptolemaic circles, and with the law of equal
areas replacing that of equal arcs, he was able to dispense with all the
complex corrective devices, epicycles, eccentrics, equants, and so forth. Even
more significantly, his one simple geometrical figure and his one simple
mathematical speed equation produced results that precisely matched
observations of the most rigorous quality—something none of the previous
Ptolemaic solutions, despite all their ad hoc devices, had ever accomplished.
Kepler had taken centuries of diverse and largely inexplicable observations
of the heavens and condensed them into a few concise, overarching
275 

principles which gave convincing evidence that the universe was arranged
in accordance with elegant mathematical harmonies. Empirical data and
abstract mathematical reasoning at last meshed perfectly. And of particular
importance for Kepler, the most advanced scientific conclusions affirmed
both Copernicus’s theory and the mathematical mysticism of the ancient
Pythagorean and Platonic philosophers.
Moreover, for the first time a mathematical solution to the problem of the
planets led directly to a physical account of the heavens in terms of a
physically plausible motion. For Kepler’s ellipses were continuous
straightforward motions of a single shape. By contrast, the complicated
Ptolemaic system of indefinitely compounded circles possessed no empirical
correlate in everyday experience. Because of this, mathematical solutions in
the Ptolemaic tradition had often been considered as merely instumentalist
constructions with no ultimate claim to describing a physical reality.
Copernicus had nevertheless argued for the physical reality of his
mathematical constructions. In the first book of the De Revolutionibus, he
alluded to the ancient conception of astronomy as “the consummation of
mathematics.” Yet in the end, even Copernicus offered an implausibly
complicated system of minor epicycles and eccentrics to account for the
appearances.
With Kepler, however, Copernicus’s intuition and imperfect mathematical
argument were brought to fruition. For the first time in planetary
astronomy, the appearances were “genuinely” saved, not just instrumentally.
Indeed, Kepler both saved the phenomena in the traditional sense and
“saved” mathematical astronomy itself by demonstrating mathematics’
genuine physical relevance to the heavens—its capacity to disclose the
actual nature of the physical motions. Mathematics was now established not
just as an instrument for astronomical prediction, but as an intrinsic element
of astronomical reality. Kepler thus considered that the Pythagorean claim
for mathematics as the key to cosmic understanding had been triumphantly
validated, thereby revealing the previously hidden grandeur of God’s
creation.
Galileo
276 

With Kepler’s breakthrough, the Copernican revolution would in time have
almost certainly succeeded in the scientific world through sheer
mathematical and predictive superiority. But coincidentally, in 1609, the
same year that Kepler published in Prague his laws of planetary motion,
Galileo in Padua turned his recently constructed telescope to the heavens,
and through his startling observations made available to astronomy the first
qualitatively new evidence it had known since the ancients. And each of his
observations—the craters and mountains on the surface of the Moon, the
moving spots on the Sun, the four moons revolving around Jupiter, the
phases of Venus, the “unbelievably” numerous individual stars of the Milky
Way—was interpreted by Galileo as powerful evidence in favor of the
Copernican heliocentric theory.
If the Moon’s surface was uneven, like the Earth’s, and if the Sun had
spots that came and went, then these bodies were not the perfect,
incorruptible, and immutable celestial objects of Aristotelian-Ptolemaic
cosmology. Similarly, if Jupiter was a moving body and yet could also have
four moons revolving around it while its entire system revolved in a greater
orbit, then the Earth could also do the same with its own moon—thus
refuting the traditional argument that the Earth could not move around the
Sun, or else the Moon would have long ago spun off its orbit. And again, if
phases of Venus were visible, then Venus must be revolving around the Sun.
And if the Milky Way, which to the naked eye was just a nebulous glow,
now proved to be composed of a multitude of new stars, then the
Copernican suggestion of a much larger universe (to explain the lack of
visible annual stellar parallax despite the Earth’s movement around the Sun)
seemed considerably more plausible. And if the planets now appeared
through the telescope to have substantial bodies with extended surfaces and
were not just points of light, and yet many more stars were visible without
any apparent extension, then this also argued in favor of an incomparably
larger universe than that assumed by the traditional cosmology. After several
months of such discoveries and conclusions, Galileo quickly wrote his
Sidereus Nuncius (The Messenger of the Stars), making public his first
observations. The book created a sensation in European intellectual circles.
With Galileo’s telescope, the heliocentric theory could no longer be
considered merely a computational convenience. It now had visible physical
277 

substantiation. Moreover, the telescope revealed the heavens in their gross
materiality—not transcendent points of celestial light, but concrete
substances appropriate for empirical investigation, just like natural
phenomena on the Earth. The time-honored academic practice of arguing
and observing exclusively from within the boundaries of Aristotelian
thought began giving way to a fresh examination of empirical phenomena
with a critical eye. Many individuals not previously involved in scientific
studies now took up the telescope and saw for themselves the nature of the
new Copernican universe. Astronomy, by virtue of the telescope and
Galileo’s compelling writings, became of vital interest to more than
specialists. Successive generations of late Renaissance and post-Renaissance
Europeans, increasingly willing to doubt the absolute authority of traditional
doctrines both ancient and ecclesiastical, were finding the Copernican
theory not only plausible but liberating. A new celestial world was opening
up to the Western mind, just as a new terrestrial world was being opened by
the global explorers. Although the cultural consequences of Kepler’s and
Galileo’s discoveries were gradual and cumulative, the medieval universe
had effectively been dealt its death blow. The Copernican revolution’s
epochal triumph in Western thought had begun.
It is possible the Church could have reacted to this triumph otherwise
than it did. Seldom in its history had the Christian religion attempted to
suppress so rigidly a scientific theory strictly on the basis of apparent
scriptural contradictions. As Galileo himself pointed out, the Church had
long been accustomed to sanctioning allegorical interpretations of the Bible
whenever the latter appeared to conflict with scientific evidence. He quoted
the early Church fathers to that effect, and added that it would be “a terrible
detriment for the souls if people found themselves convinced by proof of
something that it was made then a sin to believe.” Moreover, many
ecclesiastical authorities recognized Galileo’s genius, including several Jesuit
astronomers in the Vatican. Indeed, the pope himself was a friend of Galileo
and accepted with enthusiasm the dedication of his book, Assayer, which
had outlined the new scientific method. Even Cardinal Bellarmine, the
Church’s chief theologian, who finally made the decision to declare
Copernicanism “false and erroneous,” had earlier written:
278 

If there were a real proof that the Sun is in the center of the universe,
that the Earth is in the third heaven, and that the Sun does not go
round the Earth but the Earth round the Sun, then we should have to
proceed with great circumspection in explaining passages of Scripture
which appear to teach the contrary, and rather admit that we did not
understand them than declare an opinion to be false which is proved to
be true.2
But a unique and potent combination of circumstances conspired
otherwise. The Church’s pervasive awareness of the Protestant threat
compounded the challenge of any novel and potentially heretical position.
With the memory of the Bruno heresy still fresh, Catholic authorities
earnestly desired to avoid a new scandal that might further disrupt
Reformation-torn Christianity. Making the issue all the more threatening
were the new power of the printing press and the lucid persuasiveness of
Galileo’s vernacular Italian, undermining the Church’s attempts to control
the beliefs of the faithful. Also complicating the Church’s reaction were the
intricate political conflicts in Italy involving the pope. A pivotal role was
played by the Aristotelian professors in the universities, whose intense
opposition to the vociferously anti-Aristotelian and all-too-popular Galileo
served to arouse fundamentalist preachers, who in turn aroused the
Inquisition. Galileo’s own polemical and even vitriolic personality, which
alienated his opponents to the point of vengeance, was a contributing factor,
as was his insufficient sensitivity to the profound significance of the greater
cosmological revolution taking place. Bellarmine’s conviction that
mathematical hypotheses were only intellectual constructs with no ultimate
relation to physical reality; Galileo’s espousal of atomism, when the Catholic
doctrine of the eucharistic transubstantiation seemed to require an
Aristotelian physics; the pope’s sense of personal betrayal, exacerbated by his
political insecurity; the power struggles between different religious orders
within the Church; the Inquisition’s voracious appetite for punitive
repression—all these factors coalesced with fateful accord to motivate the
Church’s official decision to prohibit Copernicanism.
That decision caused irreparable harm to the Church’s intellectual and
spiritual integrity. Catholicism’s formal commitment to a stationary Earth
279 

drastically undercut its status and influence among the European
intelligentsia. The Church would retain much power and loyalty in the
succeeding centuries, but it could no longer justifiably claim to represent the
human aspiration toward full knowledge of the universe. After the
Inquisition’s ban, Galileo’s writings were smuggled to the north, where the
vanguard of the Western intellectual quest would thereafter reside.3
Whatever the relative importance of individual factors such as the
entrenched Aristotelian academic opposition or the pope’s personal motives,
the ultimate cultural meaning of the Galilean conflict was that of Church
versus science, and, by implication, religion versus science. And in Galileo’s
forced recantation lay the Church’s own defeat and science’s victory.
Institutional Christianity as a whole suffered from the Copernican victory,
which contravened both religious foundations—Protestantism’s literal Bible
and Catholicism’s sacramental authority. For the present, most European
intellectuals, including the scientific revolutionaries, would remain devoutly
Christian. But the schism between science and religion—maintained even
within the individual mind—had fully announced itself. With Luther, the
West’s intellectual independence had asserted itself within the realm of
religion. With Galileo, it took a step outside of religion altogether, established
new principles, and opened new territory.
The Forging of Newtonian Cosmology
Although Kepler’s mathematical and Galileo’s observational support assured
the success of the heliocentric theory in astronomy, the theory still lacked a
more encompassing conceptual scheme, a coherent cosmology within
which it could fit. Ptolemy had been satisfactorily replaced, but not Aristotle.
That the Earth and the other planets moved in elliptical orbits around the
Sun seemed clear, but if there were no circling aetheric spheres, then how
did the planets, including the Earth, move at all? And what now kept them
from flying out of their orbits? If the Earth was moving, thereby destroying
the basis of Aristotelian physics, then why did terrestrial objects always fall
toward its surface? If the stars were so numerous and distant, then how
large was the universe? What was its structure, and where was its center, if
280 

any? What happened to the long-recognized celestial-terrestrial division if
the Earth was planetary like other heavenly bodies, and if the heavenly
bodies now appeared to have Earth-like qualities? And where was God in
this cosmos? Until these weighty questions were answered, the Copernican
revolution had shattered the old cosmology, but it had not yet forged a new
one.
Both Kepler and Galileo had provided vital insights and tools with which
to approach these problems. Both had believed and then demonstrated that
the universe was organized mathematically, and that scientific progress was
achieved by rigorously comparing mathematical hypotheses with empirical
observations. And Copernicus’s work had already made the most fertile
suggestion for the new cosmology; by making the Earth a planet to explain
the Sun’s apparent motion, he implied that the heavens and the Earth should
not and could not be considered absolutely distinct. But Kepler went further,
and directly applied notions of terrestrial force to celestial phenomena.
The Ptolemaic (and Copernican) circular orbits had always been
considered “natural motions” in the Aristotelian sense: by their elemental
nature, the aetheric spheres moved in perfect circles, just as the heavy
elements of earth and water moved downward and the light elements of air
and fire moved upward. Kepler’s ellipses, however, were not circular and
constant, but involved the planets in changes of speed and direction at each
point in their orbits. Elliptical motion in a heliocentric universe required a
new explanation beyond that of natural motion.
Kepler suggested as an alternative the concept of a constantly imposed
force. Influenced as always by the Neoplatonic exaltation of the Sun, he
believed the Sun to be an active source of movement in the universe. He
therefore postulated an anima motrix, a moving force akin to astrological
“influences,” which emanated from the Sun and moved the planets—most
powerfully close to the Sun, less so when distant. But Kepler still had to
explain why the orbits curved in ellipses. Having absorbed William Gilbert’s
recently published work on magnetism, with its thesis that the Earth itself
was a giant magnet, Kepler extended this principle to all celestial bodies and
hypothesized that the Sun’s anima motrix combined with its own magnetism
and that of the planets to create the elliptical orbits. Kepler thereby made the
first proposal that the planets in their orbits were moved by mechanical
281 

forces, rather than by the automatic geometrical motion of the Aristotelian-
Ptolemaic spheres. Despite its relatively primitive form, Kepler’s concept of
the solar system as a self-governing machine based on notions of terrestrial
dynamics correctly anticipated the emerging cosmology.
In the meantime, Galileo had pursued this mechanical-mathematical
mode of analysis on the terrestrial plane with systematic rigor and
extraordinary success. Like his fellow Renaissance scientists Kepler and
Copernicus, Galileo had imbibed from the Neoplatonic Humanists the belief
that the physical world could be understood in geometrical and arithmetic
terms. With Pythagorean conviction he declared that “the Book of Nature is
written in mathematical characters.” But with his more down-to-earth
sensibility, Galileo developed mathematics less as a mystical key to the
heavens than as a straightforward tool for the understanding of matter in
motion and for the defeat of his Aristotelian academic opponents. Although
Kepler’s understanding of celestial motion was more advanced than that of
Galileo (who, like Copernicus, still believed in self-sustaining circular
motion), it was Galileo’s insights into terrestrial dynamics that, when applied
by his successors to the heavens, would begin to solve the physical problems
created by Copernicus’s innovation.
Aristotle’s physics, based on perceptible qualities and verbal logic, still
ruled most contemporary scientific thinking and dominated the universities.
But Galileo’s revered model was Archimedes the mathematical physicist
(whose writings had been recently rediscovered by the Humanists), rather
than Aristotle the descriptive biologist. To combat the Aristotelians, Galileo
developed both a new procedure for analyzing phenomena and a new basis
for testing theories. He argued that to make accurate judgments concerning
nature, scientists should consider only precisely measurable “objective”
qualities (size, shape, number, weight, motion), while merely perceptible
qualities (color, sound, taste, touch, smell) should be ignored as subjective
and ephemeral. Only by means of an exclusively quantitative analysis could
science attain certain knowledge of the world. In addition, while Aristotle’s
empiricism had been predominantly a descriptive and, especially as
exaggerated by later Aristotelians, logico-verbal approach, Galileo now
established the quantitative experiment as the final test of hypotheses.
Finally, to further penetrate nature’s mathematical regularities and true
282 

character, Galileo employed, developed, or invented a host of technical
instruments—lens, telescope, microscope, geometric compass, magnet, air
thermometer, hydrostatic balance. The use of such instruments gave a new
dimension to empiricism unknown to the Greeks, a dimension that undercut
both the theories and the practice of the Aristotelian professors. In Galileo’s
vision, free exploration of an impersonal mathematical universe was to
replace the hidebound academic tradition’s interminable deductive
justification of Aristotle’s organismic universe.
Employing the new categories and new methodology, Galileo set out to
demolish the spurious dogma of academic physics. Aristotle had believed
that a heavier body would fall at a faster rate than a lighter one, because of
its elemental propensity to seek the center of the Earth as its natural position
—the heavier the body, the greater the propensity. Through his repeated
application of mathematical analysis to physical experiments, Galileo first
refuted this tenet and later formulated the law of uniform accelerated
motion in falling bodies—a motion that was independent of the weight or
composition of the bodies. Building on the impetus theory of Aristotle’s
Scholastic critics Buridan and Oresme, Galileo analyzed projectile motion
and developed the crucial idea of inertia. Contrary to Aristotle, who held
that all bodies sought their natural place and that nothing continued to
move otherwise without a constantly applied external push, Galileo stated
that just as a body at rest would tend to remain so unless otherwise pushed,
so too would a moving body tend to remain in constant motion unless
otherwise stopped or deflected. Force was required to explain only change
in motion, not constant motion. In this way, he met one of the Aristotelians’
chief physical arguments against a planetary Earth—that objects on a
moving Earth would be forcibly knocked about, and that a projectile thrown
directly upward from a moving Earth would necessarily land at some
distance away from its point of departure. Since neither of these phenomena
was observed, they concluded that the Earth must be stationary. Through his
concept of inertia, however, Galileo demonstrated that a moving Earth
would automatically endow all its objects and projectiles with the Earth’s
own motion, and therefore the collective inertial motion would be
imperceptible to anyone on the Earth.
In the course of his life’s work, Galileo had effectively supported the
283 

Copernican theory, initiated the full mathematization of nature, grasped the
idea of force as a mechanical agent, laid the foundations of modern
mechanics and experimental physics, and developed the working principles
of modern scientific method. But the question of how to explain physically
the celestial movements, including the motion of the Earth itself, still
remained unresolved. Because Galileo had missed the significance of the
planetary laws discovered by his contemporary Kepler, he had continued to
maintain the traditional understanding of celestial motion as circular orbits,
only now centered around the Sun. His concept of inertia—which he
understood as applicable on the Earth only to motion on horizontal surfaces
(where gravity was not a factor) and which was thus circular motion around
the Earth’s surface—was applied to the heavens accordingly: The planets
continued to move in their orbits about the Sun because their natural
inertial tendency was circular. Galileo’s circular inertia, however, could not
explain Kepler’s ellipses. And it was all the more implausible if the Earth,
which as the unique center of the universe in Aristotelian cosmology had
defined the surrounding space and given an absolute motive and reference
point for circling spheres, was now understood to be a planet. The
Copernican universe had created and was still plagued by a fundamental
enigma.
But now occurred another influx of ancient Greek philosophy: the
atomism of Leucippus and Democritus, which would both point toward a
solution to the problem of celestial motion and help shape the future course
of Western scientific development. The philosophy of atomism, as passed on
by Democritus’s successors Epicurus and Lucretius, had resurfaced during
the Renaissance as part of the Humanists’ recovery of ancient literature,
particularly through the manuscript of Lucretius’s poem De Rerum Natura
(On the Nature of Things), outlining the Epicurean system. Originally
developed as an attempt to meet the logical objections against change and
motion put forward by Parmenides, Greek atomism had posited a universe
made up of invisibly small, indivisible particles moving freely in an infinite
neutral void, and creating by their collisions and combinations all
phenomena. In this void there was no absolute up or down or universal
center, every position in space being neutral and equal to every other. Since
the entire universe was composed of the same material particles on the same
284 

principles, the Earth itself was merely another chance aggregation of
particles and was neither at rest nor at the universe’s center. There was
therefore no fundamental celestial-terrestrial division. And since both the
size of the void and the number of particles were infinite, the universe was
potentially populated by many moving earths and suns, each created by the
atoms’ random movements.
The evolving Copernican universe bore a number of striking
resemblances to this conception. Making the Earth a planet had removed
the foundation from the Aristotelian idea of an absolute (nonneutral) space
centered on the stationary Earth. A planetary Earth also required a much
larger universe to satisfy the absence of observable stellar parallax. With the
Earth no longer the universal center, the universe did not have to be finite (a
universal center requires a finite universe, since an infinite space can have
no center). The outermost sphere of stars was now unnecessary as an
explanation for the movement of the heavens, and so the stars could be
dispersed infinitely, as the Neoplatonists had also suggested. And Galileo’s
telescopic discoveries had both revealed a multitude of new stars at
apparently great distances, and further undermined the celestial-terrestrial
dichotomy. The implications of a Copernican universe—a non unique
moving Earth; a neutral, centerless, multipopulated, and perhaps infinite
space; and the elimination of the celestial-terrestrial distinction—all
coincided with those of the atomistic cosmos. With the comprehensive
structure of Aristotelian cosmology collapsing, and with no other viable
alternative to replace it, the atomists’ universe represented an already well-
developed and uniquely appropriate framework into which the new
Copernican system could be placed. The esoteric philosopher-scientist
Bruno was the first to perceive the congruence between the two systems.
Through his work, the Neoplatonic image of an infinite universe enunciated
by Nicholas of Cusa was reinforced by the atomistic conception to create an
immensely expanded Copernican cosmos.
But atomism was to provide other and no less consequential contributions
to the developing cosmology. For not only was the structure of the atomistic
cosmos congruent with the Copernican theory, but, in addition, the
atomistic conception of matter itself was singularly appropriate to the
working principles of the new natural scientists. Democritus’s atoms were
285 

characterized exclusively by quantitative factors—size, shape, motion, and
number—and not by any perceptible qualities, such as taste, smell, touch, or
sound. All apparent qualitative changes in phenomena were created by
differing quantities of atoms combined in different arrangements, and
therefore the atomistic universe was in principle open to mathematical
analysis. The material particles possessed neither purpose nor intelligence,
but moved solely according to mechanical principles. Thus the cosmological
and physical structures of ancient atomism invited the very modes of
analysis—mechanistic and mathematical—already being chosen and rapidly
developed by seventeenth-century natural scientists. Atomism influenced
Galileo in his approach to nature as matter in motion, was admired by
Francis Bacon and employed by Thomas Hobbes in his philosophy of
mechanistic materialism, and was popularized in European scientific circles
by their younger contemporary Pierre Gassendi. But it was finally René
Descartes who undertook the task of systematically adapting atomism to
provide a physical explanation for the Copernican universe.
The basic principles of ancient atomism offered many parallels to
Descartes’s image of nature as an intricate impersonal machine strictly
ordered by mathematical law. Like Democritus, Descartes assumed that the
physical world was composed of an infinite number of particles, or
“corpuscles,” which mechanically collided and aggregated. As a Christian,
however, he assumed that these corpuscles did not move in utterly random
fashion, but obeyed certain laws imposed on them by a providential God at
their creation. To discover those laws was Descartes’s challenge, and his first
step was to ask how a single corpuscle would freely move in an infinite
universe possessing neither absolute directions nor Aristotelian elemental
tendencies to motion. By employing the Scholastics’ impetus theory in the
new context of an atomistic space, he concluded that a corpuscle at rest
would tend to remain at rest unless otherwise pushed, while a corpuscle in
motion would tend to continue moving in a straight line at the same speed
unless otherwise deflected. Thus Descartes enunciated the first unequivocal
statement of the law of inertia—one that included the critical element of
inertial linearity (compared with Galileo’s more rudimentary and empirically
conceived Earth-oriented inertia with its implication of circularity).
Descartes additionally reasoned that since all motion in a corpuscular
286 

universe must in principle be mechanistic, any deviations from these inertial
tendencies must occur as a result of corpuscular collisions with other
corpuscles. The basic principles governing these collisions he set out to
establish by intuitive deduction.
With its freely moving particles in an infinite neutral space, atomism had
suggested a new way of looking at motion. Descartes’s notion of corpuscular
collision allowed his successors to develop further Galileo’s insights into the
nature of force and momentum. But of immediate significance for the
Copernican theory, Descartes applied his theories of linear inertia and
corpuscular collision to the problem of planetary motion, and thereby began
to clear away the last residue of Aristotelian physics from the heavens. For
the automatic circular motions of the celestial bodies still espoused by
Copernicus and Galileo were not possible in an atomistic world in which
particles could only move in a straight line or remain at rest. By applying his
inertial and corpuscular theories to the heavens, Descartes isolated the
crucial missing factor in the explanation of planetary motion: Unless there
was some other inhibiting force, the inertial motion of the planets, including
that of the Earth, would necessarily tend to propel them in a tangential
straight line away from the curving orbit around the Sun. Since, however,
their orbits were maintained in continuous closed curves without such
centrifugal breaks, it was evident that some factor was forcing the planets
toward the Sun—or as Descartes and his successors more revealingly
formulated it, something was continually forcing the planets to “fall” toward
the Sun. To discover what force caused that fall was the fundamental
celestial dilemma facing the new cosmology. The fact that the planets moved
at all was now explicable by inertia. But the form that motion took—the
planets’ constant maintenance of elliptical orbits about the Sun—still
demanded explanation.
Many of Descartes’s intuitively deduced hypotheses concerning his
corpuscular universe—including most of his laws of corpuscular collision
and his filling the universe with vortices of moving corpuscles (by which he
tried to explain the planets’ being pushed back into their orbits)—were not
retained by his successors. But his basic conception of the physical universe
as an atomistic system ruled by a few mechanistic laws became the guiding
model for seventeenth-century scientists grappling with the Copernican
287 

innovation. And because the riddle of planetary motion still remained the
outstanding problem for post-Copernican science in its efforts to establish a
self-consistent cosmology, Descartes’s isolation of the “fall” factor was
indispensable. With Descartes’s concept of inertia applied to Kepler’s
ellipses, and with the general principle of mechanistic explanation implicit
in both their rudimentary theories of planetary motion (Kepler’s anima
motrix and magnetism, Descartes’s corpuscular vortices), the problem had
gained a definition within which subsequent scientists—Borelli, Hooke,
Huygens—could fruitfully work. Galileo’s terrestrial dynamics had further
defined the problem by effectively contravening Aristotelian physics, and by
giving precise mathematical measurements of heavy bodies falling to the
Earth. Thus two fundamental questions remained, one celestial and one
terrestrial: Given inertia, why did the Earth and other planets continually fall
toward the Sun? And given a moving noncentral Earth, why did terrestrial
objects fall to the Earth at all?
The possibility that both questions could have the same answer had been
constantly growing with the work of Kepler, Galileo, and Descartes. The
notion of an attractive force acting between all material bodies had also been
developing. Among the Greeks, Empedocles had posited such a force.
Among the Scholastics, Oresme had reasoned that if Aristotle were mistaken
about the Earth’s unique central position, an alternative explanation for
bodies’ falling to the Earth could be that matter naturally tended to attract
other matter. Both Copernicus and Kepler had invoked such a possibility to
defend their moving Earth. By the third quarter of the seventeenth century,
Robert Hooke had clearly glimpsed the synthesis: that a single attractive
force governed both planetary motions and falling bodies. Moreover, he
mechanically demonstrated his idea with a pendulum swung in an elongated
circular path, its linear motion being continuously deflected by a central
attraction. Such a demonstration tellingly illustrated the relevance of
terrestrial mechanics for the explanation of celestial phenomena. Hooke’s
pendulum signaled the extent to which the scientific imagination had
radically transformed the heavens from being a transcendent realm with its
own special laws to being in principle no different from the mundane realm
of the Earth.
It finally fell to Isaac Newton, born on Christmas Day the year of Galileo’s
288 

death, to complete the Copernican revolution by quantitatively establishing
gravity as a universal force—a force that could simultaneously cause both
the fall of stones to the Earth and the closed orbits of the planets around the
Sun. Indeed, it was Newton’s astounding achievement to synthesize
Descartes’s mechanistic philosophy, Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, and
Galileo’s laws of terrestial motion in one comprehensive theory. In an
unprecedented series of mathematical discoveries and intuitions, Newton
established that to maintain their stable orbits at the relative speeds and
distances specified by Kepler’s third law, the planets must be pulled toward
the Sun with an attractive force that decreased inversely as the square of the
distance from the Sun, and that bodies falling toward the Earth—not only a
nearby stone but also the distant Moon—conformed to the same law.
Moreover, he mathematically derived from this inverse-square law both the
elliptical shapes of the planetary orbits and their speed variation (equal areas
in equal times) as defined by Kepler’s first and second laws. Thus all the
major cosmological problems confronting the Copernicans were at last
solved—what moved the planets, how they remained in their orbits, why
heavy objects fall toward the Earth, the basic structure of the universe, the
issue of the celestial-terrestrial dichotomy. The Copernican hypothesis had
provoked the need for, and now found, a new, comprehensive, and self-
consistent cosmology.
With an exemplary combination of empirical and deductive rigor,
Newton had formulated a very few overarching laws that appeared to
govern the entire cosmos. Through his three laws of motion (of inertia,
force, and equal reaction) and the theory of universal gravitation, he not
only established a physical basis for all of Kepler’s laws, but was also able to
derive the movements of the tides, the precession of the equinoxes, the
orbits of comets, the trajectory motion of cannonballs and other projectiles
—indeed, all the known phenomena of celestial and terrestrial mechanics
were now unified under one set of physical laws. Every particle of matter in
the universe attracted every other particle with a force proportional to the
product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them. Newton had struggled to discover the grand design
of the universe, and had patently succeeded. Descartes’s vision of nature as a
perfectly ordered machine governed by mathematical laws and
289 

comprehensible by human science was fulfilled.
Although Newton’s working concept of gravity as a force acting at a
distance—a concept transposed from his studies of the sympathies and
antipathies of Hermetic philosophy and alchemy—seemed esoteric and
insufficiently mechanical to continental mechanistic philosophers, and
puzzled even Newton, the mathematical derivations were too spectacularly
comprehensive not to be compelling. Through the concept of a
quantitatively defined attractive force, he had integrated the two major
themes of seventeenth-century science—the mechanistic philosophy and
the Pythagorean tradition. It was not long before both his method and his
conclusions were recognized as the paradigm of scientific practice. In 1686-
87, the Royal Society of London published Newton’s Principia Mathematica
Philosophiae Naturalis. During the following decades, his achievement was
celebrated as the triumph of the modern mind over ancient and medieval
ignorance. Newton had revealed the true nature of reality: Voltaire called
him the greatest man who ever lived.
The Newtonian-Cartesian cosmology was now established as the
foundation for a new world view. By the beginning of the eighteenth
century, the educated person in the West knew that God had created the
universe as a complex mechanical system, composed of material particles
moving in an infinite neutral space according to a few basic principles, such
as inertia and gravity, that could be analyzed mathematically. In this
universe, the Earth moved about the Sun, which was one star among a
multitude, just as the Earth was one planet among many, and neither Sun
nor Earth was at the center of the universe. A single set of physical laws
governed both the celestial and the terrestrial realms, which were thus no
longer fundamentally distinct. For just as the heavens were composed of
material substances, so were their motions impelled by natural mechanical
forces.
It also seemed reasonable to assume that after the creation of this intricate
and orderly universe, God removed himself from further active involvement
or intervention in nature, and allowed it to run on its own according to
these perfect, immutable laws. The new image of the Creator was thus that
of a divine architect, a master mathematician and clock maker, while the
universe was viewed as a uniformly regulated and fundamentally
290 

impersonal phenomenon. Man’s role in that universe could best be judged
on the evidence that, by virtue of his own intelligence, he had penetrated
the universe’s essential order and could now use that knowledge for his own
benefit and empowerment. One could scarcely doubt that man was the
crown of creation. The Scientific Revolution—and the birth of the modern
era—was now complete.
291 

The Philosophical Revolution
The career of philosophy during these pivotal centuries was intimately tied
to the Scientific Revolution, which it accompanied and stimulated, for which
it provided a foundation, and by which it was critically molded. Indeed,
philosophy now acquired an entirely new identity and structure as it entered
into its third great epoch in the history of the Western mind. During much
of the classical era, philosophy, though influenced by both religion and
science, had held a largely autonomous position as definer and judge of the
literate culture’s world view. With the advent of the medieval period, the
Christian religion assumed that preeminent status, while philosophy took on
a subordinate role in the joining of faith to reason. But with the coming of
the modern era, philosophy began to establish itself as a more fully
independent force in the intellectual life of the culture. More precisely,
philosophy now commenced its momentous transfer of allegiance from
religion to science.
Bacon
In the same decades of the early seventeenth century during which Galileo
in Italy was forging the new scientific practice, Francis Bacon in England
proclaimed the birth of a new era in which natural science would bring
man a material redemption to accompany his spiritual progress toward the
Christian millennium. For Bacon, the discovery of the New World by the
global explorers demanded a corresponding discovery of a new mental
world in which old patterns of thinking, traditional prejudices, subjective
292 

distortions, verbal confusions, and general intellectual blindness would be
overcome by a new method of acquiring knowledge. This method was to be
fundamentally empirical: through the careful observation of nature and the
skillful devising of many and varied experiments, pursued in the context of
organized cooperative research, the human mind could gradually elicit
those laws and generalizations that would give man the understanding of
nature necessary for its control. Such a science would bring man
immeasurable benefits and reestablish that mastery over nature he had lost
with the fall of Adam.
While Socrates had equated knowledge with virtue, Bacon equated
knowledge with power. Its practical usefulness was the very measure of its
validity. With Bacon, science took on a new role—utilitarian, utopian, the
material and human counterpart to God’s plan of spiritual salvation. Man
was created by God to interpret and hold dominion over nature. The pursuit
of natural science was therefore his religious obligation. Man’s primal fall
required that such a pursuit be painstaking and fallible, but if he would
discipline his mind and purify his vision of nature from age-old prejudices,
man would achieve his divine right. Through science, the man of the
modern era could assert his true superiority over the ancients. History was
not cyclical, as was supposed by the ancients, but progressive, for man now
stood at the dawn of a new, scientific civilization.
Skeptical of received doctrines and impatient with the syllogisms of the
Aristotelian Scholastics, which he saw as nothing more than long-respected
obstacles to useful knowledge, Bacon insisted that progress in science
required a radical reformulation of its foundations. The true basis of
knowledge was the natural world and the information it provided through
the human senses. To fill the world with assumed final causes, as did
Aristotle, or with intelligible divine essences, as did Plato, was to obscure
from man a genuine understanding of nature on its own terms, solidly based
on direct experimental contact and inductive reasoning from particulars. No
longer should the pursuer of knowledge start from abstract definitions and
verbal distinctions and then reason deductively, forcing the phenomena into
prearranged order. Instead, he must begin with the unbiased analysis of
concrete data and only then reason inductively, and cautiously, to reach
general, empirically supported conclusions.
293 

Bacon criticized Aristotle and the Scholastics for depending so heavily on
deduction for their knowledge, since the premises from which deduction
proceeded might simply be a spurious concoction of the philosopher’s mind
with no foundation in nature. From Bacon’s point of view, all pure reason
could accomplish in such circumstances would be to spin out of itself a web
of abstractions possessing no objective validity. By contrast, the true
philosopher directly approached the real world and studied it, without
falsely anticipating and prejudicing the outcome. He cleansed the mind of its
subjective distortions. The Aristotelian search for formal and final causes, the
a priori belief that nature possessed teleological purposes and archetypal
essences, were just such distortions, deceptively attractive to the emotionally
tainted intellect. They should be discarded as useless, barren of empirical
fruit. The traditional philosophers’ Forms were merely fictions, and their
words were prone to obscure rather than reveal. Preconceptions and
verbiage must be renounced in favor of direct attention to things and their
observed orderings. No “necessary” or “ultimate” truths should be so blithely
assumed. To discover nature’s true order, the mind must be purified of all its
internal obstacles, purged of its habitual tendencies to produce rational or
imaginary wish fulfillments in advance of empirical investigation. The mind
must humble itself, rein itself in. Otherwise science would be impossible.
To assume, as did the ancient and medieval philosophers, that the world
was divinely permeated and ordered in a manner directly accessible to the
human mind, leading the mind directly to God’s hidden purposes, was to bar
the mind from insight into nature’s actual forms. Only by recognizing the
distinction between God and his creation, and between God’s mind and
man’s, could man achieve real progress in science. Thus Bacon expressed
the spirit of the Reformation and of Ockham. A “natural theology,” as in
classical Scholasticism, must be relinquished as a contradiction in terms, a
falsifying miscegenation of matters of faith with matters of nature. Each
realm had its own laws and its own appropriate method. Theology pertained
to the realm of faith, but the realm of nature must be approached by a
natural science unhampered by irrelevant assumptions derived from the
religious imagination. Kept rightly separate, both theology and science could
better flourish, and man could better serve his Creator through
understanding the earthly kingdom’s true natural causes—thereby gaining
294 

power over it as God intended.
Because all the previous systems of philosophy from the Greeks onward
lacked a rigorously critical sense-based empiricism, because they relied on
rational and imaginative constructions unsupported by careful experiment,
they were like grandly entertaining theatrical productions, of no genuine
relevance to the real world they so elegantly distorted. Emotional needs and
traditional styles of thinking constantly impelled man to misperceive nature,
to anthropomorphize it, to make it out to be what he wishes rather than
what it is. The true philosopher does not attempt to narrow down the world
to fit his understanding, but strives to expand his understanding to fit the
world. Hence for Bacon, the business of philosophy was first and foremost
the fresh examination of particulars. Through the astute use of experiments,
the evidence of the senses could be progressively corrected and enhanced to
reveal the truths hidden in nature. Thus could take place at last a marriage
between the human mind and the natural universe, the fruit of which Bacon
foresaw to be a long line of great inventions to relieve the miseries of
mankind. In the future of science lay the restoration of learning and of
human greatness itself.
With Bacon was evident the modern turning of the tide in philosophy.
The nominalism and empiricism of the later Scholastics, and their growing
criticism of Aristotle and speculative theology, now found bold and
influential expression. It is true that for all his shrewdness, Bacon drastically
underestimated the power of mathematics for the development of the new
natural science, he failed to grasp the necessity of theoretical conjecture
prior to empirical observation, and he altogether missed the significance of
the new heliocentric theory. Yet his forceful advocacy of experience as the
only legitimate source of true knowledge effectively redirected the European
mind toward the empirical world, toward the methodical examination of
physical phenomena, and toward the rejection of traditional assumptions—
whether theological or metaphysical—when pursuing the advancement of
learning. Bacon was neither a systematic philosopher nor a rigorous
practicing scientist. He was, rather, a potent intermediary whose rhetorical
power and visionary ideal persuaded future generations to fulfill his
revolutionary program: the scientific conquest of nature for man’s welfare
and God’s glory.
295 

Descartes
If it was Bacon in England who helped inspire the distinctive character,
direction, and vigor of the new science, it was Descartes on the Continent
who established its philosophical foundation, and in so doing articulated the
epochal defining statement of the modern self.
In an age faced with a crumbling world view, with unexpected and
disorienting discoveries of every sort, and with the collapse of fundamental
institutions and cultural traditions, a skeptical relativism concerning the
possibility of certain knowledge was spreading among the European
intelligentsia. External authorities could no longer be naively trusted, no
matter how venerable, yet there existed no new absolute criterion of truth
to replace the old. This growing epistemological uncertainty, already
exacerbated by the plethora of competing ancient philosophies bestowed by
the Humanists to the Renaissance, received additional stimulus through yet
another influx from the Greeks—the recovery of Sextus Empiricus’s classical
defense of Skepticism. The French essayist Montaigne was especially
sensitive to the new mood, and he in turn gave modern voice to the ancient
epistemological doubts. If human belief was determined by cultural custom,
if the senses could be deceptive, if the structure of nature did not necessarily
match the processes of the mind, if reason’s relativity and fallibility
precluded knowledge of God or absolute moral standards, then nothing was
certain.
A skeptical crisis in French philosophy had emerged, a crisis that the
young Descartes, steeped in the critical rationalism of his Jesuit schooling,
experienced acutely. Pressed by the residual confusions of his education, by
the contradictions between different philosophical perspectives, and by the
lessening relevance of religious revelation for understanding the empirical
world, Descartes set out to discover an irrefutable basis for certain
knowledge.
To begin by doubting everything was the necessary first step, for he
wished to sweep away all the past presumptions now confusing human
knowledge and to isolate only those truths he himself could clearly and
directly experience as indubitable. Unlike Bacon, however, Descartes was a
considerable mathematician, and it was the rigorous methodology
296 

characteristic of geometry and arithmetic that alone seemed to promise him
the certainty he so fervently sought in philosophical matters. Mathematics
began with the statement of simple self-evident first principles, foundational
axioms from which further and more complex truths could be deduced
according to strict rational method. By applying such precise and
painstaking reasoning to all questions of philosophy, and by accepting as
true only those ideas that presented themselves to his reason as clear,
distinct, and free from internal contradiction, Descartes established his
means for the attainment of absolute certainty. Disciplined critical rationality
would overcome the untrustworthy information about the world given by
the senses or the imagination. Using such a method, Descartes would be the
new Aristotle, and found a new science that would usher man into a new
era of practical knowledge, wisdom, and well-being.
Skepticism and mathematics thus combined to produce the Cartesian
revolution in philosophy. The third term in that revolution, that which was
both the impulse behind and the outcome of systematic doubt and self-
evident reasoning, was to be the bedrock of all human knowledge: the
certainty of individual self-awareness. For in the process of methodically
doubting everything, even the apparent reality of the physical world and his
own body (which could all be only a dream), Descartes concluded that there
was one datum that could not be doubted—the fact of his own doubting. At
least the “I” who is conscious of doubting, the thinking subject, exists. At least
this much is certain: Cogito, ergo sum—I think, therefore I am. All else can
be questioned, but not the irreducible fact of the thinker’s self-awareness.
And in recognizing this one certain truth, the mind can perceive that which
characterizes certainty itself: Certain knowledge is that which can be clearly
and distinctly conceived.
The cogito was thus the first principle and paradigm of all other
knowledge, providing both a basis for subsequent deductions and a model
for all other self-evident rational intuitions. From the indubitable existence
of the doubting subject, which was ipso facto an awareness of imperfection
and limitation, Descartes deduced the necessary existence of a perfect
infinite being, God. Something cannot proceed from nothing, nor can an
effect possess a reality not derived from its cause. The thought of God was of
such magnitude and perfection that it self-evidently must have derived from
297 

a reality beyond the finite and contingent thinker; hence the certainty of an
objective omnipotent God. Only through presupposition of such a God
could the reliability of the natural light of human reason, or the objective
reality of the phenomenal world, be assured. For if God is God, which is to
say a perfect being, then he would not deceive man and the reason that
gives man self-evident truths.
Of equal consequence, the cogito also revealed an essential hierarchy and
division in the world. Rational man knows his own awareness to be certain,
and entirely distinct from the external world of material substance, which is
epistemologically less certain and perceptible only as object. Thus res
cogitans—thinking substance, subjective experience, spirit, consciousness,
that which man perceives as within—was understood as fundamentally
different and separate from res extensa— extended substance, the objective
world, matter, the physical body, plants and animals, stones and stars, the
entire physical universe, everything that man perceives as outside his mind.
Only in man did the two realities come together as mind and body. And both
the cognitive capacity of human reason and the objective reality and order
of the natural world found their common source in God.
Hence on the one side of Descartes’s dualism, soul is understood as mind,
and human awareness as distinctively that of the thinker. The senses are
prone to flux and error, the imagination prey to fantastic distortion, the
emotions irrelevant for certain rational comprehension. On the other side of
the dualism, and in contrast to the mind, all objects of the external world
lack subjective awareness, purpose, or spirit. The physical universe is
entirely devoid of human qualities. Rather, as purely material objects, all
physical phenomena can in essence be comprehended as machines—much
like the lifelike automata and ingenious machines, clocks, mills, and
fountains being constructed and enjoyed by seventeenth-century Europeans.
God created the universe and defined its mechanical laws, but after that the
system moved on its own, the supreme machine constructed by the supreme
intelligence.
The universe, therefore, was not a live organism, as Aristotle and the
Scholastics supposed, endowed with forms and motivated by teleological
purpose. If such preconceptions were set aside and man’s analytic reason
alone employed to intuit the simplest, most self-evident description of
298 

nature, then it was apparent that the universe was composed of nonvital
atomistic matter. Such a substance was best understood in mechanistic
terms, reductively analyzed into its simplest parts, and exactly
comprehended in terms of those parts’ arrangements and movements: “The
laws of Mechanics are identical with those of Nature.” For man to claim to
see immanent forms and purposes in nature was to assert a metaphysical
impiety, claiming direct access to God’s mind. Yet because the physical
world was entirely objective, and solidly and unambiguously material, it was
inherently measurable. Therefore man’s most powerful tool for
understanding the universe was mathematics, available to the natural light
of human reason.
To support his metaphysics and epistemology, Descartes used Galileo’s
distinction between primary, measurable properties of objects and
secondary, more subjective properties. In seeking to understand the
universe, the scientist should not focus on those qualities merely apparent to
sense perception, which are liable to subjective misjudgment and human
distortion, but should instead attend only to those objective qualities that can
be perceived clearly and distinctly and analyzed in quantitative terms—
extension, shape, number, duration, specific gravity, relative position. Upon
this basis, using experiment and hypothesis, science could proceed. For
Descartes, mechanics was a species of a “universal mathematics” by which
the physical universe could be fully analyzed and effectively manipulated to
serve the health and comfort of mankind. With quantitative mechanics
ruling the world, an absolute faith in human reason was justified. Here, then,
was the basis for a practical philosophy—not the speculative philosophy of
the schools, but one granting man direct understanding of the forces of
nature so they could be turned to his own purposes.
Thus human reason establishes first its own existence, out of experiential
necessity, then God’s existence, out of logical necessity, and thence the God-
guaranteed reality of the objective world and its rational order. Descartes
enthroned human reason as the supreme authority in matters of knowledge,
capable of distinguishing certain metaphysical truth and of achieving certain
scientific understanding of the material world. Infallibility, once ascribed
only to Holy Scripture or the supreme pontiff, was now transferred to
human reason itself. In effect, Descartes unintentionally began a theological
299 

Copernican revolution, for his mode of reasoning suggested that God’s
existence was established by human reason and not vice versa. Although the
self-evident certainty of God’s existence was guaranteed by God’s
benevolent veracity in creating a reliable human reason, that conclusion
could be affirmed only on the basis of the clear-and-distinct-idea criterion,
in which authority was fundamentally rooted in a judgment by the
individual human intellect. In the ultimate religious question, not divine
revelation but the natural light of human reason had the final say. Until
Descartes, revealed truth had maintained an objective authority outside of
human judgment, but now its validity began to be subject to affirmation by
human reason. The metaphysical independence that Luther had demanded
within the parameters of the Christian religion, Descartes now intimated
more universally. For whereas Luther’s foundational certainty was his faith
in God’s saving grace as revealed in the Bible, Descartes’s foundational
certainty was his faith in the procedural clarities of mathematical reasoning
applied to the indubitability of the thinking self.
Moreover, by his assertion of the essential dichotomy between thinking
substance and extended substance, Descartes helped emancipate the
material world from its long association with religious belief, freeing science
to develop its analysis of that world in terms uncontaminated by spiritual or
human qualities and unconstrained by theological dogma. Both the human
mind and the natural world now stood autonomously as never before,
separated from God and from each other.
Here, then, was the prototypical declaration of the modern self,
established as a fully separate, self-defining entity, for whom its own rational
self-awareness was absolutely primary—doubting everything except itself,
setting itself in opposition not only to traditional authorities but to the world,
as subject against object, as a thinking, observing, measuring, manipulating
being, fully distinct from an objective God and an external nature. The fruit
of the dualism between rational subject and material world was science,
including science’s capacity for rendering certain knowledge of that world
and for making man “master and possessor of nature.” In Descartes’s vision,
science, progress, reason, epistemological certainty, and human identity
were all inextricably connected with each other and with the conception of
an objective, mechanistic universe; and upon this synthesis was founded the
300 

paradigmatic character of the modern mind.
Thus Bacon and Descartes—prophets of a scientific civilization, rebels
against an ignorant past, and zealous students of nature—proclaimed the
twin epistemological bases of the modern mind. In their respective
manifestos of empiricism and rationalism, the long-growing significance of
the natural world and the human reason, initiated by the Greeks and
recovered by the Scholastics, achieved definitive modern expression. Upon
this dual foundation, philosophy proceeded and science triumphed: It was
not accidental to Newton’s accomplishment that he had systematically
employed a practical synthesis of Bacon’s inductive empiricism and
Descartes’s deductive mathematical rationalism, thereby bringing to fruition
the scientific method first forged by Galileo.
After Newton, science reigned as the authoritative definer of the universe,
and philosophy defined itself in relation to science—predominantly
supportive, occasionally critical and provocative, sometimes independent
and concerned with different areas, but ultimately not in a position to
gainsay the cosmological discoveries and conclusions of empirical science,
which now increasingly ruled the Western world view. Newton’s
achievement in effect established both the modern understanding of the
physical universe—as mechanistic, mathematically ordered, concretely
material, devoid of human or spiritual properties, and not especially
Christian in structure—and the modern understanding of man, whose
rational intelligence had comprehended the world’s natural order, and who
was thus a noble being not by virtue of being the central focus of a divine
plan as revealed in Scripture, but because by his own reason he had grasped
nature’s underlying logic and thereby achieved dominion over its forces.
The new philosophy did not just mirror the new sense of human
empowerment. Its significance as a philosophy, and the cause of its great
impact on the Western mind, lay especially in its scientific and then
technological corroboration. As never before, a way of thinking produced
spectacularly tangible results. Within such a potent framework, progress
appeared inevitable. Mankind’s happy destiny at last seemed assured, and
patently as a result of its own rational powers and concrete achievements. It
301 

was now evident that the quest for human fulfillment would be propelled by
increasingly sophisticated analysis and manipulation of the natural world,
and by systematic efforts to extend man’s intellectual and existential
independence in every realm—physical, social, political, religious, scientific,
metaphysical. Proper education of the human mind in a well-designed
environment 
would 
bring 
forth 
rational 
individuals, 
capable 
of
understanding the world and themselves, able to act in the most intelligent
fashion for the good of the whole. With the mind cleared of traditional
prejudices and superstitions, man could grasp the self-evident truth and
thus establish for himself a rational world within which all could flourish.
The dream of human freedom and fulfillment in this world could now be
realized. Mankind had at last reached an enlightened age.
302 

Foundations of the Modern World View
And so between the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries, the West saw the
emergence of a newly self-conscious and autonomous human being—
curious about the world, confident in his own judgments, skeptical of
orthodoxies, rebellious against authority, responsible for his own beliefs and
actions, enamored of the classical past but even more committed to a greater
future, proud of his humanity, conscious of his distinctness from nature,
aware of his artistic powers as individual creator, assured of his intellectual
capacity to comprehend and control nature, and altogether less dependent
on an omnipotent God. This emergence of the modern mind, rooted in the
rebellion against the medieval Church and the ancient authorities, and yet
dependent upon and developing from both these matrices, took the three
distinct and dialectically related forms of the Renaissance, the Reformation,
and the Scientific Revolution. These collectively ended the cultural
hegemony of the Catholic Church in Europe and established the more
individualistic, skeptical, and secular spirit of the modern age. Out of that
profound cultural transformation, science emerged as the West’s new faith.
For when the titanic battle of the religions failed to resolve itself, with no
monolithic structure of belief any longer holding sway over civilization,
science suddenly stood forth as mankind’s liberation—empirical, rational,
appealing to common sense and to a concrete reality that every person
could touch and weigh for himself. Verifiable facts and theories tested and
discussed among equals replaced dogmatic revelation hierarchically imposed
by an institutional Church. The search for truth was now conducted on a
basis of international cooperation, in a spirit of disciplined curiosity, with a
willingness, even eagerness, to transcend previous limits of knowledge.
303 

Offering a new possibility of epistemological certainty and objective
agreement, new powers of experimental prediction, technical invention, and
control of nature, science presented itself as the saving grace of the modern
mind. Science ennobled that mind, showing it to be capable of directly
comprehending the rational order of nature first declared by the Greeks, but
on a level far transcending the achievements of the ancients and the
medieval Scholastics. No traditional authority now dogmatically defined the
cultural outlook, nor was such authority needed, for every individual
possessed within himself the means for attaining certain knowledge—his
own reason and his observation of the empirical world.
Thus science seemed to bring the Western mind to independent maturity,
out of the encompassing structure of the medieval Church, beyond the
classical glories of the Greeks and Romans. From the Renaissance onward,
modern culture evolved and left behind the ancient and medieval world
views as primitive, superstitious, childish, unscientific, and oppressive. By
the end of the Scientific Revolution, the Western mind had acquired-a new
way of discovering knowledge and a new cosmology. Because of man’s own
intellectual and physical efforts, the world itself had expanded—immensely,
unprecedentedly. And the most astonishing global shift of all had now
dawned on the cultural psyche: the Earth moves. The straightforward
evidence of the naive senses, the theological and scientific certitude of the
naive centuries, that the Sun rises and sets and that the Earth beneath one’s
feet is utterly stationary at the center of the universe, was now overcome
through critical reasoning, mathematical calculation, and technologically
enhanced observation. Indeed, not only the Earth but man himself now
moved, as never before, out of the finite, static, hierarchical Aristotelian-
Christian universe and into new, unknown territories. The nature of reality
had fundamentally shifted for Western man, who now perceived and
inhabited a cosmos of entirely new proportions, structure, and existential
meaning.
The way was now open to envision and establish a new form of society,
based on self-evident principles of individual liberty and rationality. For the
strategies and principles that science had shown to be so useful for
discovering truth in nature were clearly relevant to the social realm as well.
Just as the antiquated Ptolemaic structure of the heavens, with its
304 

complicated, cumbersome, and finally unsustainable system of epicyclic
fabrications, had been replaced by the rational simplicity of the Newtonian
universe, so too could the antiquated structures of society—absolute
monarchical power, aristocratic privilege, clerical censorship, oppressive
and arbitrary laws, inefficient economies—be replaced by new forms of
government based not on supposed divine sanction and inherited traditional
assumptions, but on rationally ascertainable individual rights and mutually
beneficial social contracts. The application of systematic critical thought to
society could not but suggest the need for reform of that society, and as
modern reason brought to nature a scientific revolution, so would it bring to
society a political revolution. Thus did John Locke, and the French
philosophes of the Enlightenment after him, take the lessons of Newton and
extend them to the human realm.
At this point the foundation and direction of the modern mind had been
largely established. It is time, then, to summarize some of the major tenets of
the modern world view, as we did earlier with the classical Greek and
medieval Christian outlooks. Yet to do this, we must define our focus more
precisely and extend our analysis forward. For the modern world view was,
like its predecessors, not a stable entity but a continually evolving way of
experiencing existence, and, what is especially relevant to us here, the views
of Newton, Galileo, Descartes, Bacon, and the rest were essentially a
Renaissance synthesis of modern and medieval: i.e., a compromise between a
medieval Christian Creator God and a modern mechanistic cosmos, between
the human mind as a spiritual principle and the world as objective
materiality, and so forth. During the two centuries following the Cartesian-
Newtonian formulation, the modern mind continued to disengage itself from
its medieval matrix. The writers and scholars of the Enlightenment—Locke,
Leibniz, Spinoza, Bayle, Voltaire, Montesquieu, Diderot, d’Alembert, Holbach,
La Mettrie, Pope, Berkeley, Hume, Gibbon, Adam Smith, Wolff. Kant—
philosophically elaborated, broadly disseminated, and culturally established
the new world view. By its end, the autonomous human reason had fully
displaced traditional sources of knowledge about the universe, and in turn
had defined its own limits as those constituted by the boundaries and
305 

methods of empirical science. The industrial and democratic revolutions, and
the rise of the West to global hegemony, brought forth the concrete
technological, economic, social, and political concomitants of that world
view, which was thus further affirmed and elevated in its cultural
sovereignty. And in modern science’s culminating triumph over traditional
religion, Darwin’s theory of evolution brought the origin of nature’s species
and man himself within the compass of natural science and the modern
outlook. At this juncture, science’s capacity to comprehend the world had
apparently achieved insuperable dimensions, and the modern world view
could assert its mature character.
The following synopsis of the modern outlook thus reflects not only its
earlier Cartesian-Newtonian formulation, but also its later form as the
modern mind more fully realized itself in the course of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. For as the Cartesian-Newtonian framework was
drawn out to its logical conclusion, the implications of the new sensibility
and the new conceptions that had been initiated in the Renaissance and
Scientific Revolution were gradually made explicit. We may describe as the
specifically “modern” world view that which was most sharply distinguished
from its antecedents, mindful that in reality the latter (e.g., the Judaeo-
Christian perspective) continued to play a major role in the culture’s
understanding, if often in a latent manner, and that a particular individual’s
outlook in the modern era could occupy any position in a wide spectrum
ranging from a minimally affected childlike religious faith to an
uncompromisingly tough-minded secular skepticism.
(1) In contrast to the medieval Christian cosmos, which was not only
created but continuously and directly governed by a personal and actively
omnipotent God, the modern universe was an impersonal phenomenon,
governed by regular natural laws, and understandable in exclusively
physical and mathematical terms. God was now distantly removed from the
physical universe, as creator and architect, and was now less a God of love,
miracle, redemption, or historical intervention than a supreme intelligence
and first cause, who established the material universe and its immutable laws
and then withdrew from further direct activity. While the medieval cosmos
was continuously contingent upon God, the modern cosmos stood more on
306 

its own, with its own greater ontological reality, and with a diminution of
any divine reality either transcendent or immanent. Eventually that residual
divine reality, unsupported by scientific investigation of the visible world,
disappeared altogether. The order found in the natural world, initially
ascribed to and guaranteed by the will of God, was eventually understood to
be the result of innate mechanical regularities generated by nature without
higher purpose. And while in the medieval Christian view, the human mind
could not comprehend the universe’s order, which was ultimately
supernatural, without the aid of divine revelation, in the modern view, the
human mind was capable by its own rational faculties of comprehending the
order of the universe, and that order was entirely natural.
(2) The Christian dualistic stress on the supremacy of the spiritual and
transcendent over the material and concrete was now largely inverted, with
the physical world becoming the predominant focus for human activity. An
enthusiastic embrace of this world and this life as the stage for a full human
drama now replaced the traditional religious dismissal of mundane existence
as an unfortunate and temporary trial in preparation for eternal life. Human
aspiration was now increasingly centered on secular fulfillment. The
Christian dualism between spirit and matter, God and world, was gradually
transformed into the modern dualism of mind and matter, man and cosmos:
a subjective and personal human consciousness versus an objective and
impersonal material world.
(3) Science replaced religion as preeminent intellectual authority, as
definer, judge, and guardian of the cultural world view. Human reason and
empirical observation replaced theological doctrine and scriptural
revelation as the principal means for comprehending the universe. The
domains of religion and metaphysics became gradually compartmentalized,
regarded as personal, subjective, speculative, and fundamentally distinct
from public objective knowledge of the empirical world. Faith and reason
were now definitively severed. Conceptions involving a transcendent reality
were increasingly regarded as beyond the competence of human
knowledge; as useful palliatives for man’s emotional nature; as aesthetically
satisfying 
imaginative 
creations; 
as 
potentially 
valuable 
heuristic
assumptions; as necessary bulwarks for morality or social cohesion; as
political-economic propaganda; as psychologically motivated projections; as
307 

life-impoverishing illusions; as superstitious, irrelevant, or meaningless. In
lieu of religious or metaphysical overviews, the two bases of modern
epistemology, rationalism and empiricism, eventually produced their
apparent metaphysical entailments: While modern rationalism suggested
and eventually affirmed and based itself upon the conception of man as the
highest or ultimate intelligence, modern empiricism did the same for the
conception of the material world as the essential or only reality—i.e., secular
humanism and scientific materialism, respectively.
(4) In comparison with the classical Greek outlook, the modern universe
possessed an intrinsic order, yet not one emanating from a cosmic
intelligence in which the human mind could directly participate, but rather
an order empirically derived from nature’s material patterning by means of
the human mind’s own resources. Nor was this an order simultaneously and
inherently shared by both nature and the human mind, as the Greeks had
understood. The modern world order was not a transcendent and pervasive
unitary order informing both inner mind and outer world, in which
recognition of the one necessarily signified knowledge of the other. Rather,
the two realms, subjective mind and objective world, were now
fundamentally distinct and operated on different principles. Whatever order
was perceived was now simply the objective recognition of nature’s innate
regularities (or, after Kant, a phenomenal order constituted by the mind’s
own categories). The human mind was conceived of as separate from and
superior to the rest of nature.4 Nature’s order was exclusively unconscious
and mechanical. The universe itself was not endowed with conscious
intelligence or purpose; only man possessed such qualities. The rationally
empowered capacity to manipulate impersonal forces and material objects
in nature became the paradigm of the human relationship to the world.
(5) In contrast to the Greeks’ implicit emphasis on an integrated
multiplicity of cognitive modes, the order of the modern cosmos was now
comprehensible in principle by man’s rational and empirical faculties alone,
while other aspects of human nature—emotional, aesthetic, ethical,
volitional, relational, imaginative, epiphanic—were generally regarded as
irrelevant or distortional for an objective understanding of the world.
Knowledge of the universe was now primarily a matter for sober impersonal
scientific investigation, and when successful resulted not so much in an
308 

experience of spiritual liberation (as in Pythagoreanism and Platonism) but
in intellectual mastery and material improvement.
(6) While the cosmology of the classical era was geocentric, finite, and
hierarchical, with the surrounding heavens the locus of transcendent
archetypal forces that defined and influenced human existence according to
the celestial movements, and while the medieval cosmology maintained this
same general structure, reinterpreted according to Christian symbolism, the
modern cosmology posited a planetary Earth in a neutral infinite space, with
a complete elimination of the traditional celestial-terrestrial dichotomy. The
heavenly bodies were now moved by the same natural and mechanical
forces and composed of the same material substances as those found on the
Earth. With the fall of the geocentric cosmos and the rise of the mechanistic
paradigm, astronomy was finally severed from astrology. In contrast to both
the ancient and the medieval world views, the celestial bodies of the modern
universe possessed no numinous or symbolic significance; they did not exist
for man, to light his way or give meaning to his life. They were
straightforwardly material entities whose character and motions were
entirely the product of mechanistic principles having no special relation
either to human existence per se or to any divine reality. All specifically
human or personal qualities formerly attributed to the outer physical world
were now recognized as naive anthropomorphic projections and deleted
from the objective scientific perception. All divine attributes were similarly
recognized as the effect of primitive superstition and wishful thinking, and
were removed from serious scientific discourse. The universe was
impersonal, not personal; nature’s laws were natural, not supernatural. The
physical world possessed no intrinsic deeper meaning. It was opaquely
material, not the visible expression of spiritual realities.
(7) With the integration of the theory of evolution and its multitude of
consequences in other fields, the nature and origin of man and the dynamics
of nature’s transformations were now understood to be exclusively
attributable to natural causes and empirically observable processes. What
Newton had accomplished for the physical cosmos, Darwin, building on
intervening advances in geology and biology (and later aided by Mendel’s
work in genetics), accomplished for organic nature.5 While the Newtonian
theory had established the new structure and extent of the universe’s spatial
309 

dimension, the Darwinian theory established the new structure and extent
of nature’s temporal dimension—both its great duration and its being the
stage for qualitative transformations in nature. While with Newton
planetary motion was understood to be sustained by inertia and defined by
gravity, with Darwin biological evolution was seen as sustained by random
variation and defined by natural selection. As the Earth had been removed
from the center of creation to become another planet, so now was man
removed from the center of creation to become another animal.
Darwinian evolution presented a continuation, a seemingly final
vindication, of the intellectual impulse established in the Scientific
Revolution, yet it also entailed a significant break from that revolution’s
classical paradigm. For evolutionary theory provoked a fundamental shift
away from the regular, orderly, predictable harmony of the Cartesian-
Newtonian world in recognition of nature’s ceaseless and indeterminate
change, struggle, and development. In doing so, Darwinism both furthered
the Scientific Revolution’s secularizing consequences and vitiated that
revolution’s compromise with the traditional Judaeo-Christian perspective.
For the scientific discovery of the mutability of species controverted the
biblical account of a static creation in which man had been deliberately
placed at its sacred culmination and center. It was now less certain that man
came from God than that he came from lower forms of primates. The
human mind was not a divine endowment but a biological tool. The
structure and movement of nature was the result not of God’s benevolent
design and purpose, but of an amoral, random, and brutal struggle for
survival in which success went not to the virtuous but to the fit. Nature
itself, not God or a transcendent Intellect, was now the origin of nature’s
permutations. Natural selection and chance, not Aristotle’s teleological forms
or the Bible’s purposeful Creation, governed the processes of life. The early
modern concept of an impersonal deistic Creator who had initiated and then
left to itself a fully formed and eternally ordered world—the last
cosmological compromise between? Judaeo-Christian revelation and
modern science—now receded in the face of an evolutionary theory that
provided a dynamic naturalistic explanation for the origin of species and all
other natural phenomena. Humans, animals, plants, organisms, rocks and
mountains, planets and stars, galaxies, the entire universe could now be
310 

understood as the evolutionary outcome of entirely natural processes.
In these circumstances, the belief that the universe was purposefully
designed and regulated by divine intelligence, a belief foundational to both
the classical Greek and the Christian world views, appeared increasingly
questionable. The Christian doctrine of Christ’s divine intervention in
human history—the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Second Adam, the
Virgin Birth, the Resurrection, the Second Coming—seemed implausible in
the context of an otherwise straightforward survival-oriented Darwinian
evolution in a vast mechanistic Newtonian cosmos. Equally implausible was
the existence of a timeless metaphysical realm of transcendent Platonic
Ideas. Virtually everything in the empirical world appeared explicable
without resort to a divine reality. The modern universe was now an entirely
secular phenomenon. Moreover, it was a secular phenomenon that was still
changing and creating itself—not a divinely constructed finality with eternal
and static structure, but an unfolding process with no absolute goal, and
with no absolute foundation other than matter and its permutations. With
nature the sole source of evolutionary direction, and with man the only
rational conscious being in nature, the human future lay emphatically in
man’s hands.
(8) Finally, in contrast with the medieval Christian world view, modern
man’s independence—intellectual, psychological, spiritual—was radically
affirmed, with increasing depreciation of any religious belief or institutional
structure that would inhibit man’s natural right and potential for existential
autonomy and individual self-expression. While the purpose of knowledge
for the medieval Christian was to better obey God’s will, its purpose for
modern man was to better align nature to man’s will. The Christian doctrine
of spiritual redemption as based on the historical manifestation of Christ and
his future apocalyptic Second Coming was first reconceived as coinciding
with the progressive advance of human civilization under divine
providence, conquering evil through man’s God-given reason, and then was
gradually extinguished altogether in light of the belief that man’s natural
reason and scientific achievements would progressively realize a secular
utopian era marked by peace, rational wisdom, material prosperity, and
human dominion over nature. The Christian sense of Original Sin, the Fall,
and collective human guilt now receded in favor of an optimistic affirmation
311 

of human self-development and the eventual triumph of rationality and
science over human ignorance, suffering, and social evils.
While the classical Greek world view had emphasized the goal of human
intellectual and spiritual activity as the essential unification (or reunification)
of man with the cosmos and its divine intelligence, and while the Christian
goal was to reunite man and the world with God, the modern goal was to
create the greatest possible freedom for man—from nature; from oppressive
political, social, or economic structures; from restrictive metaphysical or
religious beliefs; from the Church; from the Judaeo-Christian God; from the
static and finite Aristotelian-Christian cosmos; from medieval Scholasticism;
from the ancient Greek authorities; from all primitive conceptions of the
world. Leaving behind tradition generally for the power of the autonomous
human intellect, modern man set out on his own, determined to discover the
working principles of his new universe, to explore and further expand its
new dimensions, and to realize his secular fulfillment.
The above description is necessarily only a useful simplification, for other
important intellectual tendencies existed alongside of, and often ran counter
to, the dominant character of the modern mind that was forged during the
Enlightenment. It will be the task of later chapters to draw a fuller, more
complex, and more paradoxical portrait of the modern sensibility. But first
we must examine more precisely the extraordinary dialectic that took place
as the dominant modern world view just described formed itself out of its
major predecessors, the classical and the Christian.
312 

Ancients and Moderns
Classical Greek thought had provided Renaissance Europe with most of the
theoretical equipment it required to produce the Scientific Revolution: the
Greeks’ initial intuition of a rational order in the cosmos, Pythagorean
mathematics, the Platonically defined problem of the planets, Euclidean
geometry, Ptolemaic astronomy, alternative ancient cosmological theories
with a moving Earth, the Neoplatonic exaltation of the Sun, the atomists’
mechanistic materialism, Hermetic esotericism, and the underlying
foundation of Aristotelian and Presocratic empiricism, naturalism, and
rationalism. Yet the character and direction of the modern mind were such
that the latter increasingly disavowed the ancients as scientific or
philosophical authorities and depreciated their world view as primitive and
unworthy of serious consideration. The intellectual dynamics provoking this
discontinuity were complex and often contradictory.
One of the most productive motives impelling sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century European scientists to engage in detailed observation
and measurement of natural phenomena derived from the heated
controversies between orthodox Scholastic Aristotelian physics and the
heterodox revival of Pythagorean-Platonic mathematical mysticism. It is no
small irony that Aristotle, the greatest naturalist and empirical scientist of
antiquity, whose work had served as the sustaining impulse of Western
science for two millennia, was jettisoned by the new science under the
impetus of a romantic Renaissance Platonism—from Plato, the speculative
idealist who most systematically wished to leave the world of the senses. But
with Aristotle’s transformation by the contemporary universities into a
stultified dogmatist, the Platonism of the Humanists had succeeded in
313 

opening the scientific imagination to a fresh sense of intellectual adventure.
At a deeper level, however, Aristotle’s empiricist this-worldly direction was
extended and fulfilled by the Scientific Revolution ad extremum; and
although Aristotle himself was overthrown in that revolution, it could be
said that this was no more than the Oedipal rebellion by the modern science
of which he was the ancient father.
Yet just as decisively was Plato overthrown. Indeed, if Aristotle was
deposed in effigy while maintained in spirit, Plato was vindicated in theory
but altogether negated in spirit. The Scientific Revolution from Copernicus
to Newton had depended upon and been inspired by a series of strategies
and assumptions derived directly from Plato, his Pythagorean predecessors,
and his Neoplatonic successors: the search for perfect timeless mathematical
forms that underlay the phenomenal world, the a priori belief that planetary
movements conformed to continuous and regular geometrical figures, the
instruction to avoid being misled by the apparent chaos of the empirical
heavens, a confidence in the beauty and simple elegance of the true solution
to the problem of the planets, the exaltation of the Sun as image of the
creative Godhead, the proposals of nongeocentric cosmologies, the belief
that the universe was permeated with divine reason and that God’s glory
was especially revealed in the heavens. Euclid, whose geometry formed a
basis both for Descartes’s rationalist philosophy and the entire Copernican-
Newtonian paradigm, had been a Platonist whose work was fully
constructed on Platonic principles. Modern scientific method itself, as
developed by Kepler and Galileo, was founded on the Pythagorean faith that
the language of the physical world was one of number, which provided a
rationale for the conviction that the empirical observation of nature and the
testing of hypotheses should be systematically focused through quantitative
measurement. Moreover, all modern science implicitly based itself upon
Plato’s fundamental hierarchy of reality, in which a diverse and ever-
changing material nature was viewed as being ultimately obedient to certain
unifying laws and principles that transcend the phenomena they govern.
Above all, modern science was the inheritor of the basic Platonic belief in
the rational intelligibility of the world order, and in the essential nobility of
the human quest to discover that order. But those Platonic assumptions and
strategies eventually led to the creation of a paradigm whose thoroughgoing
314 

naturalism left little room for the mystical tenor of Platonic metaphysics. The
numinosity of the mathematical patterns celebrated by the Pythagorean-
Platonic tradition now disappeared, regarded in retrospect as an empirically
unverifiable and superfluous appendage to the straightforward scientific
understanding of the natural world.
It is true that the Pythagorean-Platonic claim for the explanatory power
of mathematics was being constantly vindicated by natural science, and that
this apparent anomaly—why should mathematics work so consistently and
elegantly in the realm of brute material phenomena?—caused some
puzzlement among thoughtful philosophers of science. But for most
practicing scientists after Newton, such mathematical consistencies in
nature were considered to represent a certain mechanical tendency toward
regular patterning, with no deeper meaning per se. They were seldom seen
as revelatory Forms by which the mind of man was comprehending the
mind of God. Mathematical patterning was simply “in the nature of things,”
or in the nature of the human mind, and was not interpreted in a Platonic
light as giving evidence of an eternal changeless world of pure spirit. The
laws of nature, although perhaps timeless, now stood on their own on a
material foundation, dissociated from any divine cause.
Thus with the somewhat perplexing exception of mathematics, the
Platonic stream of philosophy generally ceased to be viewed as a viable form
of thought in the modern context, and science’s quantitative character was
left with an entirely secular meaning. In the face of the indisputable success
of mechanistic natural science and the ascendance of positivistic empiricism
and nominalism in philosophy, the idealist claims of Platonic metaphysics—
the eternal Ideas, the transcendent reality wherein resided true being and
meaning, the divine nature of the heavens, the spiritual government of the
world, the religious meaning of science—were now dismissed as elaborately
sophisticated products of the primitive imagination. Paradoxically, the
Platonic philosophy had served as the sine qua non for a world view that
seemed directly to controvert the Platonic assumptions. Thus “the irony of
fate built the mechanical philosophy of the eighteenth century and the
materialistic philosophy of the nineteenth out of the mystical mathematical
theory of the seventeenth.”6
A further irony lay in the modern defeat of the classical giants—Aristotle
315 

and Plato—at the hands of the ancient minority traditions. In the course of
the later classical and medieval periods, the mechanistic and materialistic
atomism of Leucippus and Democritus; the heterodox (nongeocentric or
nongeostatic) cosmologies of Philolaus, Heraclides, and Aristarchus; the
radical Skepticism of Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus—all these had been
overshadowed, almost trampled underfoot and extinguished, by the
culturally more powerful philosophical triumvirate of Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle and by the dominant Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology.7 But the
minority views’ retrieval by the Humanists during the Renaissance
eventually served to reverse that hierarchy in the world of science, with
many of their tenets enjoying an unexpected validation in the theoretical
conclusions and philosophical tenor of the Scientific Revolution and its
aftermath. A similar restoration would come to the Sophists, whose secular
humanism and relativistic skepticism found renewed favor in the
philosophical climate of the Enlightenment and subsequent modern thought.
But the isolated and seemingly fortuitous insights of a few speculative
theorists were not sufficient to offset modern science’s critical evaluation of
the ancient mind. Nor was the utility of various premises from the Platonic
and Aristotelian traditions enough to counterbalance what were seen as
their misguided and insufficiently empirical foundations. The retrospective
awe felt by medieval and Renaissance thinkers toward the genius and
achievements of the classical golden age luminaries no longer seemed
appropriate when on every side modern man was proving his practical and
intellectual superiority. Thus, having extracted whatever was useful for its
present needs, the modern mind reconceived classical culture in terms
respectful of its literary and humanistic accomplishments, while generally
dismissing the ancients’ cosmology, epistemology, and metaphysics as naive
and scientifically erroneous.
A more sweeping dismissal was given to the esoteric elements of the
ancient tradition—astrology, alchemy, Hermeticism—that had also been
instrumental in the genesis of the Scientific Revolution. The ancient birth of
astronomy, and of science itself, had been inextricably tied to the primitive
astrological understanding of the heavens as a superior realm of divine
significance, with the planetary movements carefully observed because of
their symbolic import for human affairs. In the ensuing centuries, astrology’s
316 

ties to astronomy had been essential for the latter’s technical progress, for it
was the astrological presuppositions that gave astronomy its social and
psychological relevance, as well as its political and military utility in matters
of state. Astrological predictions required the most accurate possible
astronomical data, so that astrology supplied the astronomical profession
with its most compelling motive for attempting to solve the problem of the
planets. It was no accident that prior to the Scientific Revolution the science
of astronomy enjoyed its most rapid development precisely during those
periods—the Hellenistic era, the high Middle Ages, and the Renaissance—
when astrology was most widely accepted.
Nor did the major protagonists of the Scientific Revolution move to sever
that ancient bond. Copernicus made no distinction in the De Revolutionibus
between astronomy and astrology, referring to them conjointly as “the head
of all the liberal arts.” Kepler confessed that his astronomical research was
inspired by his search for the celestial “music of the spheres.” Although
outspokenly critical of the lack of rigor in contemporary astrology, Kepler
was his era’s foremost astrological theoretician, and both he and Brahe
served as royal astrologers to the Holy Roman Emperor. Even Galileo, like
most Renaissance astronomers, routinely calculated astrological birth charts,
including one for his patron the Duke of Tuscany in 1609, the year of his
telescopic discoveries. Newton reported that it was his own early interest in
astrology that stimulated his epochal researches in mathematics, and he later
studied alchemy at considerable length. It is sometimes difficult now to
determine the actual extent of these pioneers’ commitment to astrology or
alchemy, but the modern historian of science looks in vain for a clear
demarcation in their vision between the scientific and the esoteric.
For a peculiar collaboration between science and esoteric tradition was in
fact the norm of the Renaissance, and played an indispensable role in the
birth of modern science: Besides the Neoplatonic and Pythagorean
mathematical mysticism and Sun exaltation that ran through all the major
Copernican astronomers, one finds Roger Bacon, the pioneer of
experimental science whose work was saturated with alchemical and
astrological principles; Giordano Bruno, the polymath esotericist who
championed an infinite Copernican cosmos; Paracelsus, the alchemist who
laid early foundations of modern chemistry and medicine; William Gilbert,
317 

whose theory of the Earth’s magnetism rested on his proof that the world-
soul was embodied in that magnet; William Harvey, who believed his
discovery of the circulation of the blood revealed the human body to be a
microcosmic reflection of the Earth’s circulatory systems and the cosmos’s
planetary motions; Descartes’s affiliation with mystical Rosicrucianism;
Newton’s affiliation with the Cambridge Platonists, and his belief that he
worked within an ancient tradition of secret wisdom dating back to
Pythagoras and beyond; and, indeed, the law of universal gravitation itself,
modeled on the sympathies of Hermetic philosophy. The modernity of the
Scientific Revolution was in many ways ambiguous.
But the new universe that emerged from the Scientific Revolution was not
so ambiguous, and appeared to leave little room for the reality of astrological
or other explicitly esoteric principles. While the original revolutionaries
themselves called no attention to the problems the new paradigm posed for
astrology, those contradictions soon became apparent for others. For a
planetary Earth seemed to undermine the very foundation of astrological
thinking, since the latter assumed the Earth was the absolute central focus of
planetary influences. It was difficult to see how without the privileged
position of being the fixed universal center, the Earth could continue to
deserve such distinctive cosmic attention. The entire traditional
cosmography delineated from Aristotle through Dante was shattered as the
moving Earth now trespassed into celestial realms previously defined as the
exclusive domain of specific planetary powers. After Galileo and Newton,
the celestial-terrestrial division could no longer be maintained, and without
that primordial dichotomy, the metaphysical and psychological premises
that had helped support the astrological belief system began to collapse. The
planets were now known to be prosaically material objects moved by inertia
and gravity, not archetypal symbols moved by a cosmic intelligence. There
had been relatively few thinkers in the Renaissance who were not convinced
of astrology’s essential validity, but a generation after Newton there were
few who considered it worth examining. Increasingly marginalized,
astrology went underground, surviving only among small groups of
esotericists and the uncritical masses.8 After being the classical “queen of
sciences” and the guide of emperors and kings for the better part of two
millennia, astrology was no longer credible.
318 

With the exception of the Romantics, the modern mind also gradually
outgrew the Renaissance’s fascination with ancient myth as an autonomous
dimension of existence. That the gods were nothing more than colorful
figments of pagan fantasy needed little argument from the Enlightenment
on. Just as the Platonic Forms died out in philosophy, their place taken by
objective empirical qualities, subjective concepts, cognitive categories, or
linguistic “family resemblances,” so did the ancient gods assume the role of
literary characters, artistic images, useful metaphors without any claim to
ontological reality.
For modern science had cleansed the universe of all those human and
spiritual properties previously projected upon it. The world was now
neutral, opaque, and material, and therefore no dialogue with nature was
possible—whether through magic, mysticism, or divinely certified authority.
Only the impersonal employment of man’s critical and empirically based
rational intellect could attain an objective understanding of nature.
Although in fact an astonishing variety of epistemological sources had
converged to make possible the Scientific Revolution—the immense
imaginative (and antiempirical) leap to the conception of a planetary Earth,9
Pythagorean and Neoplatonic aesthetic and mystical beliefs, Descartes’s
revelatory dream and vision of a new universal science and his own mission
to forge it, Newton’s Hermetically inspired concept of gravitational
attraction, all the serendipitous recoveries of the ancient manuscripts
(Lucretius, 
Archimedes, 
Sextus 
Empiricus, 
the 
Neoplatonists), 
the
fundamentally metaphorical character of the various scientific theories and
explanations—these were all later viewed as significant only in the context
of scientific discovery. In the context of scientific justification, of
ascertaining the truth value of any hypothesis, only empirical evidence and
rational analysis could be considered legitimate epistemological bases, and in
the wake of the Scientific Revolution these modes dominated the scientific
enterprise. The too flexible, syncretistic, and mystical epistemologies of the
classical period, and their elaborate metaphysical consequences, were now
repudiated.
Classical culture would long remain an exalted realm haunting the West’s
imaginative and aesthetic creations. It would continue to provide modern
thinkers with inspiring political and moral ideas and models. Greek
319 

philosophy, the Greek and Latin languages and literatures, the events and
personalities of ancient history would all still evoke in the modern mind avid
interest and scholarly respect, often bordering on reverence. But the
humanistic nostalgia for classicism could not disguise the latter’s growing
irrelevance for the modern mind. For when the issue at hand was a stringent
philosophical and scientific analysis of reality, the classical world view,
whatever its historical importance, and whatever its virtues in aesthetic or
imaginative terms, could not favorably compare with the intellectual rigor
and efficacy modern man could justly claim for his own understanding.
Yet for all that, the ancient Greek mind still pervaded the modern. In the
virtually religious zeal of the scientist’s quest for knowledge, in his often
unconscious assumptions concerning the rational intelligibility of the world
and man’s capacity to reveal it, in his critical independence of judgment and
his ambitious drive to expand human knowledge beyond ever more distant
horizons, Greece lived on.
320 

The Triumph of Secularism
Science and Religion: The Early Concord
The fate of Christianity in the wake of the Scientific Revolution was not
dissimilar to the fate of classical thought, nor did it lack its own share of
paradox. If the Greeks had supplied most of the theoretical provisions
requisite for the Scientific Revolution, the Catholic Church, for all its
dogmatic strictures, had provided the necessary matrix within which the
Western mind was able to develop and from which the scientific
understanding could emerge. The nature of the Church’s contribution was
both practical and doctrinal. From the beginning of the Middle Ages, the
Church had provided in its monasteries the only refuge in the West within
which the achievements of classical culture could be preserved and their
spirit continued. And from the turn of the first millennium, the Church had
officially supported and encouraged the vast Scholastic enterprise of
scholarship and education without which modern intellectuality might
never have arisen.
This momentous act of ecclesiastical sponsorship was justified by a unique
constellation of theological positions. The precise and ‘profound
comprehension of Christian doctrine required, in the medieval Church’s
evolving view, a corresponding capacity for logical clarity and intellectual
acuity. Beyond that rationale emerged another, for with the increasing
recognition of the physical world in the high Middle Ages there arose a
corresponding recognition of the positive role a scientific understanding
could play in the appreciation of God’s wondrous creation. For all its
wariness of mundane life and “the world,” the Judaeo-Christian religion
321 

nevertheless placed great emphasis on the ontological reality of that world
and its ultimate relationship to a good and just God. Christianity took this life
seriously. Therein lay a significant religious impetus for the scientific quest,
which depended not only on a sense of the human being’s active
responsibility in this world, but also on a belief in this world’s reality, its
order, and, at the start of modern science, its coherent relationship to an
omnipotent and infinitely wise Creator.
Not was the contribution of the Scholastics merely an imperfect
Christianized recovery and sustaining of the Greek ideas. For it was the
Scholastics’ exhaustive examination and criticism of those ideas, and their
creation 
of 
new 
alternative 
theories 
and 
concepts—rudimentary
formulations of inertia and momentum, the uniform acceleration of freely
falling bodies, hypothetical arguments for a moving Earth—that allowed
modern science from Copernicus and Galileo onward to begin forging its
new paradigm. And perhaps most consequential was not the specific nature
of the Scholastics’ theoretical innovations, nor their revitalization of Hellenic
thought, but rather the more intangible existential attitude medieval
thinkers passed on to their modern descendants: the theologically founded
but decidedly robust confidence that man’s God-given reason possessed the
capacity, and the religious duty, to comprehend the natural world. Man’s
intellectual relation to the creative Logos, his privileged possession of the
divine light of the active intellect—Aquinas’s lumen intellectus agentis—was
from the Christian perspective precisely what mediated the human
understanding of the cosmos. Descartes’s natural light of the human reason
was the direct half-secularized inheritor of that medieval conception. It was
Aquinas himself who had written in his Summa Theologica that “authority is
the weakest source of proof,” a dictum central for the protagonists of the
modern mind’s independence. Modern rationalism, naturalism, and
empiricism all had Scholastic roots.
But the Scholasticism encountered by the sixteenth- and seventeenth-
century natural philosophers was a senescent structure of pedagogical
dogmatism that no longer spoke to the new spirit of the age. Little or
nothing fresh was emerging from within its confines. Its obsession with
Aristotle, its oversubtle verbal distinctions and logical quibbles, and its failure
to submit theory systematically to the test of experiment all marked late
322 

Scholasticism as an outmoded, ingrown institution whose intellectual
authority had to be overthrown lest the brave infant science be fatally
smothered. After Bacon, Galileo, Descartes, and Newton, that authority had
been effectively impugned, and Scholasticism’s reputation never recovered.
From then on, science and philosophy could move forward without
theological justification, without recourse to a divine light in the human
intellect, without the colossal supporting superstructure of Scholastic
metaphysics and epistemology.
Yet despite the unambiguously secular character of the modern science
that eventually crystallized out of the Scientific Revolution, the original
scientific revolutionaries themselves continued to act, think, and speak of
their work in terms conspicuously redolent of religious illumination. They
perceived their intellectual breakthroughs as foundational contributions to a
sacred mission. Their scientific discoveries were triumphant spiritual
awakenings to the divine architecture of the world, revelations of the true
cosmic order. Newton’s joyful exclamation, “O God, I think thy thoughts
after thee!” was only the culmination of a long series of such epiphanies
marking the milestones of modern science’s birth. In the De Revolutionibus,
Copernicus celebrated astronomy as a “science more divine than human,”
closest to God in the nobility of its character, and upheld the heliocentric
theory as revealing the true structural grandeur and precision of God’s
cosmos. Kepler’s writings were ablaze with his sense of being divinely
illuminated as the inner mysteries of the cosmos unfolded before his eyes.10
He declared astronomers to be “priests of the most high God with respect to
the book of nature,” and saw his own role as “the honor of guarding, with
my discovery, the door of God’s temple, in which Copernicus serves before
the high altar.” In Sidereus Nuncius, Galileo spoke of his telescopic
discoveries as made possible by God’s grace enlightening his mind. Even the
worldly Bacon envisioned humanity’s progress through science in explicitly
religious, pietistic terms, with the material improvement of mankind
corresponding to its spiritual approach to the Christian millennium.
Descartes interpreted his vision of the new universal science, and a
subsequent dream in which that science was symbolically presented to him,
as a divine mandate for his life’s work: God had shown him the way to
certain knowledge, and assured him of his scientific quest’s ultimate success.
323 

And with Newton’s achievement, the divine birth was considered complete.
A new Genesis had been written. As Alexander Pope declared for the
Enlightenment:
Nature and nature’s laws lay hid in night;
God said, “Let Newton be,” and all was light.
For the great passion to discover the laws of nature that was felt by the
scientific revolutionaries derived not least from a sense that they were
recovering a divine knowledge that had been lost in the primal Fall. At last
the human mind had comprehended God’s working principles. The eternal
laws governing Creation, the divine handiwork itself, now stood unveiled by
science. Through science man had served God’s greater glory,
demonstrating the mathematical beauty and complex precision, the
stupendous order reigning over the heavens and the Earth. The luminous
perfection of the discoverers’ new universe compelled their awe before the
transcendent intelligence which they attributed to the Creator of such a
cosmos.
Nor was the religiosity of the major scientific pioneers a generalized
religious sentiment with little specific relation to Christianity. Newton was as
zealously absorbed in Christian theology and studies of biblical prophecy as
he was in physics. Galileo was committed to saving his Church from a costly
error and, despite his confrontation with the Inquisition, remained steadfast
in his Catholic piety. Descartes lived and died a devout Catholic. And their
Christian presuppositions were intellectually pervasive, embedded in the
very fabric of their scientific and philosophical theories. Both Descartes and
Newton constructed their cosmological systems on the assumption of God’s
existence. For Descartes, the objective world existed as a stable reality
because it stood in the mind of God, and human reason was
epistemologically reliable because of God’s intrinsically veracious character.
Similarly, for Newton, matter could not be explained on its own terms but
necessitated a prime mover, a creator, a supreme architect and governor.
God had established the physical world and its laws, and therein lay the
world’s continuing existence and order. Indeed, because of certain
unresolved problems in his calculations, Newton concluded that God’s
intervention was periodically necessary to maintain the system’s regularity.
324 

Compromise and Conflict
But the early modern accord between science and Christianity was already
displaying tensions and contradictions, for apart from the creationist
ontology still underpinning the new paradigm, the scientific universe—with
its mechanical forces, its material heavens, and its planetary Earth—was not
notably congruent with traditional Christian conceptions of the cosmos. Any
central focus of the new universe was maintained only by religious belief,
not by scientific evidence. The Earth and mankind might be the metaphysical
pivot of God’s creation, but that status could not be supported by a purely
scientific understanding, which saw both the Earth and the Sun as merely
two bodies among countless others moving through a boundless neutral
void. “I am terrified,” said the intensely religious mathematician Pascal, “by
the eternal silence of these infinite spaces.” Intellectually sensitive Christians
attempted to reinterpret and modify their religious understanding to
accommodate a universe drastically different from that of the ancient and
medieval cosmology within which the Christian religion had evolved, but
the metaphysical hiatus continued to widen. In the Enlightenment’s
Newtonian cosmos, heaven and hell had lost their physical locations, natural
phenomena had lost their symbolic import, and miracles and arbitrary
divine interventions into human affairs now appeared increasingly
implausible, contradicting the supreme orderliness of a clockwork universe.
Yet the deeply rooted principles of Christian belief could scarcely be negated
altogether.
Thus arose the psychological necessity of a double-truth universe. Reason
and faith came to be seen as pertaining to different realms, with Christian
philosophers and scientists, and the larger educated Christian public,
perceiving no genuine integration between the scientific reality and the
religious reality. Joined together in the high Middle Ages by the Scholastics
culminating in Aquinas, then severed in the late medieval period by Ockham
and nominalism, faith had moved in one direction with the Reformation,
Luther, literal Scripture, fundamentalist Protestantism and Counter-
Reformational Catholicism, while reason had moved in another direction
with Bacon, Descartes, Locke, Hume, empirical science, rational philosophy,
and the Enlightenment. Attempts to bridge the two generally failed to
325 

preserve the character of one or the other, as in Kant’s delimiting of
religious experience to the moral impulse.
With both science and religion simultaneously vital yet discrepant, the
culture’s world view was by necessity bifurcated, reflecting a metaphysical
schism that existed as much within the individual as within the larger
society. Religion was increasingly compartmentalized, seen as relevant less to
the outer world than to the inner self, less to the contemporary spirit than to
revered tradition, less to this life than to the afterlife, less to everyday than to
Sunday. Christian doctrine was still believed by most, and indeed, as if in
reaction to the abstract mechanical universe of the Enlightenment’s
physicists and philosophers, a host of fervently emotional religious
movements—Pietism in Germany, Jansenism in France, the Quakers and
Methodists in England, the Great Awakening in America—emerged and
found broad popular support in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Devout religiosity in the traditional Christian mold continued to be
widespread; these were the very years in which Western religious music
reached its apogee in Bach and Handel, both born within months of
Newton’s Principia. But amidst this pluralism, wherein the scientific and
religious temperaments pursued their separate paths, the overriding
cultural direction was clear: scientific rationalism was ineluctably on the
ascent, demonstrating its sovereignty over ever-larger areas of human
experience.
Within two centuries after Newton, the secularity of the modern outlook
had fully established itself. Mechanistic materialism had dramatically proved
its explanatory power and utilitarian efficacy. Experiences and events that
appeared to defy accepted scientific principles—alleged miracles and faith
healings, self-proclaimed religious revelations and spiritual ecstasies,
prophecies, symbolic interpretations of natural phenomena, encounters
with God or the devil—were now increasingly regarded as the effects of
madness, charlatanry, or both. Questions concerning the existence of God or
a transcendent reality ceased to play a decisive role in the scientific
imagination, which was becoming the principal factor in defining the
educated public’s shared belief system. Already for Pascal in the seventeenth
century, faced with his own religious doubts and philosophical skepticism,
the leap of faith necessary to sustain Christian belief had become a wager.
326 

Now, for many at the leading edge of Western thought, it seemed a losing
bet.
What, then, caused this shift from the explicit religiosity of the scientific
revolutionaries of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to the equally
emphatic secularism of the Western intellect in the nineteenth and
twentieth? Certainly the metaphysical incongruity of the two outlooks, the
cognitive dissonance resulting from the attempt to hold together such
innately divergent systems and sensibilities, eventually had to force the issue
in one direction or the other. The character and implications of the Christian
revelation simply did not cohere well with those of the scientific revelation.
Essential to the Christian faith was the belief in Christ’s physical resurrection
after death, an event that, with its apostolic witness and interpretation, had
served as the very foundation of Christianity. But with the near-universal
acceptance of the scientific explanation of all phenomena in terms of
regular natural laws, that foundational miracle, as well as all the other
supernatural phenomena recounted in the Bible, could no longer command
unquestioning belief. Raisings from the dead, miraculous healings and
exorcisms, a divine-human savior, a virgin birth, manna from heaven, wine
from water, water from rocks, partings of seas—all appeared increasingly
improbable to the modern mind, bearing as they did too many similarities to
other mythical or legendary concoctions of the archaic imagination.
Damaging criticism of the absolute truth of Christian revelation also
emerged from the new academic discipline of biblical scholarship, which
demonstrated Scripture’s variable and manifestly human sources. Both the
Renaissance Humanists and the Reformation theologians had pressed for a
return to the original Greek and Hebrew sources of the Bible, which led to a
more critical reading of the original texts and reevaluations of their
historical authenticity and integrity. In the course of several generations of
such scholarship, Scripture began to lose its sacral aura of divine inspiration.
The Bible could now be recognized less as the unquestionably authoritative
and pristine Word of God than as a heterogeneous collection of writings in
various traditional literary genres, composed, collected, and editorially
modified by many human hands over the centuries. Soon biblical textual
criticism was followed by critical historical studies of Christian dogma and
the church, and by historical investigations into the life of Jesus. The
327 

intellectual skills developed for analyzing secular history and literature were
now being applied to the sacred foundations of Christianity, with unsettling
consequences for the faithful.
By the time such studies were joined by the Darwinian theory’s
discrediting of the creation narrative found in Genesis, the validity of
scriptural revelation had become entirely problematic. Man could hardly
have been made in the image of God if he was also the biological descendant
of subhuman primates. The thrust of evolution was not one of spiritual
transfiguration but of biological survival. While up through Newton the
weight of science had tended to support an argument for the existence of
God based on evidence of design in the universe, after Darwin the weight of
science was thrown against that argument. The evidence of natural history
seemed more plausibly comprehended in terms of evolutionary principles of
natural selection and random mutation than in terms of a transcendent
Designer.
Certainly some scientists of a Christian persuasion noted the affinity
between the theory of evolution and the Judaeo-Christian notion of God’s
progressive and providential plan of history. These drew parallels with the
New Testament’s conception of an immanent evolutionary process of divine
incarnation in man and nature, and even attempted to remedy some of
Darwinism’s theoretical shortcomings with religious explanatory principles.
Yet for a culture generally accustomed to understanding its Bible at face
value, the more glaring inconsistency between the static original creation of
species in Genesis and the Darwinian evidence for their transmutation over
aeons of time commanded the greater attention, ultimately encouraging
massive agnostic defections from the religious fold. For at bottom, the
Christian belief in a God who acted through revelation and grace appeared
wildly incompatible with everything common sense and science suggested
about the way the world actually worked. With Luther, the monolithic
structure of the medieval Christian Church had cracked. With Copernicus
and Galileo, the medieval Christian cosmology itself had cracked. With
Darwin, the Christian world view showed signs of collapsing altogether.
In an era so unprecedentedly illuminated by science and reason, the “good
news” of Christianity became less and less convincing a metaphysical
structure, less secure a foundation upon which to build one’s life, and less
328 

psychologically necessary. The sheer improbability of the whole nexus of
events was becoming painfully obvious—that an infinite eternal God would
have suddenly become a particular human being in a specific historical time
and place only to be ignominiously executed. That a single brief life taking
place two millennia earlier in an obscure primitive nation, on a planet now
known to be a relatively insignificant piece of matter revolving about one
star among billions in an inconceivably vast and impersonal universe—that
such an undistinguished event should have any overwhelming cosmic or
eternal meaning could no longer be a compelling belief for reasonable men.
It was starkly implausible that the universe as a whole would have any
pressing interest in this minute part of its immensity—if it had any
“interests” at all. Under the spotlight of the modern demand for public,
empirical, scientific corroboration of all statements of belief, the essence of
Christianity withered.
What was probable, in the judgment of the critical modern intellect, was
that the Judaeo-Christian God was a peculiarly durable combination of
wish-fulfillment fantasy and anthropomorphic projection—made in man’s
own image to assuage all the pain and right all the wrongs man found
unbearable in his existence. If, by contrast, the unsentimental human reason
could adhere closely to the concrete evidence, there was no necessity to
posit the existence of such a God, and much that argued against it. The
scientific data suggested overwhelmingly that the natural world and its
history were expressions of an impersonal process. To say exactly what
caused this complex phenomenon, bearing signs of both order and chaos,
dramatic and yet evidently purposeless, out of control in the sense of lacking
divine government—to go so far as to posit and define what was behind this
empirical reality had to be regarded as intellectually unsound, a mere
dreaming about the world. The ancient concern with cosmic designs and
divine purposes, with ultimate metaphysical issues, with the why’s of
phenomena, now ceased to engage the attention of scientists. It was patently
more fruitful to focus on the how’s, the material mechanisms, the laws of
nature, the concrete data that could be measured and tested.11
Not that science perversely insisted on the hard facts and on a “narrower”
vision out of simple myopia. Rather, it was only the how’s, the empirical
correlations and tangible causes, that could be experimentally confirmed.
329 

Teleological designs and spiritual causes could not be subjected to such
testing, could not be systematically isolated, and therefore could not be
known to exist at all. It was better to deal only with categories that could be
empirically evidenced than to allow into the scientific discussion
transcendent principles—however noble in the abstract—that in the final
analysis could no more be corroborated than could a fairy tale. God was
scarcely a testable entity. And in any case, the character and modus operandi
of the Judaeo-Christian deity ill fitted the real world discovered by science.
With its apocalyptic prophecies and sacred rituals, its deified human hero
and world savior motifs, its miracle stories, moralisms, and veneration of
saints and relics, Christianity seemed best understood as a singularly
successful folk myth—inspiring hope in believers, giving meaning and order
to their lives, but without ontological foundation. In such a light, Christians
could be seen as well-meaning but credulous. With the victory of
Darwinism (and notably in the wake of the celebrated Oxford debate in
1860 between Bishop Wilberforce and T. H. Huxley), science had
unequivocally achieved its independence from theology. After Darwin, there
seemed little further possibility of contact of any kind between science and
theology, as science focused ever more successfully on the objective world,
while theology, virtually incapacitated outside ever-smaller religious
intellectual circles, focused exclusively on inward spiritual concerns. Faced
by the final severance of the scientifically intelligible universe from the old
spiritual verities, modern theology adopted an increasingly subjective stance.
The early Christian belief that the Fall and Redemption pertained not just to
man but to the entire cosmos, a doctrine already fading after the
Reformation, now disappeared altogether: the process of salvation, if it had
any meaning at all, pertained solely to the personal relation between God
and man. The inner rewards of Christian faith were now stressed, with a
radical discontinuity between the experience of Christ and that of the
everyday world. God was wholly other than man and this world, and therein
lay the religious experience. The “leap of faith,” not the self-evidence of the
created world or the objective authority of Scripture, constituted the
principal basis for religious conviction.
Under such limitations, modern Christianity assumed a new and far less
encompassing intellectual role. In its long-held capacity as both explanatory
330 

paradigm for the visible world and universal belief system for Western
culture, the Christian revelation had lost its potency. It is true that Christian
ethics were not so readily depreciated by the new secular sensibility. For
many non-Christians, even outspoken agnostics and atheists, the moral
ideals taught by Jesus remained as admirable as those of any other ethical
system. But the Christian revelation as a whole—the infallible Word of God
in the Bible, the divine plan of salvation, the miracles and so forth—could
not be taken seriously. That Jesus was simply a man, albeit a compelling one,
seemed increasingly self-evident. Compassion for humanity was still upheld
as a social and individual ideal, but its basis was now secular and humanistic
rather than religious. A humanitarian liberalism thereby sustained certain
elements of the Christian ethos without the latter’s transcendent foundation.
Just as the modern mind admired the loftiness of spirit and moral tone of
Platonic philosophy while simultaneously negating its metaphysics and
epistemology, so too Christianity continued to be tacitly respected, and
indeed closely followed, for its ethical precepts, while increasingly doubted
for its larger metaphysical and religious claims.
It is also true that in the eyes of not a few scientists and philosophers,
science itself contained a religious meaning, or was open to a religious
interpretation, or could serve as an opening to a religious appreciation of
the universe. The beauty of nature’s forms, the splendor of its variety, the
extraordinarily intricate functioning of the human body, the evolutionary
development of the human eye or the human mind, the mathematical
patterning of the cosmos, the unimaginable magnitude of the heavenly
spaces—to some these seemed to require the existence of a divine
intelligence and power of miraculous sophistication. But many others
argued that such phenomena were the straightforward and relatively
random results of the natural laws of physics, chemistry, and biology. The
human psyche, longing for the security of a cosmic providence, and
susceptible to personifying and projecting its own capacity for value and
purpose, might wish to see more in nature’s design, but the scientific
understanding was deliberately beyond such wishful anthropomorphizing:
the entire scenario of cosmic evolution seemed explicable as a direct
consequence of chance and necessity, the random interplay of natural laws.
In this light, any apparent religious implications had to be judged as poetic
331 

but scientifically unjustifiable extrapolations from the available evidence.
God was “an unnecessary hypothesis.”12
Philosophy, Politics, Psychology
Parallel developments in philosophy during these centuries reinforced the
same secular progression. During the Scientific Revolution and the early
Enlightenment, religion continued to hold its own among philosophers, but
was already being transformed by the character of the scientific mind. In
preference to traditional biblical Christianity, Enlightenment Deists like
Voltaire argued in favor of a “rational religion” or a “natural religion.” Such
would be appropriate not only to the rational apprehension of nature’s
order and the requirement of a universal first cause, but also to the West’s
encounter with other cultures’ religions and ethical systems—an encounter
suggesting to many the existence of a universal religious sensibility
grounded in common human experience. In such a context, the absolute
claims of Christianity could not enjoy special privilege. Newton’s cosmic
architecture demanded a cosmic architect, but the attributes of such a God
could be properly derived only from the empirical examination of his
creation, not from the extravagant pronouncements of revelation. Earlier
religious conceptions—primitive, biblical, medieval—could now be
recognized as infantile steps to the more mature modern understanding of
an impersonal rational deity presiding over an orderly creation.
The rationalist God, however, soon began to lose philosophical support.
With Descartes, God’s existence had been affirmed not through faith but
through reason; yet on that basis God’s certain existence could not be
indefinitely sustained, as Hume and Kant, the culminating philosophers of
the Enlightenment, noted in their different ways. Much as Ockham had
warned four centuries earlier, rational philosophy could not presume to
pronounce on matters that so far transcended the empirically based intellect.
At the start of the Enlightenment, in the late seventeenth century, Locke had
systematically pursued Bacon’s empiricist directive by rooting all knowledge
of the world in sensory experience and subsequent reflection on the basis of
that experience. Locke’s own inclinations were Deist, and he retained
332 

Descartes’s certainty that God’s existence was logically demonstrable from
self-evident intuitions. But the empiricism he championed necessarily
limited the human reason’s capacity for knowledge to that which could be
tested by concrete experience. As successive philosophers drew more
rigorous conclusions from the empiricist basis, it became clear that
philosophy could no longer justifiably make assertions about God, the soul’s
immortality and freedom, or other propositions that transcended concrete
experience.
In the eighteenth century, Hume and Kant systematically refuted the
traditional philosophical arguments for God’s existence, pointing out the
unwarrantability of using causal reasoning to move from the sensible to the
supersensible. Only the realm of possible experience, of concrete particulars
registered in sensation, offered any ground for valid philosophical
conclusions. For Hume, an entirely secular thinker and more unequivocal in
his skepticism, the matter was simple: To argue from the problematic
evidence of this world to the certain existence of the good and omnipotent
God of Christianity was a philosophical absurdity. But even Kant, though
highly religious himself and intent on preserving the moral imperatives of
the Christian conscience, nevertheless recognized that Descartes’s laudable
philosophical skepticism had ceased too abruptly with his dogmatic
assertions about God’s certain existence derived from the cogito. For Kant,
God was an unknowable transcendent—thinkable, not knowable, only by
attending to man’s inner sense of moral duty. Neither human reason nor the
empirical world could give” any direct or unequivocal indication of a divine
reality. Man could have faith in God, he could believe in his soul’s freedom
and immortality, but he could not claim that these inner persuasions were
rationally certain. For the rigorous modern philosopher, metaphysical
certainties about God or the like were spurious, lacking as they did a sound
basis for verification. The inevitable and proper outcome of both empiricism
and critical philosophy was to eliminate any theological substrate from
modern philosophy.
At the same time, the bolder thinkers of the French Enlightenment
increasingly tended toward not only skepticism but also atheistic materialism
as the most intellectually justifiable consequence of the scientific discoveries.
Diderot, chief editor of the Encyclopédie, the Enlightenment’s great project
333 

of cultural education, illustrated in his own life the gradual transformation
of a reflective man from religious belief to Deism, then to skepticism, and
finally to a materialism ambiguously joined with a deistic ethics. More
uncompromising was the physician La Mettrie, who portrayed man as a
purely material entity, an organic machine whose illusion of possessing an
independent soul or mind was produced simply by the interplay of its
physical components. Hedonism was the ethical consequence of such a
philosophy, which La Mettrie did not fail to advocate. The physicist Baron
d’Holbach similarly affirmed the determinisms of matter as the only
intelligible reality, and declared the absurdity of religious belief in the face of
experience: given the ubiquity of evil in the world, any God must be
deficient either in power or in justice and compassion. On the other hand,
the random occurrence of good and evil accorded readily with a universe of
mindless matter lacking any providential overseer. Atheism was necessary to
destroy the chimeras of religious fantasy that endangered the human race.
Man needed to be brought back to nature, experience, and reason.
It would be the nineteenth century that would bring the Enlightenment’s
secular progression to its logical conclusion as Comte, Mill, Feuerbach,
Marx, Haeckel, Spencer, Huxley, and, in a somewhat different spirit,
Nietzsche all sounded the death knell of traditional religion. The Judaeo-
Christian God was man’s own creation, and the need for that creation had
necessarily dwindled with man’s modern maturation. Human history could
be understood as progressing from a mythical and theological stage, through
a metaphysical and abstract stage, to its final triumph in science, based on
the positive and concrete. This world of man and matter was clearly the one
demonstrable reality. Metaphysical speculations concerning “higher”
spiritual entities constituted nothing more than idle intellectual fantasy, and
were a disservice to humanity and its present fate. The duty of the modern
age was the humanization of God, who was merely a projection of man’s
own inner nature. One could perhaps speak of “an Unknowable” behind the
world’s phenomena, but that was the extent of what could be said with any
legitimacy. What was more immediately apparent, and more positively
contributive to the modern world view, was that the world’s phenomena
were being superbly comprehended, to humanity’s inestimable benefit, by
science, and that the terms of that comprehension were fundamentally
334 

naturalistic. The question remained as to who, or what, initiated the whole
phenomenon of the universe, but intellectual honesty precluded any certain
conclusions or even progress in such an inquiry. Its answer lay
epistemologically beyond man’s ken and, in the face of more immediate and
attainable intellectual objectives, increasingly beyond his interest. With
Descartes and Kant, the philosophical relation between Christian belief and
human rationality had grown ever more attenuated. By the late nineteenth
century, with few exceptions, that relation was effectively absent.
There were also many nonepistemological factors—political, social,
economic, psychological—pressing toward this same end, the secularization
of the modern mind and its disengagement from traditional religious belief.
Even before the Industrial Revolution had demonstrated science’s superior
utilitarian value, other cultural developments had recommended the
scientific view over the religious. The Scientific Revolution had been born
amidst the immense turmoil and destruction of the wars of religion that
followed the Reformation, wars that in the name of divergent Christian
absolutisms had caused over a century of crisis in Europe. In such
circumstances much doubt was cast upon the integrity of the Christian
understanding, as well as upon its ability to foster a world of relative peace
and security, let alone of universal compassion. Despite the increased fervor
of religiosity—whether Lutheran, Zwinglian, Calvinist, Anabaptist, Anglican,
Puritan, or Catholic—experienced by the European populace in the wake of
the Reformation, it was clear to many that the culture’s failure to agree on a
universally valid religious truth had created the need for another type of
belief system, less controversially subjective and more rationally persuasive.
Thus the neutral and empirically verifiable world view of secular science
soon found an ardent reception among the educated class, offering a
commonly acceptable conceptual framework that peacefully cut across all
political and religious boundaries. Just as the last major convulsions of post-
Reformational bloodshed had been expended, the Scientific Revolution was
approaching completion. The final decade of the Thirty Years’ War, 1638–
48, saw the publication of both Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning Two New
Sciences and Descartes’s Principles of Philosophy, as well as the birth of
Newton.
Circumstances of a more specifically political nature were also to play a
335 

part in the modern shift away from religion. For centuries, there had existed
a fateful association between the hierarchical Christian world view and the
established social-political structures of feudal Europe, centering on the
traditional authority figures of God, pope, and king. By the eighteenth
century, that association had become mutually disadvantageous. The
growingly apparent implausibilities of the one and injustices of the other
combined to produce the image of a system whose senile oppressiveness
demanded revolt for the larger good of humanity. The French philosophes—
Voltaire, Diderot, Condorcet—and their successors among the French
revolutionaries recognized the Church itself in its wealth and power as a
bastion of reactionary forces, allied inextricably to the conservative
institutions of the ancien régime. To the philosophes, the power of the
organized clergy posed a formidable obstacle to the progress of civilization.
In addition to the issue of economic and social exploitation, the atmosphere
of censorship, intolerance, and intellectual rigidity that the philosophes
found so abhorrent in contemporary intellectual life was directly
attributable to the dogmatic pretensions and vested interests of the
ecclesiastical establishment.
Voltaire had seen and admired firsthand the consequences of England’s
religious toleration, which in turn, with the superior intellectual
clarifications of Bacon, Locke, and Newton, he enthusiastically presented to
the Continent for emulation. Armed with science, reason, and empirical
facts, the Enlightenment saw itself as engaged in a noble struggle against the
constricting medieval darkness of Church dogma and popular superstition,
tied to a backward and tyrannical political structure of corrupt privilege.13
The cultural authority of dogmatic religion was recognized as inherently
inimical to personal liberty and unhampered intellectual speculation and
discovery. By implication, the religious sensibility itself—except in
rationalized, deistic form—could well be seen as antagonistic to human
freedom.
Yet one philosophe, the Swiss-born Jean-Jacques Rousseau, asserted a
very different view. Like his fellows in the vanguard of the Enlightenment,
Rousseau argued with the weapons of critical reason and reformist zeal. Yet
the progress of civilization they celebrated seemed to him the source of
much of the world’s evil. Man suffered from civilization’s corrupt
336 

sophistications, which alienated him from his natural condition of simplicity,
sincerity, equality, kindness, and true understanding. Moreover, Rousseau
believed religion was intrinsic to the human condition. He contended that
the philosophes’ exaltation of reason had neglected man’s actual nature—
his feelings, his depths of impulse and intuition and spiritual hunger that
transcended all abstract formulae. Rousseau certainly disbelieved in the
organized churches and clergy, and thought absurd the orthodox Christian
belief that its form of worship was the exclusively and eternally genuine one
—the only religion acceptable to the Creator of a world most of whose
inhabitants had never heard of Christianity. Even Christianity notoriously
disagreed on what was the exclusively correct form of worship. Rather than
through the mediation of theological dogmas, priestly hierarchies, and
hostile sectarianism, Rousseau believed humanity could best learn to
worship the Creator by turning to nature, for there lay a sublimity that all
could understand and feel. The rationally demonstrable God of the Deists
was unsatisfactory, for love of God and awareness of morality were
primarily feelings, not reasonings. The deity recognized by Rousseau was not
an impersonal first cause, but a God of love and beauty whom the human
soul could know from within. Reverent awe before the cosmos, the joy of
meditative solitude, the direct intuitions of the moral conscience, the natural
spontaneity of human compassion, a “theism” of the heart—these constituted
the true nature of religion.
Rousseau thus set forth an immensely influential position beyond those of
the orthodox Church and the skeptical philosophes, combining the
religiosity of the former with the rational reformism of the latter, yet critical
of both: if the one was constricting in its narrow dogmatism, the other was
scarcely less so in its arid abstractions. And here lay the seed for
contradictory developments, for at the same time that Rousseau reaffirmed
man’s religious nature, he encouraged the modern sensibility in its gradual
departure from Christian orthodoxy. He gave a rational reformist’s support
to the lingering religious impulse of the modern mind, yet he gave that
impulse new dimensions that served the Enlightenment’s undermining of
the Christian tradition. Rousseau’s embrace of a religion whose essence was
universal rather than exclusive, whose ground was in nature and man’s
subjective emotions and mystical intuitions rather than in biblical revelation,
337 

initiated a spiritual current in Western culture that would lead first to
Romanticism and eventually to the existentialism of a later age.
Thus whether it was the anticlerical Deism of Voltaire, the rationalist
skepticism of Diderot, the agnostic empiricism of Hume, the materialistic
atheism of Holbach, or the nature mysticism and emotional religiosity of
Rousseau, the advance of the eighteenth century brought traditional
Christianity into ever-lower regard in the eyes of progressive Europeans.
By the nineteenth century, both organized religion and the religious
impulse itself had been subjected by Karl Marx to a forceful and acute
social-political critique—and prophetically redirected to embrace the
revolutionary cause. In Marx’s analysis, all ideas and cultural forms reflected
material motivations, specifically the dynamics of class struggle, and religion
was no exception. Despite their high-minded doctrines, the organized
churches seldom seemed to concern themselves with the plight of workers
or the poor. This seeming contradiction, Marx held, was in fact essential to
the churches’ character, for the true role of religion was to keep the lower
classes in order. A social opiate, religion effectively served the interests of the
ruling class against the masses by encouraging the latter to forgo their
responsibility for changing the present world of injustice and exploitation, in
exchange for the false security of divine providence and the false promise of
immortal life. Organized religion formed an essential element in the
bourgeoisie’s control of society, for religious beliefs lulled the proletariat into
self-defeating inaction. To speak of God and build one’s life on such fantasies
was to betray man. By contrast, a genuine philosophy of action must start
with the living man and his tangible needs. To transform the world, to
realize the ideals of human justice and community, man must rid himself of
the religious delusion.
The more moderate voices of nineteenth-century liberalism characteristic
of the advanced Western societies also argued for the reduction of organized
religion’s influence on political and intellectual life, and put forth the ideal
of a pluralism accommodating the broadest possible freedom of belief
consonant with social order. Liberal thinkers of a religious persuasion
recognized not only the political necessity of freedom of worship, or
freedom not to worship at all, in a liberal democracy, but also the religious
necessity of such freedom. To be constrained to be religious, let alone bound
338 

to a particular religion, could scarcely encourage a genuinely religious
approach to life.
But in such a liberal and pluralistic environment, a more secular
sensibility became the increasingly usual outcome, for many the natural one.
Religious tolerance gradually metamorphosed into religious indifference. It
was no longer mandatory in Western society to be Christian, and in
coincidence with this growing freedom, fewer members of the culture
found the Christian belief system intrinsically compelling or satisfying. Both
liberal utilitarian and radical socialist philosophies seemed to offer the
contemporary age more cogent programs for human activity than the
traditional religions. Nor was the tenor of materialism unique to Marxism,
for while capitalism had earlier been encouraged by certain elements of the
Protestant sensibility, the capitalist societies’ increasing preoccupation with
material progress could not but depreciate the urgency of the Christian
salvational message and the spiritual enterprise generally.14 While religious
observance continued to be widely upheld as a pillar of social integrity and
civilized values, that observance was often indistinguishable from the
conventions of Victorian morality.
Moreover, 
the 
Christian 
churches 
were 
themselves 
unwitting
contributors to their own decline. The Roman Catholic Church, in its
Counter-Reformational response to the Protestant heresy, had reinforced its
conservative structure by crystallizing its past—doctrinally as well as
institutionally—thereby leaving it comparatively unresponsive to any
changes necessitated by the evolution of the modern era. Catholicism
maintained a certain impregnable strength among its still vast membership,
but at the cost of its appeal to the growing modern sensibility. Conversely,
the Protestant churches in their Reformational response to Catholicism had
established a more antiauthoritarian and noncentralized structure by
overthrowing the past in its monolithic Catholic form, setting forth literal
Scripture alone as a new foundation. But in so doing, Protestantism tended
to fray out in ever-diversifying sectarianism, while leaving its later
membership, under the impact of scientific discoveries antithetical to literal
interpretations of the Bible, more susceptible to the secularizing influences
of the modern age. In either case, Christianity lost much of its relevance to
the contemporary mind. By the twentieth century, with uncounted
339 

thousands quietly leaving their inherited religion, the latter had been
radically diminished in cultural importance.
Christianity now experienced itself as not only a divided church but a
shrinking one, dwindling away before the ever-widening and ever-
deepening onslaught of secularism. The Christian religion now faced a
historical situation not unlike that encountered at its inception, when it was
one faith among many in a large, sophisticated, urbanized environment—a
world ambivalent about religion in general, and distanced from the claims
and concerns of the Christian revelation in particular. The once perfervid
enmities existing between Protestantism and Catholicism, the mutual
distancing between all the various sects of Christianity, now diminished as
these recognized their close affinity in the face of a growingly secular world.
Kinship even with Judaism, so long the outcast in a Christian world, began to
be more warmly acknowledged. In the modern world, all religions seemed to
have more in common, a fading precious truth, than in dispute. Many
commentators on the modern sensibility believed that religion was in its
terminal stages, that it was just a matter of time before the irrationalities of
religion would have relinquished their hold on the human mind.
Nevertheless, the Judaeo-Christian tradition sustained itself. Millions of
families continued to nurture their children in the tenets and images of their
inherited faith. Theologians continued to develop more historically nuanced
understandings of Scripture and Church tradition, more flexible and
imaginative applications of religious principles to life in the contemporary
world. The Catholic Church began to open itself to modernity, to pluralism,
ecumenism, and new freedom in matters of belief and worship. Christian
churches in general moved to embrace wider congregations by making their
structures and doctrines more relevant to the challenges—intellectual,
psychological, sociological, political—of modern existence. Efforts were
made to reconstruct an idea of God more immanent and evolutionary in
character than the traditional one, more congruent with current cosmology
and intellectual trends. Prominent philosophers, scientists, writers, and
artists continued to claim personal meaning and spiritual comfort in the
Judaeo-Christian framework. Yet the general movement of the culture’s
intellectual elite, of the modern sensibility as a whole—of the religiously
reared child as it reached a skeptical and secular modern maturity—was
340 

largely otherwise.
For beyond the institutional and scriptural anachronisms discouraging a
universal continuation of Christian faith lay a more general psychological
discrepancy between the traditional Judaeo-Christian self-image and that of
modern man. As early as the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the heavy
taint of Original Sin ceased to be experienced as a dominant element in the
lives of those born into the bright world of modern progress, nor could such
a doctrine be readily combined with the scientific conception of man. The
traditional image of the Semitic-Augustinian-Protestant God, who creates
man too weak to withstand evil temptation, and who predestines the
majority of his human creatures to eternal damnation with little
consideration of their good works or honest attempts at virtue, ceased to be
either palatable or plausible to many sensitive members of modern culture.
The internal liberation from religious guilt and fear was as attractive an
element in the secular world view as was earlier the external liberation from
oppressive Church-dominated political and social structures. It was also
increasingly recognized that the human spirit was expressed in secular life
or not at all—any division of spiritual and secular was an artificiality, and an
impoverishment for both. To locate the human spirit in another reality,
transcendent or otherworldly, was to subvert that spirit altogether.
It was Friedrich Nietzsche’s epochal pronouncement of “the death of God”
that culminated this long evolution in the Western psyche and
foreshadowed the existential mood of the twentieth century. With ruthless
perceptiveness, he held up a dark mirror to the soul of Christianity—its
inculcation of attitudes and values opposed to man’s present existence, to
the body, to the Earth, to courage and heroism, to joy and freedom, to life
itself. “They would have to sing better songs to me that I might believe in
their Redeemer: his disciples would have to look more redeemed!” And with
this critique many agreed. For Nietzsche, the death of God signified not just
the recognition of a religious illusion, but the demise of an entire
civilization’s world view that for too long had held man back from a daring,
liberating embrace of life’s totality.
With Freud, the modern psychological evaluation of religion achieved a
new level of systematic and penetrating theoretical analysis. The discovery of
the unconscious and of the human psyche’s tendency to project traumatic
341 

memory constellations onto later experience opened up a crucial new
dimension to the critical understanding of religious beliefs. In the light of
psychoanalysis, the Judaeo-Christian God could be seen as a reified
psychological projection based on the child’s naive view of its libidinally
restrictive and seemingly omnipotent parent. Reconceived in this way, many
aspects of religious behavior and belief appeared to be comprehensible as
symptoms of a deeply rooted cultural obsessive-compulsive neurosis. The
projection of a morally authoritative patriarchal deity could be seen as
having been a social necessity in earlier stages of human development,
satisfying the cultural psyche’s need for a powerful “external” force to
undergird society’s ethical requirements. But having internalized those
requirements, the psychologically mature individual could recognize the
projection for what it was, and dispense with it.
An important role in the devaluation of traditional religion was also
played by the issue of sexual experience. With the rise in the twentieth
century of a broad-mindedly secular and psychologically informed
perspective, the long-held Christian ideal of asexual or antisexual asceticism
seemed symptomatic more of cultural and personal psychoneurosis than of
eternal spiritual law. Medieval practices such as mortification of the flesh
were recognized as pathological aberrations rather than saintly exercises.
The sexual attitudes of the Victorian era were seen as parochial inhibitions.
Both Protestantism’s puritanical tradition and the Catholic Church’s
continuing restrictiveness in sexual matters, particularly its prohibition of
contraception, alienated thousands from the fold. The demands and delights
of human eros made the traditional religious attitudes seem unhealthily
constraining. As Freud’s insights were integrated into the ever-growing
modern movement of personal liberation and self-realization, a powerful
Dionysian impulse arose in the West. Even for more staid sensibilities, it
made little sense for human beings systematically to deny and repress that
part of their being, their physical organism, that was not only their
evolutionary inheritance but their existential foundation. Modern man had
committed himself to this world, with all the entailments of such a choice.
Finally, even the long schooling of the Western mind in the Christian
value system eventually worked to undermine Christianity’s status in the
modern era. From the Enlightenment onward, the continuing development
342 

of the Western mind’s social conscience, its growing recognition of
unconscious prejudices and injustices, and its increasing historical
knowledge shed new light on the actual practice of the Christian religion
over the centuries. The Christian injunction to love and serve all humanity
and high valuation of the individual human soul now stood in sharp
counterpoint to Christianity’s long history of bigotry and violent intolerance
—its forcible conversion of other peoples, its ruthless suppression of other
cultural perspectives, its persecutions of heretics, its crusades against
Moslems, its oppression of Jews, its depreciation of women’s spirituality and
exclusion of women from positions of religious authority, its association with
slavery and colonialist exploitation, its pervasive spirit of prejudice and
religious arrogance maintained against all those outside the fold. Measured
by its own standards, Christianity fell woefully short of ethical greatness, and
many alternative systems, from ancient Stoicism to modern liberalism and
socialism, seemed to provide equally inspiring programs for human activity
without the baggage of implausible supernatural belief.
The Modern Character
Thus was the movement from the Christian to the secular world view an
overdetermined progression. Indeed, it would seem that the overall driving
force of secularism did not lie in any specific factor or combination of
factors—the 
scientific 
discrepancies 
with 
biblical 
revelation, 
the
metaphysical consequences of empiricism, the social-political critiques of
organized religion, the growing psychological acuity, the changing sexual
mores, and so forth—for any of these could have been negotiable, as they
were for those many who remained devout Christians. Secularism, rather,
reflected a more general shift of character in the Western psyche, a shift
visible in the various specific factors but transcending and subsuming them
in its own global logic. The new psychological constitution of the modern
character had been developing since the high Middle Ages, had
conspicuously emerged in the Renaissance, was sharply clarified and
empowered by the Scientific Revolution, then extended and solidified in the
course of the Enlightenment. By the nineteenth century, in the wake of the
343 

democratic and industrial revolutions, it had achieved mature form. The
direction and quality of that character reflected a gradual but finally radical
shift of psychological allegiance from God to man, from dependence to
independence, from otherworldliness to this world, from the transcendent to
the empirical, from myth and belief to reason and fact, from universals to
particulars, from a supernaturally determined static cosmos to a naturally
determined evolving cosmos, and from a fallen humanity to an advancing
one.
The tenor of Christianity no longer suited the prevailing mood of man’s
self-sustained progress in and mastery of his world. Modern man’s capacity
to understand the natural order and to bend that order to his own benefit
could not but diminish his former sense of contingency upon God. Using his
own natural intelligence, and without the aid of Holy Scripture’s divine
revelation, man had penetrated nature’s mysteries, transformed his universe,
and immeasurably enhanced his existence. Combined with the seemingly
non-Christian character of the scientifically revealed natural order, this new
sense of human dignity and power inevitably moved man toward his secular
self. The tangible immediacy of this world and man’s ability to find his
meaning in it, to respond to its demands, and to experience progress within
it all relieved him of that incessant striving for and anxiety concerning an
afterworldly salvation. Man was responsible for his own earthly destiny. His
own wits and will could change his world. Science gave man a new faith—
not only in scientific knowledge, but in himself. It was particularly this
emerging psychological climate that made the progressive sequence of
philosophical and scientific advances—whether by Locke, Hume, and Kant,
or by Darwin, Marx, and Freud—so potently effective in undercutting
religion’s role in the modern world view. The traditional Christian attitudes
were no longer psychologically appropriate to the modern character.
Especially consequential for the secularization of the modern character
was the nature of its allegiance to reason. The modern mind required of
itself, and exulted in, a systematically critical independence of judgment—an
existential posture not easily compatible with the pious surrender required
for belief in divine revelation or obedience to the precepts of a priestly
hierarchy. The modern emergence of autonomous personal judgment,
prototypically incarnated in Luther, Galileo, and Descartes, made
344 

increasingly impossible any continuation of the medieval era’s virtually
universal intellectual deference to external authorities, such as the Church
and Aristotle, that had been culturally empowered by tradition. And as
modern man continued to mature, his striving for intellectual independence
grew more absolute.
Thus the advance of the modern era brought a massive shift in the
psychological vector of perceived authority. Whereas in earlier periods of
the West’s history, wisdom and authority were characteristically located in
the past—biblical prophets, ancient bards, classical philosophers, the
apostles and early fathers of the Church—the modern awareness
increasingly located that power in the present, in its own unprecedented
achievements, in its own self-consciousness as the evolutionary vanguard of
human experience. Earlier eras looked backward, while the modern looked
to itself and its future. Modern culture’s complexity, productivity, and
sophistication plainly put it in a class beyond all predecessors. And whereas
the past authority had been typically associated with a transcendent
principle—God, mythic deities, a cosmic intelligence—the modern
awareness was itself becoming that authority, subsuming that power,
making the transcendent immanent in itself. Medieval theism and ancient
cosmism had given way to modern humanism.
Hidden Continuities
The West had “lost its faith”—and found a new one, in science and in man.
But paradoxically, much of the Christian world view found continued life,
albeit in often unrecognized forms, in the West’s new secular outlook. Just
as the evolving Christian understanding did not fully divorce itself from its
Hellenic predecessor but, on the contrary, employed and integrated many of
the latter’s essential elements, so too did the modern secular world view—
often less consciously—retain essential elements from Christianity. The
Christian ethical values and the Scholastic-developed faith in human reason
and in the intelligibility of the empirical universe were conspicuous among
these, but even as fundamentalist a Judaeo-Christian doctrine as the
command in Genesis that man exercise dominion over nature found modern
345 

affirmation, often explicit as in Bacon and Descartes, in the advances of
science and technology.15 So too did the Judaeo-Christian high regard for
the individual soul, endowed with “sacred” inalienable rights and intrinsic
dignity, continue in the secular humanist ideals of modern liberalism—as did
other themes such as the moral self-responsibility of the individual, the
tension between the ethical and the political, the imperative to care for the
helpless and less fortunate, and the ultimate unity of mankind. The West’s
belief in itself as the most historically significant and favored culture echoed
the Judaeo-Christian theme of the Chosen People. The global expansion of
Western culture as the best and most appropriate for all mankind
represented a secular continuation of the Roman Catholic Church’s self-
concept as the one universal Church for all humanity. Modern civilization
now replaced Christianity as the cultural norm and ideal with which all
other societies were to be compared, and to which they were to be
converted. Just as Christianity had, in the process of overcoming and
succeeding the Roman Empire, become Roman itself in the centralized,
hierarchical, and politically motivated Roman Catholic Church, so too did
the modern secular West, in the process of overcoming and succeeding
Christianity and the Catholic Church, incorporate and unconsciously
continue many of the latter’s characteristic approaches to the world.
But perhaps the most pervasive and specifically Judaeo-Christian
component tacitly retained in the modern world view was the belief in
man’s linear historical progress toward ultimate fulfillment. Modern man’s
self-understanding was emphatically teleological, with humanity seen as
moving in a historical development out of a darker past characterized by
ignorance, primitiveness, poverty, suffering, and oppression, and toward a
brighter ideal future characterized by intelligence, sophistication, prosperity,
happiness, and freedom. The faith in that movement was based largely on an
underlying trust in the salvational effect of expanding human knowledge:
Humanity’s future fulfillment would be achieved in a world reconstructed
by science. The original Judaeo-Christian eschatological expectation had
here been transformed into a secular faith. The religious faith in God’s
eventual salvation of mankind—whether Israel’s arrival in the Promised
Land, the Church’s arrival at the millennium, the Holy Spirit’s progressive
perfecting of humanity, or the Second Coming of Christ—now became an
346 

evolutionary confidence, or revolutionary belief, in an eventual this-worldly
utopia whose realization would be expedited by the expert application of
human reason to nature and society.
Even in the course of Christianity’s own development of the end time
expectation, the waiting and hoping for divine action to initiate the world’s
transfiguration had gradually shifted during the early modern period to a
sense that man’s own activity and initiative were required to prepare for a
Christian social utopia appropriate to the Second Coming. In the
Renaissance, Erasmus had suggested a new understanding of Christian
eschatology whereby humanity might move toward perfection in this world,
with history realizing its goal of the Kingdom of God in a peaceful earthly
society—not through apocalypse, divine intervention, and otherworldly
escape, but through a divine immanence working within man’s historical
evolution. In a similar spirit during the Scientific Revolution, Bacon had
heralded the coming scientific civilization as a movement toward material
redemption coincident with the Christian millennium. As secularization
advanced during the modern era, the Christian element in and rationale for
the coming utopia dwindled and disappeared, though the expectation and
striving remained. In time, the focus on a social utopia merged into
futurology, which replaced earlier eras’ visions and anticipations of the
Kingdom of Heaven. “Planning” replaced “hoping” as human reason and
technology demonstrated their miraculous efficacy.
Confidence in human progress, akin to the biblical faith in humanity’s
spiritual evolution and future consummation, was so central to the modern
world view that it notably increased with the decline of Christianity.
Expectations of mankind’s coming fulfillment found vivid expression even as
the modern mind reached its most determinedly secular stages in Condorcet,
Comte, and Marx. Indeed, the ultimate statement of belief in evolutionary
human deification was found in Christianity’s most fervent antagonist,
Nietzsche, whose Superman would be born out of the death of God and the
overcoming of the old limited man.
But regardless of what attitude was maintained toward Christianity, the
conviction that man was steadily and inevitably approaching entrance into a
better world, that man himself was being progressively improved and
perfected through his own efforts, constituted one of the most characteristic,
347 

deep-seated, and consequential principles of the modern sensibility.
Christianity no longer seemed to be the driving force of the human
enterprise. For the robust civilization of the West at the high noon of
modernity, it was science and reason, not religion and belief, which
propelled that progress. Man’s will, not God’s, was the acknowledged source
of the world’s betterment and humanity’s advancing liberation.
348 

W
VI
The Transformation of the Modern Era
e now approach the last stages of our narrative. What remains for
us is to scan the trajectory taken by the modern mind as it
developed from the foundations and’ premises of the modern
world view just examined. For perhaps the most momentous paradox
concerning the character of the modern era was the curious manner in
which its progress during the centuries following the Scientific Revolution
and the Enlightenment brought Western man unprecedented freedom,
power, expansion, breadth of knowledge, depth of insight, and concrete
success, and yet simultaneously served—first subtly and later critically—to
undermine the human being’s existential situation on virtually every front:
metaphysical and cosmological, epistemological, psychological, and finally
even biological. A relentless balance, an inextricable intertwining of positive
and negative, seemed to mark the evolution of the modern age, and our task
here is to attempt to understand the nature of that intricate dialectic.
349 

The Changing Image of the Human from
Copernicus through Freud
The peculiar phenomenon of contradictory consequences ensuing from the
same intellectual advance was visible from the start of the modern era with
Copernicus’s dethroning of the Earth as the center of creation. In the same
instant that man liberated himself from the geocentric illusion of virtually all
previous generations of mankind, he also effected for himself an
unprecedentedly fundamental cosmic displacement. The universe no longer
centered on man; his cosmic position was neither fixed nor absolute. And
each succeeding step in the Scientific Revolution and its aftermath added
new dimensions to the Copernican effect, further propelling that liberation
while intensifying that displacement.
With Galileo, Descartes, and Newton, the new science was forged, a new
cosmology defined, a new world opened to man within which his powerful
intelligence could act with new freedom and effectiveness. Yet
simultaneously, that new world was disenchanted of all those personal and
spiritual qualities that for millennia had given human beings their sense of
cosmic meaning. The new universe was a machine, a self-contained
mechanism of force and matter, devoid of goals or purpose, bereft of
intelligence or consciousness, its character fundamentally alien to that of
man. The premodern world had been permeated with spiritual, mythic,
theistic, and other humanly meaningful categories, but all these were
regarded by the modern perception as anthropomorphic projections. Mind
and matter, psyche and world, were separate realities. The scientific
liberation from theological dogma and animistic superstition was thus
accompanied by a new sense of human alienation from a world that no
350 

longer responded to human values, nor offered a redeeming context within
which could be understood the larger issues of human existence. Similarly,
with science’s quantitative analysis of the world, the methodological
liberation from subjective distortions was accompanied by the ontological
diminution of all those qualities—emotional, aesthetic, ethical, sensory,
imaginative, intentional—that seemed most constitutive of human
experience. These losses and gains were noted, but the paradox seemed
inescapable if man was to be faithful to his own intellectual rigor. Science
may have revealed a cold, impersonal world, but it was the true one
nonetheless. Despite any nostalgia for the venerable but now disproved
cosmic womb, one could not go backward.
With Darwin, these consequences were further affirmed and amplified.
Any remaining theological assumptions concerning the world’s divine
government and man’s special spiritual status were severely controverted by
the new theory and evidence: Man was a highly successful animal. He was
not God’s noble creation with a divine destiny, but nature’s experiment with
an uncertain destiny. Consciousness, once believed to rule the universe and
permeate it, was now understood to have arisen accidentally in the course of
matter’s evolution, to have been in existence a relatively brief time, and to be
characteristic of a limited and relatively insignificant part of the cosmos—
Homo sapiens—for which there was no guarantee its ultimate evolutionary
fate would be any different from that of thousands of other now extinct
species.
With the world no longer a divine creation, a certain spiritual nobility
seemed to have departed from it, an impoverishment that also necessarily
touched man, its erstwhile crown. While Christian theology had maintained
that natural history existed for the sake of human history, and that humanity
was essentially at home in a universe designed for its spiritual unfoldment,
the new understanding of evolution refuted both claims as anthropocentric
delusions. All was in flux. Man was not an absolute, and his cherished values
had no foundation outside of himself. Man’s character, his mind and will,
came from below, not above. The structures not only of religion but of
society, of culture, of reason itself now seemed to be relatively arbitrary
expressions of the struggle for biological success. Thus too was Darwin
liberating and diminishing. Man could now recognize that he rode forth at
351 

the crest of evolution’s advance, nature’s most complex and dazzling
achievement; but he was also just an animal of no “higher” purpose. The
universe provided no assurance of indefinite success for the species, and
certain assurance of individual demise at physical death. Indeed, on the
longer-term macroscopic scale, the growing modern sense of life’s
contingency was further enforced by nineteenth-century physics’
formulation of the second law of thermodynamics, which portrayed the
universe as moving spontaneously and irreversibly from order to disorder
toward a final condition of maximum entropy, or “heat death.” The chief
facts of human history until the present were fortuitously supportive
biophysical circumstances and brute survival, with no apparent larger
meaning or context, and with no cosmic security supplied by any
providential design from above.
Freud dramatically forwarded these developments as he brought the
Darwinian perspective to bear more fully on the human psyche, presenting
persuasive evidence for the existence of unconscious forces determining
man’s behavior and conscious awareness. In so doing, he seemingly both
freed the modern mind from its naive unconsciousness (or rather from
being altogether unconscious of its unconsciousness), giving it a new
profundity of self-understanding, yet also confronted that mind with a dark,
deflating vision of its true character. For on the one hand, psychoanalysis
served as a virtual epiphany for the early twentieth-century mind as it
brought to light the archaeological depths of the psyche, disclosed the
intelligibility of dreams, fantasy, and psychopathological symptoms,
illuminated the sexual etiology of neurosis, demonstrated the importance of
infantile experience in conditioning adult life, discovered the Oedipus
complex, unveiled the psychological relevance of mythology and symbolism,
recognized the psychic structural components of the ego, superego, and id,
revealed the mechanisms of resistance, repression, and projection, and
brought forth a host of other insights laying open the mind’s character and
internal dynamics. Freud thereby represented a brilliant culmination of the
Enlightenment project, bringing even the human unconscious under the
light of rational investigation.
Yet on the other hand, Freud radically undermined the entire
Enlightenment project by his revelation that below or beyond the rational
352 

mind existed an overwhelmingly potent repository of nonrational forces
which did not readily submit either to rational analysis or to conscious
manipulation, and in comparison with which man’s conscious ego was a
frail and fragile epiphenomenon. Freud thereby furthered the cumulative
modern process of casting man out of that privileged cosmic status his
modern rational self-image had retained from the Christian world view.
Man could no longer doubt that it was not only his body but his psyche as
well for which powerful biological instincts—amoral, aggressive, erotic,
“polymorphous perverse”—were the most significant motivating factors, and
that in the face of these the proud human virtues of rationality, moral
conscience, and religious feelings were conceivably no more than reaction-
formations and delusions of the civilized self-concept. Given the existence of
such unconscious determinants, man’s sense of personal freedom could well
be spurious. The psychologically aware individual now knew himself to be,
like all members of modern civilization, condemned to internal division,
repression, neurosis, and alienation.
With Freud, the Darwinian struggle with nature took on new dimensions,
as man was now constrained to live in eternal struggle with his own nature.
Not only was God exposed as a primitive infantile projection, but the
conscious human ego itself with its prize virtue the human reason—man’s
last bastion separating him from nature—was now dethroned, it too
recognized as nothing more exalted than a recent and precarious
development out of the primordial id. The true wellspring of human
motivations was a seething caldron of irrational, bestial impulses—and
contemporary historical events began to provide distressing evidence for
just such a thesis. Not just man’s divinity but his humanity was coming into
question. As the scientific mind emancipated modern man from his illusions,
he seemed increasingly swallowed up by nature, deprived of his ancient
dignities, unmasked as a creature of base instinct.
Marx’s contribution had already suggested a similar deflation, for as Freud
revealed the personal unconscious, Marx exposed the social unconscious.
The philosophical, religious, and moral values of each age could be plausibly
comprehended as determined by economic and political variables, whereby
control over the means of production was maintained by the most powerful
class. The entire superstructure of human belief could be seen as reflecting
353 

the more basic struggle for material power. The elite of Western civilization,
for all its sense of cultural achievement, might recognize itself in Marx’s
dark portrait as a self-deceiving bourgeois imperialist oppressor. Class
struggle, not civilized progress, was the program of the foreseeable future—
and again, contemporary historical developments appeared to bear out that
analysis. Between Marx and Freud, with Darwin behind them, the modern
intelligentsia increasingly perceived man’s cultural values, psychological
motivations, and conscious awareness as historically relative phenomena
derived from unconscious political, economic, and instinctual impulses of an
entirely naturalistic quality. The principles and directives of the Scientific
Revolution—the search for material, impersonal, secular explanations for all
phenomena—had found new and illuminating applications in the
psychological and social dimensions of human experience. Yet in that
process, modern man’s optimistic self-estimate from the Enlightenment was
subject to repeated contradiction and diminution by his own advancing
intellectual horizons.
These horizons were also radically expanded under the force of scientific
discoveries that, like the views of Darwin, Marx, and Freud, applied a
historical and evolutionary model of change to an increasing array of
phenomena. That model had first emerged in the Renaissance and
Enlightenment when European man’s recently unbound intellectual
curiosity was combined with a new and emphatic sense of his dynamic
progress. From these grew a heightened interest in the classical and ancient
past from which he had developed, and enhanced standards of scholarship
and historical investigation. From Valla and Machiavelli to Voltaire and
Gibbon, from Vico and Herder to Hegel and Ranke, attention to history
increased, as did awareness of historical change and recognition of
developmental 
principles 
by 
which 
historical 
change 
could 
be
comprehended. The global explorers had similarly expanded Europeans’
geographical knowledge, and with it their exposure to other cultures and
other histories. With the continuous growth of information in these areas, it
gradually became evident that human history extended back in time far
longer than had been assumed, that there existed many other significant
cultures past and present, that these possessed views of the world widely
divergent from the European, and that there was nothing absolute,
354 

immemorial, or secure about modern Western man’s present status or
values. For a culture long accustomed to a relatively static, abbreviated, and
Eurocentric conception of human history—indeed, of universal history (as
in Archbishop Ussher’s famous dating of the year of Creation in Genesis as
4004 B.C.)—the new perspectives were disorienting in both scope and
character. Yet subsequent work by archaeologists pressed the horizon back
still further, uncovering ever more ancient civilizations whose entire rise
and fall had occurred before Greece and Rome were born. Unending
development and variety, decay and transformation, were the law of history,
and history’s trajectory was disconcertingly long.
When the developmental and historical perspective was applied to
nature, as with Hutton and Lyell in geology, and Lamarck and Darwin in
biology, the time spans within which organic life and the Earth were known
to have existed were exponentially expanded to thousands of millions of
years, in comparison with which all of human history had taken place
within a startlingly brief period. Yet this was only the beginning, for then
astronomers, empowered by increasingly advanced technical tools, applied
similar principles toward understanding the cosmos itself, resulting in its
unprecedented temporal and spatial expansion. By the twentieth century,
the resulting cosmology had posited the solar system as a vanishingly small
part of a gigantic galaxy containing a hundred billion other stars, each
comparable to the Sun, with the observable universe containing a hundred
billion other galaxies, each comparable to the Milky Way. These individual
galaxies were, in turn, members of much larger galactic clusters, themselves
seemingly parts of even vaster galactic superclusters, with celestial space
conveniently measurable only in terms of distances traveled in years at the
speed of light, and with the distances between galactic clusters calculated in
hundreds of millions of light-years. All these stars and galaxies were
presumed to be involved in enormously long processes of formation and
decay, with the universe itself born in a scarcely conceivable, let alone
explicable, primordial explosion some ten or twenty billion years past.
Such macrocosmic dimensions forced upon man’s awareness a
disturbingly humble sense of his own relative minuteness in both time and
space, dwarfing the entire human enterprise, not to mention individual
human lives, to shockingly minuscule proportions. Superseded by such
355 

immensities, the earlier expansions of man’s world effected by Columbus,
Galileo, and even Darwin seemed comparatively intimate. Thus did the
combined efforts of explorers, geographers, historians, anthropologists,
archaeologists, 
paleontologists, 
geologists, 
biologists, 
physicists, 
and
astronomers serve to expand man’s knowledge and diminish his cosmic
stature. The distant origins of mankind among the primates and primitives,
and yet, relative to the age of the Earth, their comparative proximity; the
great size of the Earth and the solar system, and yet, relative to the galaxy,
their extreme minuteness; the stupendous expanse of the heavens in which
the Earth’s nearest neighboring galaxies were so unimaginably remote that
their light now visible on Earth had left its source over a hundred thousand
years earlier, when Homo sapiens was still in the Old Stone Age—faced with
such vistas, thoughtful persons had good cause to ponder the apparent
insignificance of human existence in the greater scheme of things.
Yet it was not just the radical temporal and spatial diminution of human
life effected by science’s advance that threatened modern man’s self-image,
but also science’s qualitative devaluation of his essential character. For as
reductionism was successfully employed to analyze nature, and then human
nature as well, man himself was reduced. With science’s increasing
sophistication, it seemed likely, perhaps even necessary, that the laws of
physics were in some sense at the bottom of everything. The phenomena of
chemistry could be reduced to principles of physics, those of biology to
chemistry and physics, and, for many scientists, those of human behavior
and awareness to biology and biochemistry. Hence consciousness itself
became a mere epiphenomenon of matter, a secretion of the brain, a
function of electrochemical circuitry serving biological imperatives. The
Cartesian program of mechanistic analysis thereby began to overcome even
the division between res cogitans and res extensa, thinking subject and
material world, as La Mettrie, Pavlov, Watson, Skinner, and others argued
that as the universe as a whole could be best comprehended as a machine, so
too could man. Human behavior and mental functioning were perhaps only
reflex activities based on mechanistic principles of stimulus and response,
compounded by genetic factors that were themselves increasingly
susceptible to scientific manipulations. Ruled by statistical determinisms,
man was an appropriate subject for the domain of probability theory. Man’s
356 

future, his very essence, appeared to be as contingent and unmysterious as
an engineering problem. Although it was, strictly speaking, only a regulatory
assumption, the widespread hypothesis that all the complexities of human
experience, and of the world in general, would ultimately be explicable in
terms of natural scientific principles increasingly, if often unconsciously,
took on the character of a well-substantiated scientific principle itself, with
profound metaphysical entailments.
The more modern man strove to control nature by understanding its
principles, to free himself from nature’s power, to separate himself from
nature’s necessity and rise above it, the more completely his science
metaphysically submerged man into nature, and thus into its mechanistic
and impersonal character as well. For if man lived in an impersonal
universe, and if his existence was entirely grounded in and subsumed by that
universe, then man too was essentially impersonal, his private experience of
personhood a psychological fiction. In such a light, man was becoming little
more than a genetic strategy for the continuance of his species, and as the
twentieth century progressed that strategy’s success was becoming yearly
more uncertain. Thus it was the irony of modern intellectual progress that
man’s genius discovered successive principles of determinism—Cartesian,
Newtonian, 
Darwinian, 
Marxist, 
Freudian, 
behaviorist, 
genetic,
neurophysiological, sociobiological—that steadily attenuated belief in his
own rational and volitional freedom, while eliminating his sense of being
anything more than a peripheral and transient accident of material
evolution.
357 

The Self-Critique of the Modern Mind
These paradoxical developments were paralleled by the simultaneous
progress of modern philosophy as it analyzed the nature and extent of
human knowledge with ever-increasing rigor, subtlety, and insight. For at
the same time that modern man was vastly extending his effective
knowledge of the world, his critical epistemology inexorably revealed the
disquieting limits beyond which his knowledge could not claim to penetrate.
From Locke to Hume
With Newton’s synthesis, the Enlightenment began with an unprecedented
confidence in human reason, and the new science’s success in explicating
the natural world affected the efforts of philosophy in two ways: first, by
locating the basis of human knowledge in the human mind and its
encounter with the physical world; and second, by directing philosophy’s
attention to an analysis of the mind that was capable of such cognitive
success.
It was above all John Locke, Newton’s contemporary and Bacon’s heir,
who set the tone for the Enlightenment by affirming the foundational
principle of empiricism: There is nothing in the intellect that was not
previously in the senses (Nihil est in intellectu quod non antea fuerit in
sensu). Stimulated to philosophy by reading Descartes, yet also influenced by
the contemporary empirical science of Newton, Boyle, and the Royal Society,
and affected as well by Gassendi’s atomistic empiricism, Locke could not
accept the Cartesian rationalist belief in innate ideas. In Locke’s analysis, all
358 

knowledge of the world must rest finally on man’s sensory experience.
Through the combining and compounding of simple sensory impressions or
“ideas” (defined as mental contents) into more complex concepts, through
reflection after sensation, the mind can arrive at sound conclusions. Sense
impressions and inner reflection on these impressions: “These two are the
fountains of knowledge, from whence all the ideas we have, or can naturally
have, do spring.” The mind is at first a blank tablet, upon which experience
writes. It is intrinsically a passive receptor of its experience, and receives
atomistic sensory impressions that represent the external material objects
causing them. From those impressions, the mind can build its conceptual
understanding by means of its own introspective and compounding
operations. The mind possesses innate powers, but not innate ideas.
Cognition begins with sensation.
The British empiricist demand that sensory experience be the ultimate
source of knowledge of the world set itself in opposition to the Continental
rationalist orientation, epitomized in Descartes and variously elaborated by
Spinoza and Leibniz, which held that the mind alone, through its recognition
of clear, distinct, and self-evident truths, could achieve certain knowledge.
For the empiricists, such empirically ungrounded rationalism was, as Bacon
had said, akin to a spider’s producing cobwebs out of its own substance. The
characteristic imperative of the Enlightenment (soon to be carried by
Voltaire from England to the Continent and the French Encyclopedists) held
that reason required sensory experience to know anything about the world
other than its own concoctions. The best criterion of truth was henceforth
its genetic basis—in sense experience—not just its apparent intrinsic
rational validity, which could be spurious. In subsequent empiricist thought,
rationalism was increasingly delimited in its legitimate claims: The mind
without sensory evidence cannot possess knowledge of the world, but can
only speculate, define terms, or perform mathematical and logical
operations. Similarly, the rationalist belief that science could attain certain
knowledge of general truths about the world was increasingly displaced by a
less absolutist position, suggesting that science cannot make known the real
structure of things but can only, on the basis of hypotheses concerning
appearances, discover probable truths.
This nascent skepticism in the empiricist position was already visible in
359 

Locke’s own difficulties with his theory of knowledge. For Locke recognized
there was no guarantee that all human ideas of things genuinely resembled
the external objects they were supposed to represent. Nor was he able to
reduce all complex ideas, such as the idea of substance, to simple ideas or
sensations. There were three factors in the process of human knowledge: the
mind, the physical object, and the perception or idea in the mind that
represents that object. Man knows directly only the idea in the mind, not the
object. He knows the object only mediately, through the idea. Outside man’s
perception is simply a world of substances in motion; the various
impressions of the external world that man experiences in cognition cannot
be absolutely confirmed as belonging to the world in itself.
Locke, however, attempted a partial solution to such problems by making
the distinction (following Galileo and Descartes) between primary and
secondary qualities—between those qualities that inhere in all extended
material objects as objectively measurable, like weight and shape and
motion, and those that inhere only in the subjective human experience of
those objects, like taste and odor and color. While primary qualities produce
ideas in the mind that genuinely resemble the external object, secondary
qualities produce ideas that are simply consequences of the subject’s
perceptual apparatus. By focusing on the measurable primary qualities,
science can gain reliable knowledge of the material world.
But Locke was followed by Bishop Berkeley, who pointed out that if the
empiricist analysis of human knowledge is carried through rigorously, then
it must be admitted that all qualities that the human mind registers, whether
primary or secondary, are ultimately experienced as ideas in the mind, and
there can be no conclusive inference whether or not some of those qualities
“genuinely” represent or resemble an outside object. Indeed, there can be no
conclusive inference concerning even the existence of a world of material
objects outside the mind producing those ideas. For there is no justifiable
means by which one can distinguish between objects and sensory
impressions, and thus no idea in the mind can be said to be “like” a material
thing so that the latter is “represented” to the mind. Since one can never get
outside of the mind to compare the idea with the actual object, the whole
notion of representation is groundless. The same arguments Locke used
against the representational accuracy of secondary qualities were equally
360 

applicable to primary qualities, for in the end both types of qualities must be
regarded as experiences of the mind.
Locke’s doctrine of representation was therefore untenable. In Berkeley’s
analysis, all human experience is phenomenal, limited to appearances in the
mind. Man’s perception of nature is his mental experience of nature, and
consequently all sense data must finally be adjudged as “objects for the mind”
and not representations of material substances. In effect, while Locke had
reduced all mental contents to an ultimate basis in sensation, Berkeley now
further reduced all sense data to mental contents.
The Lockean distinction between qualities that belong to the mind and
qualities that belong to matter could not be sustained, and with this
breakdown Berkeley, a bishop of the church, sought to overcome the
contemporary tendency toward “atheistic Materialism” which he felt had
unjustifiably arisen with modern science. The empiricist rightly affirms that
all knowledge rests on experience. But in the end, Berkeley pointed out, all
experience is nothing more than experience—all mental representations of
supposed material substances are finally ideas in the mind—and therefore
the existence of a material world external to the mind is an unwarranted
assumption. All that can be known with certainty to exist is the mind and its
ideas, including those ideas that seem to represent a material world. From a
rigorously philosophical point of view, “to be” does not mean “to be a
material substance”; rather, “to be” means “to be perceived by a mind” (esse
est percipi).
Yet Berkeley held that the individual mind does not subjectively determine
its experience of the world, as if the latter were a fantasy susceptible to any
person’s whim of the moment. The reason that objectivity exists, that
different individuals continually perceive a similar world, and that a reliable
order inheres in that world, is that the world and its order depend on a mind
that transcends individual minds and is universal—namely, God’s mind. That
universal mind produces sensory ideas in individual minds according to
certain regularities, the constant experience of which gradually reveals to
man the “laws of nature.” It is this situation that allows the possibility of
science. Science is not hampered by the recognition of sense data’s
immaterial basis, for it can continue its analysis of objects just as well with
the critical knowledge that they are objects for the mind—not external
361 

material substances but recurrent groups of sense qualities. The philosopher
does not have to worry about the problems created by Locke’s
representation of an external material reality that evaded certain
corroboration, because the material world does not exist as such. The ideas
in the mind are the final truth. Thus Berkeley strove to preserve the
empiricist orientation and solve Locke’s representation problems, while also
preserving a spiritual foundation for human experience and natural science.
But Berkeley in turn was followed by David Hume, who drove the
empiricist epistemological critique to its final extreme, making use of
Berkeley’s insight while turning it in a direction more characteristic of the
modern mind—more reflective of that secular skepticism growingly visible
from Montaigne through Bayle and the Enlightenment. As an empiricist
who grounded all human knowledge in sense experience, Hume agreed
with Locke’s general orientation, and he agreed too with Berkeley’s criticism
of Locke’s theory of representation; but he disagreed with Berkeley’s idealist
solution. Human experience was indeed of the phenomenal only, of sense
impressions, but there was no way to ascertain what was beyond the sense
impressions, spiritual or otherwise. Like Berkeley, Hume could not accept
Locke’s views on representative perception, but neither could he accept
Berkeley’s identification of external objects with internal ideas, rooted
ultimately in the mind of God.
To begin his analysis, Hume made a distinction between sensory
impressions and ideas: Sensory impressions are the basis of any knowledge,
and they come with a force and liveliness that make them unique. Ideas are
faint copies of those impressions. One can experience through the senses an
impression of the color blue, and on the basis of this impression one can
have an idea of that color whereby the latter can be recalled. The question
therefore arises, What causes the sensory impression? If every valid idea has
a basis in a corresponding impression, then to what impression can the mind
point for its idea of causality? None, Hume answered. If the mind analyzes its
experience without preconception, it must recognize that in fact all its
supposed knowledge is based on a continuous chaotic volley of discrete
sensations, and that on these sensations the mind imposes an order of its
own. The mind draws from its experience an explanation that in fact derives
from the mind itself, not from the experience. The mind cannot really know
362 

what causes the sensations, for it never experiences “cause” as a sensation. It
experiences only simple impressions, atomized phenomena, and causality
per se is not one of those simple impressions. Rather, through an association
of ideas—which is only a habit of the human imagination—the mind
assumes a causal relation that in fact has no basis in a sensory impression. All
that man has to base his knowledge on is impressions in the mind, and he
cannot assume to know what exists beyond those impressions.
Hence the presumed basis for all human knowledge, the causal relation, is
never ratified by direct human experience. Instead, the mind experiences
certain impressions that suggest they are caused by an objective substance
existing continuously and independently of the mind; but the mind never
experiences that substance, only the suggestive impressions. Similarly, the
mind may perceive that one event, A, is repeatedly followed by another
event, B, and on that basis the mind may project that A causes B. But in fact
all that is known is that A and B have been regularly perceived in close
association. The causal nexus itself has never been perceived, nor can it be
said to exist outside of the human mind and its internal habits. Cause must
be recognized as merely the accident of a repeated conjunction of events in
the mind. It is the reification of a psychological expectation, apparently
affirmed by experience but never genuinely substantiated.
Even the ideas of space and time are ultimately not independent realities,
as Newton assumed, but are simply the result of experiencing the
coexistence or succession of particular objects. From repeated experiences
of this kind, the notions of time and space are abstracted by the mind, but
actually time and space are only ways of experiencing objects. All general
concepts originate in this way, with the mind moving from an experience of
particular impressions to an idea of relationship between those impressions,
an idea that the mind then separates and reifies. But the general concept, the
idea, is only the result of the mind’s habit of association. At bottom, the mind
experiences only particulars, and any relation between those particulars is
woven by the mind into the fabric of its experience. The intelligibility of the
world reflects habits of the mind, not the nature of reality.
Part of Hume’s intention was to refute the metaphysical claims of
philosophical rationalism and its deductive logic. In Hume’s view, two kinds
of propositions are possible, one based purely on sensation and the other
363 

purely on the intellect. A proposition based on sensation concerns obvious
matters of concrete fact (e.g., “it is a sunny day”), which are always
contingent (they could have been different, though in fact they were not). By
contrast, a proposition based purely on intellect concerns relations between
concepts (e.g., “all squares have four equal sides”), and these are always
necessary—that is, their denial leads to self-contradiction. But the truths of
pure reason, such as those of mathematics, are necessary only because they
exist in a self-contained system with no mandatory reference to the external
world. They are true only by logical definition, by making explicit what is
implicit in their own terms, and these can claim no necessary relation to the
nature of things. Hence the only truths of which pure reason is capable are
tautological. Reason alone cannot assert a truth about the ultimate nature of
things.
Moreover, not only does pure reason have no direct insight into
metaphysical matters, neither can reason pronounce on the ultimate nature
of things by inference from experience. One cannot know the supersensible
by analyzing the sensible, because the only principle upon which one can
base such a judgment—causality—is finally grounded only in the
observation of particular concrete events in temporal succession. Without
the elements of temporality and concreteness, causality is rendered
meaningless. Hence all metaphysical arguments, which seek to make certain
statements about all possible reality beyond temporal concrete experience,
are vitiated at their basis. Thus for Hume, metaphysics was just an exalted
form of mythology, of no relevance to the real world.
But another and, for the modern mind, more disturbing consequence of
Hume’s critical analysis was its apparent undermining of empirical science
itself, for the latter’s logical foundation, induction, was now recognized as
unjustifiable. The mind’s logical progress from many particulars to a
universal certainty could never be absolutely legitimated: no matter how
many times one observes a given event-sequence, one can never be certain
that that event-sequence is a causal one and will always repeat itself in
subsequent observations. Just because event B has always been observed to
follow event A in the past cannot guarantee it will always do so in the
future. Any acceptance of that “law,” any belief that the sequence represents
a true causal relationship, is only an ingrained psychological persuasion, not
364 

a logical certainty. The apparent causal necessity in phenomena is the
necessity only of subjective conviction, of the human imagination controlled
by its regular association of ideas. It has no objective basis. One can perceive
the regularity of events, but not their necessity. The latter is no more than a
subjective feeling induced by the experience of apparent regularity. In such
a context, science is possible, but it is a science of the phenomenal only, of
appearances registered in the mind, and its certainty is a subjective one,
determined not by nature but by human psychology.
Paradoxically, Hume had begun with the intention of applying rigorous
Newtonian “experimental” principles of investigation to man, to bring the
successful empirical methods of natural science to a science of man. But he
ended by casting into question the objective certainty of empirical science
altogether. If all human knowledge is based on empiricism, yet induction
cannot be logically justified, then man can have no certain knowledge.
With Hume, the long-developing empiricist stress on sense perceptions,
from Aristotle and Aquinas to Ockham, Bacon, and Locke, was brought to its
ultimate extreme, in which only the volley and chaos of those perceptions
exist, and any order imposed on those perceptions was arbitrary, human,
and without objective foundation. In terms of Plato’s fundamental distinction
between “knowledge” (of reality) and “opinion” (about appearances), for
Hume all human knowledge had to be regarded as opinion. Where Plato had
held sensory impressions to be faint copies of Ideas, Hume held ideas to be
faint copies of sensory impressions. In the long evolution of the Western
mind from the ancient idealist to the modern empiricist, the basis of reality
had been entirely reversed: Sensory experience, not ideal apprehension, was
the standard of truth–and that truth was utterly problematic. Perceptions
alone were real for the mind, and one could never know what stood beyond
them.
Locke had retained a certain faith in the capacity of the human mind to
grasp, however imperfectly, the general outlines of an external world by
means of its combining operations. But for Hume, not only was the human
mind less than perfect, it could never claim access to the world’s order,
which could not be said to exist apart from the mind. That order was not
inherent in nature, but was the result of the mind’s own associating
tendencies. If nothing was in the mind that did not ultimately derive from
365 

the senses, and if all valid complex ideas were based on simple ideas derived
from sensory impressions, then the idea of cause itself, and thus certain
knowledge of the world, had to be critically reconsidered, for cause was
never so perceived. It could never be derived from a simple direct
impression. Even the experience of a continuously existing substance was
only a belief produced by many impressions’ recurring in a regular way,
producing the fiction of an enduring entity.
Pursuing this psychological analysis of human experience still further,
Hume concluded that the mind itself was only a bundle of disconnected
perceptions, with no valid claims to substantial unity, continuous existence,
or internal coherence, let alone to objective knowledge. All order and
coherence, including that giving rise to the idea of the human self, were
understood to be mind-constructed fictions. Human beings required such
fictions to live, but the philosopher could not substantiate them. With
Berkeley, there had been no necessary material basis for experience, though
the mind had retained a certain independent spiritual power derived from
God’s mind, and the world experienced by the mind derived its order from
the same source. But with the more secular skepticism of Hume, nothing
could be said to be objectively necessary—not God, not order, not causality,
nor substantial existents, nor personal identity, nor real knowledge. All was
contingent. Man knows only phenomena, chaotic impressions; the order he
perceives therein is imagined, for reasons of psychological habit and
instinctual need, and then projected. Thus did Hume articulate philosophy’s
paradigmatic skeptical argument, one that in turn was to stimulate
Immanuel Kant to develop the central philosophical position of the modern
era.
Kant
The intellectual challenge that faced Immanuel Kant in the second half of
the eighteenth century was a seemingly impossible one: on the one hand, to
reconcile the claims of science to certain and genuine knowledge of the
world with the claim of philosophy that experience could never give rise to
such knowledge; on the other hand, to reconcile the claim of religion that
366 

man was morally free with the claim of science that nature was entirely
determined by necessary laws. With these several claims in such intricate
and pointed conflict, an intellectual crisis of profound complexity had
emerged. Kant’s proposed resolution of that crisis was equally complex,
brilliant, and weighty in its consequences.
Kant was too intimate with Newtonian science and its triumphs to doubt
that man had access to certain knowledge. Yet he felt as well the force of
Hume’s relentless analysis of the human mind. He too had come to distrust
the absolute pronouncements on the nature of the world for which a purely
rational speculative metaphysics had been pretending competence, and
concerning which it had fallen into endless and seemingly irresolvable
conflict. According to Kant, the reading of Hume’s work had awakened him
from his “dogmatic slumber,” the residue of his long training in the
dominant German rationalist school of Wolff, Leibniz’s academic
systematizer. He now recognized that man could know only the
phenomenal, and that any metaphysical conclusions concerning the nature
of the universe that went beyond his experience were unfounded. Such
propositions of the pure reason, Kant demonstrated, could as readily be
opposed as supported by logical argument. Whenever the mind attempted
to ascertain the existence of things beyond sensory experience—such as
God, the immortality of the soul, or the infinity of the universe—it inevitably
found itself entangled in contradiction or illusion. The history of metaphysics
was thus a record of contention and confusion, entirely devoid of
cumulative progress. The mind required empirical evidence before it could
be capable of knowledge, but God, immortality, and other such metaphysical
matters could never become phenomena; they were not empirical.
Metaphysics, therefore, was beyond the powers of human reason.
But Hume’s dissolution of causality also appeared to undercut the claims
of natural science to necessary general truths about the world, since
Newtonian science was based on the assumed reality of the now uncertified
causal principle. If all human knowledge necessarily came from observation
of particular instances, these could never be legitimately generalized into
certain laws, since only discrete events were perceived, never their causal
connection. Nevertheless, Kant was convinced beyond doubt that Newton,
with the aid of experiments, had gotten hold of real knowledge of absolute
367 

certainty and generality. Who was correct, Hume or Newton? If Newton
had attained certain knowledge, and yet Hume had demonstrated the
impossibility of such knowledge, how could Newton have succeeded? How
was certain knowledge possible in a phenomenal universe? This was the
burden of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, and his solution was to satisfy the
claims of both Hume and Newton, of skepticism and science—and in so
doing to resolve modern epistemology’s fundamental dichotomy between
empiricism and rationalism.
The clarity and strict necessity of mathematical truths had long provided
the rationalists—above all Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz—with the
assurance that, in the world of modern doubt, the human mind had at least
one solid basis for attaining certain knowledge. Kant himself had long been
convinced that natural science was scientific to the precise extent that it
approximated to the ideal of mathematics. Indeed, on the basis of such a
conviction, Kant himself had made an important contribution to Newtonian
cosmology, demonstrating that through strictly necessary measurable
physical forces, the Sun and planets had consolidated and assumed the
motions defined by Copernicus and Kepler. To be sure, in attempting to
extend the mathematical mode of reasoning to metaphysics, Kant became
convinced of pure reason’s incompetence in such matters. But within the
bounds of sensory experience, as in natural science, mathematical truth was
patently successful.
Yet because natural science was concerned with the external world given
through the senses, it thereby opened itself to Hume’s criticism that all its
knowledge would then be contingent, its apparent necessity only
psychological. By Hume’s reasoning, with which Kant had to agree, the
certain laws of Euclidean geometry could not have been derived from
empirical observation. Yet Newtonian science was explicitly based upon
Euclidean geometry. If the laws of mathematics and logic were said to come
from within the human mind, how could they be said to pertain with
certainty to the world? Rationalists like Descartes had more or less simply
assumed a mind-world correspondence, but Hume had subjected that
assumption to a damaging critique. Nevertheless, a mind-world
correspondence was clearly presupposed, and seemingly vindicated, in the
Newtonian achievement, of which Kant was certain.
368 

Kant’s extraordinary solution was to propose that the mind-world
correspondence was indeed vindicated in natural science, yet not in the
naive sense previously assumed, but in the critical sense that the “world”
science explicated was a world already ordered by the mind’s own cognitive
apparatus. For in Kant’s view, the nature of the human mind is such that it
does not passively receive sense data. Rather, it actively digests and
structures them, and man therefore knows objective reality precisely to the
extent that that reality conforms to the fundamental structures of the mind.
The world addressed by science corresponds to principles in the mind
because the only world available to the mind is already organized in
accordance with the mind’s own processes. All human cognition of the
world is channeled through the human mind’s categories. The necessity and
certainty of scientific knowledge derive from the mind, and are embedded in
the mind’s perception and understanding of the world. They do not derive
from nature independent of the mind, which in fact can never be known in
itself. What man knows is a world permeated by his knowledge, and
causality and the necessary laws of science are built into the framework of
his cognition. Observations alone do not give man certain laws; rather, those
laws reflect the laws of man’s mental organization. In the act of human
cognition, the mind does not conform to things; rather, things conform to
the mind.
How did Kant arrive at this epoch-making conclusion? He began by
noting that if all content that could be derived from experience was
withdrawn from mathematical judgments, the ideas of space and time still
remained. From this he inferred that any event experienced by the senses is
located automatically in a framework of spatial and temporal relations.
Space and time are “a priori forms of human sensibility”: they condition
whatever is apprehended through the senses. Mathematics could accurately
describe the empirical world because mathematical principles necessarily
involve a context of space and time, and space and time lay at the basis of all
sensory experience: they condition and structure any empirical observation.
Space and time are thus not drawn from experience but are presupposed in
experience. They are never observed as such, but they constitute that
context within which all events are observed. They cannot be known to exist
in nature independently of the mind, but the world cannot be known by the
369 

mind without them.
Space and time therefore cannot be said to be characteristic of the world
in itself, for they are contributed in the act of human observation. They are
grounded epistemologically in the nature of the mind, not ontologically in
the nature of things. Because mathematical propositions are based on direct
intuitions of spatial relations, they are “a priori”—constructed by the mind
and not derived from experience—and yet they are also valid for
experience, which will by necessity conform to the a priori form of space. It
is true that pure reason inevitably becomes entangled in contradiction if it
attempts to apply these ideas to the world as a whole—to ascertain what is
true beyond all possible experience—as in trying to decide whether the
universe is infinite or finite either in time or space. But as regards the
phenomenal world that man does experience, time and space are not just
applicable concepts, they are intrinsic components of all human experience
of that world, frames of reference mandatory for human cognition.
Moreover, further analysis reveals that the character and structure of the
mind are such that the events it perceives in space and time are subject to
other a priori principles—namely, the categories of the understanding, such
as the law of causation. These categories in turn lend their necessity to
scientific knowledge. Whether all events are causally related in the world
outside the mind cannot be ascertained, but because the world that man
experiences is necessarily determined by his mind’s predispositions, it can be
said with certainty that events in the phenomenal world are causally related,
and science can so proceed. The mind does not derive cause and effect from
observations, but already experiences its observations in a context in which
cause and effect are presupposed realities: causality in human cognition is
not derived from experience but is brought to experience.
As with cause and effect, so too with other categories of the
understanding such as substance, quantity, and relation. Without such
fundamental frames of reference, such a priori interpretive principles, the
human mind would be incapable of comprehending its world. Human
experience would be an impossible chaos, an utterly formless and
miscellaneous 
manifold, 
except 
that 
the 
human 
sensibility 
and
understanding by their very nature transfigure that manifold into a unified
perception, place it in a framework of time and space, and subject it to the
370 

ordering principles of causality, substance, and the other categories.
Experience is a construction of the mind imposed on sensation.
The a priori forms and categories serve as absolute conditions of
experience. They are not read out of experience, but read into it. They are a
priori, yet empirically applicable—and applicable only empirically, not
metaphysically. For the only world that man knows is the empirical world of
phenomena, of “appearances,” and that world exists only to the extent that
man participates in its construction. We can know things only relative to
ourselves. Knowledge is restricted to the sensible effects of things on us, and
these appearances or phenomena are, as it were, predigested. Contrary to
the usual assumption, the mind never experiences what is “out there” apart
from the mind in some clear, undistorted mirroring of objective “reality.”
Rather, “reality” for man is necessarily one of his own making, and the world
in itself must remain something one can only think about, never know.
The order man perceives in his world is thus an order grounded not in
that world but in his mind: the mind, as it were, forces the world to obey its
own organization. All sensory experience has been channeled through the
filter of human a priori structures. Man can attain certain knowledge of the
world, not because he has the power to penetrate to and grasp the world in
itself, but because the world he perceives and understands is a world already
saturated with the principles of his own mental organization. This
organization is what is absolute, not that of the world in itself, which
ultimately remains beyond human cognition. But because man’s mental
organization is absolute, Kant assumed, man can know with genuine
certainty—know, that is, the only world he can experience, the phenomenal
world.
Thus man does not receive all his knowledge from experience, but his
knowledge in a sense already introduces itself into his experience in the
process of cogn.tion. Although Kant criticized Leibniz and the rationalists for
believing that reason alone without sense experience can calculate the
universe (for, Kant argued, knowledge requires acquaintance with
particulars), he also criticized Locke and the empiricists for believing that
sense impressions alone, without a priori concepts of the understanding,
could ever lead to knowledge (for particulars are meaningless without
general concepts by which they are interpreted). Locke was correct to deny
371 

innate ideas in the sense of mental representations of physical reality, but
wrong to deny innate formal knowledge. As thought without sensation is
empty, so is sensation without thought blind. Only in conjunction can
understanding and sensibility supply objectively valid knowledge of things.
For Kant, Hume’s division of propositions into those based on pure
intellect (which are necessary but tautological) and those based on pure
sensation (which are factual but not necessary) required a third and more
important category, one involving the intimately combined operation of
both faculties. Without such a combination, certain knowledge would be
impossible. One cannot know something about the world simply by
thinking; nor can one do so simply by sensing, or even by sensing and then
thinking about the sensations. The two modes must be interpenetrating and
simultaneous.
Hume’s analysis had demonstrated that the human mind could never
attain certain knowledge of the world, for the apparent order of all past
experience could not guarantee the order of any future experience. Cause
was not directly perceivable in the world, and the mind could not penetrate
beyond the veil of phenomenal experience of discrete particulars. It was
therefore clear to Kant that if we received all our knowledge of things from
sensation alone, there would be no certainty. But Kant then moved beyond
Hume because he recognized the extent to which the history of science had
progressed only on the basis of conceptual predispositions that were not
derived from experience, but were already woven into the fabric of the
scientific observation. He knew that Newton’s and Galileo’s theories could
not have been derived simply from observations, for purely accidental
observations that have not been prearranged according to human design
and hypothesis could never lead to a general law. Man can elicit from
nature universal laws not by waiting on nature like a pupil for answers, but
only, like an appointed judge, by putting shrewd questions to nature that
will be deliberately and precisely revealing. Science’s answers derive from
the same source as its questions. On the one hand, the scientist requires
experiments to ascertain that his hypotheses are valid and thus true laws of
nature; only by tests can he be sure there are no exceptions and that his
concepts are genuine concepts of the understanding and not only imaginary.
On the other hand, the scientist also requires a priori hypotheses even to
372 

approach the world, to observe and test it fruitfully. And the situation of
science in turn reflects the nature of all human experience. The mind can
know with certainty only that which it has in some sense already put into its
experience.
Man’s knowledge, then, does not conform to objects, but objects conform
to man’s knowledge. Certain knowledge is possible in a phenomenal
universe because the human mind bestows to that universe its own absolute
order. Thus Kant proclaimed what has been called his “Copernican
revolution”: as Copernicus had explained the perceived movement of the
heavens by the actual movement of the observer, so Kant explained the
perceived order of the world by the actual order of the observer.1
By confronting the seemingly irresolvable dialectic between Humean
skepticism and Newtonian science, Kant demonstrated that human
observations of the world were never neutral, never free of priorly imposed
conceptual judgments. The Baconian ideal of an empiricism totally free of
“anticipations” was an impossibility. It could not work in science, nor was it
even experientially possible, for no empirical observation and no human
experience was pure, neutral, without unconscious assumptions or a priori
orderings. In terms of scientific knowledge, the world could not be said to
exist complete in itself with intelligible forms that man could empirically
reveal if only he would clear his mind of preconceptions and improve his
senses by experiment. Rather, the world that man perceived and judged was
formed in the very act of his perception and judgment. Mind was not
passive but creative, actively structuring. Physical particulars could not
simply be identified and then correlated by means of conceptual categories.
Rather, the particulars required prior categorization of some kind to be
identified at all. To make knowledge possible, the mind necessarily imposed
its own cognitive nature on the data of experience, and thus man’s
knowledge was not a description of external reality as such, but was to a
crucial extent the product of the subject’s cognitive apparatus. The laws of
natural processes were the product of the observer’s internal organization
in interaction with external events that could never be known in
themselves. Hence neither pure empiricism (without a priori structures) nor
pure rationalism (without sensory evidence) constituted a viable
epistemological strategy.
373 

The task of the philosopher was therefore radically redefined. His goal
could no longer be that of determining a metaphysical world conception in
the traditional sense, but should instead be that of analyzing the nature and
limits of human reason. For although reason could not decide a priori on
matters transcending experience, it could determine what cognitive factors
are intrinsic to all human experience and inform all experience with its
order. Thus philosophy’s true task was to investigate the formal structure of
the mind, for only there would it find the true origin and foundation for
certain knowledge of the world.
The epistemological consequences of Kant’s Copernican revolution were
not without disturbing features. Kant had rejoined the knower to the
known, but not the knower to any objective reality, to the object in itself.
Knower and known were united, as it were, in a solipsistic prison. Man
knows, as indeed Aquinas and Aristotle had said, because he judges things
through the medium of a priori principles; but man cannot know whether
these internal principles possess any ultimate relevance to the real world, or
to any absolute truth or being outside the human mind. There was now no
divine warrant for the mind’s cognitive categories, such as Aquinas’s lumen
intellectus agentis, the light of the active intellect. Man could not determine
whether his knowledge had some fundamental relation to a universal reality
or whether it was merely a human reality. Only the subjective necessity of
such knowledge was certain. For the modern mind, the inevitable outcome
of a critical rationalism and a critical empiricism was a Kantian subjectivism
limited to the phenomenal world: Man had no necessary insight into the
transcendent, nor into the world as such. Man could know things only as
they appeared to him, not as they were in themselves. In retrospect, the
long-term consequences of both the Copernican and the Kantian
revolutions were fundamentally ambiguous, at once liberating and
diminishing. Both revolutions awakened man to a new, more adventurous
reality, yet both also radically displaced man—one from the center of the
cosmos, the other from genuine cognition of that cosmos. Cosmological
alienation was thereby compounded by epistemological alienation.
It could be said that in one sense Kant reversed the Copernican
374 

revolution, since he placed man again at the center of his universe by virtue
of the human mind’s central role in establishing the world order. But man’s
claim to be the center of his cognitive universe was only the obverse of his
recognition that he could no longer assume any direct contact between the
human mind and the universe’s intrinsic order. Kant “humanized” science,
but in so doing, he removed science from any certain foundation
independent of the human mind such as Cartesian and Baconian science—
the original programs of modern science—had earlier enjoyed, or
presumed. Despite the attempt to ground knowledge in a new absolute—the
human mind—and despite, from one point of view, the ennobling status of
the mind’s being the new epistemological center, it was also evident that
human knowledge was subjectively constructed and therefore—relative to
the intellectual certainties of other eras, and relative to the world in itself—
fundamentally dislocated. Man was again at the center of his universe, but
this was now only his universe, not the universe.
Yet Kant saw this as a necessary recognition of the limits of human
reason, a recognition that would paradoxically open up a larger truth to
man. For Kant’s revolution had two sides to it, one focused on science, the
other on religion: he wished to rescue both certain knowledge and moral
freedom, both his belief in Newton and his belief in God. On the one hand,
by demonstrating the necessity of the mind’s a priori forms and categories,
Kant sought to confirm the validity of science. On the other hand, by
demonstrating that man can know only phenomena, not things in
themselves, he sought to make room for the truths of religious belief and
moral doctrine.
In Kant’s view, the attempt by philosophers and theologians to rationalize
religion, to give the tenets of faith a foundation by pure reason, had
succeeded only in producing a scandal of conflict, casuistry, and skepticism.
Kant’s restriction of reason’s authority to the phenomenal world thereby
freed religion of reason’s clumsy intrusion. Moreover, by such a restriction,
science would no longer conflict with religion. Since the causal determinism
of science’s mechanistic world picture would deny the soul’s freedom of
will, yet such freedom must be presupposed in any genuine moral activity,
Kant argued that his limitation of science’s competence to the phenomenal,
his recognition of man’s ignorance concerning things in themselves, opened
375 

up the possibility of faith. Science could claim certain knowledge of
appearances, but it could no longer arrogantly claim knowledge over all of
reality, and precisely this allowed Kant to reconcile scientific determinism
with religious belief and morality. For science could not legitimately rule out
the possibility that the truths of religion were valid as well.
Kant thus held that although one could not know that God exists, one
must nevertheless believe he exists in order to act morally. Belief in God is
therefore justified, morally and practically, even if it is not certifiable. It is a
matter of faith rather than knowledge. Ideas of God, the soul’s immortality,
and the freedom of the will could not be known to be true in the same way
that the laws of nature established by Newton were so known. Yet one could
not justify doing one’s duty if there were no God, or if free will did not exist,
or if one’s soul perished at death. These ideas must therefore be believed as
true. They are necessary to postulate for a moral existence. With the
advances of scientific and philosophical knowledge, the modern mind could
no longer base religion on a cosmological or metaphysical foundation, but
instead it could base religion in the structure of the human situation itself—
and it was through this decisive insight that Kant, following the spirit of
Rousseau and of Luther before him, defined the direction of modern
religious thought. Man was freed from the external and objective to form
his religious response to life. Inner personal experience, not objective
demonstration or dogmatic belief, was the true ground of religious meaning.
In Kant’s terms, man could view himself under two different, even
contradictory aspects—scientifically, as a “phenomenon,” subject to the laws
of nature; and morally, as a thing-in-itself, a “noumenon,” which could be
thought of (not known) as free, immortal, and subject to God. Here the
Humean and Newtonian influences in Kant’s philosophical development
were countered by the universal humanitarian moral ideals of Rousseau,
who had stressed the priority of feeling over reason in religious experience,
and whose works had made a considerable impression on Kant, reinforcing
the deeper roots of Kant’s sense of moral duty coming from his strict Pietist
childhood. The inner experience of duty, the impulse to selfless moral virtue,
permitted Kant to transcend the otherwise daunting limitations of the
modern mind’s world picture, which had reduced the knowable world to
one of appearance and mechanistic necessity. Kant was thereby able to
376 

rescue religion from scientific determinism, just as he had rescued science
from radical skepticism.
But he rescued these only at the price of their disjunction, and of the
restriction of human knowledge to phenomena and subjective certainties. It
is clear that at heart, Kant believed that the laws moving the planets and
stars ultimately stood in some fundamental harmonious relation to the moral
imperatives he experienced within himself: “Two things fill the heart with
ever new and always increasing awe and admiration: the starry heavens
above me and the moral law within me.” But Kant also knew he could not
prove that relation, and in his delimitation of human knowledge to
appearances, the Cartesian schism between the human mind and the
material cosmos continued in a new and deepened form.
In the subsequent course of Western thought, it was to be Kant’s fate that,
as regards both religion and science, the power of his epistemological
critique tended to outweigh his positive affirmations. On the one hand, the
room he made for religious belief began to resemble a vacuum, since
religious faith had now lost any external support from either the empirical
world or pure reason, and increasingly seemed to lack internal plausibility
and appropriateness for secular modern man’s psychological character. On
the other hand, the certainty of scientific knowledge, already unsupported
by any external mind-independent necessity after Hume and Kant, became
unsupported as well by any internal cognitive necessity with the dramatic
controversion by twentieth-century physics of the Newtonian and Euclidean
categories which Kant had assumed were absolute.
Kant’s penetrating critique had effectively pulled the rug out from under
the human mind’s pretensions to certain knowledge of things in themselves,
eliminating in principle any human cognition of the ground of the world.
Subsequent developments in the Western mind—the deepening relativisms
introduced not only by Einstein, Bohr, and Heisenberg, but also by Darwin,
Marx, and Freud; by Nietzsche, Dilthey, Weber, Heidegger, and
Wittgenstein; by Saussure, Lévi-Strauss, and Foucault; by Gödel, Popper,
Quine, Kuhn, and a host of others—radically magnified that effect,
altogether eliminating the grounds for subjective certainty still felt by Kant.
All human experience was indeed structured by largely unconscious
principles, but those principles were not absolute and timeless. Rather, they
377 

varied fundamentally in different eras, different cultures, different classes,
different languages, different persons, different existential contexts. In the
wake of Kant’s Copernican revolution, science, religion, and philosophy all
had to find their own bases for affirmation, for none could claim a priori
access to the universe’s intrinsic nature.
The Decline of Metaphysics
The course of modern philosophy unfolded under the impact of Kant’s
epochal distinctions. At first, Kant’s successors in Germany pursued his
thinking in an unexpectedly idealist direction. In the Romantic climate of
European culture in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries,
Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel suggested that the cognitive categories of the
human mind were in some sense the ontological categories of the universe
—i.e., that human knowledge did not point to a divine reality but was itself
that reality—and on that basis constructed a metaphysical system with a
universal Mind revealing itself through man. For these idealists, the
“transcendental ego” (Kant’s notion of the human self that imposed
categories and heuristic unifying principles on experience to render
knowledge) could be radically extended and recognized as an aspect of an
absolute Spirit constituting all reality. Kant had held that mind supplied the
form taken by experience, but that the content of experience is given
empirically by an external world. For his idealist successors, however, it
seemed more philosophically plausible that both content and form were
determined by the all-encompassing Mind, so that nature was in some sense
more an image or symbol of the self than an altogether independent
existent.
But among most scientifically inclined modern thinkers, the speculations
of idealist metaphysics could not command widespread philosophical
acceptance, especially after the nineteenth century, for they were not
empirically testable, nor for many did they appear to represent adequately
the tenor of scientific knowledge or the modern experience of an objective
and ontologically distinct material universe. Materialism, the opposite
metaphysical option from idealism, seemed to better reflect the quality of
378 

contemporary scientific evidence. Yet it too assumed an ultimate untestable
substance—matter, rather than spirit—and seemingly failed to account for
the subjective phenomenology of human consciousness and man’s sense of
being a personal volitional entity different in character from the
unconscious impersonal external world. But because materialism, or at least
naturalism—the position holding that all phenomena could ultimately be
explained by natural causes—appeared most congruent with the scientific
account of the world, it constituted a more compelling conceptual
framework than did idealism. Still, there was much in such a conception that
was not entirely acceptable to the modern sensibility, whether because of
doubts concerning the completeness and certainty of scientific knowledge,
because of ambiguities within the scientific evidence itself, or because of
various conflicting religious or psychological factors.
The other available metaphysical option was therefore some form of
dualism reflecting the Cartesian and Kantian positions, one that more
adequately represented the common modern experience of disjunction
between the objective physical universe and subjective human awareness.
But with the increasing reluctance of the modern mind to postulate any
transcendent dimension, the nature of the Cartesian-Kantian position was
such as to prevent, or at best make highly problematic, any coherent
metaphysical conception. Given both the discontinuity of the modern
experience (the dualism between man and world, mind and matter), and the
epistemological quandary entailed by that discontinuity (how can man
presume to know that which is fundamentally separate and different from
his own awareness?), metaphysics necessarily lost its traditional
preeminence in the philosophical enterprise. One could investigate the
world as a scientist, or human experience as an introspective analyst; or one
could avoid the dichotomy by admitting the human world’s irresolvable
ambiguity and contingency, arguing instead for its existential or pragmatic
transformation through an act of will. But a universal order rationally
intelligible to the contemplative observer was now generally precluded.
Thus modern philosophy, progressing according to principles established
with Descartes and Locke, eventually undercut its own traditional raison
d’être. While from one perspective the problematic entity for the modern
human being was the external physical world in its dehumanized
379 

objectification, from another perspective the human mind itself and its
inscrutable cognitive mechanisms had become that which could not
command full trust and endorsement. For man could no longer assume his
mind’s interpretation of the world to be a mirrorlike reflection of things as
they actually were. The mind itself might be the alienating principle.
Moreover, the insights of Freud and the depth psychologists radically
increased the sense that man’s thinking about the world was governed by
nonrational factors that he could neither control nor be fully conscious of.
From Hume and Kant through Darwin, Marx, Freud and beyond, an
unsettling conclusion was becoming inescapable: Human thought was
determined, structured, and very probably distorted by a multitude of
overlapping factors—innate but nonabsolute mental categories, habit,
history, culture, social class, biology, language, imagination, emotion, the
personal unconscious, the collective unconscious. In the end, the human
mind could not be relied upon as an accurate judge of reality. The original
Cartesian certainty, that which served as foundation for the modern
confidence in human reason, was no longer defensible.
Henceforth, philosophy concerned itself largely with the clarification of
epistemological problems, with the analysis of language, with the philosophy
of science, or with phenomenological and existentialist analyses of human
experience. Despite the incongruence of aims and predispositions among
the various schools of twentieth-century philosophy, there was general
agreement on one crucial point: the impossibility of apprehending an
objective cosmic order with the human intelligence. That point of
agreement was approached from the various positions as developed by
philosophers as diverse as Bertrand Russell, Martin Heidegger, and Ludwig
Wittgenstein: Because empirical science alone could render verifiable, or at
least provisionally corroborated, knowledge, and such knowledge concerned
the contingent natural world of sense experience only, unverifiable and
untestable metaphysical propositions concerning the world as a whole were
without genuine meaning (logical positivism). Because human experience—
finite, conditioned, problematic, individual—was all man could know,
human subjectivity and the very nature of human being necessarily
permeated, negated, or made inauthentic any attempts at an impartially
objective world conception (existentialism and phenomenology). Because
380 

the meaning of any term could be found only in its specific use and context,
and because human experience was fundamentally structured by language,
and yet no direct relation between language and an independent deeper
structure in the world could be presumed, philosophy should concern itself
only with a therapeutic clarification of language in its many concrete uses
without any commitment to a particular abstract conception of reality
(linguistic analysis).
On the basis of these several converging insights, the belief that the
human mind could attain or should attempt an objective metaphysical
overview as traditionally understood was virtually relinquished. With few
exceptions, the philosophical enterprise was redirected into the analysis of
linguistic problems, scientific and logical propositions, or the raw data of
human experience, all without metaphysical entailments in the classical
sense. If “metaphysics” still had any viable function, aside from being a
handmaid to scientific cosmology, it could only involve the analysis of those
various factors that structured human cognition—i.e., to continue Kant’s
work with an approach at once more relativistic and more sensitive to the
multiplicity of factors that can influence and permeate human experience:
historical, social, cultural, linguistic, existential, psychological. But cosmic
syntheses could no longer be taken seriously.
As philosophy became more technical, more concerned with
methodology, and more academic, and as philosophers increasingly wrote
not for the public but for each other, the discipline of philosophy lost much
of its former relevance and importance for the intelligent layperson, and
thus much of its former cultural power. Semantics was now more germane
to philosophical clarity than were universal speculations, but for most
nonprofessionals, semantics held limited interest. In any case, philosophy’s
traditional mandate and status had been obviated by its own development:
There was no all-encompassing or transcendent or intrinsic “deeper” order
in the universe to which the human mind could legitimately lay claim.
381 

The Crisis of Modern Science
With both philosophy and religion in such problematic condition, it was
science alone that seemed to rescue the modern mind from pervasive
uncertainty. Science achieved a golden age in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, with extraordinary advances in all its major branches,
with widespread institutional and academic organization of research, and
with practical applications rapidly proliferating on the basis of a systematic
linkage of science with technology. The optimism of the age was directly tied
to confidence in science and in its powers to improve indefinitely the state of
human knowledge, health, and general welfare.
Religion and metaphysics continued their long, slow decline, but science’s
ongoing—indeed, accelerating—progress could not be doubted. Its claims to
valid knowledge of the world, even subject to the critique of post-Kantian
philosophy, continued to seem not only plausible but scarcely questionable.
In the face of science’s supreme cognitive effectiveness and the rigorously
impersonal precision of its explanatory structures, religion and philosophy
were compelled to define their positions in relation to science, just as, in the
medieval era, science and philosophy were compelled to do so in relation to
the culturally more powerful conceptions of religion. For the modern mind,
it was science that presented the most realistic, and reliable world picture—
even if that picture was limited to “technical” knowledge of natural
phenomena, and despite its existentially disjunctive implications. But two
developments in the course of the twentieth century radically changed
science’s cognitive and cultural status, one theoretical and internal to
science, the other pragmatic and external.
In the first instance, the classical Cartesian-Newtonian cosmology
382 

gradually and then dramatically broke down under the cumulative impact of
several astonishing developments in physics. Beginning in the later
nineteenth century with Maxwell’s work with electromagnetic fields, the
Michelson-Morley experiment, and Becquerel’s discovery of radioactivity,
then in the early twentieth century with Planck’s isolation of quantum
phenomena and Einstein’s special and general theories of relativity, and
culminating in the 1920s with the formulation of quantum mechanics by
Bohr, Heisenberg, and their colleagues, the long-established certainties of
classical modern science were radically undermined. By the end of the third
decade of the twentieth century, virtually every major postulate of the
earlier scientific conception had been controverted: the atoms as solid,
indestructible, and separate building blocks of nature, space and time as
independent absolutes, the strict mechanistic causality of all phenomena, the
possibility of objective observation of nature. Such a fundamental
transformation in the scientific world picture was staggering, and for no one
was this more true than the physicists themselves. Confronted with the
contradictions observed in subatomic phenomena, Einstein wrote: “All my
attempts to adapt the theoretical foundation of physics to this knowledge
failed completely. It was as if the ground had been pulled out from under
one, with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere upon which one could
have built.” Heisenberg similarly realized that “the foundations of physics
have started moving . . . [and] this motion has caused the feeling that the
ground would be cut from science.”
The challenge to previous scientific assumptions was deep and multiple:
The solid Newtonian atoms were now discovered to be largely empty. Hard
matter no longer constituted the fundamental substance of nature. Matter
and 
energy 
were 
interchangeable. 
Three-dimensional 
space 
and
unidimensional time had become relative aspects of a four-dimensional
space-time continuum. Time flowed at different rates for observers moving
at different speeds. Time slowed down near heavy objects, and under certain
circumstances could stop altogether. The laws of Euclidean geometry no
longer provided the universally necessary structure of nature. The planets
moved in their orbits not because they were pulled toward the Sun by an
attractive force acting at a distance, but because the very space in which
they moved was curved. Subatomic phenomena displayed a fundamentally
383 

ambiguous nature, observable both as particles and as waves. The position
and momentum of a particle could not be precisely measured
simultaneously. The uncertainty principle radically undermined and
replaced strict Newtonian determinism. Scientific observation and
explanation could not proceed without affecting the nature of the object
observed. The notion of substance dissolved into probabilities and
“tendencies to exist.” Nonlocal connections between particles contradicted
mechanistic causality. Formal relations and dynamic processes replaced hard
discrete objects. The physical world of twentieth-century physics resembled,
in Sir James Jeans’s words, not so much a great machine as a great thought.
The consequences of this extraordinary revolution were again ambiguous.
The continuing modern sense of intellectual progress, leaving behind the
ignorance and misconceptions of past eras while reaping the fruits of new
concrete technological results, was again bolstered. Even Newton had been
corrected and improved upon by the ever-evolving, increasingly
sophisticated modern mind. Moreover, to the many who had regarded the
scientific universe of mechanistic and materialistic determinism as
antithetical 
to 
human 
values, 
the 
quantum-relativistic 
revolution
represented an unexpected and welcome broaching of new intellectual
possibilities. Matter’s former hard substantiality had given way to a reality
perhaps more conducive to a spiritual interpretation. Freedom of the human
will seemed to be given a new foothold if subatomic particles were
indeterminate. The principle of complementarity governing waves and
particles suggested its broader application in a complementarity between
mutually exclusive ways of knowledge, like religion and science. Human
consciousness, or at least human observation and interpretation, seemed to
be given a more central role in the larger scheme of things with the new
understanding of the subject’s influence on the observed object. The deep
interconnectedness of phenomena encouraged a new holistic thinking about
the world, with many social, moral, and religious implications. Increasing
numbers of scientists began to question modern science’s pervasive, if often
unconscious, assumption that the intellectual effort to reduce all reality to
the smallest measurable components of the physical world would eventually
reveal that which was most fundamental in the universe. The reductionist
program, dominant since Descartes, now appeared to many to be myopically
384 

selective, and likely to miss that which was most significant in the nature of
things.
Yet such inferences were neither universal nor even widespread among
practicing physicists. Modern physics was perhaps open to a spiritual
interpretation, but did not necessarily compel it. Nor was the larger
population intimately conversant with the arcane conceptual changes
wrought by the new physics. Moreover, for several decades the revolution
in physics did not result in comparable theoretical transformations in the
other natural and social sciences, although their theoretical programs had
been based largely on the mechanistic principles of classical physics.
Nevertheless, many felt that the old materialistic world view had been
irrevocably challenged, and that the new scientific models of reality offered
possible opportunities for a fundamental rapprochement with man’s
humanistic aspirations.
Yet these ambiguous possibilities were countered by other, more
disturbing factors. To begin with, there was now no coherent conception of
the world, comparable to Newton’s Principia, that could theoretically
integrate the complex variety of new data. Physicists failed to come to any
consensus as to how the existing evidence should be interpreted with
respect to defining the ultimate nature of reality. Conceptual contradictions,
disjunctions, and paradoxes were ubiquitous, and stubbornly evaded
resolution.2 A certain irreducible irrationality, already recognized in the
human psyche, now emerged in the structure of the physical world itself. To
incoherence was added unintelligibility, for the conceptions derived from
the new physics not only were difficult for the layperson to comprehend,
they presented seemingly insuperable obstacles to the human intuition
generally: a curved space, finite yet unbounded; a four-dimensional space-
time continuum; mutually exclusive properties possessed by the same
subatomic entity; objects that were not really things at all but processes or
patterns of relationship; phenomena that took no decisive shape until
observed; particles that seemed to affect each other at a distance with no
known causal link; the existence of fundamental fluctuations of energy in a
total vacuum.
Moreover, for all the apparent opening of the scientific understanding to
a less materialistic and less mechanistic conception, there was no real
385 

change in the essential modern dilemma: The universe was still an
impersonal vastness in which man with his peculiar capacity for
consciousness was still an ephemeral, inexplicable, randomly produced
minutia. Nor was there any compelling answer to the looming question as to
what ontological context preceded or underlay the “big-bang” birth of the
universe. Nor did leading physicists believe that the equations of quantum
theory described the actual world. Scientific knowledge was confined to
abstractions, mathematical symbols, “shadows.” Such knowledge was not of
the world itself, which now more than ever seemed beyond the compass of
human cognition.
Thus in certain respects the intellectual contradictions and obscurities of
the new physics only heightened the sense of human relativity and
alienation growing since the Copernican revolution. Modern man was being
forced to question his inherited classical Greek faith that the world was
ordered in a manner clearly accessible to the human intelligence. In the
physicist P. W. Bridgman’s words, “the structure of nature may eventually be
such that our processes of thought do not correspond to it sufficiently to
permit us to think about it at all. . . . The world fades out and eludes us. . . .
We are confronted with something truly ineffable. We have reached the
limit of the vision of the great pioneers of science, the vision, namely, that
we live in a sympathetic world in that it is comprehensible by our minds.”3
Philosophy’s conclusion was becoming science’s as well: Reality may not be
structured in any way the human mind can objectively discern. Thus
incoherence, unintelligibility, and an insecure relativism compounded the
earlier modern predicament of human alienation in an impersonal cosmos.
When relativity theory and quantum mechanics undid the absolute
certainty of the Newtonian paradigm, science demonstrated, in a way that
Kant as a convinced Newtonian could never have anticipated, the validity of
Kant’s skepticism concerning the human mind’s capacity for certain
knowledge of the world in itself. Because he was certain of the truth of
Newtonian science, Kant had argued that the categories of human cognition
congruent with that science were themselves absolute, and these alone
provided a basis for the Newtonian achievement, as well as for man’s
386 

epistemological competence in general. But with twentieth-century physics,
the bottom fell out of Kant’s last certainty. The fundamental Kantian a prioris
—space, time, substance, causality—were no longer applicable to all
phenomena. The scientific knowledge that had seemed after Newton to be
universal and absolute had to be recognized after Einstein, Bohr, and
Heisenberg as limited and provisional. So too did quantum mechanics reveal
in unexpected fashion the radical validity of Kant’s thesis that the nature
described by physics was not nature in itself but man’s relation to nature—
i.e., nature as exposed to man’s form of questioning.
What had been implicit in Kant’s critique, but obscured by the apparent
certainty of Newtonian physics, now became explicit: Because induction can
never render certain general laws, and because scientific knowledge is a
product of human interpretive structures that are themselves relative,
variable, and creatively employed, and finally because the act of observation
in some sense produces the objective reality science attempts to explicate,
the truths of science are neither absolute nor unequivocally objective. In the
combined wake of eighteenth-century philosophy and twentieth-century
science, the modern mind was left free of absolutes, but also disconcertingly
free of any solid ground.
This problematic conclusion was reinforced by a newly critical approach
to the philosophy and history of science, influenced above all by the work of
Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn. Drawing on the insights of Hume and Kant,
Popper noted that science can never produce knowledge that is certain, nor
even probable. Man observes the universe as a stranger, making imaginative
guesses about its structure and workings. He cannot approach the world
without such bold conjectures in the background, for every observed fact
presupposes an interpretive focus. In science, these conjectures must be
continually and systematically tested; yet however many tests are
successfully passed, any theory can never be viewed as more than an
imperfectly corroborated conjecture. At any time, a new test could falsify it.
No scientific truth is immune to such a possibility. Even the basic facts are
relative, always potentially subject to a radical reinterpretation in a new
framework. Man can never claim to know the real essences of things. Before
the virtual infinitude of the world’s phenomena, human ignorance itself is
infinite. The wisest strategy is to learn from one’s inevitable mistakes.
387 

But while Popper maintained the rationality of science by upholding its
fundamental commitment to rigorous testing of theories, its fearless
neutrality in the quest for truth, Kuhn’s analysis of the history of science
tended to undercut even that security. Kuhn agreed that all scientific
knowledge required interpretive structures based on fundamental
paradigms or conceptual models that allowed researchers to isolate data,
elaborate theories, and solve problems. But citing many examples in the
history of science, he pointed out that the actual practice of scientists seldom
conformed to Popper’s ideal of systematic self-criticism by means of
attempted falsification of existing theories. Instead, science typically
proceeded by seeking confirmations of the prevailing paradigm—gathering
facts in the light of that theory, performing experiments on its basis,
extending its range of applicability, further articulating its structure,
attempting to clarify residual problems. Far from subjecting the paradigm
itself to constant testing, normal science avoided contradicting it by
routinely reinterpreting conflicting data in ways that would support the
paradigm, or by neglecting such awkward data altogether. To an extent
never consciously recognized by scientists, the nature of scientific practice
makes its governing paradigm self-validating. The paradigm acts as a lens
through which every observation is filtered, and is maintained as an
authoritative bulwark by common convention. Through teachers and texts,
scientific pedagogy sustains the inherited paradigm and ratifies its credibility,
tending to produce a firmness of conviction and theoretical rigidity not
unlike an education in systematic theology.
Kuhn further argued that when the gradual accumulation of conflicting
data finally produces a paradigm crisis and a new imaginative synthesis
eventually wins scientific favor, the process by which that revolution takes
place is far from rational. It depends as much on the established customs of
the scientific community, on aesthetic, psychological, and sociological
factors, on the presence of contemporary root metaphors and popular
analogies, on unpredictable imaginative leaps and “gestalt switches,” even on
the aging and dying of conservative scientists, as on disinterested tests and
arguments. For in fact the rival paradigms are seldom genuinely
comparable; they are selectively based on differing modes of interpretation
and hence different sets of data. Each paradigm creates its own gestalt, so
388 

comprehensive that scientists working within different paradigms seem to
be living in different worlds. Nor is there any common measure, such as
problem-solving ability or theoretical coherence or resistance to
falsification, that all scientists agree upon as a standard for comparison.
What is an important problem for one group of scientists is not for another.
Thus the history of science is not one of linear rational progress moving
toward ever more accurate and complete knowledge of an objective truth,
but is one of radical shifts of vision in which a multitude of nonrational and
nonempirical factors play crucial roles. Whereas Popper had attempted to
temper Hume’s skepticism by demonstrating the rationality of choosing the
most rigorously tested conjecture, Kuhn’s analysis served to restore that
skepticism.4
With these philosophical and historical critiques and with the revolution
in physics, a more tentative view of science became widespread in
intellectual circles. Science was still patently effective and powerful in its
knowledge, but scientific knowledge was now regarded as, in several senses,
a relative matter. The knowledge science rendered was relative to the
observer, to his physical context, to his science’s prevailing paradigm and his
own theoretical assumptions. It was relative to his culture’s prevailing belief
system, to his social context and psychological predispositions, to his very act
of observation. And science’s first principles might be overturned at any
point in the face of new evidence. Moreover, by the later twentieth century,
the conventional paradigm structures of other sciences, including the
Darwinian theory of evolution, were coming under increasing pressure
from conflicting data and alternative theories. Above all, the bedrock
certainty of the Cartesian-Newtonian world view, for centuries the
acknowledged epitome and model of human knowledge and still pervasively
influential in the cultural psyche, had been shattered. And the post-
Newtonian world order was neither intuitively accessible nor internally
coherent—indeed, scarcely an order at all.
Yet for all this, science’s cognitive status would still have retained its
unquestioned preeminence for the modern mind. Scientific truth might be
increasingly esoteric and only provisional, but it was a testable truth,
389 

continually being improved and more accurately formulated, and its
practical effects in the form of technological progress—in industry,
agriculture, 
medicine, 
energy 
production, 
communication 
and
transportation—provided tangible public evidence for science’s claims to
render viable knowledge of the world. But it was, paradoxically, this same
tangible evidence that was to prove crucial in an antithetical development;
for it was when the practical consequences of scientific knowledge could no
longer be judged exclusively positive that the modern mind was forced to
reevaluate its previously wholehearted trust in science.
As early as the nineteenth century, Emerson had warned that man’s
technical achievements might not be unequivocally in his own best interests:
“Things are in the saddle and ride mankind.” By the turn of the century, just
as technology was producing new wonders like the automobile and the
widespread application of electricity, a few observers began to sense that
such developments might signal an ominous reversal of human values. By
the mid-twentieth century, modern science’s brave new world had started
to become subject to wide and vigorous criticism: Technology was taking
over and dehumanizing man, placing him in a context of artificial
substances and gadgets rather than live nature, in an unaesthetically
standardized environment where means had subsumed ends, where
industrial labor requirements entailed the mechanization of human beings,
where all problems were perceived as soluble by technical research at the
expense of genuine existential responses. The self-propelling and self-
augmenting imperatives of technical functioning were dislodging man and
uprooting him from his fundamental relation to the Earth. Human
individuality seemed increasingly tenuous, disappearing under the impact of
mass production, the mass media, and the spread of a bleak and problem-
ridden urbanization. Traditional structures and values were crumbling. With
an unending stream of technological innovations, modern life was subject to
an unprecedentedly disorienting rapidity of change. Gigantism and turmoil,
excessive noise, speed, and complexity dominated the human environment.
The world in which man lived was becoming as impersonal as the cosmos of
his science. With the pervasive anonymity, hollowness, and materialism of
modern life, man’s capacity to retain his humanity in an environment
determined by technology seemed increasingly in doubt. For many, the
390 

question of human freedom, of mankind’s ability to maintain mastery over
its own creation, had become acute.
But compounding these humanistic critiques were more disturbingly
concrete signs of science’s untoward consequences. The critical
contamination of the planet’s water, air, and soil, the manifold harmful
effects on animal and plant life, the extinction of innumerable species, the
deforestation of the globe, the erosion of topsoil, the depletion of
groundwater, the vast accumulation of toxic wastes, the apparent
exacerbation of the greenhouse effect, the breakdown of the ozone layer in
the atmosphere, the radical disruption of the entire planetary ecosystem—all
these emerged as direly serious problems with increasing force and
complexity. From even a short-term human perspective, the accelerating
depletion of irreplaceable natural resources had become an alarming
phenomenon. Dependence on foreign supplies of vital resources brought a
new precariousness into global political and economic life. New banes and
stresses to the social fabric continued to appear, directly or indirectly tied to
the advance of a scientific civilization—urban overdevelopment and
overcrowding, cultural and social rootlessness, numbingly mechanical labor,
increasingly disastrous industrial accidents, automobile and air travel
fatalities, cancer and heart disease, alcoholism and drug addiction, mind-
dulling and culture-impoverishing television, growing levels of crime,
violence, and psychopathology. Even science’s most cherished successes
paradoxically entailed new and pressing problems, as when the medical
relief of human illness and lowering of mortality rates, combined with
technological strides in food production and transportation, in turn
exacerbated the threat of global overpopulation. In other cases, the advance
of science presented new Faustian dilemmas, as in those surrounding the
unforeseeable future uses of genetic engineering. More generally, the
scientifically unfathomed complexity of all relevant variables—whether in
global or local environments, in social systems, or in the human body—made
the consequences of technological manipulation of those variables
unpredictable and often pernicious.
All these developments had reached an early and ominous proleptic
climax when natural science and political history conspired to produce the
atomic bomb. It seemed supremely, if tragically, ironic that the Einsteinian
391 

discovery of the equivalence of mass and energy, by which a particle of
matter could be converted into an immense quantity of energy—a discovery
by a dedicated pacifist reflecting a certain apex of human intellectual
brilliance and creativity—precipitated for the first time in history the
prospect of humanity’s self-extinction. With the dropping of atomic bombs
on the civilians of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, faith in science’s intrinsic moral
neutrality, not to say its unlimited powers of benign progress, could no
longer be upheld. During the protracted and tense global schism of the Cold
War that followed, the numbers of unprecedentedly destructive nuclear
missiles relentlessly multiplied until the entire planet could be devastated
many times over. Civilization itself was now brought into peril by virtue of
its own genius. The same science that had dramatically lessened the hazards
and burdens of human survival now presented to human survival its gravest
menace.
The great succession of science’s triumphs and cumulative progress was
now shadowed by a new sense of science’s limits, its dangers, and its
culpability. The modern scientific mind found itself beleaguered on several
fronts at once: by the epistemological critiques, by its own theoretical
problems arising in a growing number of fields, by the increasingly urgent
psychological necessity of integrating the modern outlook’s human-world
divide, and above all by its adverse consequences and intimate involvement
in the planetary crisis. The close association of scientific research with the
political, military, and corporate establishments continued to belie science’s
traditional self-image of detached purity. The very concept of “pure science”
was now criticized by many as entirely illusory. The belief that the scientific
mind had unique access to the truth of the world, that it could register
nature like a perfect mirror reflecting an extrahistorical, universal objective
reality, was seen not only as epistemologically naive, but also as serving,
either consciously or unconsciously, specific political and economic agenda,
often allowing vast resources and intelligence to be commandeered for
programs of social and ecological domination. The aggressive exploitation of
the natural environment, the proliferation of nuclear weaponry, the threat
of global catastrophe—all pointed to an indictment of science, of human
reason itself, now seemingly in thrall to man’s own self-destructive
irrationality.
392 

If all scientific hypotheses were to be rigorously and disinterestedly tested,
then it seemed that the “scientific world view” itself, the governing
metahypothesis of the modern era, was being decisively falsified by its
deleterious and counterproductive consequences in the empirical world.
The scientific enterprise, which in its earlier stages had presented a cultural
predicament—philosophical, religious, social, psychological—had now
provoked a biological emergency. The optimistic belief that the world’s
dilemmas could be solved simply by scientific advance and social
engineering had been confounded. The West was again losing its faith, this
time not in religion but in science and in the autonomous human reason.
Science was still valued, in many respects still revered. But it had lost its
untainted image as humanity’s liberator. It had also lost its long-secure
claims to virtually absolute cognitive reliability. With its productions no
longer exclusively benign, with its reductionist understanding of the natural
environment apparently deficient, with its evident susceptibility to political
and economic bias, the previously unqualified trustworthiness of scientific
knowledge could no longer be affirmed. On the basis of these several
interacting factors, something like Hume’s radical epistemological
skepticism—mixed with a relativized Kantian sense of a priori cognitive
structures—seemed publicly vindicated. After modern philosophy’s acute
epistemological critique, the principal remaining foundation for reason’s
validity had been its empirical support by science. The philosophical critique
alone had been in effect an abstract exercise, without definite influence on
the larger culture or on science, and would have so continued if the
scientific enterprise had itself continued being so unequivocally positive in
its practical and cognitive progress. But with science’s concrete
consequences so problematic, reason’s last foundation was now unfirm.
Many thoughtful observers, not just professional philosophers, were
forced to reevaluate the status of human knowledge. Man might think he
knows things, scientifically or otherwise, but there was clearly no guarantee
for this: he had no a priori rational access to universal truths; empirical data
were always theory-soaked and relative to the observer; and the previously
reliable scientific world view was open to fundamental question, for that
conceptual framework was evidently both creating and exacerbating
problems for humanity on a global scale. Scientific knowledge was
393 

stupendously effective, but those effects suggested that much knowledge
from a limited perspective could be a very dangerous thing.
394 

Romanticism and Its Fate
The Two Cultures
From the complex matrix of the Renaissance had issued forth two distinct
streams of culture, two temperaments or general approaches to human
existence characteristic of the Western mind. One emerged in the Scientific
Revolution and Enlightenment and stressed rationality, empirical science,
and a skeptical secularism. The other was its polar complement, sharing
common roots in the Renaissance and classical Greco-Roman culture (and in
the Reformation as well), but tending to express just those aspects of human
experience suppressed by the Enlightenment’s overriding spirit of
rationalism. First conspicuously present in Rousseau, then in Goethe,
Schiller, Herder, and German Romanticism, this side of the Western
sensibility fully emerged in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, and has not since ceased to be a potent force in Western culture
and consciousness—from Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Hölderlin,
Schelling, Schleiermacher, the Schlegel brothers, Madame de Staël, Shelley,
Keats, Byron, Hugo, Pushkin, Carlyle, Emerson, Thoreau, Whitman, and
onward in its diverse forms to their many descendants, countercultural and
otherwise, of the present era.
To be sure, the Romantic temperament shared much with its
Enlightenment opposite, and their complex interplay could be said to
constitute the modern sensibility. Both tended to be “humanist” in their high
estimate of man’s powers and their concern with man’s perspective on the
universe. Both looked to this world and nature as the setting of the human
drama and the focus for human endeavor. Both were attentive to the
395 

phenomena of human consciousness and the nature of its hidden structures.
Both found in classical culture a rich source of insight and values. Both were
profoundly Promethean—in their rebellion against oppressive traditional
structures, in their celebration of individual human genius, in their restless
quest for human freedom, fulfillment, and bold exploration of the new.
But in each of these commonalities there were deep differences. In
contrast with the spirit of the Enlightenment, the Romantic vision perceived
the world as a unitary organism rather than an atomistic machine, exalted
the ineffability of inspiration rather than the enlightenment of reason, and
affirmed the inexhaustible drama of human life rather than the calm
predictability 
of 
static 
abstractions. 
Whereas 
the 
Enlightenment
temperament’s high valuation of man rested on his unequaled rational
intellect and its power to comprehend and exploit the laws of nature, the
Romantic valued man rather for his imaginative and spiritual aspirations, his
emotional depths, his artistic creativity and powers of individual self-
expression and self-creation. The genius celebrated by the Enlightenment
temperament was a Newton, a Franklin, or an Einstein, while for the
Romantic it was a Goethe, a Beethoven, or a Nietzsche. On both sides, the
autonomous world-changing will and mind of modern man were
apotheosized, bringing the cult of the hero, the history of great men and
their deeds. Indeed, on many fronts at once, the Western ego gained
substance and impetus, whether in the titanic self-assertions of the French
Revolution and Napoleon, the new self-awareness of Rousseau and Byron,
the advancing scientific clarities of Lavoisier and Laplace, the incipient
feminist confidence of Mary Wollstonecraft and George Sand, or the many-
sided richness of human experience and creativity realized by Goethe. But
for the two temperaments, Enlightenment and Romantic, the character and
aims of that autonomous self were sharply distinct. Bacon’s utopia was not
Blake’s.
Whereas for the Enlightenment-scientific mind, nature was an object for
observation and experiment, theoretical explanation and technological
manipulation, for the Romantic, by contrast, nature was a live vessel of
spirit, a translucent source of mystery and revelation. The scientist too
wished to penetrate nature and reveal its mystery; but the method and goal
of that penetration, and the character of that revelation, were different from
396 

the Romantic’s. Rather than the distanced object of sober analysis, nature for
the Romantic was that which the human soul strove to enter and unite with
in an overcoming of the existential dichotomy, and the revelation he sought
was not of mechanical law but of spiritual essence. While the scientist
sought truth that was testable and concretely effective, the Romantic sought
truth that was inwardly transfiguring and sublime. Thus Wordsworth saw
nature as ensouled with spiritual meaning and beauty, while Schiller
considered the impersonal mechanisms of science a poor substitute for the
Greek deities who had animated nature for the ancients. Both modern
temperaments, scientific and Romantic, looked to present human experience
and the natural world for fulfillment, but what the Romantic sought and
found in those domains reflected a radically different universe from that of
the scientist.
Equally notable was the difference in their attitudes toward the
phenomena of human awareness. The Enlightenment-scientific examination
of the mind was empirical and epistemological, gradually becoming focused
on sense perception, cognitive development, and quantitative behavioral
studies. By contrast, beginning with Rousseau’s Confessions—the modern
Romantic sequel and response to the ancient Catholic Confessions of
Augustine—the Romantics’ interest in human consciousness was fueled by a
newly intense sense of self-awareness and a focus on the complex nature of
the human self, and was comparatively unconstrained by the limits of the
scientific perspective. Emotion and imagination, rather than reason and
perception, were of prime importance. New concern arose not only with
the exalted and noble but with the contraries and darkness in the human
soul, with evil, death, the demonic, and the irrational. Generally ignored in
the optimistic, clarified light of rational science, these themes now inspired
the works of Blake and Novalis, Schopenhauer and Kierkegaard, Hawthorne
and Melville, Poe and Baudelaire, Dostoevsky and Nietzsche. With
Romanticism, the modern eye was turned ever more inward to discern the
shadows of existence. To explore the mysteries of interiority, of moods and
motives, love and desire, fear and angst, inner conflicts and contradictions,
memories and dreams, to experience extreme and incommunicable states of
consciousness, to be inwardly grasped in epiphanic ecstasy, to plumb the
depths of the human soul, to bring the unconscious into consciousness, to
397 

know the infinite—such were the imperatives of Romantic introspection.
In contrast to the scientist’s quest for general laws defining a single
objective reality, the Romantic gloried in the unbounded multiplicity of
realities pressing in on his subjective awareness, and in the complex
uniqueness of each object, event, and experience presented to his soul. Truth
discovered in divergent perspectives was valued above the monolithic and
univocal ideal of empirical science. For the Romantic, reality was
symbolically 
resonant 
through 
and 
through, 
and 
was 
therefore
fundamentally multivalent, a constantly changing complex of many-leveled
meanings, even of opposites. For the Enlightenment-scientific mind, by
contrast, reality was concrete and literal, univocal. Against this view, the
Romantic pointed out that even the reality constructed and perceived by the
scientific mind was at bottom symbolic, but its symbols were exclusively of a
specific kind—mechanistic, material, impersonal—and were interpreted by
scientists as uniquely valid. From the Romantic’s perspective, the
conventional scientific view of reality was essentially a jealous “monotheism”
in new clothes, wanting no other gods before it. The literalism of the modern
scientific mind was a form of idolatry—myopically worshiping an opaque
object as the only reality, rather than recognizing that object as a mystery, a
vessel of deeper realities.
The search for a unifying order and meaning remained central for the
Romantics, but in that task the limits of human knowledge were radically
expanded beyond those imposed by the Enlightenment, and a larger range of
human faculties were considered necessary for genuine cognition.
Imagination and feeling now joined sense and reason to render a deeper
understanding of the world. In his morphological studies, Goethe sought to
experience the archetypal form or essence of each plant and animal by
saturating the objective perception with the content of his own imagination.
Schelling proclaimed that “to philosophize about nature means to create
nature,” for nature’s true meaning could be produced only from within
man’s “intellectual imagination.” The historians Vico and Herder took
seriously modes of cognition such as the mythological that had informed the
consciousness of other eras, and believed that the historian’s task was to feel
himself into the spirit of other ages through an empathic “historical sense,”
to understand from within by means of the sympathetic imagination. Hegel
398 

discerned overarching rational and spiritual meaning in the vast data of
history by means of a “logic of passion.” Coleridge wrote that “deep thinking
is attainable only by a man of deep feeling,” and that the artist’s “esemplastic
power of the imagination” gave to the human mind the ability to grasp
things in their entirety, to create and shape coherent wholes out of disparate
elements. Wordsworth recognized the numinous vision of the natural child
as possessing a deeper insight into reality than did the opaque, disenchanted
perspective of the conventional adult. And Blake recognized “Imagination”
as the sacred vessel of the infinite, the emancipator of the bound human
mind, the means by which eternal realities came to expression and
consciousness. Indeed, for many Romantics, imagination was in some sense
the whole of existence, the true ground of being, the medium of all realities.
It both pervaded consciousness and constituted the world.
Like imagination, the will too was considered a necessary element in the
attainment of human knowledge, a force preceding knowledge and freely
impelling man and universe forward to new levels of creativity and
awareness. Here it was Nietzsche who, in a uniquely powerful synthesis of
titanic Romantic spiritual passion and the most radical strain of
Enlightenment skepticism, set forth the paradigmatic Romantic position
concerning the relation of will to truth and knowledge: The rational intellect
could not achieve objective truth; nor could any perspective ever be
independent of interpretation of some sort. “Against positivism, which halts
at phenomena—‘There are only facts’—I would say: No, facts are precisely
what there are not, only interpretations. “ This was true not just for matters
of morality, but for physics too, which was but a specific perspective and
exegesis to suit specific needs and desires. Every way of viewing the world
was the product of hidden impulses. Every philosophy revealed not an
impersonal system of thought, but an involuntary confession. Unconscious
instinct, psychological motivation, linguistic distortion, cultural prejudice—
these affected and defined every human perspective. Against the long
Western tradition of asserting the unique validity of one system of concepts
and beliefs—whether religious, scientific, or philosophical—that alone
mirrors the Truth, Nietzsche set forth a radical perspectivism: There exists a
plurality of perspectives through which the world can be interpreted, and
there is no authoritative independent criterion according to which one
399 

system can be determined to be more valid than others.
But if the world was radically indeterminate, it could be shaped by a
heroic act of will to affirm life and bring forth its triumphant fulfillment: The
highest truth, Nietzsche prophesied, was being born within man through
the self-creating power of the will. All of man’s striving for knowledge and
power would fulfill itself in a new being who would incarnate the living
meaning of the universe. But to achieve this birth, man would have to grow
beyond himself so fundamentally that his present limited self would be
destroyed: “What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal. . . .
Man is something that must be overcome.” For man was a way to new
dawns and new horizons far beyond the compass of the present age. And the
birth of this new being was not a life-impoverishing otherworldly fantasy to
be believed by ecclesiastical decree, but was a vivid, tangible reality to be
created, here and now, through the heroic self-overcoming of the great
individual. Such an individual had to transform life into a work of art, within
which he could forge his character, embrace his fate, and recreate himself as
heroic protagonist of the world epic. He had to invent himself anew,
imagine himself into being. He had to will into existence a fictive drama into
which he could enter and live, imposing a redemptive order on the chaos of
a meaningless universe without God. Then the God who had long been
projected to the beyond could be born within the human soul. Then man
could dance godlike in the eternal flux, free of all foundations and all
bounds, beyond every metaphysical constraint. Truth was not something one
proved or disproved; it was something one created. In Nietzsche, as in
Romanticism generally, the philosopher became poet: a world conception
was judged not in terms of abstract rationality or factual verification, but as
an expression of courage, beauty, and imaginative power.
Thus the Romantic sensibility advanced new standards and values for
human knowledge. Through the self-creating power of imagination and
will, the human being could body forth unborn realities, penetrate invisible
but altogether real levels of being, comprehend nature and history and the
cosmos’s unfolding—indeed, participate in the very process of creation. A
new epistemology was claimed both possible and necessary. And so the limits
of knowledge established by Locke, Hume, and the positivist side of Kant
were boldly defied by the Idealists and Romantics of the post-Enlightenment.
400 

The two temperaments held similarly divergent attitudes toward the two
traditional pillars of Western culture, Greco-Roman classicism and the
Judaeo-Christian religion. As the Enlightenment-scientific mind developed
during the modern era, it increasingly employed the thought of the classical
era only to the extent that it provided useful starting points for further
investigation and theory construction, beyond which ancient metaphysical
and scientific schemes were generally perceived as deficient and of mainly
historical interest. By contrast, classical culture for the Romantic was still a
living realm of Olympian images and personalities, its artistic creations from
Homer and Aeschylus onward still exalted models, its imaginative and
spiritual insights still pregnant with newly discoverable meaning. Both
viewpoints encouraged the recovery of the classical past, but for different
motives—one for the sake of accurate historical knowledge, the other to
revivify that past, to enable it to live again in the creative spirit of modern
man.
It was along such lines that their respective attitudes toward tradition in
general differed. While the rational scientific mind viewed tradition in more
skeptical terms, valuable only to the extent of providing continuity and
structure for the growth of knowledge, the Romantic, although no less
rebellious in character and often considerably more so, found in tradition
something more mysterious—a repository of collective wisdom, the accrued
insights of a people’s soul, a living, changing force with its own autonomy
and evolutionary dynamism. Such wisdom was not merely the empirical and
technical knowledge of the scientific mind, but spoke of deeper realities,
hidden to common sense and mechanical experiment. New appreciation
thus arose not only for the classical Greco-Roman past, but for the
spiritually resonant Middle Ages, for Gothic architecture and folk literature,
for the ancient and the primitive, for the Oriental and exotic, for esoteric
traditions of all sorts, for the Volksgeist of the Germanic and other peoples,
for the Dionysian wellsprings of culture. A new awareness of the
Renaissance now emerged, followed in subsequent years by a new
consciousness of the age of Romanticism itself. By contrast, such matters
concerned the scientific mind not out of empathic appreciation or
inspiration, but by virtue of their historical and anthropological interest. In
the Enlightenment-scientific vision, modern civilization and its values stood
401 

unequivocally above all its predecessors, while Romanticism maintained a
profound ambivalence toward modernity in its many expressions. As time
passed, ambivalence turned into antagonism as Romantics radically
questioned the West’s belief in its own “progress,” in its civilization’s innate
superiority, in rational man’s inevitable fulfillment.
The issue of religion posed the same contrasts. Both streams were in part
predicated on the Reformation, for individualism and personal freedom of
belief were common to both, yet each developed different aspects of the
Reformation legacy. The spirit of the Enlightenment rebelled against the
strictures of ignorance and superstition imposed by theological dogma and
belief in the supernatural, in favor of straightforward empirical and rational
knowledge and a liberating embrace of the secular. Religion was either
rejected altogether or maintained only in the form of a rationalist deism or
natural law ethics. The Romantic’s attitude toward religion was more
complex. His rebellion too was against the hierarchies and institutions of
traditional religion, against enforced belief, moralistic constriction, and
hollow ritual. Yet religion itself was a central and enduring element in the
Romantic spirit, whether it took the form of transcendental idealism,
Neoplatonism, Gnosticism, pantheism, mystery religion, nature worship,
Christian 
mysticism, 
Hindu-Buddhist 
mysticism, 
Swedenborgianism,
theosophy, esotericism, religious existentialism, neopaganism, shamanism,
Mother Goddess worship, evolutionary human divinization, or some
syncretism of these. Here the “sacred” remained a viable category, whereas
in science it had long since disappeared. God was rediscovered in
Romanticism—not the God of orthodoxy or deism but of mysticism,
pantheism, and immanent cosmic process; not the juridical monotheistic
patriarch but a divinity more ineffably mysterious, pluralistic, all-embracing,
neutral or even feminine in gender; not an absentee creator but a numinous
creative force within nature and within the human spirit.
Moreover, art itself—music, literature, drama, painting—now took on a
virtually religious status for the Romantic sensibility. In a world made
mechanical and soulless by science, the pursuit of beauty for its own sake
assumed extraordinary psychological importance. Art provided a unique
point of conjunction between the natural and the spiritual, and for many
modem intellectuals disillusioned with orthodox religion, art became the
402 

chief spiritual outlet and medium. The problem of grace, focused on the
enigma of inspiration, now seemed of more vital concern to painters,
composers, and writers than to theologians. The artistic enterprise was
elevated to an exalted spiritual role, whether as poetic epiphany or aesthetic
rapture, as divine afflatus or revelation of eternal realities, as creative quest,
imaginative discipline, devotion to the Muses, existential imperative, or
liberating transcendence from the world of suffering. The most secular of
moderns could yet worship the artistic imagination, hold sacred the
humanistic tradition of art and culture. The creative masters of the past
became the saints and prophets of that culture, the critics and essayists its
high priests. In art, the disenchanted modem psyche could yet find a ground
for meaning and value, a hallowed context for its spiritual yearnings, a
world open to profundity and mystery.
The artistic and literary culture also presented the modern mind with
virtually an alternative, if more complex and variable, world picture to that
of science. The cultural power of, for example, the novel in reflecting and
shaping human experience—from Rabelais, Cervantes, and Fielding,
through Hugo, Stendhal, Flaubert, Melville, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy, and on
to Mann, Hesse, Lawrence, Woolf, Joyce, Proust, and Kafka—constituted a
constant and often unassimilable counterpoint to the power of the dominant
scientific world conception. Having lost belief in the theological and
mythological master plots of earlier eras, the literate culture of the modern
West turned its instinctive hunger for cosmic coherence, for existential
order, to the narrative plots of imaginative fiction. Through the artist’s
ability to give new contour and significance to experience, in the mystical
crucible of aesthetic transfiguration, a new reality could be made—“a rival
creation” in Henry James’s words. Here in the novel, as in theater and poetry
and the other arts, was expressed a concern with the phenomena of
consciousness as such, as well as with the qualitative details of the outer
world, so that artistic realism could (again in James’s words) “survey the
whole field.” Here in the realms of art and literature was pursued with
penetrating rigor and nuance that broad phenomenology of human
experience that was also entering into formal philosophy itself through
William James and Bergson, Husserl and Heidegger. Rather than conducting
experimental analysis of an objectified world, this tradition focused its
403 

attention on “being” itself, on the lived world of human experience, on its
unceasing ambiguity, its spontaneity and autonomy, its uncontainable
dimensions, its ever-deepening complexity.
In this sense the Romantic impulse continued and expanded the modem
mind’s overall movement toward realism. Its goal was to delineate all aspects
of existence, not just the conventionally acceptable and consensually
validated. As Romanticism extended its compass and shifted its focus in the
course of the modern period, it sought to reflect the authentic character of
modern life in its lived actuality, not limiting itself to the ideal or the
aristocratic, or to traditional subjects from classical, mythological, or biblical
sources. Its mission was to transmute the mundane and commonplace into
art, to perceive the poetic and mystical in the most concrete details of
ordinary experience, even in the degraded and ugly. Its quest was to show
“the heroism of modern life” (Baudelaire), and its antiheroism as well. By
expressing ever more precisely the variegated quality of human experience,
the Romantic conveyed as well its confusion, its irresolution, and its
subjectivity. Pressing ever deeper into the nature of human perception and
creativity, the modern artist began to move beyond the traditional mimetic,
representational view of art, and the “spectator” theory of reality underlying
it. Such an artist sought to be not merely the reproducer of forms, not even
their discoverer, but rather their creator. Reality was not to be copied, but to
be invented.
These radically broadening conceptions of reality, however, could not
easily be integrated with the more positivist side of the modern mind. Also
alienating to the scientific temperament was the Romantic’s characteristic
openness to transcendent dimensions of experience, and characteristic
antagonism to science’s alleged rationalist reductionism and pretensions to
objective certainty. As time passed, what had been the medieval dichotomy
between reason and faith, which was followed by the early modern
dichotomy between secular science and the Christian religion, now became
a more general schism between scientific rationalism on the one hand and
the multifaceted Romantic humanistic culture on the other, with the latter
now including a diversity of religious and philosophical perspectives loosely
allied with the literary and artistic tradition.
404 

The Divided World View
Because both temperaments were deeply and simultaneously expressive of
Western attitudes and yet were largely incompatible, a complex bifurcation
of the Western outlook resulted. With the modern psyche so affected by the
Romantic sensibility and in some sense identified with it, yet with the truth
claims of science so formidable, modern man experienced in effect an
intractable division between his mind and his soul. The same individual
could appreciate, say, both Blake and Locke, but not in a coherent manner.
Yeats’s esoteric vision of history could scarcely be conjoined with the history
taught in modern universities. Rilke’s idealist ontology (“We are the bees of
the invisible”) could not readily be accommodated by the assumptions of
conventional science. As distinctly modern and influential a sensibility as T. S.
Eliot’s was yet closer to Dante than to Darwin.
Romantic poets, religious mystics, idealist philosophers, and counter-
cultural psychedelicists would claim (and often describe in detail) the
existence of other realities beyond the material and argue for an ontology of
human consciousness sharply differing from that of conventional
empiricism. But when it came to defining a basic cosmology, the secular
scientific mind continued to determine the modern Weltanschauung’s
center of gravity. For without consensual validation, the Romantic’s
revelations could not overcome their apparent incompatibility with the
commonly accepted truths of scientific observation, the bottom line of
modern belief. The dreamer held no fragrant rose, tangible and public, with
which to demonstrate to all the truth of his dream.
Thus while Romanticism in this most general sense continued to inspire
the West’s “inner” culture—its art and literature, its religious and
metaphysical vision, its moral ideals—science dictated the “outer” cosmology:
the character of nature, man’s place in the universe, and the limits of his
real knowledge. Because science ruled the objective world, the Romantic
perception was by necessity limited to the subjective. The Romantics’
reflections on life, their music and poetry and religious yearnings, richly
absorbing and culturally sophisticated as those might be, in the end had to
be consigned to only a part of the modern universe. Spiritual, imaginative,
emotional, and aesthetic concerns had their place, but could not claim full
405 

ontological relevance in an objective world whose parameters were
fundamentally impersonal and opaque. The faith-reason division of the
medieval era and the religion-science division of the early modern era had
become one of subject-object, inner-outer, man-world, humanities-science.
A new form of the double-truth universe was now established.
As a consequence of this dualism, modern man’s experience of the natural
world and his relation to it underwent a paradoxical inversion as the
modern period evolved, with the Romantic and scientific streams virtually
mirroring each other in reverse. To begin with, a gradual immersion of man
into nature was visible on both fronts. On the Romantic side, as in Rousseau,
Goethe, or Wordsworth, there was an impassioned striving for conscious
unity with nature, both poetic and instinctual. On the scientific side, man’s
immersion into nature was realized in science’s description of man in
increasingly, and then entirely, naturalistic terms. But against the
harmonious aspirations of the Romantics, man’s unity with nature was here
placed in the context of a Darwinian-Freudian struggle with a nature of
brute unconsciousness—a struggle for survival, for ego integrity, for
civilization. In the scientific view, man’s antagonism toward nature—and
thus the necessity of nature’s external exploitation and internal repression—
was the inevitable consequence of man’s biological evolution and
emergence from the rest of nature.
In the longer run, however, the early Romantic sense of harmony with
nature underwent a distinct transformation as the modern era grew old.
Here the Romantic temperament was complexly influenced by its own
internal developments, by the sundering effects of modern industrial
civilization and modern history, and by science’s view of nature as
impersonal, non-anthropocentric, and random. The overdetermined result
was an experience of nature almost opposite from the original Romantic
ideal: Modern man now increasingly sensed his alienation from nature’s
womb, his fall from unitary being, his confinement to an absurd universe of
chance and necessity. No longer the early Romantic’s spiritually glorious
child of nature, late modern man was the incongruously sensitive denizen of
an implacable vastness devoid of meaning. Wordsworth’s vision had been
displaced by Frost’s:
406 

Space ails us moderns: we are sick with space.
Its contemplation makes us out as small.
As a brief epidemic of microbes
That in a good glass may be seen to crawl
The patina of this least of globes.
By contrast, and for different reasons, the temperament allied with science
and technological development had lauded man’s separation from nature.
Human freedom from nature’s constraints, man’s ability to control his
environment, and his intellectual capacity to observe and understand nature
without anthropomorphic projection were all indispensable values for the
scientific mind. Yet this same strategy paradoxically led science to a
deepened awareness of man’s intrinsic unity with nature: his ineluctable
dependence 
upon 
and 
ecological 
involvement 
with 
the 
natural
environment, his epistemological interrelatedness with the nature he could
never completely objectify, and the concrete dangers of the modern attempt
at such separation and objectification. Science thereby began to move
toward a position not altogether unlike the original Romantic one in its
appreciation of man’s unity with nature—though generally without
spiritual or transcendent dimensions, and without effectively resolving the
theoretical and practical problems of the still fundamental human-world
divide.
In the meantime, the Romantic position had succumbed to the alienation
necessitated by that schism. Nature was still impersonal and non-
anthropocentric, and the modern psyche’s acute awareness of that cosmic
estrangement was scarcely dented by the incipient and partial scientific
rapprochement. It is true that in the twentieth century, both scientist and
artist simultaneously experienced the breakdown and dissolution of the old
categories of time, space, causality, and substance. But the deeper
discontinuities between the scientific universe and human aspiration
remained unresolved. The modern experience was still vexed by a profound
incoherence, with the dichotomies of the Romantic and scientific
temperaments reflecting the Western Weltanschauung’s seemingly
unbridgeable disjunction between human consciousness and unconscious
cosmos. In a sense the two cultures, the two sensibilities, were present in
407 

varying proportion in every reflective individual of the modern West. And
as the full character and implications of the scientific world view became
explicit, that inner division was experienced as that of the sensitive human
psyche situated in a world alien to human meaning. Modern man was a
divided animal, inexplicably self-aware in an indifferent universe.
Attempted Syntheses: From Goethe and Hegel to Jung
There were those who sought to encompass that schism by bridging the
scientific and humanistic imperatives in both method and theory. Goethe led
a naturphilosophie movement that strove to unite empirical observation and
spiritual intuition into a science of nature more revealing than Newton’s, a
science capable of grasping nature’s organic archetypal forms. The scientist
could not, in Goethe’s view, arrive at nature’s deeper truths by detaching
himself from nature and employing bloodless abstractions to understand it,
registering the external world like a machine. Such a strategy guaranteed
that the observed reality would be a partial illusion, a picture whose depths
had been eliminated by an unconscious filter. Only by bringing observation
and imaginative intuition into intimate interaction could man penetrate
nature’s appearances and discover its essence. Then the archetypal form in
each phenomenon could be elicited; then the universal could be recognized
in the particular and reunited with it.
Goethe justified this approach with a philosophical stance sharply
divergent from that of his older contemporary Kant. For while, like Kant, he
recognized the human mind’s constrictive role in knowledge, he
nevertheless perceived man’s true relation to nature as overcoming the
Kantian dualism. In Goethe’s vision, nature permeates everything, including
the human mind and imagination. Hence nature’s truth does not exist as
something independent and objective, but is revealed in the very act of
human cognition. The human spirit does not simply impose its order on
nature, as Kant thought. Rather, nature’s spirit brings forth its own order
through man, who is the organ of nature’s self-revelation. For nature is not
distinct from spirit but is itself spirit, inseparable not only from man but
from God. God does not exist as a remote governor over nature, but “holds
408 

her close to her breast,” so that nature’s processes breathe God’s own spirit
and power. Thus did Goethe unite poet and scientist in an analysis of nature
that reflected his distinctively sensuous religiosity.
In a similar spirit, the metaphysical speculations of the German Idealists
after Kant culminated in the extraordinary philosophical achievement of
Georg W. F. Hegel. Drawing on classical Greek philosophy, Christian
mysticism, and German Romanticism to construct his all-encompassing
system, Hegel set forth a conception of reality that sought to relate and unify
man and nature, spirit and matter, human and divine, time and eternity. At
the foundation of Hegel’s thought was his understanding of dialectic,
according to which all things unfold in a continuing evolutionary process
whereby every state of being inevitably brings forth its opposite. The
interaction between these opposites then generates a third stage in which
the opposites are integrated—they are at once overcome and fulfilled—in a
richer and higher synthesis, which in turn becomes the basis for another
dialectical process of opposition and synthesis.5 Through philosophy’s
comprehension of this fundamental process, Hegel asserted, every aspect of
reality—human thought, history, nature, the divine reality itself—could be
made intelligible.
Hegel’s overriding impulse was to comprehend all dimensions of
existence as dialectically integrated in one unitary whole. In Hegel’s view, all
human thought and all reality is pervaded by contradiction, which alone
makes possible the development of higher states of consciousness and higher
states of being. Each phase of being contains within itself a self-
contradiction, and it is this that serves as the motor of its movement to a
higher and more complete phase. Through a continuing dialectical process
of opposition and synthesis, the world is always in the process of completing
itself. Whereas for most of the history of Western philosophy from Aristotle
onward, the defining essence of opposites was that they were logically
contradictory and mutually exclusive, for Hegel all opposites are logically
necessary and mutually implicated elements in a larger truth. Truth is thus
radically paradoxical.
Yet for Hegel the human mind in its highest development was fully
capable of comprehending such truth. In contrast to Kant’s more
circumscribed view, Hegel possessed a profound faith in human reason,
409 

believing it was ultimately grounded in the divine reason itself. While Kant
had argued that reason could not penetrate the veil of phenomena to reach
the ultimate reality, since man’s finite reason inevitably became caught in
contradiction whenever it attempted to do so, Hegel saw human reason as
fundamentally an expression of a universal Spirit or Mind (Geist), through
the power of which, as in love, all opposites could be transcended in a
higher synthesis.
Hegel further argued that Kant’s philosophical revolution did not
establish the final limits or necessary foundations of human knowledge, but
rather was one of a long sequence of such conceptual revolutions by which
man as subject repeatedly recognized that what he had thought was a
being-in-itself actually received its content by means of the form given to it
by the subject. The history of the human mind constantly replayed this
drama of the subject’s becoming conscious of itself and the consequent
destruction of the previously uncriticized form of consciousness. The
structures of human knowledge were not fixed and timeless, as Kant
supposed, but were historically determined stages that evolved in a
continuing dialectic until consciousness achieved absolute knowledge of
itself. What at any moment was seen as fixed and certain was constantly
overcome by the evolving mind, thereby opening up new possibilities and
greater freedom. Every stage of philosophy from the ancient Presocratics
onward, every form of thought in human history, was both an incomplete
perspective and yet a necessary step in this great intellectual evolution.
Every era’s world view was both a valid truth unto itself and also an
imperfect stage in the larger process of absolute truth’s self-unfolding.
This same dialectical process also characterized Hegel’s metaphysical and
religious understanding. Hegel conceived of the primal being of the world,
the universal Mind or Spirit, as unfolding itself through its creation,
achieving its ultimate realization in the human spirit. In Hegel’s
understanding, the Absolute first posits itself in the immediacy of its own
inner consciousness, then negates this initial condition by expressing itself in
the particularities of the finite world of space and time, and finally, by
“negating the negation,” recovers itself in its infinite essence. Mind thereby
overcomes its estrangement from the world, a world that Mind itself has
constituted. Thus the movement of knowledge evolves from consciousness
410 

of the object separate from the subject, to absolute knowledge in which the
knower and the known became one.
But it was only through a dialectical process of self-negation that the
Absolute could achieve its fulfillment. Whereas for Plato the immanent and
secular was ontologically dismissed in favor of the transcendent and
spiritual, for Hegel this world was the very condition of the Absolute’s self-
realization. In Hegel’s conception, both nature and history are ever
progressing toward the Absolute: The universal Spirit expresses itself in
space as nature, in time as history. All of nature’s processes and all of history,
including man’s intellectual, cultural, and religious development, constitute
the teleological plot of the Absolute’s quest for self-revelation. Just as it was
only through the experience of alienation from God that man could
experience the joy and triumph of rediscovering his own divinity, so it was
only through the process of God’s becoming finite, in nature and in man,
that God’s infinite nature could be expressed. For this reason, Hegel declared
that the essence of his philosophical conception was expressed in the
Christian revelation of God’s incarnation as man, the climax of religious
truth.
The world is the history of the divine’s unfolding, a constant process of
becoming, an immense drama in which the universe reveals itself to itself
and achieves its freedom. All struggle and evolution are resolved in the
realization of the world’s telos, its goal and purpose. In this great dialectic,
all potentialities are embodied in forms of ever-increasing complexity, and
all that was implicit in the original state of being gradually becomes explicit.
Man—his thought, his culture, his history—is the pivot of that unfolding,
the vessel of God’s glory. Hence theology for Hegel was replaced by the
comprehension of history: God is not beyond the creation, but is the creative
process itself. Man is not the passive spectator of reality, but its active co-
creator, his history the matrix of its fulfillment. The universal essence, which
constitutes and permeates all things, finally comes to consciousness of itself
in man. At the climax of his long evolution, man achieves possession of
absolute truth and recognizes his unity with the divine spirit that has
realized itself within him.
When all this was set forth in the early nineteenth century, and for
several decades afterward, Hegel’s great structure of thought was regarded
411 

by many as the most satisfying and indeed ultimate philosophical conception
in the history of the Western mind, the culmination of philosophy’s long
development since the Greeks. Every aspect of existence and human culture
found a place in this world conception, embraced by its all-encompassing
totality. Hegel’s influence was considerable, first in Germany and later in
English-speaking countries, encouraging a renascence of classical and
historical studies from an Idealist perspective and providing a metaphysical
bulwark for spiritually disposed intellectuals grappling with the forces of
secular materialism. A new attentiveness to history and to the evolution of
ideas was thereby engendered, with history seen as motivated ultimately not
simply by political or economic or biological—i.e., material—factors, though
these all played a role, but rather by consciousness itself, by spirit or mind,
by the self-unfoldment of thought and the power of ideas.
Yet Hegel also aroused much criticism. For some, the absolutist closures of
his system appeared to limit the unpredictable possibilities of the universe
and the personal autonomy of the human individual. His stress on the
rational determinism of the Absolute Spirit and the ultimate overcoming of
all oppositions seemed to undercut the problematic contingency and
irrationality of life, and to ignore the concrete emotional and existential
actuality of human experience. His abstract metaphysical certitudes seemed
to avoid the grim reality of death, and to disregard the human experience of
God’s remoteness and inscrutability. Religious critics objected that belief in
God was not simply the solution to a philosophical problem but required a
free and courageous leap of faith amidst ignorance and dark uncertainty. His
philosophy was interpreted by others as a metaphysical justification for the
status quo, and was therefore criticized as a betrayal of humanity’s drive for
political and material betterment. Later critics noted that his exalted view of
Western culture in the context of world history, and of rational civilization’s
imposing itself on the contingencies of nature, could be interpreted as a
justification for modern man’s hubristic impulse toward domination and
exploitation. Indeed, fundamental Hegelian concepts such as those
concerning the nature of God, spirit, reason, history, and freedom appeared
to be open to completely antithetical interpretations.
Often Hegel’s historical judgments seemed peremptory, his political and
religious implications ambiguous, his language and style perplexing.
412 

Moreover, his scientific views, though informed, were unorthodox. In any
case Hegelian Idealism did not easily cohere with the naturalistic view of the
world corroborated by science. After Darwin, evolution no longer seemed to
require an all-encompassing Spirit, nor did the conventional scientific view
of the evidence suggest one. Nor, finally, did subsequent historical events
provide grounds for confidence in Western man’s inevitable spiritual
consummation through history.
Hegel had spoken with the autocratic confidence of one who had
experienced a vision of reality whose absolute truth transcended the
skepticism and demands for detailed empirical tests that other systems might
require. To his critics, Hegel’s philosophy was unfounded, fantastic. The
modern mind did indeed incorporate much of Hegel, above all his grasp of
dialectic and his recognition of the pervasiveness of evolution and the
power of history. But as an entirety, the Hegelian synthesis was not sustained
by the modern mind. In fulfillment, as it were, of its own theory,
Hegelianism was eventually submerged by the very reactions it helped
provoke—irrationalism and existentialism (Schopenhauer and Kierkegaard),
dialectical materialism (Marx and Engels), pluralistic pragmatism (James and
Dewey), logical positivism (Russell and Carnap), and linguistic analysis
(Moore and Wittgenstein), all movements increasingly more reflective of the
general tenor of modern experience. With Hegel’s decline there passed from
the modern intellectual arena the last culturally powerful metaphysical
system claiming the existence of a universal order accessible to human
awareness.
In the twentieth century, metaphysically inclined scientists such as Henri
Bergson, Alfred North Whitehead, and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin sought to
conjoin the scientific picture of evolution with philosophical and religious
conceptions of an underlying spiritual reality along lines similar to Hegel.
Their eventual fate, however, was also similar, for although regarded by
many as brilliant and comprehensive challenges to the conventional
scientific vision, for others such speculations did not possess a sufficiently
demonstrable empirical basis. Given the nature of the case, there seemed to
be no decisive means for verifying such concepts as Bergson’s creative élan
vital operating in the evolutionary process, Whitehead’s evolving God who
was interdependent with nature and its processes of becoming, or Teilhard’s
413 

“cosmogenesis” in which human and world evolution would be fulfilled in
an “Omega point” of unitive Christ-consciousness. Although each of these
theories of a spiritually informed evolutionary process gained wide popular
response and began to influence later modern thought in often subtle ways,
the overt cultural trend, especially in academia, was otherwise.
The decline of speculative metaphysical overviews signaled as well the
decline of speculative historical overviews, and epic efforts such as Oswald
Spengler’s and Arnold Toynbee’s, though not without admirers, were
eventually depreciated like Hegel’s before them. Academic history now
disengaged itself from the task of discerning great overarching patterns and
comprehensive uniformities in history. The Hegelian program of discovering
the “meaning” of history and the “purpose” of cultural evolution was now
regarded as impossible and misguided. Instead, professional historians saw
their competence more properly limited to carefully defined specialized
studies, to methodological problems derived from the social sciences, to
statistical analyses of measurable factors such as population levels and
income figures. The historian’s attention was better directed to the concrete
details of people’s lives, especially to their economic and social contexts
—“history from below”—than to the Idealist image of universal principles
working through great individuals to forge world history. Following the
directive of the Enlightenment, academic historians saw the need to remove
history entirely from the theological, mythological, and metaphysical
contexts within which it had long been embedded. Like nature, history too
was a nominalist phenomenon, to be examined empirically, without spiritual
preconceptions.
Yet as the modern era moved to its later stages, Romanticism would
reengage the modern mind from another field altogether. The decline of
Hegel and of metaphysical and historical overviews had originated in an
intellectual environment in which physical science was the dominant force
in determining the cultural understanding of reality. But as science itself
began to be revealed, both epistemologically and pragmatically, as a relative
and fallible form of knowledge, and with both philosophy and religion
having already lost their previous cultural preeminence, many reflective
individuals began to turn inward, to an examination of consciousness itself
as a potential source of meaning and identity in a world otherwise devoid of
414 

stable values. This new focus on the inner workings of the psyche reflected
as well an increasingly sophisticated concern with those unconscious
structures within the mind of the subject that were determining the
ostensible nature of the object—a continuation of the Kantian project on a
more comprehensive level. Thus it was that of all the instances of a
Romantically influenced science (if we except modern evolutionary theory’s
complex debt to Romantic ideas of organic evolution in nature and history,
of reality as a process of constant becoming), the most enduring and seminal
proved to be the depth psychology of Freud and Jung, both deeply
influenced by the stream of German Romanticism that flowed from Goethe
through Nietzsche.
In its concern with the elemental passions and powers of the unconscious
—with 
imagination, 
emotion, 
memory, 
myth, 
and 
dreams, 
with
introspection, psychopathology, hidden motivations, and ambivalence—
psychoanalysis brought Romanticism’s preoccupations to a new level of
systematic analysis and cultural significance. With Freud, who first turned to
medical science after hearing Goethe’s Ode to Nature as a student, and who
throughout his life obsessively collected archaic religious and mythological
statuary, the Romantic influence was often hidden or inverted by the
Enlightenment-rationalist assumptions that pervaded his scientific vision.
But with Jung, the Romantic inheritance became more explicit as Freud’s
discoveries and concepts were expanded and deepened. In the course of
analyzing a vast range of psychological and cultural phenomena, Jung found
evidence of a collective unconscious common to all human beings and
structured according to powerful archetypal principles. Though it was clear
that human experience was locally conditioned by a multitude of concrete
biographical, cultural, and historical factors, subsuming all these at a deeper
level appeared to be certain universal patterns or modes of experience,
archetypal forms that constantly arranged the elements of human
experience into typical configurations and gave to collective human
psychology a dynamic continuity. These archetypes endured as basic a priori
symbolic forms while taking on the costume of the moment in each
individual life and each cultural era, permeating each experience, each
cognition, and each world view.
The discovery of the collective unconscious and its archetypes radically
415 

extended psychology’s range of interest and insight. Religious experience,
artistic creativity, esoteric systems, and the mythological imagination were
now analyzed in nonreductive terms strongly reminiscent of the
Neoplatonic Renaissance and Romanticism. A new dimension to Hegel’s
understanding of historical dialectic emerged with Jung’s insight into the
collective psyche’s tendency to constellate archetypal oppositions in history
before moving toward a synthesis on a higher level. A host of factors
previously ignored by science and psychology were now recognized as
significant to the psychotherapeutic enterprise and given vivid conceptual
formulation: the creativity and continuity of the collective unconscious, the
psychological reality and potency of spontaneously produced symbolic forms
and autonomous mythic figures, the nature and power of the shadow, the
psychological centrality of the search for meaning, the importance of
teleological and self-regulating elements in the psyche’s processes, the
phenomenon of synchronicities. Freud and Jung’s depth psychology thus
offered a fruitful middle ground between science and the humanities—
sensitive to the many dimensions of human experience, concerned with art
and religion and interior realities, with qualitative conditions and
subjectively significant phenomena, yet striving for empirical rigor, for
rational cogency, for practical, therapeutically effective knowledge in a
context of collective scientific research.
But precisely because depth psychology was originally grounded in the
broader scientific Weltanschauung, its larger philosophical impact was
initially limited. This limitation existed not so much because depth
psychology was vulnerable to criticism for being insufficiently “scientific,”
compared with, for example, behaviorist psychology or statistical mechanics
(clinical impressions, it was sometimes argued, could not constitute
objective, contamination-free evidence for psychoanalytic theories). Such
criticisms were occasionally voiced by more conservative scientists but did
not significantly affect depth psychology’s cultural acceptance, since most
who familiarized themselves with its insights found these to possess a certain
internal self-evidence and persuasive logic, often bearing the character of
an illumination. But more constraining for depth psychology’s impact was
the very nature of its study: given the basic subject-object dichotomy of the
modern mind, the insights of depth psychology had to be adjudged relevant
416 

only to the psyche, to the subjective aspect of things, not to the world as
such. Even if “objectively” true, they were objectively true only in relation to
a subjective reality. They did not and could not change the cosmic context
within which the human being sought psychological integrity.
This limitation was further enforced by the modern epistemological
critique of all human knowledge. Jung, though metaphysically more flexible
than Freud, was epistemologically more exacting, and repeatedly affirmed
throughout much of his life the fundamental epistemological limits of his
own theories (though he also reminded more conventional scientists that
their epistemological situation was no different). With his philosophical
grounding in the Kantian critical tradition rather than in Freud’s more
conventional rationalist materialism, Jung was compelled to admit that his
psychology could have no necessary metaphysical implications. It is true that
Jung’s granting the status of empirical phenomena to psychological reality
was itself a major step past Kant, for he thereby gave substance to “internal”
experience as Kant had to “external” experience: all human experience, not
just sense impressions, had to be included for a genuinely comprehensive
empiricism. Yet in a Kantian spirit, Jung stated that whatever the data
provided by psychotherapeutic investigations, these could never provide
substantial warrant for propositions concerning the universe or reality as
such. The discoveries of psychology could reveal nothing with certainty
about the world’s actual constitution, no matter how subjectively convincing
was the evidence for a mythic dimension, an anima mundi, or a supreme
deity. Whatever the human mind produced could be regarded only as a
product of the human mind and its intrinsic structures, with no necessary
objective or universal correlations. The epistemological value of depth
psychology lay rather in its capacity to reveal those unconscious structural
factors, the archetypes, which appeared to govern all mental functioning
and hence all human perspectives on the world.
Thus the nature of Jung’s field and concepts seemed to require an
exclusively psychological interpretation of his findings. They were indeed
empirical, but they were only psychologically empirical. Depth psychology
had perhaps rendered a deeper inner world for modern man, but the
objective universe as known by natural science was necessarily still opaque,
without transcendent dimensions. It is true that many striking parallels
417 

existed between Jungian archetypes and Platonic archetypes; but for the
ancient mind, Platonic archetypes were cosmic, while for the modern mind,
Jungian archetypes were only psychic. Therein lay the fundamental
difference between the classical Greek and the modern Romantic: Descartes,
Newton, Locke, and Kant had intervened. With the bifurcation of the
modern mind between Romantic and depth psychology interiority on the
one hand and the naturalistic cosmology of the physical sciences on the
other, there seemed to be no possibility for a genuine synthesis of subject
and object, psyche and world. Yet the therapeutic and intellectual
contributions of the Freudian-Jungian tradition to twentieth-century
culture were many, and gained more significance with each passing decade.
Indeed, the modern psyche appeared to require the services of depth
psychology with increasing urgency, as a profound sense of spiritual
alienation and other symptoms of social and psychological distress became
more widespread. With the traditional religious perspectives no longer
offering effective solace, depth psychology itself, along with its numerous
offspring, took on characteristics of a religion—a new faith for modern man,
a path for the healing of the soul bringing regeneration and rebirth,
epiphanies of sudden insight and spiritual conversion (and other facets of
religion as well, with the memorializing of psychology’s founding prophets
and their initiatory revelations, the development of dogmas, priestly elites,
rituals, schisms, heresies, reformations, and the proliferation of protestant
and gnostic sects). Yet it seemed that salvation for the cultural psyche was
not being widely effected—as if the tools of depth psychology were being
employed in a context riddled with a more encompassing pathology than a
subjectivist psychotherapy could hope to cure.
Existentialism and Nihilism
As the twentieth century advanced, modern consciousness found itself
caught up in an intensely contradictory process of simultaneous expansion
and contraction. Extraordinary intellectual and psychological sophistication
was accompanied by a debilitating sense of anomie and malaise. An
unprecedented broadening of horizons and exposure to the experience of
418 

others coincided with a private alienation of no less extreme proportions. A
stupendous quantity of information had become available about all aspects
of life—the contemporary world, the historical past, other cultures, other
forms of life, the subatomic world, the macrocosm, the human mind and
psyche—yet there was also less ordering vision, less coherence and
comprehension, less certainty. The great overriding impulse defining
Western man since the Renaissance—the quest for independence, self-
determination, and individualism—had indeed brought those ideals to reality
in many lives; yet it had also eventuated in a world where individual
spontaneity and freedom were increasingly smothered, not just in theory by
a reductionist scientism, but in practice by the ubiquitous collectivity and
conformism of mass societies. The great revolutionary political projects of
the modern era, heralding personal and social liberation, had gradually led
to conditions in which the modern individual’s fate was ever more
dominated by bureaucratic commercial and political superstructures. Just as
man had become a meaningless speck in the modern universe, so had
individual persons become insignificant ciphers in modern states, to be
manipulated or coerced by the millions.
The quality of modern life seemed ever equivocal. Spectacular
empowerment was countered by a widespread sense of anxious helplessness.
Profound moral and aesthetic sensitivity confronted horrific cruelty and
waste. The price of technology’s accelerating advance grew ever higher.
And in the background of every pleasure and every achievement loomed
humanity’s unprecedented vulnerability. Under the West’s direction and
impetus, modern man had burst forward and outward, with tremendous
centrifugal force, complexity, variety, and speed. And yet it appeared he had
driven himself into a terrestrial nightmare and a spiritual wasteland, a fierce
constriction, a seemingly irresolvable predicament.
Nowhere was the problematic modern condition more precisely
embodied than in the phenomenon of existentialism, a mood and philosophy
expressed in the writings of Heidegger, Sartre, and Camus, among others,
but ultimately reflecting a pervasive spiritual crisis in modern culture. The
anguish and alienation of twentieth-century life were brought to full
articulation as the existentialist addressed the most fundamental, naked
concerns of human existence—suffering and death, loneliness and dread,
419 

guilt, conflict, spiritual emptiness and ontological insecurity, the void of
absolute values or universal contexts, the sense of cosmic absurdity, the
frailty of human reason, the tragic impasse of the human condition. Man
was condemned to be free. He faced the necessity of choice and thus knew
the continual burden of error. He lived in constant ignorance of his future,
thrown into a finite existence bounded at each end by nothingness. The
infinity of human aspiration was defeated before the finitude of human
possibility. Man possessed no determining essence: only his existence was
given, an existence engulfed by mortality, risk, fear, ennui, contradiction,
uncertainty. No transcendent Absolute guaranteed the fulfillment of human
life or history. There was no eternal design or providential purpose. Things
existed simply because they existed, and not for some “higher” or “deeper”
reason. God was dead, and the universe was blind to human concerns,
devoid of meaning or purpose. Man was abandoned, on his own. All was
contingent. To be authentic one had to admit, and choose freely to
encounter, the stark reality of life’s meaninglessness. Struggle alone gave
meaning.
The Romantic’s quest for spiritual ecstasy, union with nature, and
fulfillment of self and society, previously buttressed by the progressive
optimism of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, had met the dark
realities of the twentieth, and the existentialist predicament was felt by many
throughout the culture. Even theologians—perhaps especially theologians—
were sensitive to the existentialist spirit. In a world shattered by two world
wars, totalitarianism, the holocaust, and the atomic bomb, belief in a wise
and omnipotent God ruling history for the good of all seemed to have lost
any defensible basis. Given the unprecedentedly tragic dimensions of
contemporary historical events, given the fall of Scripture as an unshakable
foundation for belief, given the lack of any compelling philosophical
argument for God’s existence, and given above all the almost universal crisis
of religious faith in a secular age, it was becoming impossible for many
theologians to speak of God in any way meaningful to the modern sensibility:
thus emerged the seemingly self-contradictory but singularly representative
theology of the “death of God.”
Contemporary narratives increasingly portrayed individuals caught in a
bewilderingly problematic environment, vainly attempting to forge meaning
420 

and value in a context devoid of significance. Faced with the relentless
impersonality of the modern world—whether mechanized mass society or
soulless cosmos—the Romantic’s only remaining response appeared to be
despair or self-annihilating defiance. Nihilism in a multitude of inflections
now penetrated cultural life with growing insistence. The earlier Romantic
passion to merge with the infinite began to be turned against itself, inverted,
transformed into a compulsion to negate that passion. Romanticism’s
disenchanted spirit increasingly expressed itself in fragmentation,
dislocation, and self-parody, its only possible truths those of irony and dark
paradox. Some suggested that the entire culture was psychotic in its
disorientation, and that those called mad were in fact closer to genuine
sanity. The revolt against conventional reality began to take new and more
extreme forms. Earlier modern responses of realism and naturalism gave
way to the absurd and surreal, the dissolution of all established foundations
and solid categories. The quest for freedom became ever more radical, its
price the destruction of any standard or stability. As the physical sciences
also dismantled long-held certainties and structures, so art met science in
the throes of the twentieth century’s epistemological relativism.
Already at the beginning of the century, the West’s traditional artistic
canon, rooted in the forms and ideals of classical Greece and the
Renaissance, had begun to be dissolved and atomized. Whereas the nature of
human identity reflected in novels of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries conveyed a sense of human selfhood solidly outlined against large
coherent backgrounds of linear narrative logic and historical sequence, the
characteristic twentieth-century novel was notable for a constant
questioning of its own premises, an incessant disruption of narrative and
historical coherence, a confusing of horizons, a sophisticated and convoluted
self-doubt that left characters, author, and reader in a state of irreducible
suspension. Reality and identity, as Hume had precociously perceived two
centuries earlier, were neither humanly ascertainable nor ontologically
absolute. They were fictive habits of psychological and pragmatic
convenience, and in the acutely introspective, wary, relativist consciousness
of the contemporary Western mind, they could no longer be confidently
presumed. For many, they were also false prisons, to be seen through and
transcended: for where there was uncertainty, there was also freedom.
421 

Half in reflection, half in prophesy, the dissonance and disjunction, radical
freedom and radical uncertainty of the twentieth century found full and
precise expression in its arts. Palpable life in all its flux and chaos replaced
the formal conventions of earlier eras. The marvelous in art was sought
through the aleatory, the spontaneous, the happenstance. Whether in
painting or poetry, music or theater, an insistent amorphousness and
indeterminacy governed artistic expression. Incoherence and disturbing
juxtaposition constituted the new aesthetic logic. The anomalous became
normative: the incongruous, the fractured, the stylized, the trivial, the
allusively obscure. Concern with the irrational and subjective, compounded
by the overriding impulse to break free from conventions and expectations,
often rendered an art intelligible to but an esoteric few—or so elliptically
inscrutable as to preclude communication altogether. Each artist had
become the prophet of his own new order and dispensation, courageously
breaking the old law and forging a new testament.
Art’s task was to “make the world strange,” to shock the dulled sensibility,
to forge a new reality by fragmenting the old. In art as in social practices,
rebellion against a constricting and spiritually destitute society required the
earnest, even systematic flouting of traditional values and assumptions. The
sacred, made bland and empty by centuries of pious convention, seemed
better expressed through the profane and blasphemous. Elemental passion
and sensation could best draw forth the aboriginal wellsprings of the
creative spirit. In Picasso as in the century he mirrored, there arose a
Dionysian compound of unbound eroticism, aggression, dismemberment,
death and birth. Alternatively, artistic revolt took the form of simulating the
modern world in its metallic aridity, with the minimalists mimicking the
scientific positivist in their striving for an expressionless art—an impersonal
objectivism stripped of interpretation, flatly depicting gestures, forms, and
tones devoid of subjectivity or meaning. In the view of many artists, not just
intelligibility and meaning but beauty itself was to be abjured, for beauty,
too, could be a tyrant, a convention to be destroyed.
It was not simply that the old formulae had been exhausted, or that artists
sought novelty at any cost. Rather, the nature of contemporary human
experience demanded the collapse of old structures and themes, the creation
of new ones, or the renouncing of any discernible form or content
422 

whatever. Artists had become realists of a new reality—of an ever-growing
multiplicity of realities—lacking any precedent. Thus their artistic
responsibilities sharply diverged from those of their predecessors: radical
change, in art as in society, was the century’s overriding theme, its dominant
imperative and its inescapable actuality.
Yet a price was paid. “Make it new,” Ezra Pound had decreed, but later he
reflected, “I cannot make it cohere.” Radical change and ceaseless innovation
lent themselves to unaesthetic chaos, to incomprehensibility and barren
alienation. The late modern experiment threatened to fray out into
meaningless solipsism. The results of incessant novelty were creative but
seldom enduring. Incoherence was authentic but seldom satisfying.
Subjectivism was perhaps fascinating but too often irrelevant. The insistent
elevation of the abstract over the representational sometimes seemed to
reflect little more than the growing incapacity of the modern artist to relate
to nature. In the absence of established aesthetic forms or culturally
sustained modes of vision, the arts in the twentieth century became notable
for a certain quality of graceless transiency, an undisguised self-
consciousness regarding their own ephemeral substance and style.
By contrast, what was constant and cumulative in twentieth-century art
was an increasingly ascetic striving for an uncompromised essence of art
that gradually eliminated every artistic element that could be regarded as
peripheral or contingent—representation, narrative, character, melody,
tonality, structural continuity, thematic relation, form, content, meaning,
purpose—moving inevitably toward an end point in which all that remained
was a blank canvas, an empty stage, silence. Reversion to distantly past or
foreign forms and standards seemed to offer the only way out, but these, too,
proved short-lived gambits, incapable of taking deep root in the restless
modern psyche. Like philosophers and theologians, artists were finally left
with only the self-reflective and fairly paralyzing preoccupation with their
own creative processes and formal procedures—and, not infrequently, their
destruction of the results. The earlier modernist faith in the great artist who
alone was sovereign in an otherwise meaningless world gave way to the
postmodernist loss of faith in the artist’s transcendence.
The contemporary writer . . . is forced to start from scratch: Reality
423 

doesn’t exist, time doesn’t exist, personality doesn’t exist. God was the
omniscient author, but he died; now no one knows the plot, and since
our reality lacks the sanction of a creator, there’s no guarantee as to the
authenticity of the received version. Time is reduced to presence, the
content of a series of discontinuous moments. Time is no longer
purposive, and so there is no density, only chance. Reality is, simply, our
experience, and objectivity is, of course, an illusion. Personality, after
passing through a stage of awkward self-consciousness, has become . . .
a mere locus for our experience. In view of these annihilations, it
should be no surprise that literature, also, does not exist—how could it?
There is only reading and writing . . . ways of maintaining a considered
boredom in face of the abyss.6
The underlying powerlessness of the individual in modern life pressed
many artists and intellectuals to withdraw from the world, to forsake the
public arena. Fewer felt capable of engaging issues beyond those
immediately confronting the self and its private struggle for substance, let
alone committing to universal moral visions that no longer appeared
tenable. Human activity—artistic, intellectual, moral—was forced to find its
ground in a standardless vacuum. Meaning seemed to be no more than an
arbitrary construct, truth only a convention, reality undiscoverable. Man, it
began to be said, was a futile passion.
Underneath the superficial clamor of an often frenetic and
hyperstimulated daily existence, an apocalyptic tone started to pervade
many aspects of cultural life, and as the twentieth century advanced there
could be heard, with accelerating frequency and intensity, bell-tolling
declarations concerning the decline and fall, the deconstruction and
collapse, of virtually every one of the West’s great intellectual and cultural
projects: the end of theology, the end of philosophy, the end of science, the
end of literature, the end of art, the end of culture itself. Just as the
Enlightenment-scientific side of the modern mind found itself undermined
by its own intellectual advance and radically challenged by its technological
and political consequences in the world, so too the Romantic side, reacting
to similar circumstances but with a different and often more prophetic
sensibility, found itself both disillusioned from within and thwarted from
424 

without, apparently destined to hold transcendent aspirations in a cosmic
and historical context devoid of transcendent meaning.
Thus Western man enacted an extraordinary dialectic in the course of the
modern era—moving from a near boundless confidence in his own powers,
his spiritual potential, his capacity for certain knowledge, his mastery over
nature, and his progressive destiny, to what often appeared to be a sharply
opposite condition: a debilitating sense of metaphysical insignificance and
personal futility, spiritual loss of faith, uncertainty in knowledge, a mutually
destructive relationship with nature, and an intense insecurity concerning
the human future. In the four centuries of modern man’s existence, Bacon
and Descartes had become Kafka and Beckett.
Something indeed was ending. And so it was that the Western mind, in
response to these many complexly interwoven developments, had followed a
trajectory that by the late twentieth century had largely dissolved the
foundations of the modern world view, leaving the contemporary mind
increasingly bereft of established certainties, yet also fundamentally open in
ways it had never been before. And the intellectual sensibility that now
reflects and expresses this unprecedented situation, the overdetermined
outcome of the modern mind’s extraordinary development of increasing
sophistication and self-deconstruction, is the postmodern mind.
425 

The Postmodern Mind
Each great epochal transformation in the history of the Western mind
appears to have been initiated by a kind of archetypal sacrifice. As if to
consecrate the birth of a fundamental new cultural vision, in each case a
symbolically resonant trial and martyrdom of some sort was suffered by its
central prophet: thus the trial and execution of Socrates at the birth of the
classical Greek mind, the trial and crucifixion of Jesus at the birth of
Christianity, and the trial and condemnation of Galileo at the birth of
modern science. By all accounts the central prophet ot he postmodern mind
was Friedrich Nietzsche, with his radical perspectivism, his sovereign critical
sensibility, and his powerful, poignantly ambivalent anticipation of the
emerging nihilism in Western culture. And we see a curious, perhaps aptly
postmodern analogy of this theme of archetypal sacrifice and martyrdom
with the extraordinary inner trial and imprisonment—the intense
intellectual ordeal, the extreme psychological isolation, and the eventually
paralyzing madness—suffered at the birth of the postmodern by Nietzsche,
who signed his last letters “The Crucified,” and who died at the dawn of the
twentieth century.
Like Nietzsche, the postmodern intellectual situation is profoundly
complex and ambiguous—perhaps this is its very essence. What is called
postmodern varies considerably according to context, but in its most general
and widespread form, the postmodern mind may be iewed as an open-
ended, indeterminate set of attitudes that has been haped by a great diversity
of intellectual and cultural currents; these range from pragmatism,
existentialism, Marxism, and psychoanalysis to feminism, hermeneutics,
deconstruction, and postempiricist philosophy of science, to cite only a few
426 

of the more prominent. Out of this maelstrom of highly developed and often
divergent impulses and tendencies, a few widely shared working principles
have emerged. There is an appreciation of the plasticity and constant change
of reality and knowledge, a stress on the priority of concrete experience
over fixed abstract principles, and a conviction that no single a priori
thought system should govern belief or investigation. It is recognized that
human knowledge is subjectively determined by a multitude of factors; that
objective essences, or things-in-themselves, are neither accessible nor
positable; and that the value of all truths and assumptions must be
continually subjected to direct testing. The critical search for truth is
constrained to be tolerant of ambiguity and pluralism, and its outcome will
necessarily be knowledge that is relative and fallible rather than absolute or
certain.
Hence the quest for knowledge must be endlessly self-revising. One must
try the new, experiment and explore, test against subjective and objective
consequences, learn from one’s mistakes, take nothing for granted, treat all
as provisional, assume no absolutes. Reality is not a solid, self-contained
given but a fluid, unfolding process, an “open universe,” continually affected
and molded by one’s actions and beliefs. It is possibility rather than fact. One
cannot regard reality as a removed spectator against a fixed object; rather,
one is always and necessarily engaged in reality, thereby at once
transforming it while being transformed oneself. Although intransigent or
provoking in many respects, reality must in some sense be hewed out by
means of the human mind and will, which themselves are already enmeshed
in that which they seek to understand and affect. The human subject is an
embodied agent, acting and judging in a context that can never be wholly
objectified, with orientations and motivations that can never be fully grasped
or controlled. The knowing subject is never disengaged from the body or
from the world, which form the background and condition of every
cognitive act.
The inherent human capacity for concept and symbol formation is
recognized as a fundamental and necessary element in the human
understanding, anticipation, and creation of reality. The mind is not the
passive reflector of an external world and its intrinsic order, but is active
and creative in the process of perception and cognition. Reality is in some
427 

sense constructed by the mind, not simply perceived by it, and many such
constructions are possible, none necessarily sovereign. Although human
knowledge may be bound to conform to certain innate subjective structures,
there is a degree of indeterminacy in these that, combined with the human
will and imagination, permit an element of freedom in cognition. Implicit
here is a relativized critical empiricism and a relativized critical rationalism
—recognizing the indispensability both of concrete investigation and of
rigorous argument, criticism, and theoretical formulation, yet also
recognizing that neither procedure can claim any absolute foundation:
There is no empirical “fact” that is not already theory-laden, and there is no
logical argument or formal principle that is a priori certain. All human
understanding is interpretation, and no interpretation is final.
The prevalence of the Kuhnian concept of “paradigms” in current
discourse is highly characteristic of postmodern thought, reflecting a critical
awareness of the mind’s fundamentally interpretive nature. This awareness
has not only affected the postmodern approach to past cultural world views
and the history of changing scientific theories, but has also influenced the
postmodern self-understanding itself, encouraging a more sympathetic
attitude toward repressed or unorthodox perspectives and a more self-
critical view of currently established ones. Continuing advances in
anthropology, sociology, history, and linguistics have underscored the
relativity of human knowledge, bringing increased recognition of the
“Eurocentric” character of Western thought, and of the cognitive bias
produced by factors such as class, race, and ethnicity. Especially penetrating
in recent years has been the analysis of gender as a crucial factor in
determining, and limiting, what counts as truth. Various forms of
psychological analysis, cultural as well as individual, have further unmasked
the unconscious determinants of human experience and knowledge.
Reflecting and supporting all these developments is a radical
perspectivism that lies at the very heart of the postmodern sensibility: a
perspectivism rooted in the epistemologies developed by Hume, Kant, Hegel
(in his historicism), and Nietzsche, and later articulated in pragmatism,
hermeneutics, and posstructuralism. In this understanding, the world cannot
be said to possess any features in principle prior to interpretation. The world
does not exist as a thing-in-itself, independent of interpretation; rather, it
428 

comes into being only in and through interpretations. The subject of
knowledge is already embedded in the object of knowledge: the human mind
never stands outside the world, judging it from an external vantage point.
Every object of knowledge is already part of a preinterpreted context, and
beyond that context are only other preinterpreted contexts. All human
knowledge is mediated by signs and symbols of uncertain provenance,
constituted by historically and culturally variable predispositions, and
influenced by often unconscious human interests. Hence the nature of truth
and reality, in science no less than in philosophy, religion, or art, is radically
ambiguous. The subject can never presume to transcend the manifold
predispositions of his or her subjectivity. One can at best attempt a fusion of
horizons, a never-complete rapprochement between subject and object. Less
optimistically, one must recognize the insuperable solipsism of human
awareness against the radical illegibility of the world.
The other side of the postmodern mind’s openness and indeterminacy is
thus the lack of any firm ground for a world view. Both inner and outer
realities have become unfathomably ramified, multidimensional, malleable,
and unbounded—bringing a spur to courage and creativity, yet also a
potentially debilitating anxiety in the face of unending relativism and
existential finitude. The conflicts of subjective and objective testings, an
acute awareness of the cultural parochialism and historical relativity of all
knowledge, a pervasive sense of radical uncertainty and displacement, and a
pluralism bordering on distressing incoherence all contribute to the
postmodern condition. To even speak of subject and object as distinguishable
entities is to presume more than can be known. With the ascendance of the
postmodern mind, the human quest for meaning in the cosmos has devolved
upon a hermeneutic enterprise that is disorientingly free-floating: The
postmodern human exists in a universe whose significance is at once utterly
open and without warrantable foundation.
Of the many factors that have converged to produce this intellectual
position, it has been the analysis of language that has brought forth the most
radically skeptical epistemological currents in the postmodern mind, and it is
these currents that have identified themselves most articulately and self-
consciously as “postmodern.” Again, many sources contributed to this
development—Nietzsche’s analysis of the problematic relation of language
429 

to reality; C. S. Peirce’s semiotics, positing that all human thought takes place
in signs; Ferdinand de Saussure’s linguistics, positing the arbitrary
relationship between word and object, sign and signified; Wittgenstein’s
analysis of the linguistic structuring of human experience; Heidegger’s
existentialist-linguistic critique of metaphysics; Edward Sapir and B. L.
Whorf’s linguistic hypothesis that language shapes the perception of reality
as much as reality shapes language; Michel Foucault’s genealogical
investigations into the social construction of knowledge; .and Jacques
Derrida’s deconstructionism, challenging the attemp; to establish a secure
meaning in any text. The upshot of these several influences, particularly in
the contemporary academic world, has been the dynamic dissemination of a
view of human discourse and knowledge that radically relativizes human
claims to a sovereign or enduring truth, and that thereby supports an
emphatic revision of the character and goals of intellectual analysis.
Basic to this perspective is the thesis that all human thought is ultimately
generated and bound by idiosyncratic cultural-linguistic forms of life.
Human knowledge is the historically contingent product of linguistic and
social practices of particular local communities of interpreters, with no
assured “ever-closer” relation to an independent ahistorical reality. Because
human experience is linguistically prestructured, yet the various structures
of language possess no demonstrable connection with an independent
reality, the human mind can never claim access to any reality other than
that determined by its local form of life. Language is a “cage” (Wittgenstein).
Moreover, linguistic meaning itself can be shown to be fundamentally
unstable, because the contexts that determine meaning are never fixed, and
beneath the surface of every apparently coherent text can be found a
plurality of incompatible meanings. No interpretation of a text can claim
decisive authority because that which is being interpreted inevitably
contains hidden contradictions that undermine its coherence. Hence all
meaning is ultimately undecidable, and there is no “true” meaning. No
underlying primal reality can be said to provide the foundation for human
attempts to represent truth. Texts refer only to other texts, in an infinite
regress, with no secure basis in something external to language. One can
never escape from “the play of signifiers.” The multiplicity of
incommensurable human truths exposes and defeats the conventional
430 

assumption that the mind can progress ever forward to a nearer grasp of
reality. Nothing certain can be said about the nature of truth, except
perhaps that it is, as Richard Rorty put it, “what our peers will let us get
away with saying.7
Here in a sense the Cartesian critical intellect has reached its furthest
point of development, doubting all, applying a systematic skepticism to every
possible meaning. With no divine foundation to certify the Word, language
possesses no privileged connection to truth. The fate of human
consciousness is ineluctably nomadic, a self-aware wandering through
error. The history of human thought is a history of idiosyncratic
metaphorical schemes, ambiguous interpretive vocabularies having no
ground beyond what is already saturated by their own metaphorical and
interpretive categories. Postmodern philosophers can compare and contrast,
analyze and discuss the many sets of perspectives human beings have
expressed, the diverse symbol systems, the various ways of making things
hang together, but they cannot pretend to possess an extrahistorical
Archimedean point fron which to judge whether a given perspective validly
represents the “Truth.” Since there are no indubitable foundations for
human knowledge, the highest value for any perspective is its capacity to be
temporarily useful or edifying, emancipatory or creative—though it is
recognized that in the end these valuations are themselves not justifiable by
anything beyond personal and cultural taste. For justification is itself only
another social practice with no foundation beyond social practice.
The most prominent philosophical outcome of these several converging
strands of postmodern thought has been a many-sided critical attack on the
central Western philosophical tradition from Platonism onward. The whole
project of that tradition to grasp and articulate a foundational Reality has
been criticized as a futile exercise in linguistic game playing, a sustained but
doomed effort to move beyond elaborate fictions of its own creation. More
pointedly, such a project has been condemned as inherently alienating and
oppressively hierarchical—an intellectually imperious procedure that has
produced an existential and cultural impoverishment, and that has led
ultimately to the technocratic domination of nature and the social-political
domination of others. The Western mind’s overriding compulsion to impose
some form of totalizing reason—theological, scientific, economic—on every
431 

aspect of life is accused of being not only self-deceptive but destructive.
Spurred by these and other, related factors, postmodern critical thought
has encouraged a vigorous rejection of the entire Western intellectual
“canon” as long defined and privileged by a more or less exclusively male,
white, European elite. Received truths concerning “man,” “reason,”
“civilization,” and “progress” are indicted as intellectually and morally
bankrupt. Under the cloak of Western values, too many sins have been
committed. Disenchanted eyes are now cast onto the West’s long history of
ruthless expansionism and exploitation—the rapacity of its elites from
ancient times to modern, its systematic thriving at the expense of others, its
colonialism and imperialism, its slavery and genocide, its anti-Semitism, its
oppression of women, people of color, minorities, homosexuals, the working
classes, the poor, its destruction of indigenous societies throughout the
world, its arrogant insensitivity to other cultural traditions and values, its
cruel abuse of other forms of life, its blind ravaging of virtually the entire
planet.
In this radically transformed cultural context, the contemporary academic
world has increasingly concerned itself with the critical deconstruction of
traditional assumptions through several overlapping modes of analysis—
sociological and political, historical and psychological, linguistic and literary.
Texts of every category are analyzed with an acute sensitivity to the
rhetorical strategies and political functions they serve. The underlying
intellectual ethos is one of disassembling established structures, deflating
pretensions, exploding beliefs, unmasking appearances—a “hermeneutics of
suspicion” in the spirit of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud. Postmodernism in this
sense is “an antinomian movement that assumes a vast unmaking in the
Western 
mind 
. 
. 
. 
deconstruction, 
decentering, 
disappearance,
dissemination, demystification, discontinuity, difference, dispersion, etc. Such
terms . . . express an epistemological obsession with fragments or fractures,
and a corresponding ideological commitment to minorities in politics, sex,
and language. To think well, to feel well, to act well, to read well, according
to the épistème of unmaking, is to refuse the tyranny of wholes; totalization
in any human endeavor is potentially totalitarian.”8 The pretense of any form
of omniscience—philosophical, religious, scientific—must be abandoned.
Grand theories and universal overviews cannot be sustained without
432 

producing empirical falsification and intellectual authoritarianism. To assert
general truths is to impose a spurious dogma on the chaos of phenomena.
Respect for contingency and discontinuity limits knowledge to the local and
specific. Any alleged comprehensive, coherent outlook is at best no more
than a temporarily useful fiction masking chaos, at worst an oppressive
fiction masking relationships of power, violence, and subordination.
Properly speaking, therefore, there is no “postmodern world view,” nor
the possibility of one. The postmodern paradigm is by its nature
fundamentally subversive of all paradigms, for at its core is the awareness of
reality as being at once multiple, local and temporal, and without
demonstrable foundation. The situation recognized by John Dewey at the
start of the century, that “despair of any integrated outlook and attitude [is]
the chief intellectual characteristic of the present age,” has been enshrined
as the essence of the postmodern vision, as in Jean-François Lyotard’s
definition of postmodern as “incredulity toward metanarratives,”
Here, paradoxically, we can recognize something of the old confidence of
the modern mind in the superiority of its own perspective. Only whereas
the modern mind’s conviction of superiority derived from its awareness of
possessing in an absolute sense more knowledge than its predecessors, the
postmodern mind’s sense of superiority derives from its special awareness of
how little knowledge can be claimed by any mind, itself included. Yet
precisely by virtue of that self-relativizing critical awareness, it is recognized
that a quasi-nihilist rejection of any and all forms of “totalization” and
“metanarrative“—of any aspiration toward intellectual unity, wholeness, or
comprehensive coherence—is itself a position not beyond questioning, and
cannot on its own principles ultimately justify itself any more than can the
various metaphysical overviews against which the postmodern mind has
defined itself. Such a position presupposes a metanarrative of its own, one
perhaps more subtle than others, but in the end no less subject to
deconstructive criticism. On its own terms, the assertion of the historical
relativity and culturallinguistic bondage of all truth and knowledge must
itself be regarded as reflecting but one more local and temporal perspective
having no necessarily universal, extrahistorical value. Everything could
change tomorrow. Implicitly, the one postmodern absolute is critical
consciousness, which, by deconstructing all, seems compelled by its own
433 

logic to do so to itself as well. This is the unstable paradox that permeates the
postmodern mind.
But if the postmodern mind has sometimes been prone to a dogmatic
relativism and a compulsively fragmenting skepticism, and if the cultural
ethos that has accompanied it has sometimes deteriorated into cynical
detachment and spiritless pastiche, it is evident that the most significant
characteristics of the larger postmodern intellectual situation—its pluralism,
complexity, and ambiguity—are precisely the characteristics necessary for
the potential emergence of a fundamentally new form of intellectual vision,
one that might both preserve and transcend the current state of
extraordinary differentiation. In the politics of the contemporary
Weltanschauung, no perspective—religious, scientific, or philosophical—
has the upper hand, yet that situation has encouraged an almost
unprecedented intellectual flexibility and cross-fertilization, reflected in the
widespread call for, and practice of, open “conversation” between different
understandings, different vocabularies, different cultural paradigms.
Looked at as a whole, the extreme fluidity and multiplicity of the
contemporary intellectual scene can scarcely be exaggerated. Not only is the
postmodern mind itself a maelstrom of unresolved diversity, but virtually
every important element of the Western intellectual past is now present and
active in one form or another, contributing to the vitality and confusion of
the contemporary Zeitgeist. With so many previously established
assumptions having been called into question, there remain few, if any, a
priori strictures on the possible, and many perspectives from the past have
reemerged with new relevance. Hence any generalizations about the
postmodern mind have to be qualified by a recognition of the continuing
presence or recent resurgence of most of its major predecessors, the topics
of all the previous chapters of this book. Various still-vital forms of the
modern sensibility, of the scientific mind, of Romanticism and the
Enlightenment, of Renaissance syncretism, of Protestantism, Catholicism, and
Judaism—all of these, at various stages of development and ecumenical
interpenetration, continue today to be influential factors. Even elements of
the Western cultural tradition going back to the Hellenistic era and classical
434 

Greece—Platonic and Presocratic philosophy, Hermeticism, mythology, the
mystery religions—have been reemerging to play new roles in the current
intellectual scene. Moreover, these in turn have been joined, and affected, by
a multitude of cultural perspectives from outside the West, such as the
Buddhist and Hindu mystical traditions; by underground cultural streams
from within the West itself, such as Gnosticism and the major esoteric
traditions; and by indigenous and archaic perspectives antedating Western
civilization altogether, such as Neolithic European and Native American
spiritual traditions—all gathering now on the intellectual stage as if for some
kind of climactic synthesis.
The cultural and intellectual role of religion has of course been drastically
affected by the secularizing and pluralistic developments of the modern age,
but while in most respects the influence of institutionalized religion has
continued to decline, the religious sensibility itself seems to have been
revitalized by the newly ambiguous intellectual circumstances of the
postmodern era. Contemporary religion has been revitalized as well by its
own plurality, finding new forms of expression and new sources of
inspiration and illumination ranging from Eastern mysticism and
psychedelic self-exploration to liberation theology and ecofeminist
spirituality. Although the ascendance of secular individualism and the
decline of traditional religious belief may have precipitated widespread
spiritual anomie, it is evident that, for many, these same developments
ultimately encouraged new forms of religious orientation and greater
spiritual autonomy. In growing numbers, individuals have felt not only
compelled but free to work out for themselves their relationship to the
ultimate conditions of human existence, drawing on a far wider range of
spiritual resources to do so. The postmodern collapse of meaning has thus
been countered by an emerging awareness of the individual’s self-
responsibility and capacity for creative innovation and selftransformation in
his or her existential and spiritual response to life. Following suggestions
implicit in Nietzsche, the “death of God” has begun to be assimilated and
reconceived as a positive religious development, as permitting the
emergence of a more authentic experience of the numinous, a larger sense
of deity. On the intellectual level, religion no longer tends to be understood
reductively as a psychologically or culturally determined belief in
435 

nonexistent realities, or explained away as an accident of biology, but is
recognized as a fundamental human activity in which every society and
individual symbolically interprets and engages the ultimate nature of being.
Science too, while no longer enjoying the same degree of sovereignty it
possessed during the modern era, continues to retain allegiance for the
unrivaled pragmatic power of its conceptions and the penetrating rigor of
its method. Because the earlier knowledge claims of modern science have
been relativized by both philosophy of science and the concrete
consequences of scientific and technological advance, that allegiance is no
longer uncritical, yet in these new circumstances science itself has seemingly
been freed up to explore new and less-constricted approaches to
understanding the world. It is true that individuals who subscribe to an
allegedly unified and self-evident “scientific world view” of the modern type
are seen as having failed to engage the larger intellectual challenge of the
age—thereby receiving the same judgment in the postmodern era that the
ingenuous religious person received from science in the modern era. In
virtually all contemporary disciplines, it is recognized that the prodigious
complexity, subtlety, and multivalence of reality far transcend the grasp of
any one intellectual approach, and that only a committed openness to the
interplay of many perspectives can meet the extraordinary challenges of the
postmodern era. But contemporary science has itself become increasingly
self-aware and self-critical, less prone to a naive scientism, more conscious
of its epistemological and existential limitations. Nor is contemporary
science singular, having given rise to a number of radically divergent
interpretations of the world, many of which differ sharply from what was
previously the conventional scientific vision.
Common to these new perspectives has been the imperative to rethink
and reformulate the human relation to nature, an imperative driven by the
growing recognition that modern science’s mechanistic and objectivist
conception of nature was not only limited but fundamentally flawed. Major
theoretical interventions such as Bateson’s “ecology of mind,” Bohm’s theory
of the implicate order, Sheldrake’s theory of formative causation,
McClintock’s theory of genetic transposition, Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis,
Prigogine’s theory of dissipative structures and order by fluctuation, Lorenz
and Feigenbaum’s chaos theory, and Bell’s theorem of nonlocality have
436 

pointed to new possibilities for a less reductionist scientific world
conception. Evelyn Fox Keller’s methodological recommendation that the
scientist be capable of empathic identification with the object he or she seeks
to understand reflects a similar reorientation of the scientific mind.
Moreover, many of these developments within the scientific community
have been strengthened and often stimulated by the reemergence of and
widespread interest in various archaic and mystical conceptions of nature,
the impressive sophistication of which is increasingly recognized.
A further crucial development encouraging these integrative tendencies
in the postmodern intellectual milieu has been the epistemological
rethinking of the nature of imagination, carried out on many fronts—
philosophy of science, sociology, anthropology, religious studies—and
s$$rred perhaps above all by the work of Jung and the epistemological
insights of post-Jungian depth psychology. Imagination is no longer
conceived as simplistically opposed to perception and reason; rather,
perception and reason are recognized as being always informed by the
imagination. With this awareness of the fundamental mediating role of the
imagination in human experience has also come an increased appreciation
of the power and complexity of the unconscious, as well as new insight into
the nature of archetypal pattern and meaning. The postmodern
philosopher’s recognition of the inherently metaphorical nature of
philosophical and scientific statements (Feyerabend, Barbour, Rorty) has
been both affirmed and more precisely articulated with the postmodern
psychologist’s insight into the archetypal categories of the unconscious that
condition and structure human experience and cognition (Jung, Hillman).
The long-standing philosophical problem of universals, which had been
partly illuminated by Wittgenstein’s concept of “family resemblances“—his
thesis that what appears to be a definite commonality shared by all instances
covered by a single general word in fact often comprises a whole range of
indefinite, overlapping similarities and relationships—has been given new
intelligibility through depth psychology’s understanding of archetypes. In
this conception, archetypes are recognized as enduring patterns or
principles that are inherently ambiguous and multivalent, dynamic,
malleable, and subject to diverse cultural and individual inflections, yet that
possess a distinct underlying formal coherence and universality.
437 

An especially characteristic and challenging intellectual position that has
emerged out of modern and postmodern developments is one which,
recognizing both an essential autonomy in the human being and a radical
plasticity in the nature of reality, begins with the assertion that reality itself
tends to unfold in response to the particular symbolic framework and set of
assumptions that are employed by each individual and each society. The
fund of data available to the human mind is of such intrinsic complexity and
diversity that it provides plausible support for many different conceptions of
the ultimate nature of reality. The human being must therefore choose
among a multiplicity of potentially viable options, and whatever option is
chosen will in turn affect both the nature of reality and the choosing subject.
In this view, although there exist many defining structures in the world and
in the mind that resist or compel human thought and activity in various
ways, on a fundamental level the world tends to ratify, and open up
according to, the character of the vision directed toward it. The world that
the human being attempts to know and remake is in some sense projectively
elicited by the frame of reference with which it is approached.
Such a position emphasizes the immense responsibility inherent in the
human situation, and the immense potential. Since evidence can be adduced
and interpreted to corroborate a virtually limitless array of world views, the
human challenge is to engage that world view or set of perspectives which
brings forth the most valuable, life-enhancing consequences. The “human
predicament” is here regarded as the human adventure: the challenge of
being, in potentia, a radically self-defining entity—not in the context of the
no-exit box of the secular existentialist, which unconsciously assumed
specific a priori metaphysical limits, but in a universe that is genuinely open.
Because the human understanding is not unequivocally compelled by the
data to adopt one metaphysical position over another, an irreducible
element of human choice supervenes. Hence there enter into the
epistemological equation, in addition to intellectual rigor and social-cultural
context, other, more open-ended factors such as will, imagination, faith,
hope, and empathy. The more complexly conscious and ideologically
unconstrained the individual or society, the more free is the choice of
worlds, and the more profound their participation in creating reality. This
affirmation 
of 
the 
human 
being’s 
self-defining 
autonomy 
and
438 

epistemological freedom has a historical background going back at least to
the Renaissance and Pico’s Oratio, appearing in different forms in the ideas
of Emerson and Nietzsche, William James and Rudolf Steiner, among others,
but has been given new support and further dimensions by a wide range of
contemporary intellectual developments, from philosophy of science to
sociology of religion.
More generally, whether in philosophy, religion, or science, the univocal
literalism that tended to characterize the modern mind has been
increasingly criticized and rejected, and in its place has arisen a greater
appreciation of the multidimensional nature of reality, the manysidedness of
the human spirit, and the multivalent, symbolically mediated nature of
human knowledge and experience. With that appreciation has also come a
growing sense that the postmodern dissolving of old assumptions and
categories could permit the emergence of entirely new prospects for
conceptual and existential reintegration, with the possibility of richer
interpretive vocabularies, more profound narrative coher$$ncie$$. Under
the combined impact of the remarkable changes and self-revisions that have
taken place in virtually every contemporary intellectual discipline, the
fundamental modern schism between science and religion has been
increasingly undermined. In the wake of such developments, the original
project of Romanticism—the reconciliation of subject and object, human
and nature, spirit and matter, conscious and unconscious, intellect and soul
—has reemerged with new vigor.
Two antithetical impulses can thus be discerned in the contemporary
intellectual situation, one pressing for a radical deconstruction and
unmasking—of knowledge, beliefs, world views—and the other for a radical
integration and reconciliation. In obvious ways the two impulses work
against each other, yet more subtly they can also be seen as working
together as polarized, but complementary, tendencies. Nowhere is this
dynamic tension and interplay between the deconstructive and the
integrative more dramatically in evidence than in the rapidly expanding
body of work produced by women informed by feminism. Carolyn
Merchant, Evelyn Fox Keller, and other historians of science have analyzed
the influence exerted on the modern scientific understanding by
genderbiased strategies and metaphors supporting a patriarchal conception
439 

of nature—as a mindless, passive feminine object, to be penetrated,
controlled, dominated, and exploited. Paula Treichler, Francine Wattman
Frank, Susan Wolfe, and other linguists have meticulously explored the
complex relations between language, sex, and society, illuminating the
multiplicity of ways women have been excluded or depreciated through the
implicit codings of linguistic conventions. New and powerful insights have
emerged from the work of Rosemary Ruether, Mary Daly, Beatrice Bruteau,
Joan Chamberlain Engelsman, and Elaine Pagels in religious studies; of
Marija Gimbutas in archaeology; of Carol Gilligan in moral and
developmental psychology; of Jean Baker Miller and Nancy Chodorow in
psychoanalysis; of Stephanie de Voogd and Barbara Eckman in epistemology;
of a host of feminist scholars in history, anthropology, sociology,
jurisprudence, economics, ecology, ethics, aesthetics, literary theory, cultural
criticism.
Considered as a whole, the feminist perspective and impulse has brought
forth perhaps the most vigorous, subtle, and radically critical analysis of
conventional intellectual and cultural assumptions in all of contemporary
scholarship. No academic discipline or area of human experience has been
left untouched by the feminist reexamination of how meanings are created
and preserved, how evidence is selectively interpreted and theory molded
with mutually reinforcing circularity, how particular rhetorical strategies
and behavioral styles have sustained male hegemony, how women’s voices
remained unheard through centuries of social and intellectual male
dominance, how deeply problematic consequences have ensued from
masculine assumptions about reality, knowledge, nature, society, the divine.
Such analyses in turn have helped illuminate parallel patterns and structures
of domination that have marked the experience of other oppressed peoples
and forms of life. Given the context in which it has arisen, the feminist
intellectual impulse has been compelled to assert itself with a forceful
critical spirit that has often been oppositional and polarizing in character;
yet precisely as a result of that critique, long-established categories that had
sustained traditional oppositions and dualities—between male and female,
subject and object, human and nature, body and spirit, self and other—have
been deconstructed and reconceived, permitting the contemporary mind to
consider less-dichotomized alternative perspectives that could not have
440 

been envisioned within previous interpretive frameworks. In certain
respects the implications, both intellectual and social, of feminist analyses are
so fundamental that their significance is only beginning to be realized by the
contemporary mind.
And so on many fronts, the postmodern mind’s insistence on the pluralism
of truth and its overcoming of past structures and foundations have begun
to open up a wide range of unforeseen possibilities for approaching the
intellectual and spiritual problems that have long exercised and confounded
the modern mind. The postmodern era is an era without consensus on the
nature of reality, but it is blessed with an unprecedented wealth of
perspectives with which to engage the great issues that confront it.
Still, the contemporary intellectual milieu is riddled with tension,
irresolution, and perplexity. The practical benefits of its pluralism are
repeatedly undercut by stubborn conceptual disjunctions. Despite frequent
congruence of purpose, there is little effective cohesion, no apparent means
by which a shared cultural vision could emerge, no unifying perspective
cogent or comprehensive enough to satisfy the burgeoning diversity of
intellectual needs and aspirations. “In the twentieth century nothing is in
agreement with anything else” (Gertrude Stein). A chaos of valuable but
seemingly incompatible interpretations prevails, with no resolution in sight.
Certainly such a context provides less hindrance to the free play of
intellectual creativity than would the existence of a monolithic cultural
paradigm. Yet fragmentation and incoherence are not without their own
inhibiting consequences. The culture suffers both psychologically and
pragmatically from the philosophical anomie that pervades it. In the absence
of any viable, embracing cultural vision, old assumptions remain
blunderingly in force, providing an increasingly unworkable and dangerous
blueprint for human thought and activity.
Faced with such a differentiated and problematic intellectual situation,
thoughtful individuals engage the task of evolving a flexible set of premises
and perspectives that would not reduce or suppress the complexity and
multiplicity of human realities, yet could also serve to mediate, integrate, and
clarify. The dialectical challenge felt by many is to evolve a cultural vision
441 

possessed of a certain intrinsic profundity or universality that, while not
imposing any a priori limits on the possible range of legitimate
interpretations, would yet somehow bring an authentic and fruitful
coherence out of the present fragmentation, and also provide a sustaining
fertile ground for the generation of unanticipated new perspectives and
possibilities in the future. Given the nature of the present situation,
however, such an intellectual task appears surpassingly formidable—not
unlike having to string the great Odyssean bow of opposites, and then send
an arrow through a seemingly impossible multiplicity of targets.
The intellectual question that looms over our time is whether the current
state of profound metaphysical and epistemological irresolution is something
that will continue indefinitely, taking perhaps more viable, or more radically
disorienting, forms as the years and decades pass; whether it is in fact the
entropic prelude to some kind of apocalyptic denouement of history; or
whether it represents an epochal transition to another era altogether,
bringing a new form of civilization and a new world view with principles
and ideals fundamentally different from those that have impelled the
modern world through its dramatic trajectory.
442 

At the Millennium
Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world . . . .
Surely some revelation is at hand.
William Butler Yeats
“The Second Coming”
As the twentieth century draws to its close, a widespread sense of urgency is
tangible on many levels, as if the end of an aeon is indeed approaching. It is
a time of intense expectation, of striving, of hope and uncertainty. Many
sense that the great determining force of our reality is the mysterious
process of history itself, which in our century has appeared to be hurtling
toward a massive disintegration of all structures and foundations, a triumph
of the Heraclitean flux. Near the end of his life, Toynbee wrote:
Present-day man has recently become aware that history has been
accelerating—and this at an accelerating rate. The present generation
has been conscious of this increase of acceleration in its own lifetime;
and the advance in man’s knowledge of his past has revealed, in
retrospect, that the acceleration began about 30,000 years ago . . . and
that it has taken successive “great leaps forward” with the invention of
agriculture, with the dawn of civilization, and with the progressive
harnessing—within the last two centuries—of the titanic physical
forces of inanimate nature. The approach of the climax foreseen
intuitively by the prophets is being felt, and feared, as a coming event.
443 

Its imminence is, today, not an article of faith; it is a datum of
observation and experience.9
A powerful crescendo can be sensed in the dramatic series of
pronouncements, uttered by some of the West’s great thinkers and
visionaries, concerning an imminent shift in the ages. Nietzsche, in whom
“nihilism became conscious for the first time” (Camus), who had foreseen the
cataclysm that would befall European civilization in the twentieth century,
realized within himself the epochal crisis that would finally come when the
modern mind became conscious of its destruction of the metaphysical world,
“the death of God”:
What were we doing when we unchained this earth from its sun?
Whither is it moving now? Whither are we moving? Away from all
suns? Are we not plunging continually? Backward, sideward, forward,
in all directions? Is there still any up or down? Are we not straying as
through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space?
Has it not become colder? Is not night continually closing in on us?10
And so also the great sociologist Max Weber, who saw the ineluctable
consequences of the modern mind’s disenchantment of the world, saw the
yawning void of relativism left by modernity’s dissolution of traditional
world views, and saw that modern reason, in which the Enlightenment had
placed all its hopes for human freedom and progress, yet which could not
on its own terms justify universal values to guide human life, had in fact
created an iron cage of bureaucratic rationality that permeated every aspect
of modern existence:
No one knows who will live in this cage in the future, or whether at the
end of this tremendous development entirely new prophets will arise,
or there will be a great rebirth of old ideas and ideals, or if neither,
mechanized petrification, embellished with a sort of convulsive self-
importance. For of the last stage of this cultural development, it might
well be truly said: “Specialists without spirit, sensualists without heart;
this nullity imagines that it has attained a level of civilization never
before achieved.”11
444 

“Only a god can save us,” said Heidegger at the end of his life. And Jung, at
the end of his, comparing our age to the beginning of the Christian era two
millennia ago, wrote:
[A] mood of universal destruction and renewal. . . has set its mark on
our age. This mood makes itself felt everywhere, politically, socially, and
philosophically. We are living in what the Greeks called the kairos—the
right moment—for a “metamorphosis of the gods,” of the fundamental
principles and symbols. This peculiarity of our time, which is certainly
not of our conscious choosing, is the expression of the unconscious
man within us who is changing. Coming generations will have to take
account of this momentous transformation if humanity is not to destroy
itself through the might of its own technology and science. . . . So much
is at stake and so much depends on the psychological constitution of
modern man. . . . Does the individual know that he is the makeweight
that tips the scales?12
Our moment in history is indeed a pregnant one. As a civilization and as a
species we have come to a moment of truth, with the future of the human
spirit, and the future of the planet, hanging in the balance. If ever boldness,
depth, and clarity of vision were called for, from many, it is now. Yet
perhaps it is this very necessity that could summon forth from us the
courage and imagination we now require. Let us give the last words of this
unfinished epic to Nietzsche’s Zarathustra:
And how could I endure to be a man, if man were not also poet and
reader of riddles and . . . a way to new dawns.
445 

W
VII
Epilogue
e may be seeing the beginnings of the reintegration of our culture,
a new possibility of the unity of consciousness. If so, it will not be
on the basis of any new orthodoxy, either religious or scientific.
Such a new integration will be based on the rejection of all univocal
understandings of reality, of all identifications of one conception of reality
with reality itself. It will recognize the multiplicity of the human spirit, and
the necessity to translate constantly between different scientific and
imaginative vocabularies. It will recognize the human proclivity to fall
comfortably into some single literal interpretation of the world and
therefore the necessity to be continuously open to rebirth in a new heaven
and a new earth. It will recognize that in both scientific and religious culture
all we have finally are symbols, but that there is an enormous difference
between the dead letter and the living word.
Robert Bellah
Beyond Belief
446 

  
In these final pages, I would like to present an interdisciplinary framework
that may help deepen our understanding of the extraordinary history just
recounted. I would also like to share with the reader a few concluding
reflections on where we, as a culture, may be headed. Let us begin with a
brief overview of the background to our present intellectual situation.
The Post-Copernican Double Bind
In a narrow sense, the Copernican revolution can be understood as simply a
specific paradigm shift in modern astronomy and cosmology, initiated by
Copernicus, established by Kepler and Galileo, and completed by Newton.
Yet the Copernican revolution can also be understood in a much wider and
more significant sense. For when Copernicus recognized that the Earth was
not the absolute fixed center of the universe, and, equally important, when
he recognized that the movement of tie neavens could be explained in terms
of the movement of the observer, he brought forth what was perhaps the
pivotal insight of the modern mind. The Copernican shift of perspective can
be seen as a fundamental metaphor for the entire modern world view: the
profound deconstruction of the naive understanding, the critical recognition
that the apparent condition of the objective world was unconsciously
determined by the condition of the subject, the consequent liberation from
the ancient and medieval cosmic womb, the radical displacement of the
human being to a relative and peripheral position in a vast and impersonal
universe, the ensuing disenchantment of the natural world. In this broadest
sense—as an event that took place not only in astronomy and the sciences
but in philosophy and religion and in the collective human psyche—the
Copernican revolution can be seen as constituting the epochal shift of the
modern age. It was a primordial event, world-destroying and world-
constituting.
In philosophy and epistemology, this larger Copernican revolution took
place in the dramatic series of intellectual advances that began with
Descartes and culminated in Kant. It has been said that Descartes and Kant
447 

were both inevitable in the development of the modern mind, and I believe
this is correct. For it was Descartes who first fully grasped and articulated
the experience of the emerging autonomous modern self as being
fundamentally distinct and separate from an objective external world that it
seeks to understand and master. Descartes “woke up in a Copernican
universe”:1 after Copernicus, humankind was on its own in the universe, its
cosmic place irrevocably relativized. Descartes then drew out and expressed
in philosophical terms the experiential consequence of that new
cosmological context, starting from a position of fundamental doubt vis-à-
vis the world, and ending in the cogito. In doing this, he set into motion a
train of philosophical events—leading from Locke to Berkeley and Hume
and culminating in Kant—that eventually produced a great epistemological
crisis. Descartes was in this sense the crucial midpoint between Copernicus
and Kant, between the Copernican revolution in cosmology and the
Copernican revolution in epistemology.
For if the human mind was in some sense fundamentally distinct and
different from the external world, and if the only reality that the human
mind had direct access to was its own experience, then the world
apprehended by the mind was ultimately only the mind’s interpretation of
the world. Human knowledge of reality had to be forever incommensurate
with its goal, for there was no guarantee that the human mind could ever
accurately mirror a world with which its connection was so indirect and
mediated. Instead, everything that this mind could perceive and judge would
be to some undefined extent determined by its own character, its own
subjective structures. The mind could experience only phenomena, not
things-in-themselves; appearances, not an independent reality. In the
modern universe, the human mind was on its own.
Thus Kant, building on his empiricist predecessors, drew out the
epistemological consequences of the Cartesian cogito. Of course Kant
himself set forth cognitive principles, subjective structures, that he thought
were absolute—the a priori forms and categories—on the basis of the
apparent certainties of Newtonian physics. As time passed, however, what
endured from Kant was not the specifics of his solution but rather the
profound problem he articulated. For Kant had drawn attention to the
crucial fact that all human knowledge is interpretive. The human mind can
448 

claim no direct mirrorlike knowledge of the objective world, for the object it
experiences has already been structured by the subject’s own internal
organization. The human being knows not the world-in-itself but rather the
world-as-rendered-by-the-human-mind. 
Thus 
Descartes’s 
ontological
schism was both made more absolute and superseded by Kant’s
epistemological schism. The gap between subject and object could not be
certifiably bridged. From the Cartesian premise came the Kantian result.
In the subsequent evolution of the modern mind, each of these
fundamental shifts, which I am associating here symbolically with the figures
of Copernicus, Descartes, and Kant, has been sustained, extended, and
pressed to its extreme. Thus Copernicus’s radical displacement of the human
being from the cosmic center was emphatically reinforced and intensified by
Darwin’s relativization of the human being in the flux of evolution—no
longer divinely ordained, no longer absolute and secure, no longer the
crown of creation, the favored child of the universe, but rather just one
more ephemeral species. Placed in the vastly expanded cosmos of modern
astronomy, the human being now spins adrift, once the noble center of the
cosmos, now an insignificant inhabitant of a tiny planet revolving around an
undistinguished star—the familiar litany—at the edge of one galaxy among
billions, in an indifferent and ultimately hostile universe.
In the same way, Descartes’s schism between the personal and conscious
human subject and the impersonal and unconscious material universe was
systematically ratified and augmented by the long procession of subsequent
scientific developments, from Newtonian physics all the way to
contemporary big-bang cosmology, black holes, quarks, W and Z particles,
and grand unified superforce theories. The world revealed by modern
science has been a world devoid of spiritual purpose, opaque, ruled by
chance and necessity, without intrinsic meaning. The human soul has not
felt at home in the modern cosmos: the soul can hold dear its poetry and its
music, its private metaphysics and religion, but these find no certain
foundation in the empirical universe.
And so too with the third of this trinity of modern alienation, the great
schism established by Kant—and here we see the pivot of the shift from the
modern to the postmodern. For Kant’s recognition of the human mind’s
subjective ordering of reality, and thus, finally, the relative and unrooted
449 

nature of human knowledge, has been extended and deepened by a host of
subsequent developments, from anthropology, linguistics, sociology of
knowledge, and quantum physics to cognitive psychology, neurophysiology,
semiotics, and philosophy of science; from Marx, Nietzsche, Weber, and
Freud to Heisenberg, Wittgenstein, Kuhn, and Foucault. The consensus is
decisive: The world is in some essential sense a construct. Human knowledge
is radically interpretive. There are no perspective-independent facts. Every
act of perception and cognition is contingent, mediated, situated, contextual,
theory-soaked. Human language cannot establish its ground in an
independent reality. Meaning is rendered by the mind and cannot be
assumed to inhere in the object, in the world beyond the mind, for that
world can never be contacted without having already been saturated by the
mind’s own nature. That world cannot even be justifiably postulated. Radical
uncertainty prevails, for in the end what one knows and experiences is to an
indeterminate extent a projection.
Thus the cosmological estrangement of modern consciousness initiated by
Copernicus and the ontological estrangement initiated by Descartes were
completed by the epistemological estrangement initiated by Kant: a threefold
mutually enforced prison of modern alienation.
I would like to point out here the striking resemblance between this state
of affairs and the condition that Gregory Bateson famously described as the
“double bind”: the impossibly problematic situation in which mutually
contradictory demands eventually lead a person to become schizophrenic.2
In Bateson’s formulation, there were four basic premises necessary to
constitute a double bind situation between a child and a “schizophrenogenic”
mother: (1) The child’s relationship to the mother is one of vital dependency,
thereby making it critical for the child to assess communications from the
mother accurately. (2) The child receives contradictory or incompatible
information from the mother at different levels, whereby, for example, her
explicit 
verbal 
communication 
is 
fundamentally 
denied 
by 
the
“metacommunication,” the nonverbal context in which the explicit message
is conveyed (thus the mother who says to her child with hostile eyes and a
rigid body, “Darling, you know I love you so much”). The two sets of signals
cannot be understood as coherent. (3) The child is not given any opportunity
to ask questions of the mother that would clarify the communication or
450 

resolve the contradiction. And (4) the child cannot leave the field, i.e., the
relationship. In such circumstances, Bateson found, the child is forced to
distort his or her perception of both outer and inner realities, with serious
psychopathological consequences.
Now if we substitute in these four premises world for mother, and human
being for child, we have the modern double bind in a nutshell: (1) The
human being’s relationship to the world is one of vital dependency, thereby
making it critical for the human being to assess the nature of that world
accurately. (2) The human mind receives contradictory or incompatible
information about its situation with respect to the world, whereby its inner
psychological and spiritual sense of things is incoherent with the scientific
metacommunication. (3) Epistemologically, the human mind cannot achieve
direct communication with the world. (4) Existentially, the human being
cannot leave the field.
The differences between Bateson’s psychiatric double bind and the
modern existential condition are more in degree than in kind: the modern
condition is an extraordinarily encompassing and fundamental double bind,
made less immediately conspicuous simply because it is so universal. We
have the post-Copernican dilemma of being a peripheral and insignificant
inhabitant of a vast cosmos, and the post-Cartesian dilemma of being a
conscious, purposeful, and personal subject confronting an unconscious,
purposeless, and impersonal universe, with these compounded by the post-
Kantian dilemma of there being no possible means by which the human
subject can know the universe in its essence. We are evolved from,
embedded in, and defined by a reality that is radically alien to our own, and
moreover cannot ever be directly contacted in cognition.
This double bind of modern consciousness has been recognized in one
form or another since at least Pascal: “I am terrified by the eternal silence of
these infinite spaces.” Our psychological and spiritual predispositions are
absurdly at variance with the world revealed by our scientific method. We
seem to receive two messages from our existential situation: on the one
hand, strive, give oneself to the quest for meaning and spiritual fulfillment;
but on the other hand, know that the universe, of whose substance we are
derived, is entirely indifferent to that quest, soulless in character, and
nullifying in its effects. We are at once aroused and crushed. For
451 

inexplicably, absurdly, the cosmos is inhuman, yet we are not. The situation
is profoundly unintelligible.
If we follow Bateson’s diagnosis and apply it to the larger modern
condition, it should not be surprising what kinds of response the modern
psyche has made to this situation as it attempts to escape the double bind’s
inherent contradictions. Either inner or outer realities tend to be distorted:
inner feelings are repressed and denied, as in apathy and psychic numbing,
or they are inflated in compensation, as in narcissism and egocentrism; or
the outer world is slavishly submitted to as the only reality, or it is
aggressively objectified and exploited. There is also the strategy of flight,
through various forms of escapism: compulsive economic consumption,
absorption in the mass media, faddism, cults, ideologies, nationalistic fervor,
alcoholism, drug addiction. When avoidance mechanisms cannot be
sustained, there is anxiety, paranoia, chronic hostility, a feeling of helpless
victimization, a tendency to suspect all meanings, an impulse toward self-
negation, a sense of purposelessness and absurdity, a feeling of irresolvable
inner contradiction, a fragmenting of consciousness. And at the extreme,
there are the full-blown psychopathological reactions of the schizophrenic:
selfdestructive violence, delusional states, massive amnesia, catatonia,
automatism, mania, nihilism. The modern world knows each of these
reactions in various combinations and compromise formations, and its social
and political life is notoriously so determined.
Nor should it be surprising that twentieth-century philosophy finds itself
in the condition we now see. Of course modern philosophy has brought
forth some courageous intellectual responses to the post-Copernican
situation, but by and large the philosophy that has dominated our century
and our universities resembles nothing so much as a severe obsessive-
compulsive sitting on his bed repeatedly tying and untying his shoes because
he never quite gets it right—while in the meantime Socrates and Hegel and
Aquinas are already high up the mountain on their hike, breathing the
bracing alpine air, seeing new and unexpected vistas.
But there is one crucial way in which the modern situation is not identical
to the psychiatric double bind, and this is the fact that the modern human
being has not simply been a helpless child, but has actively engaged the
world and pursued a specific strategy and mode of activity—a Promethean
452 

project of freeing itself from and controlling nature. The modern mind has
demanded a specific type of interpretation of the world: its scientific method
has required explanations of phenomena that are concretely predictive, and
therefore impersonal, mechanistic, structural. To fulfill their purposes, these
explanations of the universe have been systematically “cleansed” of all
spiritual and human qualities. Of course we cannot be certain that the world
is in fact what these explanations suggest. We can be certain only that the
world is to an indeterminate extent susceptible to this way of interpretation.
Kant’s insight is a sword that cuts two ways. Although on the one hand it
appears to place the world beyond the grasp of the human mind, on the
other hand it recognizes that the impersonal and soulless world of modern
scientific cognition is not necessarily the whole story. Rather, that world is
the only kind of story that for the past three centuries the Western mind has
considered intellectually justifiable. In Ernest Gellner’s words, “It was Kant’s
merit to see that this compulsion [for mechanistic impersonal explanation] is
in us, not in things.” And “it was Weber’s to see that it is historically a specific
kind of mind, not human mind as such, that is subject to this compulsion.”3
Hence one crucial part of the modern double bind is not airtight. In the
case of Bateson’s schizophrenogenic mother and child, the mother more or
less holds all the cards, for she unilaterally controls the communication. But
the lesson of Kant is that the locus of the communication problem—i.e., the
problem of human knowledge of the world—must first be viewed as
centering in the human mind, not in the world as such. Therefore it is
theoretically possible that the human mind has more cards than it has been
playing. The pivot of the modern predicament is epistemological, and it is
here that we should look for an opening.
Knowledge and the Unconscious
When Nietzsche in the nineteenth century said there are no facts, only
interpretations, he was both summing up the legacy of eighteenth-century
critical philosophy and pointing toward the task and promise of twentieth-
century depth psychology. That an unconscious part of the psyche exerts
decisive influence over human perception, cognition, and behavior was an
453 

idea long developing in Western thought, but it was Freud who effectively
brought it into the foreground of modern intellectual concern. Freud played
a fascinatingly multiple role in the unfolding of the greater Copernican
revolution. On the one hand, as he said in the famous passage at the end of
the eighteenth of his Introductory Lectures, psychoanalysis represented the
third wounding blow to man’s naive pride and self-love, the first being
Copernicus’s heliocentric theory, and the second being Darwin’s theory of
evolution. For psychoanalysis revealed that not only is the Earth not the
center of the universe, and not only is man not the privileged focus of
creation, but even the human mind and ego, man’s most precious sense of
being a conscious rational self, is only a recent and precarious development
out of the primordial id, and is by no means master of its own house. With
his epochal insight into the unconscious determinants of human experience,
Freud stood directly in the Copernican lineage of modern thought that
progressively relativized the status of the human being. And again, like
Copernicus and like Kant but on an altogether new level, Freud brought the
fundamental recognition that the apparent reality of the objective world was
being unconsciously determined by the condition of the subject.
But Freud’s insight too was a sword that cut both ways, and in a
significant sense Freud represented the crucial turning point in the modern
trajectory. For the discovery of the unconscious collapsed the old boundaries
of interpretation. As Descartes and the post-Cartesian British empiricists had
noted, the primary datum in human experience is ultimately human
experience itself—not the material world, and not sensory transforms of that
world; and with psychoanalysis was begun the systematic exploration of the
seat of all human experience and cognition, the human psyche. From
Descartes to Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, and then to Kant, the progress of
modern epistemology had depended on increasingly acute analyses of the
role played by the human mind in the act of cognition. With this
background, and with the further steps taken by Schopenhauer, Nietzsche,
and others, the analytic task established by Freud was in a sense ineluctable.
The modern psychological imperative, to recover the unconscious, precisely
coincided with the modern epistemological imperative—to discover the root
principles of mental organization.
But while it was Freud who penetrated the veil, it was Jung who grasped
454 

the critical philosophical consequences of depth psychology’s discoveries.
Partly this was because Jung was more epistemologically sophisticated than
Freud, having been steeped in Kant and critical philosophy from his youth
(even in the 1930s Jung was an informed reader of Karl Popper—which
comes as a surprise to many Jungians).4 Partly this was also because by
intellectual temperament Jung was less bound than Freud by nineteenth-
century scientism. But above all, Jung had the more profound experience to
draw upon, and could see the larger context within which depth psychology
was operating. As Joseph Campbell used to say, Freud was fishing while
sitting on a whale—he didn’t realize what he had before him. But of course
who of us does, and we all depend on our successors to overleap our own
limitations.
Thus it was Jung who recognized that critical philosophy was, as he put it,
“the mother of modern psychology.”5 Kant was correct when he saw that
human experience was not atomistic, as Hume had thought, but instead was
permeated by a priori structures; yet Kant’s formulation of those structures,
reflecting his complete belief in Newtonian physics, was inevitably too
narrow and simplistic. In a sense, just as Freud’s understanding of the mind
had been limited by his Darwinian presuppositions, so was Kant’s
understanding limited by his Newtonian presuppositions. Jung, under the
impact of far more powerful and extensive experiences of the human
psyche, both his own and others, pushed the Kantian and Freudian
perspectives all the way until he reached a kind of holy grail of the inner
quest: the discovery of the universal archetypes in all their power and rich
complexity as the fundamental determining structures of human
experience.
Freud had discovered Oedipus and Id and Superego and Eros and
Thanatos; he had recognized the instincts in essentially archetypal terms. But
at crucial junctures, his reductionist presuppositions drastically restricted his
vision. With Jung, however, the full symbolic multivalence of the archetypes
was disclosed, and the personal unconscious of Freud, which comprised
mainly repressed contents resulting from biographical traumas and the ego’s
antipathy to the instincts, opened into a vast archetypally patterned
collective unconscious which was not so much the result of repression as it
was the primordial foundation of the psyche itself. With its progressively
455 

unfolding disclosure of the unconscious, depth psychology radically
redefined the epistemological riddle that had first been posed by Kant—
Freud doing so narrowly and inadvertently as it were, and then Jung doing
so on a more comprehensive and self-aware level.
Yet what was the actual nature of these archetypes, what was this
collective unconscious, and how did any of this affect the modern scientific
world view? Although the Jungian archetypal perspective greatly enriched
and deepened the modern understanding of the psyche, in certain ways it
too could be seen as merely reinforcing the Kantian epistemological
alienation. As Jung repeatedly emphasized for many years in his loyal
Kantian way, the discovery of the archetypes was the result of the empirical
investigation of psychological phenomena and therefore had no necessary
metaphysical implications. The study of the mind rendered knowledge of the
mind, not of the world beyond the mind. Archetypes so conceived were
psychological, hence in a certain way subjective. Like Kant’s a priori forms
and categories, they structured human experience without giving the
human mind any direct knowledge of reality beyond itself; they were
inherited structures or dispositions that preceded human experience and
determined its character, but they could not be said to transcend the human
psyche. They were perhaps only the most fundamental of the many
distorting lenses that distanced the human mind from genuine knowledge of
the world. They were perhaps only the deepest patterns of human
projection.
But of course Jung’s thought was extremely complex, and in the course of
his very long intellectually active life his conception of the archetypes went
through a significant evolution. The conventional and still most widely
known view of Jungian archetypes, just described, was based on Jung’s
middle-period writings when his thought was still largely governed by
Cartesian-Kantian philosophical assumptions concerning the nature of the
psyche and its separation from the external world. In his later work,
however, and particularly in relation to his study of synchronicities, Jung
began to move toward a conception of archetypes as autonomous patterns
of meaning that appear to structure and inhere in both psyche and matter,
thereby in effect dissolving the modern subject-object dichotomy.
Archetypes in this view were more mysterious than a priori categories—
456 

more ambiguous in their ontological status, less easily restricted to a specific
dimension, more like the original Platonic and Neoplatonic conception of
archetypes. Some aspects of this late-Jungian development have been
pressed further, brilliantly and controversially, by James Hillman and the
school of archetypal psychology, which has developed a “postmodern”
Jungian perspective: recognizing the primacy of the psyche and the
imagination, and the irreducible psychic reality and potency of the
archetypes, but, unlike the late Jung, largely avoiding metaphysical or
theological statements in favor of a full embrace of psyche in all its endless
and rich ambiguity.
But the most epistemologically significant development in the recent
history of depth psychology, and indeed the most important advance in the
field as a whole since Freud and Jung themselves, has been the work of
Stanislav Grof, which over the past three decades has not only
revolutionized psychodynamic theory but also brought forth major
implications for many other fields, including philosophy. Many readers will
already be familiar with Grof’s work, particularly in Europe and California,
but for those who are not I will give here a brief summary.6 Grof began as a
psychoanalytic psychiatrist, and the original background of his ideas was
Freudian, not Jungian; yet the unexpected upshot of his work was to ratify
Jung’s archetypal perspective on a new level, and bring it into coherent
synthesis with Freud’s biological and biographical perspective, though on a
much deeper stratum of the psyche than Freud had recognized.
The basis of Grof’s discoveries was his observation of several thousand
psychoanalytic sessions, first in Prague and then in Maryland with the
National Institute of Mental Health, in which subjects used extremely potent
psychoactive substances, particularly LSD, and then later a variety of
powerful nondrug therapeutic methods, which served as catalysts of
unconscious processes. Grof found that subjects involved in these sessions
tended to undergo progressively deeper explorations of the unconscious, in
the course of which there consistently emerged a pivotal sequence of
experiences of great complexity and intensity. In the initial sessions, subjects
typically moved back through earlier and earlier biographical experiences
and traumas—the Oedipus complex, toilet training, nursing, early infantile
experiences—which were generally intelligible in terms of Freudian
457 

psychoanalytic principles and appeared to represent something like
laboratory evidence for the basic correctness of Freud’s theories. But after
reliving and integrating these various memory complexes, subjects regularly
tended to move further back into an extremely intense engagement with the
process of biological birth.
Although this process was experienced on a biological level in the most
explicit and detailed manner, it was informed by, or saturated by, a distinct
archetypal sequence of considerable numinous power. Subjects reported
that experiences at this level possessed an intensity and universality that far
surpassed what they had previously believed was the experiential limit for
an individual human being. These experiences occurred in a highly variable
order, and overlapped with each other in very complex ways, but
abstracting from this complexity Grof found visible a distinct sequence—
which moved from an initial condition of undifferentiated unity with the
maternal womb, to an experience of sudden fall and separation from that
primal organismic unity, to a highly charged life-and-death struggle with
the contracting uterus and the birth canal, and culminating in an experience
of complete annihilation. This was followed almost immediately by an
experience of sudden unexpected global liberation, which was typically
perceived not only as physical birth but also as spiritual rebirth, with the
two mysteriously intermixed.
I should mention here that I lived for over ten years at Esalen Institute in
Big Sur, California, where I was the director of programs, and in the course
of those years virtually every conceivable form of therapy and personal
transformation, great and small, came through Esalen. In terms of
therapeutic effectiveness, Grof’s was by far the most powerful; there was no
comparison. Yet the price was dear—in a sense the price was absolute: the
reliving of one’s birth was experienced in a context of profound existential
and spiritual crisis, with great physical agony, unbearable constriction and
pressure, extreme narrowing of mental horizons, a sense of hopeless
alienation and the ultimate meaninglessness of life, a feeling of going
irrevocably insane, and finally a shattering experiential encounter with
death—with losing everything, physically, psychologically, intellectually,
spiritually. Yet after integrating this long experiential sequence, subjects
regularly reported experiencing a dramatic expansion of horizons, a radical
458 

change of perspective as to the nature of reality, a sense of sudden
awakening, a feeling of being fundamentally reconnected to the universe, all
accompanied by a profound sense of psychological healing and spiritual
liberation. Later in these sessions and in subsequent ones, subjects reported
having access to memories of prenatal intrauterine existence, which
typically emerged in association with archetypal experiences of paradise,
mystical union with nature or with the-divine or with the Great Mother
Goddess, dissolution of the ego in ecstatic unity with the universe,
absorption into the transcendent One, and other forms of mystical unitive
experience. Freud called the intimations of this level of experience that he
had observed the “oceanic feeling,” though for Freud this referred only as far
back as infant nursing experiences of unity with the mother at the breast—a
less profound version of the primal undifferentiated consciousness of the
intrauterine condition.
In terms of psychotherapy, Grof found that the deepest source of
psychological symptoms and distress reached back far past childhood
traumas and biographical events to the experience of birth itself, intimately
interwoven with the encounter with death. When successfully resolved, this
experience tended to result in a dramatic disappearance of long-standing
psychopathological problems, including conditions and symptoms that had
proved entirely recalcitrant to previous therapeutic programs. I should
emphasize here that this “perinatal” (surrounding birth) sequence of
experiences typically took place on several levels at once, but it virtually
always had an intense somatic component. The physical catharsis involved in
reliving the birth trauma was extremely powerful, and clearly suggested the
reason for the relative ineffectiveness of most psychoanalytic forms of
therapy, which have been based largely on verbal interaction and by
comparison seem scarcely to scratch the surface. The perinatal experiences
that emerged in Grof’s work were preverbal, cellular, elemental. They took
place only when the ego’s usual capacity for control had been overcome,
either through the use of a catalytic psychoactive substance or therapeutic
technique, or through the spontaneous force of the unconscious material.
Yet these experiences were also profoundly archetypal in character.
Indeed, the encounter with this perinatal sequence constantly brought home
to subjects a sense that nature itself, including the human body, was the
459 

repository and vessel of the archetypal, that nature’s processes were
archetypal processes—an insight that both Freud and Jung had approached,
but from opposite directions. In a sense Grof’s work gave a more explicit
biological ground to the Jungian archetypes, while giving a more explicit
archetypal ground to the Freudian instincts. The encounter with birth and
death in this sequence seemed to represent a kind of transduction point
between dimensions, a pivot that linked the biological and the archetypal,
the Freudian and the Jungian, the biographical and the collective, the
personal and the transpersonal, body and spirit. In retrospect, the evolution
of psychoanalysis can be seen as having gradually pressed the Freudian
biographical-biological perspective back to earlier and earlier periods of
individual life, until, reaching the encounter with birth itself, that strategy
culminated in a decisive negation of orthodox Freudian reductionism,
opening the psychoanalytic conception to a radically more complex and
expanded ontology of human experience. The result has been an
understanding of the psyche that, like the experience of the perinatal
sequence itself, is irreducibly multidimensional.
A host of implications from Grof’s work could be discussed here—insights
concerning the roots of male sexism in the unconscious fear of female
birthing bodies; concerning the roots of the Oedipus complex in the far
more primal and fundamental struggle against the seemingly punitive
uterine contractions and constricting birth canal to regain union with the
nourishing maternal womb; concerning the therapeutic importance of the
encounter with death; concerning the roots of specific psychopathological
conditions such as depression, phobias, obsessive-compulsive neurosis,
sexual disorders, sadomasochism, mania, suicide, addiction, various psychotic
conditions, as well as collective psychological disorders such as the impulse
toward war and totalitarianism. One could discuss the superbly clarifying
synthesis Grof’s work achieved in psychodynamic theory, bringing together
not only Freud and Jung but Reich, Rank, Adler, Ferenczi, Klein, Fairbairn,
Winnicott, Erikson, Maslow, Perls, Laing. My concern here, however, is not
psychotherapeutic but philosophical, and while this perinatal area
constituted the crucial threshold for therapeutic transformation, it also
proved to be the pivotal area for major philosophical and intellectual issues.
Hence I will limit this discussion to the specific consequences and
460 

implications that Grof’s work holds for our present epistemological
situation.
In this context, certain crucial generalizations from the clinical evidence
are relevant:
First, the archetypal sequence that governed the perinatal phenomena
from womb through birth canal to birth was experienced above all as a
powerful dialectic—moving from an initial state of undifferentiated unity to
a problematic state of constriction, conflict, and contradiction, with an
accompanying sense of separation, duality, and alienation; and finally
moving through a stage of complete annihilation to an unexpected
redemptive liberation that both overcame and fulfilled the intervening
alienated state—restoring the initial unity but on a new level that preserved
the achievement of the whole trajectory.
Second, this archetypal dialectic was often experienced simultaneously on
both an individual level and, often more powerfully, a collective level, so
that the movement from primordial unity through alienation to liberating
resolution was experienced in terms of the evolution of an entire culture,
for example, or of humankind as a whole—the birth of Homo sapiens out of
nature no less than the birth of the individual child from the mother. Here
personal and transpersonal were equally present, inextricably fused, so that
ontogeny not only recapitulated phylogeny but in some sense opened out
into it.
And third, this archetypal dialectic was experienced or registered in
several dimensions—physical, psychological, intellectual, spiritual—often
more than one of these at a time, and sometimes all simultaneously in
complex combination. As Grof has emphasized, the clinical evidence
suggests not that this perinatal sequence should be seen as simply reducible
to the birth trauma; rather, it appears that the biological process of birth is
itself an expression of a larger underlying archetypal process that can
manifest in many dimensions. Thus:
• In physical terms, the perinatal sequence was experienced as biological
gestation and birth, moving from the symbiotic union with the all-
encompassing nourishing womb, through a gradual growth of complexity
and individuation within that matrix, to an encounter with the contracting
uterus, the birth canal, and finally delivery.
461 

• In psychological terms, the experience was one of movement from an
initial condition of undifferentiated pre-egoic consciousness to a state of
increasing individuation and separation between self and world, increasing
existential alienation, and finally an experience of ego death followed by
psychological rebirth; this was often complexly associated with the
biographical experience of moving from the womb of childhood through
the labor of life and the contraction of aging to the encounter with death.
• On the religious level, this experiential sequence took a wide variety of
forms, but especially frequent was the Judaeo-Christian symbolic movement
from the primordial Garden through the Fall, the exile into separation from
divinity, into the world of suffering and mortality, followed by the
redemptive crucifixion and resurrection, bringing the reunion of the divine
and the human. On an individual level, the experience of this perinatal
sequence closely resembled—indeed, it appeared to be essentially identical to
—the death-rebirth initiation of the ancient mystery religions.
• Finally, on the philosophical level, the experience was comprehensible in
what might be called Neoplatonic-Hegelian-Nietzschean terms as a
dialectical evolution from an archetypally structured primordial Unity,
through an emanation into matter with increasing complexity, multiplicity,
and individuation, through a state of absolute alienation—the death of God
in both Hegel’s and Nietzsche’s senses—followed by a dramatic Aufhebung,
a synthesis and reunification with self-subsistent Being that both annihilates
and fulfills the individual trajectory.
This multilevel experiential sequence holds relevance for a wide range of
important issues, but it is the epistemological implications which I would
like to draw out here as especially significant for our current intellectual
situation.7 For from the perspective suggested by this evidence, the
fundamental subject-object dichotomy that has governed and defined
modern consciousness—that has constituted modern consciousness, that has
been generally assumed to be absolute, taken for granted as the basis for any
“realistic” perspective and experience of the world—appears to be rooted in
a specific archetypal condition associated with the unresolved trauma of
human birth, in which an original consciousness of undifferentiated
organismic unity with the mother, a participation mystique with nature, has
been outgrown, disrupted, and lost. Here, on both the individual and the
462 

collective levels, can be seen the source of the profound dualism of the
modern mind: between man and nature, between mind and matter, between
self and other, between experience and reality—that pervading sense of a
separate ego irrevocably divided from the encompassing world. Here is the
painful separation from the timeless all-encompassing womb of nature, the
development of human self-consciousness, the loss of connection with the
matrix of being, the expulsion from the Garden, the entrance into time and
history and materiality, the disenchantment of the cosmos, the sense of total
immersion in an antithetical world of impersonal forces. Here is the
experience of the universe as ultimately indifferent, hostile, inscrutable.
Here is the compulsive striving to liberate oneself from nature’s power, to
control and dominate the forces of nature, even to revenge oneself against
nature. Here is the primal fear of losing control and dominance, rooted in
the 
all-consuming 
awareness 
and 
fear 
of 
death—the 
inevitable
accompaniment of the individual ego’s emergence out of the collective
matrix. But above all, here is the profound sense of ontological and
epistemological separation between self and world.
This fundamental sense of separation is then structured into the
legitimated interpretive principles of the modern mind. It was no accident
that the man who first systematically formulated the separate modern
rational self, Descartes, was also the man who first systematically formulated
the mechanistic cosmos for the Copernican revolution. The basic a priori
categories and premises of modern science, with its assumption of an
independent external world that must be investigated by an autonomous
human reason, with its insistence on impersonal mechanistic explanation,
with its rejection of spiritual qualities in the cosmos, its repudiation of any
intrinsic meaning or purpose in nature, its demand for a univocal, literal
interpretation of a world of hard facts—all of these ensure the construction
of a disenchanted and alienating world view. As Hillman has emphasized:
“The evidence we gather in support of a hypothesis and the rhetoric we use
to argue it are already part of the archetypal constellation we are in. . . . The
‘Objective’ idea we find in the pattern of data is also the ‘subjective’ idea by
means of which we see the data.”8
From this perspective, the Cartesian-Kantian philosophical assumptions
that have governed the modern mind, and that have informed and impelled
463 

the modern scientific achievement, reflect the dominance of a powerful
archetypal gestalt, an experiential template that selectively filters and shapes
human awareness in such a manner that reality is perceived to be opaque,
literal, objective, and alien. The Cartesian-Kantian paradigm both expresses
and ratifies a state of consciousness in which experience of the unitive
numinous depths of reality has been systematically extinguished, leaving the
world disenchanted and the human ego isolated. Such a world view is, as it
were, a kind of metaphysical and epistemological box, a hermetically closed
system that reflects the contracted enclosure of the archetypal birth process.
It is the elaborate articulation of a specific archetypal domain within which
human awareness is encompassed and confined as if it existed inside a
solipsistic bubble.
The great irony suggested here of course is that it is just when the modern
mind believes it has most fully purified itself from any anthropomorphic
projections, when it actively construes the world as unconscious,
mechanistic, and impersonal, it is just then that the world is most completely
a selective construct of the human mind. The human mind has abstracted
from the whole all conscious intelligence and purpose and meaning, and
claimed these exclusively for itself, and then projected onto the world a
machine. As Rupert Sheldrake has pointed out, this is the ultimate
anthropomorphic projection: a man-made machine, something not in fact
ever found in nature. From this perspective, it is the modern mind’s own
impersonal soullessness that has been projected from within onto the world
—or, to be more precise, that has been projectively elicited from the world.
But it has been the fate and burden of depth psychology, that
astonishingly seminal tradition founded by Freud and Jung, to mediate the
modern mind’s access to archetypal forces and realities that reconnect the
individual self with the world, dissolving the dualistic world view. Indeed, in
retrospect it would seem that it had to be depth psychology that would bring
forth awareness of these realities to the modern mind: if the realm of the
archetypal could not be recognized in the philosophy and religion and
science of the high culture, then it had to reemerge from the underworld of
the psyche. As L. L. Whyte has noted, the idea of the unconscious first
appeared and played an increasing role in Western intellectual history
almost immediately from the time of Descartes, beginning its slow ascent to
464 

Freud. And when, at the start of the twentieth century, Freud introduced his
work to the world in The Interpretation of Dreams, he began with that great
epigraph from Virgil which said it all: “If I cannot bend the Gods above, then
I will move the Infernal regions.” The compensation was inevitable—if not
above, then from below.
Thus the modern condition begins as a Promethean movement toward
human freedom, toward autonomy from the encompassing matrix of nature,
toward individuation from the collective, yet gradually and ineluctably the
Cartesian-Kantian condition evolves into a Kafka—Beckett-like state of
existential isolation and absurdity—an intolerable double bind leading to a
kind of deconstructive frenzy. And again, the existential double bind closely
mirrors the infant’s situation within the birthing mother: having been
symbiotically united with the nourishing womb, growing and developing
within that matrix, the beloved center of an all-comprehending supportive
world, yet now alienated from that world, constricted by that womb,
forsaken, crushed, strangled, and expelled in a state of extreme confusion
and anxiety—an inexplicably incoherent situation of profound traumatic
intensity.
Yet full experience of this double bind, of this dialectic between the
primordial unity on the one hand and the birth labor and subject-object
dichotomy on the other, unexpectedly brings forth a third condition: a
redemptive reunification of the individuated self with the universal matrix.
Thus the child is born and embraced by the mother, the liberated hero
ascends from the underworld to return home after his far-flung odyssey.
The individual and the universal are reconciled. The suffering, alienation,
and death are now comprehended as necessary for birth, for the creation of
the self: O Felix Culpa. A situation that was fundamentally unintelligible is
now recognized as a necessary element in a larger context of profound
intelligibility. The dialectic is fulfilled, the alienation redeemed. The rupture
from Being is healed. The world is rediscovered in its primordial
enchantment. The autonomous individual self has been forged and is now
reunited with the ground of its being.
The Evolution of World Views
465 

All of this suggests that another, more sophisticated and comprehensive
epistemological perspective is called for. Although the Cartesian-Kantian
epistemological position has been the dominant paradigm of the modern
mind, it has not been the only one, for at almost precisely the same time that
the Enlightenment reached its philosophical climax in Kant, a radically
different epistemological perspective began to emerge—first visible in
Goethe with his study of natural forms, developed in new directions by
Schiller, Schelling, Hegel, Coleridge, and Emerson, and articulated within the
past century by Rudolf Steiner. Each of these thinkers gave his own distinct
emphasis to the developing perspective, but common to all was a
fundamental conviction that the relation of the human mind to the world
was ultimately not dualistic but participatory.
In essence this alternative conception did not oppose the Kantian
epistemology but rather went beyond it, subsuming it in a larger and subtler
understanding 
of 
human 
knowledge. 
The 
new 
conception 
fully
acknowledged the validity of Kant’s critical insight, that all human
knowledge of the world is in some sense determined by subjective
principles; but instead of considering these principles as belonging
ultimately to the separate human subject, and therefore not grounded in the
world independent of human cognition, this participatory conception held
that these subjective principles are in fact an expression of the world’s own
being, and that the human mind is ultimately the organ of the world’s own
process of self-revelation. In this view, the essential reality of nature is not
separate, self-contained, and complete in itself, so that the human mind can
examine it “objectively” and register it from without. Rather, nature’s
unfolding truth emerges only with the active participation of the human
mind. Nature’s reality is not merely phenomenal, nor is it independent and
objective; rather, it is something that comes into being through the very act
of human cognition. Nature becomes intelligible to itself through the human
mind.
In this perspective, nature pervades everything, and the human mind in
all its fullness is itself an expression of nature’s essential being. And it is only
when the human mind actively brings forth from within itself the full
powers of a disciplined imagination and saturates its empirical observation
with archetypal insight that the deeper reality of the world emerges. A
466 

developed inner life is therefore indispensable for cognition. In its most
profound and authentic expression, the intellectual imagination does not
merely project its ideas into nature from its isolated brain corner. Rather,
from within its own depths the imagination directly contacts the creative
process within nature, realizes that process within itself, and brings nature’s
reality to conscious expression. Hence the imaginal intuition is not a
subjective distortion but is the human fulfillment of that reality’s essential
wholeness, which had been rent asunder by the dualistic perception. The
human imagination is itself part of the world’s intrinsic truth; without it the
world is in some sense incomplete. Both major forms of epistemological
dualism—the conventional precritical and the post-Kantian critical
conceptions of human knowledge—are here countered and synthesized. On
the one hand, the human mind does not just produce concepts that
“correspond” to an external reality. Yet on the other hand, neither does it
simply “impose” its own order on the world. Rather, the world’s truth
realizes itself within and through the human mind.
This participatory epistemology, developed in different ways by Goethe,
Hegel, Steiner, and others, can be understood not as a regression to naive
participation mystique, but as the dialectical synthesis of the long evolution
from the primordial undifferentiated consciousness through the dualistic
alienation. It incorporates the postmodern understanding of knowledge and
yet goes beyond it. The interpretive and constructive character of human
cognition is fully acknowledged, but the intimate, interpenetrating and all-
permeating relationship of nature to the human being and human mind
allows the Kantian consequence of epistemological alienation to be entirely
overcome. The human spirit does not merely prescribe nature’s phenomenal
order; rather, the spirit of nature brings forth its own order through the
human mind when that mind is employing its full complement of faculties—
intellectual, volitional, emotional, sensory, imaginative, aesthetic, epiphanic.
In such knowledge, the human mind “lives into” the creative activity of
nature. Then the world speaks its meaning through human consciousness.
Then human language itself can be recognized as rooted in a deeper reality,
as reflecting the universe’s unfolding meaning. Through the human
intellect, in all its personal individuality, contingency, and struggle, the
world’s evolving thought-content achieves conscious articulation. Yes,
467 

knowledge of the world is structured by the mind’s subjective contribution;
but that contribution is teleologically called forth by the universe for its own
self-revelation. Human thought does not and cannot mirror a ready-made
objective truth in the world; rather, the world’s truth achieves its existence
when it comes to birth in the human mind. As the plant at a certain stage
brings forth its blossom, so does the universe bring forth new stages of
human knowledge. And, as Hegel emphasized, the evolution of human
knowledge is the evolution of the world’s self-revelation.
Such a perspective suggests of course that the Cartesian-Kantian
paradigm, and thus the epistemologically enforced double bind of modern
consciousness, is not absolute. But if we take this participatory epistemology,
and if we combine it with Grof’s discovery of the perinatal sequence and its
underlying archetypal dialectic, then a more surprising conclusion is
suggested: namely, that the Cartesian-Kantian paradigm, and indeed the
entire trajectory into alienation taken by the modern mind, has not been
simply an error, an unfortunate human aberration, a mere manifestation of
human blindness, but has rather reflected a much deeper archetypal process
impelled by forces beyond the merely human. For in this view, the powerful
contraction of vision experienced by the modern mind has itself been an
authentic expression of nature’s unfolding, a process enacted through the
growingly autonomous human intellect, and now reaching a highly critical
stage of transfiguration. From this perspective, the dualistic epistemology
derived from Kant and the Enlightenment is not simply the opposite of the
participatory epistemology derived from Goethe and Romanticism, but is
rather an important subset of it, a necessary stage in the evolution of the
human mind. And if this is true, several long-standing philosophical
paradoxes may now be cleared up.
I shall focus here on one especially significant area. Much of the most
exciting work in contemporary epistemology has come from philosophy of
science, above all from the work of Popper, Kuhn, and Feyerabend. Yet
despite this work, or rather because of this work, which has revealed in so
many ways the relative and radically interpretive nature of scientific
knowledge, philosophers of science have been left with two notoriously
fundamental dilemmas—one left by Popper, the other by kuhn and
Feyerabend.
468 

With Popper the problem of scientific knowledge left by Hume and Kant
was brilliantly explicated. For Popper, as for the modern mind, man
approaches the world as a stranger—but a stranger who has a thirst for
explanation, and an ability to invent myths, stories, theories, and a
willingness to test these. Sometimes, by luck and hard work and many
mistakes, a myth is found to work. The theory saves the phenomena; it is a
lucky guess. And this is the greatness of science, that through an occasionally
fortunate combination of rigor and inventiveness, a purely human
conception can be found to work in the empirical world, at least
temporarily. Yet a gnawing question remains for Popper: How, in the end,
are successful conjectures, successful myths, possible? How does the human
mind ever acquire genuine knowledge if it’s just a matter of projected myths
that are tested? Why do these myths ever work? If the human mind has no
access to a priori certain truth, and if all observations are always already
saturated by uncertified assumptions about the world, how could this mind
possibly conceive a genuinely successful theory? Popper answered this
question by saying that, in the end, it is “luck”—but this answer has never
satisfied. For why should the imagination of a stranger ever be able to
conceive merely from within itself a myth that works so splendidly in the
empirical world that whole civilizations can be built on it (as with Newton)?
How can something come from nothing?
I believe there is only one plausible answer to this riddle, and it is an
answer suggested by the participatory epistemological framework outlined
above: namely, that the bold conjectures and myths that the human mind
produces in its quest for knowledge ultimately come from something far
deeper than a purely human source. They come from the wellspring of
nature itself, from the universal unconscious that is bringing forth through
the human mind and human imagination its own gradually unfolding
reality. In this view, the theory of a Copernicus, a Newton, or an Einstein is
not simply due to the luck of a stranger; rather, it reflects the human mind’s
radical kinship with the cosmos. It reflects the human mind’s pivotal role as
vehicle of the universe’s unfolding meaning. In this view, neither the
postmodern skeptic nor the perennialist philosopher is correct in their
shared opinion that the modern scientific paradigm is ultimately without
any cosmic foundation. For that paradigm is itself part of a larger
469 

evolutionary process.
We can now also suggest a resolution to that fundamental problem left by
Kuhn—the problem of explaining why in the history of science one
paradigm 
is 
chosen 
over 
another 
if 
paradigms 
are 
ultimately
incommensurable, if they cannot ever be rigorously compared. As Kuhn has
pointed out, each paradigm tends to create its own data and its own way of
interpreting those data in a manner that is so comprehensive and self-
validating that scientists operating within different paradigms seem to exist
in altogether different worlds. Although to a given community of scientific
interpreters one paradigm seems to be superior to another, there is no way
of justifying that superiority if each paradigm governs and saturates its own
data base. Nor does any consensus exist among scientists concerning a
common measure or value—such as conceptual precision, or coherence, or
breadth, or simplicity, or resistance to falsification, or congruence with
theories used in other specialties, or fruitfulness in new research findings—
that could be used as a universal standard of comparison. Which value is
considered most important varies from one scientific era to another, from
one discipline to another, even between individual research groups. What,
then, can explain the progress of scientific knowledge if, in the end, each
paradigm is selectively based on differing modes of interpretation and
different sets of data and different scientific values?
Kuhn has always answered this problem by saying that ultimately the
decision lies with the ongoing scientific community, which provides the final
basis of justification. Yet, as many scientists have complained, this answer
seems to undercut the very foundation of the scientific enterprise, leaving it
to the mercy of sociological and personal factors that subjectively distort the
scientific judgment. And indeed, as Kuhn himself has demonstrated, scientists
generally do not in practice fundamentally question the governing paradigm
or test it against other alternatives, for many reasons—pedagogical,
socioeconomic, cultural, psychological—most of them unconscious.
Scientists, like everyone else, are attached to their beliefs. What, then,
ultimately explains the progression of science from one paradigm to
another? Does the evolution of scientific knowledge have anything to do
with “truth,” or is it a mere artifact of sociology? And more radically, with
Paul Feyerabend’s dictum that “anything goes” in the battle of paradigms: If
470 

anything goes, then why ultimately does one thing go rather than another?
Why is any scientific paradigm judged superior? If anything goes, why does
anything go at all?
The answer I am suggesting here is that a paradigm emerges in the
history of science, it is recognized as superior, as true and valid, precisely
when that paradigm resonates with the current archetypal state of the
evolving collective psyche. A paradigm appears to account for more data,
and for more important data, it seems more relevant, more cogent, more
attractive, fundamentally because it has become archetypally appropriate to
that culture or individual at that moment in its evolution. And the dynamics
of this archetypal development appear to be essentially identical to the
dynamics of the perinatal process. Kuhn’s description of the ongoing
dialectic between normal science and major paradigm revolutions strikingly
parallels the perinatal dynamics described by Grof: The pursuit of knowledge
always takes place within a given paradigm, within a conceptual matrix—a
womb that provides an intellectually nourishing structure, that fosters
growth and increasing complexity and sophistication—until gradually that
structure is experienced as constricting, a limitation, a prison, producing a
tension of irresolvable contradictions, and finally a crisis is reached. Then
some inspired Promethean genius comes along and is graced with an inner
breakthrough to a new vision that gives the scientific mind a new sense of
being cognitively connected—reconnected—to the world: an intellectual
revolution occurs, and a new paradigm is born. Here we see why such
geniuses regularly experience their intellectual breakthrough as a profound
illumination, a revelation of the divine creative principle itself, as with
Newton’s exclamation to God, “I think Thy thoughts after Thee!” For the
human mind is following the numinous archetypal path that is unfolding
from within it.
And here we can see why the same paradigm, such as the Aristotelian or
the Newtonian, is perceived as a liberation at one time and then a
constriction, a prison, at another. For the birth of every new paradigm is also
a conception in a new conceptual matrix, which begins the process of
gestation, growth, crisis, and revolution all over again. Each paradigm is a
stage in an unfolding evolutionary sequence, and when that paradigm has
fulfilled its purpose, when it has been developed and exploited to its fullest
471 

extent, then it loses its numinosity, it ceases to be libidinally charged, it
becomes felt as oppressive, limiting, opaque, something to be overcome—
while the new paradigm that is emerging is felt as a liberating birth into a
new, luminously intelligible universe. Thus the ancient symbolically resonant
geocentric universe of Aristotle, Ptolemy, and Dante gradually loses its
numinosity, becomes seen as a problem full of contradictions, and with
Copernicus and Kepler that numinosity is fully transferred to the
heliocentric cosmos. And because the evolution of paradigm shifts is an
archetypal process, rather than merely either a rational-empirical or a
sociological one, this evolution takes place historically both from within and
without, both “subjectively” and “objectively.” As the inner gestalt changes in
the cultural mind, new empirical evidence just happens to appear, pertinent
writings from the past suddenly are unearthed, appropriate epistemological
justifications are formulated, supportive sociological changes coincidentally
take place, new technologies become available, the telescope is invented and
just happens to fall into Galileo’s hands. As new psychological
predispositions and metaphysical assumptions emerge from within the
collective mind, from within many individual minds simultaneously, they are
matched and encouraged by the synchronistic arrival of new data, new
social contexts, new methodologies, new tools that fulfill the emerging
archetypal gestalt.
And as with the evolution of scientific paradigms, so with all forms of
human thought. The emergence of a new philosophical paradigm, whether
that of Plato or Aquinas, Kant or Heidegger, is never simply the result of
improved logical reasoning from the observed data. Rather, each philosophy,
each metaphysical perspective and epistemology, reflects the emergence of a
global experiential gestalt that informs that philosopher’s vision, that
governs his or her reasoning and observations, and that ultimately affects
the entire cultural and sociological context within which the philosopher’s
vision is taking form.
For the very possibility of a new world view’s appearance rests on the
underlying archetypal dynamic of the larger culture. Thus the Copernican
revolution that emerged during the Renaissance and Reformation perfectly
reflected the archetypal moment of modern humanity’s birth out of the
ancient-medieval cosmic-ecclesiastical womb. And at the other end, the
472 

twentieth century’s massive and radical breakdown of so many structures—
cultural, philosophical, scientific, religious, moral, artistic, social, economic,
political, atomic, ecological—all this suggests the necessary deconstruction
prior to a new birth. And why is there evident now such a widespread and
constantly growing collective impetus in the Western mind to articulate a
holistic and participatory world view, visible in virtually every field? The
collective psyche seems to be in the grip of a powerful archetypal dynamic
in which the long-alienated modern mind is breaking through, out of the
contractions of its birth process, out of what Blake called its “mind-forg’d
manacles,” to rediscover its intimate relationship with nature and the larger
cosmos.
And so we can recognize a multiplicity of these archetypal sequences,
with each scientific revolution, each change of world view; yet perhaps we
can also recognize one overall archetypal dialectic in the evolution of
human consciousness that subsumes all of these smaller sequences, one long
metatrajectory, beginning with the primordial participation mystique and, in
a sense, culminating before our eyes. In this light, we can better understand
the great epistemological journey of the Western mind from the birth of
philosophy out of the mythological consciousness in ancient Greece,
through the classical, medieval, and modern eras, to our own postmodern
age: the extraordinary succession of world views, the dramatic sequence of
transformations in the human mind’s apprehension of reality, the
mysterious evolution of language, the shifting relationships between
universal and particular, transcendent and immanent, concept and percept,
conscious and unconscious, subject and object, self and world—the constant
movement toward differentiation, the gradual empowerment of the
autonomous human intellect, the slow forging of the subjective self, the
accompanying disenchantment of the objective world, the suppression and
withdrawal of the archetypal, the constellating of the human unconscious,
the eventual global alienation, the radical deconstruction, and finally,
perhaps, the emergence of a dialectically integrated, participatory
consciousness reconnected to the universal.
But to do justice to this complex epistemological progression and to the
other great dialectical trajectories of Western intellectual and spiritual
history that have paralleled it—cosmological, psychological, religious,
473 

existential—would require another book altogether. Instead, I would like to
conclude with a brief, very broad overview of this long historical evolution,
a kind of archetypal metanarrative, applying on a large scale the insights
and perspectives that have been set forth in the foregoing discussion.
Bringing It All Back Home
Many generalizations could be made about the history of the Western mind,
but today perhaps the most immediately obvious is that it has been from
start to finish an overwhelmingly masculine phenomenon: Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, Paul, Augustine, Aquinas, Luther, Copernicus, Galileo, Bacon,
Descartes, Newton, Locke, Hume, Kant, Darwin, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. . . .
The Western intellectual tradition has been produced and canonized almost
entirely by men, and informed mainly by male perspectives. This masculine
dominance in Western intellectual history has certainly not occurred
because women are any less intelligent than men. But can it be attributed
solely to social restriction? I think not. I believe something more profound is
going on here: something archetypal. The masculinity of the Western mind
has been pervasive and fundamental, in both men and women, affecting
every aspect of Western thought, determining its most basic conception of
the human being and the human role in the world. All the major languages
within which the Western tradition has developed, from Greek and Latin on,
have tended to personify the human species with words that are masculine
in gender: anthrōpos, homo, l’homme, el hombre, l’uomo, chelovek, der
Mensch, man. As the historical narrative in this book has faithfully reflected,
it has always been “man” this and “man” that—“the ascent of man,” “the
dignity of man,” “man’s relation to God,” “man’s place in the cosmos,” “man’s
struggle with nature,” “the great achievement of modern man,” and so forth.
The “man” of the Western tradition has been a questing masculine hero, a
Promethean biological and metaphysical rebel who has constantly sought
freedom and progress for himself, and who has thus constantly striven to
differentiate himself from and control the matrix out of which he emerged.
This masculine predisposition in the evolution of the Western mind, though
largely unconscious, has been not only characteristic of that evolution, but
474 

essential to it.9
For the evolution of the Western mind has been driven by a heroic
impulse to forge an autonomous rational human self by separating it from
the primordial unity with nature. The fundamental religious, scientific, and
philosophical perspectives of Western culture have all been affected by this
decisive masculinity—beginning four millennia ago with the great
patriarchal nomadic conquests in Greece and the Levant over the ancient
matrifocal cultures, and visible in the West’s patriarchal religion from
Judaism, its rationalist philosophy from Greece, its objectivist science from
modern Europe. All these have served the cause of evolving the autonomous
human will and intellect: the transcendent self, the independent individual
ego, the self-determining human being in its uniqueness, separateness, and
freedom. But to do this, the masculine mind has repressed the feminine.
Whether one sees this in the ancient Greek subjugation of the pre-Hellenic
matrifocal mythologies, in the Judaeo-Christian denial of the Great Mother
Goddess, or in the Enlightenment’s exalting of the coolly self-aware rational
ego radically separate from a disenchanted external nature, the evolution of
the Western mind has been founded on the repression of the feminine—on
the repression of undifferentiated unitary consciousness, of the participation
mystique with nature: a progressive denial of the anima mundi, of the soul
of the world, of the community of being, of the all-pervading, of mystery
and ambiguity, of imagination, emotion, instinct, body, nature, woman—of
all that which the masculine has projectively identified as “other.”
But this separation necessarily calls forth a longing for a reunion with that
which has been lost—especially after the masculine heroic quest has been
pressed to its utmost one-sided extreme in the consciousness of the late
modern mind, which in its absolute isolation has appropriated to itself all
conscious intelligence in the universe (man alone is a conscious intelligent
being, the cosmos is blind and mechanistic, God is dead). Then man faces the
existential crisis of being a solitary and mortal conscious ego thrown into an
ultimately meaningless and unknowable universe. And he faces the
psychological and biological crisis of living in a world that has come to be
shaped in such a way that it precisely matches his world view—i.e., in a
man-made environment that is increasingly mechanistic, atomized, soulless,
and self-destructive. The crisis of modern man is an essentially masculine
475 

crisis, and I believe that its resolution is already now occurring in the
tremendous emergence of the feminine in our culture: visible not only in the
rise of feminism, the growing empowerment of women, and the widespread
opening up to feminine values by both men and women, and not only in the
rapid burgeoning of women’s scholarship and gender-sensitive perspectives
in virtually every intellectual discipline, but also in the increasing sense of
unity with the planet and all forms of nature on it, in the increasing
awareness of the ecological and the growing reaction against political and
corporate policies supporting the domination and exploitation of the
environment, in the growing embrace of the human community, in the
accelerating collapse of long-standing political and ideological barriers
separating the world’s peoples, in the deepening recognition of the value
and necessity of partnership, pluralism, and the interplay of many
perspectives. It is visible also in the widespread urge to reconnect with the
body, the emotions, the unconscious, the imagination and intuition, in the
new concern with the mystery of childbirth and the dignity of the maternal,
in the growing recognition of an immanent intelligence in nature, in the
broad popularity of the Gaia hypothesis. It can be seen in the increasing
appreciation of indigenous and archaic cultural perspectives such as the
Native American, African, and ancient European, in the new awareness of
feminine perspectives of the divine, in the archaeological recovery of the
Goddess tradition and the contemporary reemergence of Goddess
spirituality, in the rise of Sophianic Judaeo-Christian theology and the papal
declaration of the Assumptio Mariae, in the widely noted spontaneous
upsurge of feminine archetypal phenomena in individual dreams and
psychotherapy. And it is evident as well in the great wave of interest in the
mythological perspective, in esoteric disciplines, in Eastern mysticism, in
shamanism, in archetypal and transpersonal psychology, in hermeneutics
and other non-objectivist epistemologies, in scientific theories of the
holonomic universe, morphogenetic fields, dissipative structures, chaos
theory, systems theory, the ecology of mind, the participatory universe—the
list could go on and on. As Jung prophesied, an epochal shift is taking place
in the contemporary psyche, a reconciliation between the two great
polarities, a union of opposites: a hieros gamos (sacred marriage) between
the long-dominant but now alienated masculine and the long-suppressed
476 

but now ascending feminine.
And this dramatic development is not just a compensation, not just a
return of the repressed, as I believe this has all along been the underlying
goal of Western intellectual and spiritual evolution. For the deepest passion
of the Western mind has been to reunite with the ground of its own being.
The driving impulse of the West’s masculine consciousness has been its
dialec$$cal quest not only to realize itself, to forge its own autonomy, but
also, finally, to come to terms with the great feminine principle in life, and
thus to recover its connection with the whole: to differentiate itself from but
then rediscover and reunite with the feminine, with the mystery of life, of
nature, of soul. And that reunion can now occur on a new and profoundly
different level from that of the primordial unconscious unity, for the long
evolution of human consciousness has prepared it to be capable at last of
embracing its own ground and matrix freely and consciously. The telos, the
inner direction and goal, of the Western mind has been to reconnect with
the cosmos in a mature participation mystique, to surrender itself freely and
consciously in the embrace of a larger unity that preserves human
autonomy while also transcending human alienation.
But to achieve this reintegration of the repressed feminine, the masculine
must undergo a sacrifice, an ego death. The Western mind must be willing to
open itself to a reality the nature of which could shatter its most established
beliefs about itself and about the world. This is where the real act of heroism
is going to be. A threshold must now be crossed, a threshold demanding a
courageous act of faith, of imagination, of trust in a larger and more
complex reality; a threshold, moreover, demanding an act of unflinching
self-discernment. And this is the great challenge of our time, the
evolutionary imperative for the masculine to see through and overcome its
hubris and one-sidedness, to own its unconscious shadow, to choose to enter
into a fundamentally new relationship of mutuality with the feminine in all
its forms. The feminine then becomes not that which must be controlled,
denied, and exploited, but rather fully acknowledged, respected, and
responded to for itself. It is recognized: not the objectified “other,” but rather
source, goal, and immanent presence
This is the great challenge, yet I believe it is one the Western mind has
been slowly preparing itself to meet for its entire existence. I believe that the
477 

West’s restless inner development and incessantly innovative masculine
ordering of reality has been gradually leading, in an immensely long
dialectical movement, toward a reconciliation with the lost feminine unity,
toward a profound and many-leveled marriage of the masculine and
feminine, a triumphant and healing reunion. And I consider that much of
the conflict and confusion of our own era reflects the fact that this
evolutionary drama may now be reaching its climactic stages.10 For our time
is struggling to bring forth something fundamentally new in human history:
We seem to be witnessing, suffering, the birth labor of a new reality, a new
form of human existence, a “child” that would be the fruit of this great
archetypal marriage, and that would bear within itself all its antecedents in a
new form. I therefore would affirm those indispensable ideals expressed by
the supporters of feminist, ecological, archaic, and other countercultural
and multicultural perspectives. But I would also wish to affirm those who
have valued and sustained the central Western tradition, for I believe that
this tradition—the entire trajectory from the Greek epic poets and Hebrew
prophets on, the long intellectual and spiritual struggle from Socrates and
Plato and Paul and Augustine to Galileo and Descartes and Kant and Freud—
that this stupendous Western project should be seen as a necessary and
noble part of a great dialectic, and not simply rejected as an imperialist-
chauvinist plot. Not only has this tradition achieved that fundamental
differentiation and autonomy of the human which alone could allow the
possibility of such a larger synthesis, it has also painstakingly prepared the
way for its own self-transcendence. Moreover, this tradition possesses
resources, left behind and cut off by its own Promethean advance, that we
have scarcely begun to integrate—and that, paradoxically, only the opening
to the feminine will enable us to integrate. Each perspective, masculine and
feminine, is here both affirmed and transcended, recognized as part of a
larger whole; for each polarity requires the other for its fulfillment. And
their synthesis leads to something beyond itself: It brings an unexpected
opening to a larger reality that cannot be grasped before it arrives, because
this new reality is itself a creative act.
But why has the pervasive masculinity of the Western intellectual and
spiritual tradition suddenly become so apparent to us today, while it
remained so invisible to almost every previous generation? I believe this is
478 

occurring only now because, as Hegel suggested, a civilization cannot
become conscious of itself, cannot recognize its own significance, until it is
so mature that it is approaching its own death.
Today we are experiencing something that looks very much like the death
of modern man, indeed that looks very much like the death of Western man.
Perhaps the end of “man” himself is at hand. But man is not a goal. Man is
something that must be overcome—and fulfilled, in the embrace of the
feminine.
479 

Chronology
(Dates for events in antiquity are approximate.)
2000 B.C.
Migrations of Greek-speaking Indo-European peoples into
Aegean area begin
1950
Hebrew patriarchs migrate from Mesopotamia to Canaan
(traditional biblical dating)
1800
Early Mesopotamian astronomical observations recorded
1700
Minoan civilization on Crete at height during next two
centuries, influencing Greek mainland
1600
Gradual Greek fusion of Indo-European and pre-Hellenic
Mediterranean religions
1450
Fall of Minoan civilization on Crete after invasions and
volcanic disasters
1400
Ascendancy of Mycenaean civilization on Greek mainland
1250
Exodus of Hebrews from Egypt under Moses
1200
Trojan War with Mycenaean Greeks
1100
Dorian invasions, end of Mycenaean dominance
1000
David unites kingdom of Israel with capital at Jerusalem
950
Reign of Solomon, building of Temple
900–700
Early books of Hebrew Bible composed
Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey composed
776
First Pan-Hellenic Olympic games held at Olympia
480 

750
Greek colonization of Mediterranean spreads
740
First Isaiah fl. in Israel
700
Hesiod’s Theogony, Works and Days
600
Thales of Miletus fl., birth of philosophy
594
Solon reforms government of Athens, establishes rules for
public recital of Homeric poems
590
Jeremiah fl. in Israel
586–538
Babylonian captivity of Jews
Ezekiel and Second Isaiah fl., prophesy historical
redemption
Compilation and redaction of Hebrew Scriptures begins
580
Sappho fl., flowering of Greek lyric poetry
570
Anaximander fl., develops systematic cosmology
545
Anaximenes fl., posits transmutations of underlying
substance
525
Pythagoras begins philosophical-religious brotherhood,
develops synthesis of science and mysticism
520
Xenophanes fl., concept of human progress, philosophical
monotheism, skepticism toward anthropomorphic
deities
508
Democratic reforms instituted in Athens by Cleisthenes
500
Heraclitus fl., philosophy of pervasive flux, universal Logos
499
Persian wars begin
490
Athens defeats Persian army at Marathon
480
Greeks defeat Persian fleet at Salamis
481 

478
Establishment of Delian League of Greek states led by
Athens
Period of Athenian ascendancy begins
472
Aeschylus’s The Persians, rise of Greek tragedy
470
Pindar fl., apex of Greek lyric poetry Parmenides fl., posits
logical opposition between appearances and changeless
unitary reality
469
Birth of Socrates
465
Aeschylus’s Prometheus Bound
460
Anaxagoras fl., concept of universal Mind (Nous)
458–429
Age of Pericles
450
Emergence of Sophists begins
447
Building of Parthenon (completed 432)
446
Herodotus writing History
441
Sophocles’s Antigone
431
Euripides’s Medea
431–404
Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta
430
Democritus fl., atomism
429
Sophocles’s Oedipus Rex
427
Birth of Plato
423
Aristophanes’s The Clouds
420
Thucydides writing History of the Peloponnesian War
415
Euripides’s Trojan Women
410
Hippocrates fl., lays foundations of ancient medicine
482 

404
Athens defeated by Sparta
399
Trial and execution of Socrates
399–347
Plato’s Dialogues written
387
Plato founds Academy in Athens
367
Aristotle begins twenty years of study at Plato’s Academy
360
Eudoxus formulates first theory of planetary motion
347
Death of Plato
342
Aristotle tutors Alexander in Macedonia
338
Philip II of Macedon subjugates Greece
336
Death of Philip, accession of Alexander
336–323
Conquests of Alexander the Great
335
Aristotle founds Lyceum in Athens
331
Founding of Alexandria in Egypt
323
Death of Alexander
Beginning of Hellenistic era (to c. A.D. 312)
322
Death of Aristotle
320
Pyrrho of Elis fl., founder of Skepticism
306
Epicurus founds Epicurean school in Athens
300
Zeno of Citium founds Stoic school in Athens
300–100
Zenith or Alexandria as center of Hellenistic culture
Development of humanistic scholarship, science, astrology
295
Euclid’s Elements codifying classical geometry
280
Museum (Mouseion) built in Alexandria
270
Aristarchus proposes heliocentric theory
483 

260
Skepticism taught at Platonic Academy for next two
centuries
250
Hebrew Bible translated into Greek by Alexandrian
scholars
240
Archimedes fl., develops classical mechanics and
mathematics
220
Apollonius of Perga fl., advances astronomy and geometry
146
Greece conquered by Rome
130
Hipparchus fl., makes first comprehensive chart of
heavens, develops classical geocentric cosmology
63
Julius Caesar reforms calendar
Cicero prosecutes Catiline conspiracy
60
Lucretius’s De Rerum Natura propounds Epicurus’s
atomistic theory of universe
58–48
Caesar conquers Gaul, defeats Pompey
45–44
Cicero’s philosophical works
44
Julius Caesar assassinated
31
Octavian (Augustus) defeats Antony and Cleopatra
Beginning of Roman Empire
29
Livy begins writing history of Rome
23
Horace’s Odes
19
Virgil’s Aeneid
8–4 B.C.
Birth of Jesus of Nazareth
8 A.D.
Ovid’s Metamorphoses
14
Death of Augustus
484 

15
Manilius’s Astronomica
23
Strabo’s Geography
29–30
Death of Jesus
35
Conversion of Paul on way to Damascus
40
Philo of Alexandria fl., integration of Judaism and Platonism
48
Council of Apostles at Jerusalem recognizes Paul’s mission
to Gentiles
50–60
Letters of Paul written
64–68
Apostles Peter and Paul martyred in Rome under Nero
First major persecution of Christian$$
64–70
Gospel according to Mark
70
Temple in Jerusalem destroyed by Romans
70–80
Gospels according to Matthew and Luke
90–100
Gospel according to John
95
Quintilian’s Institutio Oratoria codifying humanistic
education in Rome
96
First appearance of formula en Christo paideia,
foreshadowing synthesis of classical humanism with
Christianity
100
Nicomachus’s Introduction to Arithmetic
100–200
Gnosticism flourishes
109
Tacitus’s Historiae
110
Plutarch fl., writes Parallel Lives, comparative biographies
of prominent Greeks and Romans
120
Epictetus fl., Stoic moralist
485 

140
Ptolemy’s Almagest and Tetrabiblos codify classical
astronomy and astrology
150
Justin Martyr’s early synthesis of Christianity and Platonism
161
Marcus Aurelius becomes emperor
170
Galen fl., advances science of medicine
175
Earliest extant authoritative canon of New Testament
180
Irenaeus’s Against Heresies criticizes Gnosticism
Clement assumes leadership of Christian school in
Alexandria
190
Sextus Empiricus fl., summarizes classical Skepticism
200
Corpus Hermeticum compiled in Alexandria (approx.)
203
Origen succeeds Clement as head of Catechetical school
232
Plotinus begins eleven years’ study with Ammonius Saccas
in Alexandria
235–285
Barbarian invasions into Roman Empire
Beginning of severe inflation, spread of plague,
depopulation
248
Origen’s Contra Celsum defends Christianity against pagan
intellectuals
250–260
Persecutions of Christians by emperors Decius and
Valerian
265
Plotinus writing and teaching in Rome, emergence of
Neoplatonism
301
Plotinus’s Enneads compiled by Porphyry
486 

303
Final and most severe persecution of Christians begins
under Diocletian
312
Conversion of Constantine to Christianity
313
Edict of Milan establishes religious toleration for
Christianity in Roman Empire
324
Eusebius’s Ecclesiastical History, first history of Christian
Church
325
Council of Nicaea convened by Constantine establishes
orthodox Christian doctrine
330
Constantine moves imperial capital to Constantinople
(Byzantium)
354
Birth of Augustine
361–363
Julian the Apostate briefly restores paganism in Roman
Empire
370
Huns begin massive invasion of Europe (until 453)
374
Ambrose becomes bishop of Milan
382
Jerome begins translation of Bible into Latin
386
Conversion of Augustine
391
Theodosius prohibits all pagan worship in Roman Empire
Destruction of Sarapeum in Alexandria
400
Augustine’s Confessions
410
Visigoth sack of Rome
413–427
Augustine’s City of God
415
Death of Hypatia in Alexandria
430
Death of Augustine
487 

439
Carthage captured by the Vandals, West overrun by
barbarians
476
End of Roman Empire in West
485
Death of Proclus, last major pagan Greek philosopher
498
Franks under Clovis convert to Catholicism
500
Dionysius the Areopagite fl. (estim.), Christian Neoplatonist
524
Boethius’s Consolation of Philosophy
529
Closing of Platonic Academy in Athens by Justinian
Benedict founds first monastery at Monte Cassino
590–604
Papacy of Gregory the Great
622
Beginning of Islam
731
Bede’s Ecclesiastical History of the English People,
populariz$$s method of dating events from birth of
Christ
732
Muslim forces halted in Europe by Charles Martel at
Poitiers
781
Alcuin leads Carolingian renaissance, establishes study of
seven liberal arts as basic medieval curriculum
800
Charlemagne crowned emperor of West
866
John Scotus Erigena’s De Divisione Naturae, synthesis of
Christianity and Neoplatonism
1000
Most of Europe under Christian influence
1054
Schism declared between Western and Eastern Churches
1077
Anselm’s Meditation on the Reasonableness of Faith
1090
Roscellinus teaching nominalism
488 

1095
First Crusade initiated by Urban II
1117
Abelard’s Sic et Non
1130
Hugh of Saint-Victor writes first medieval summa
1150
Rediscovery of Aristotle’s works begins in Latin West
1170
Founding of University of Paris
Intellectual centers developing at Oxford and Cambridge
Court of Eleanor of Aquitaine at Poitiers becomes center of
troubador poetry and model of courtly life
1185
André le Chapelain’s Art of Courtly Love
1190
Joachim of Fiore fl., trinitarian philosophy of history
1194
Building of Chartres Cathedral begins
1209
Francis of Assisi founds Franciscan order
1210
Wolfram von Eschenbach’s Parzival
Gottfried von Strassburg’s Tristan und Isolde
1215
Signing of Magna Carta
1216
Dominic founds Dominican order
1225
Birth of Thomas Aquinas
1245
Aquinas begins studies under Albertus Magnus in Paris
1247
Foger Bacon begins experimental research at Oxford
1260
Chartres Cathedral consecrated
1266
Siger of Brabant prominent at Paris
1266–73
Aquinas’s Summa Theologica
1274
Death of Aquinas
1280
Jean de Meun’s Roman de la Rose
489 

1300–30
Spread of mysticism in Rhineland, Meister Eckhart fl.
1304
Birth of Petrarch
1305
Duns Scotus teaching at Paris
1309
Papacy moved to Avignon (“Babylonian captivity”)
1310–14
Dante’s La Divina Commedia
1319
Ockham teaching at Oxford
1323
Aquinas canonized
1330–50
Spread of Ockham’s thought (nominalism) at Oxford and
Paris
1335
First public striking clock erected in Milan
1337
Hundred Years’ War begins between England and France
1340
Buridan rector at University of Paris
1341
Petrarch crowned poet laureate on the Capitoline in Rome
1347–51
Plague sweeps Europe (Black Death)
1353
Boccaccio’s Decameron
1377
Oresme’s Book on the Sky and the World defends
theoretical possibility of moving Earth
1378
Great Schism, conflict between rival popes (until 1417)
1380
Wycliffe attacks Church abuses and orthodox doctrine
1400
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales
1404
Vergerio’s Concerning Liberal Studies, first humanist
treatise on education
1415
Religious reformer Jan Hus burned at stake
1429
Joan of Arc leads French against English
490 

Bruni’s History of Florence pioneers Renaissance
historiography
1434
Accession to power of Cosimo de’Medici in Florence
1435
Alberti’s On Painting systematizes principles of perspective
1440
Nicholas of Cusa’s On Learned Ignorance
Valla’s On the True Good
1452
Birth of Leonardo da Vinci
1453
Fall of Constantinople to Ottom$$n Turks, end of Byzantine
Empire
1455
Gutenberg Bible produced, start of printing revolution
1462
Ficino becomes head of Platonic Academy of Florence
1469
Accession of Lorenzo the Magnificent in Florence
1470
Ficino completes first Latin translation of Plato’s Dialogues
1473
Birth of Copernicus
1482
Ficino’s Theologica Platonica
1483
Birth of Luther
Leonardo’s Virgin of the Rocks
1485
Botticelli’s Birth of Venus
1486
Pico’s Oration on the Dignity of Man
1492
Columbus reaches America
1497
Vasco da Gama reaches India
Copernicus studying in Italy, makes first astronomical
observation
1498
Leonardo’s Last Supper
491 

1504
Michelangelo’s David
1506
Saint Peter’s Basilica in Rome begun under Bramante
1508
Erasmus’s Adagia
1508–11
Raphael’s School of Athens, Parnassus, Triumph of the
Church
1508–12
Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel ceiling
1512–14
Copernicus’s Commentariolus, first outline of heliocentric
theory
1513
Machiavelli’s The Prince
1513–14
Dürer’s Knight, Death and Devil, St. Jerome in His Study,
Melencolia I
1516
Thomas More’s Utopia
Erasmus’s Latin translation of New Testament
1517
Luther posts Ninety-five Theses in Wittenburg Beginning
of Reformation
1519
Luther’s On Christian Liberty
1521
Luther’s excommunication and defiance of the imperial
Diet at Worms
1524
Erasmus’s defense of freedom of will against Luther
1527
Paracelsus teaching at Basel
1528
Castiglione’s The Courtier
1530
Melanchthon’s Augsburg Confession of Lutheran Churches
1532
Rabelais’s Pantagruel
1534
Henry VIII issues Act of Supremacy rejecting papal control
492 

Luther completes translation of Bible into German
1535
Ignatius of Loyola’s Spiritual Exercises
1536
Calvin’s Institutes of the Christian Religion
1540
Society of Jesus founded by Loyola
Rheticus’s Narratio Prima, first published work describing
Copernican theory
1541
Michelangelo’s Last Judgment
1542
Establishment of Roman Inquisition
1543
Copernicus’s De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium
Vesalius’s On the Structure of the Human Body
1545–63
Council of Trent, start of Counter-Reformation
1550
Vasari’s Lives of the Artists
1554
Palestrina’s first book of masses
1564
Birth of Galileo, Shakespeare
1567
Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross promote Carmelite
reform
1572
Tycho Brahe observes supernova
1580
Montaigne’s Essays
1582
Gregorian calendar reform instituted
1584
Bruno’s On the Infinite Universe and Worlds
1590
Shakespeare’s Henry VI
1596
Birth of Descartes
Kepler’s Mysterium Cosmographicum
Spenser’s Faerie Queene
493 

1597
Bacon’s Essays
1600
Shakespeare’s Hamlet
Giordano Bruno executed for heresy by Inquisition
Gilbert’s On the Magnet
1602
Kepler’s On the More Certain Fundamentals of Astrology
1605
Bacon’s Advancement of Learning
Cervantes’s Don Quixote
1607
Monteverdi’s Orfeo
1609
Kepler’s Astronomia Nova, first two laws of planetary
motion
1610
Galileo announces telescopic discoveries in Sidereus
Nuncius
1611
King James translation of Bible into English
Shakespeare’s The Tempest
1616
Catholic Church declares Copernican theory “false and
erroneous”
1618–48
Thirty Years’ War
1619
Kepler’s Harmonia Mundi, third law of planetary motion
Descartes’s revelatory vision of a new science
1620
Bacon’s Novum Organum
1623
Galileo’s Assayer
Boehme’s Mysterium Magnum
1628
Harvey’s On the Movement of the Heart and Blood in
Animals
Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
494 

1632
Systems
1633
Galileo condemned by Inquisition
1635
Founding of Académie Française
1636
Founding of Harvard College
1637
Descartes’s Discourse on Method
Corneille’s Le Cid
1638
Galileo’s Two New Sciences
1640
Jansen’s Augustinus, beginning of Jansenism in France
1642–48
English Civil War
1644
Descartes’s Principia Philosophiae
Milton’s Areopagitica
1647
Lilly’s Christian Astrology
1648
Peace of Westphalia ending Thirty Years’ War
1651
Hobbes’s Leviathan
1660
Founding of Royal Society
Boyle’s New Experiments Physico-Mechanical
1664
Molière’s Tartuffe
1665–66
Newton makes early scientific discoveries and develops
calculus
1666
Hooke demonstrates mechanical theory of planetary
motion
Founding of Académie des Sciences
1667
Milton’s Paradise Lost
1670
Pascal’s Pensées
495 

1675
Spread of Evangelical Pietism in Germany
1677
Spinoza’s Ethica
Racine’s Phaedra
Leeuwenhoek’s discovery of microscopic organisms
1678
Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress
Simon’s Critical History of the Old Testament pioneers
textual criticism of Bible
Huygens proposes wave theory of light
1687
Newton’s Principia Mathematica Philosophiae Naturalis
Quarrel of ancients and moderns begins at Académie
Française
1688–89
Glorious Revolution in England
1690
Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Two
Treatises of Civil Government
1697
Bayle’s Dictionnaire Historique et Critique
1704
Newton’s Opticks
1710
Berkeley’s Principles of Human Knowledge
1714
Leibniz’s Monadology
1719
Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe
1721
Montesquieu’s Persian Letters
1724
Bach’s Passion According to Saint John
1725
Vico’s Scienza Nuova
1726
Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels
1734
Voltaire’s Lettres Philosophiques
Pope’s Essay on Man
496 

Jonathan Edwards fl., beginning of Great Awakening in
American colonies
1735
Linnaeus’s Systema Naturae
1738
Wesley begins Methodist revival in England
1740
Richardson’s Pamela
1741
Handel’s Messiah
1747
La Mettrie’s L’Homme-Machine
1748
Hume’s Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
Montesquieu’s Spirit of Laws
1749
Birth of Goethe
Fielding’s Tom Jones
1750
Rousseau’s Discours sur les Sciences et les Arts
1751
Encyclopédie begins publication under Diderot and
d’Alembert
Franklin’s Experiments and Observations on Electricity
1755
Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language
1756
Voltaire’s Essay on the Manners and Customs of Nations
1759
Sterne’s Tristram Shandy
Voltaire’s Candide
1762
Rousseau’s Émile, Social Contract
1764
Winckelmann’s History of the Art of Antiquity reawakens
European appreciation for classical Greek art and
culture
1769–70
Birth of Beethoven, Hegel, Napoleon, Hölderlin,
Wordsworth
497 

1770
Holbach’s Système de la Nature
1771
Swedenborg’s True Christian Religion
1774
Goethe’s Sorrows of Young Werther
1775
American Revolution begins
1776
Jefferson et al. draft Declaration of Independence
Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations
Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
1778
Buffon’s Époques de la Nature
1779
Hume’s Dialogue Concerning Natural Religion
1780
Lessing’s Education of the Human Race
1781
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason
Herschel discovers Uranus, first new planet since antiquity
1784
Herder’s Ideas for the Philosophy of the History of
Mankind
1787
Mozart’s Don Giovanni
1787–88
The Federalist Papers by Madison, Hamilton, and Jay
1788
Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason
Mozart’s Jupiter Symphony
1789
French Revolution begins
Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen
Blake’s Songs of Innocence
Lavoisier’s Elementary Treatise on Chemistry
Bentham’s Principles of Morality and Legislation
1790
Goethe’s Metamorphosis of Plants
498 

Kant’s Critique of Judgment
Burke’s Reflections on the Revolution in France
1792
Wollstonecraft’s Vindication of the Rights of Woman
1793
Blake’s Marriage of Heaven and Hell
1795
Schiller’s Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Mankind
Condorcet’s Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress
of the Human Mind
Hutton’s Theory of the Earth
1796
Laplace’s Exposition du Système du Monde
1797
Hölderlin’s Hyperion
1798
Wordsworth and Coleridge’s Lyrical Ballads
Schlegel brothers begin Romantic periodical Athenaeum
Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Population
1799
Napoleon becomes first consul in France
Schleiermacher’s On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured
Despisers
1800
Fichte’s The Vocation of Man
Schelling’s System of Transcendental Idealism
1802
Novalis’s Heinrich von Ofterdingen
1803
Dalton proposes atomic theory of matter
1803–4
Beethoven’s Eroica Symphony
1807
Hegel’s Phenomenology of Mind
Wordsworth’s Ode: Intimations of Immortality
1808
Goethe’s Faust I
499 

1809
Lamarck’s Philosophie Zoologique
1810
De Staël’s De l’AUemagne (On Germany)
1813
Austen’s Pride and Prejudice
1814
Scott’s Waverley
1815
Waterloo, Congress of Vienna
1817
Keats’s Poems
Coleridge’s Biographia Literaria
Ricardo’s Principles of Political Economy and Taxation
Hegel’s Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences
1819
Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Idea
1820
Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound
1822
Stendhal’s De l’Amour
Fourier’s The Analytical Theory of Heat
1824
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony
Byron’s Don Juan
Gauss postulates non-Euclidean geometry
1829
Balzac begins La Comédie Humaine
1830
Stendhal’s Le Rouge et le Noir
Comte’s Cours de Philosophie Positive
Berlioz’s Symphonie Fantastique
1831
Pushkin’s Eugene Onegin
Hugo’s Notre-Dame de Paris, Les Feuilles d’Automne
Faraday discovers electromagnetic induction
Darwin begins five-year voyage on Beagle
500 

1832
Goethe’s Faust II
George Sand’s Indiana
1833
Lyell’s Principles of Geology
Emerson travels to Europe, meets Coleridge and Carlyle
1834
Carlyle’s Sartor Resartus
1835
Strauss’s Life of Jesus Critically Examined
Tocqueville’s Democracy in America
Babbage formulates idea of digital computing machine
1836
Emerson’s Nature initiates Transcendentalism
1837
Emerson’s “American Scholar” address
Dickens’s Pickwick Papers
1841
Feuerbach’s The Essence of Christianity
1843
Kierkegaard’s Either/Or, Fear and Trembling
Mill’s System of Logic
Ruskin’s Modern Painters
1844
Birth of Nietzsche
Emerson’s Essays
1845
Fuller’s Woman in the Nineteenth Century
Poe’s Tales
Marx and Engels’s Die Heilige Familie
1848
Marx and Engels’s Communist Manifesto
Revolutions erupt throughout Europe
Women’s suffrage movement begins in United States
Clausius formulates concept of entropy, second law of
501 

1850
thermodynamics
Hawthorne’s Scarlet Letter
1851
Melville’s Moby Dick
Great Exhibition in London
1854
Thoreau’s Walden
1855
Whitman’s Leaves of Grass
1857
Flaubert’s Madame Bovary
Baudelaire’s Les Fleurs du Mal
1858
Darwin and Wallace propose theory of natural selection
1859
Darwin’s Origin of Species
Mill’s On Liberty
Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde
1860
Burckhardt’s Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy
Oxford debate on evolution between Wilberforce and
Huxley
1861
Bachofen’s Mother Right
1861–65
American Civil War
1862
Hugo’s Les Misérables
1863
Emancipation Proclamation, Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address
1865
Mendel proposes theory of genetic inheritance
1866
Haeckel’s General Morphology of Organisms
Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment
1867
Marx’s Das Kapital
1869
Tolstoy’s War and Peace
502 

Arnold’s Culture and Anarchy
1871
Darwin’s The Descent of Man
1872
Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy
Monet’s Impression: Sunrise
G. Eliot’s Middlemarch
1873
Maxwell’s Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism
1875
Blavatsky founds Theosophical Society
1877
Peirce publishes first articles on pragmatism
1878
Wundt founds first laboratory for experimental psychology
1879
Edison invents electric carbon-filament light
Frege’s Begriffschrift initiates modern logic
Ibsen’s A Doll’s House
1880
Dostoevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov
1881
Ranke’s Universal History
1883
Dilthey’s Introduction to Human Sciences
1883–84
Nietzsche’s Thus Spoke Zarathustra
1884
Twain’s Huckleberry Finn
1886
Rimbaud’s Illuminations Nietzsche’s Beyond Good and Evil
Mach’s The Analysis of Sensations
1887
Michelson-Morley experiment
1889
Van Gogh’s Starry Night
1890
William James’s Principles of Psychology
Frazer’s The Golden Bough
1893
Bradley’s Appearance and Reality
503 

1894
Steiner’s Philosophy of Freedom
Tolstoy’s The Kingdom of God Is Within You
Hertz’s Principles of Mechanics
1895
Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest
Durkheim’s Rules of Sociological Method
1896
Becquerel’s discovery of radioactivity in uranium Jarry’s
Ubu Roi
Chekhov’s The Seagull
1897
James’s The Will to Believe
1898
Cezanne’s Mont Sainte-Victoire paintings
1900
Death of Nietzsche
Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams
Planck initiates quantum physics
Husserl’s Logical Investigations initiates phenomenology
Rediscovery of Mendelian genetics
1901
Henry James’s The Ambassadors
1902
William James’s The Varieties of Religious Experience
1903
Moore’s Refutation of Idealism and Principia Ethica
Shaw’s Man and Superman
Wright brothers make first powered airplane flight
1905
Einstein’s papers on special relativity, photoelectric effect,
Brownian motion
Freud’s Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality
Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism
504 

1906
Duhem’s La Théorie Physique Gandhi develops philosophy
of nonviolent activism
1907
William James’s Pragmatism
Bergson’s L’Évoiution Créatrice
Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon Suzuki’s Outline of
Mahayana Buddhism introduces Buddhism to West
1909
Schoenberg’s first atonal work
1910-13
Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica
1912
Jung’s Psychology of the Unconscious, break from Freud
Wegener proposes theory of continental drift
1913
Steiner founds anthroposophy
Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring
Proust’s A la Recherche du Temps Perdu
Lawrence’s Sons and Lovers
Unamuno’s The Tragic Sense of Life
Royce’s The Problem of Christianity
Ford begins mass production of automobiles
1914
Joyce’s Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Kafka’s The Trial
1914-18
World War I
1915
Saussure’s Cours de Linguistique Générale
1916
Einstein’s general theory of relativity
1917
Otto’s The Idea of the Holy Russian Revolution
1918
Spengler’s The Decline of the West
505 

1919
General theory of relativity experimentally confirmed
Watson’s Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist
Barth’s Epistle to the Romans
1920
Yeats’s “The Second Coming”
Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle
First public radio broadcast
1921
Russell’s The Analysis of Mind
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
1922
T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Land
Joyce’s Ulysses
Weber’s Economy and Society
1923
Rilke’s Duino Elegies
W. Stevens’s Harmonium
Freud’s The Ego and the Id
Buber’s I and Thou
Santayana’s Scepticism and Animal Faith
Pavlov’s Conditioned Reflexes
1924
Piaget’s Judgment and Reasoning in the Child
Rank’s The Trauma of Birth
Mann’s The Magic Mountain
1925
Yeats’s A Vision
Dewey’s Experience and Nature
Whitehead’s Science and the Modem World
1926
Schrodinger develops wave equation underlying quantum
506 

mechanics
1927
Heisenberg formulates principle of uncertainty
Bohr formulates principle of complementarity
Lemaître proposes big-bang theory
Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit (Being and Time)
Freud’s The Future of an Illusion
Reich’s Die Funktion des Orgasmus
Hesse’s Der Steppenwolf
1928
Yeats’s The Tower
Carnap’s The Logical Structure of the World
Jung’s The Spiritual Problem of Modern Man
1929
Whitehead’s Process and Reality
Vienna Circle manifesto: Scientific Conception of the
World
Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury
Woolf’s A Room of One’s Own
1930
Freud’s Civilization and Its Discontents
Ortega y Gasset’s The Revolt of the Masses
Bultmann’s The Historicity of Man and Faith
1931
Gödel’s Theorem proves undecidability of propositions in
formalized mathematical systems
Cassirer’s Philosophy of Symbolic Forms
1932
Jaspers’s Philosophie
Klein’s Psychoanalysis of Children
507 

1933
Hitler comes to power in Germany
1934
Toynbee’s A Study of History
Popper’s Logic of Scientific Discovery
Jung’s Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious
Mumford’s Technics and Civilization
1936
Lovejoy’s Great Chain of Being
Ayer’s Language, Truth and Logic
Keynes’s General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money
1937
Anna Freud’s The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense
Turing’s On Computable Numbers
1938
Brecht’s Galileo
Discovery of nuclear fission
Sartre’s Nausea
1939
Death of Freud
1939-45
World War II, Holocaust
1940
Collingwood’s Essay on Metaphysics
1941
Niebuhr’s The Nature and Destiny of Man
Fromm’s Escape from Freedom
Borges’s Ficciones
1942
Camus’s The Stranger and The Myth of Sisyphus
1943
Sartre’s Being and Nothingness
Eliot’s Four Quartets
1945
Merleau-Ponty’s Phénoménologie de la Perception
508 

Schrödinger’s What Is Life?
Atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Founding of United Nations
1946–48
Beginning of Cold War
Rise of public television broadcasting
First electronic digital computers developed
1947
Pollock’s first abstract drip paintings
1948
Wiener’s Cybernetics
Hartshorne’s The Divine Relativity
Graves’s The White Goddess
Merton’s The Seven Storey Mountain
1949
Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four
Eliade’s The Myth of the Eternal Return
Campbell’s The Hero with a Thousand Faces
De Beauvoir’s Le Deuxième Sex
1950
Papal declaration of the Assumptio Mariae
1951
Tillich’s Systematic Theology
Bonhoeffer’s Letters and Papers from Prison
Quine’s Two Dogmas of Empiricism
1952
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot
Jung’s Answer to Job, Synchronicity
1953
Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations
Heidegger’s Introduction to Metaphysics
Skinner’s Science and Human Behavior
509 

Watson and Crick discover structure of DNA
1954
Huxley’s Doors of Perception
Rahner’s Theological Investigations
Needham’s Science and Civilization in China
1955
Teilhard de Chardin’s The Phenomenon of Man
Marcuse’s Eros and Civilization
Ginsburg’s Howl
1956
Bateson et al. formulate double-bind theory
1957
Chomsky’s Syntactic Structures
Barfield’s Saving the Appearances
Watts’s The Way of Zen
Sputnik satellite launched
1958
Lévi-Strauss’s Anthropologie Structurale
Polanyi’s Personal Knowledge
1959
Brown’s Life Against Death
Snow’s Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution
1960
Gadamer’s Truth and Method
Quine’s Word and Object
1960-72
Rise of civil rights movement, student movement,
feminism, environmentalism, counterculture
1961
First space flights
Watts’s Psychotherapy East and West
Foucault’s Histoire de la Folie
Fanon’s Les Damnés de la Terre
510 

1962
Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
Popper’s Conjectures and Refutations
Jung’s Memories, Dreams, Reflections
Maslow’s Toward a Psychology of Being
Carson’s Silent Spring
McLuhan’s Gutenberg Galaxy
Hess proposes seafloor-spreading hypothesis
Second Vatican Council begins
Founding of Esalen Institute, rise of human potential
movement
Psychedelic experiments with Leary and Alpert at Harvard
Rise of Dylan, Beatles, Rolling Stones Students for a
Democratic Society adopts Port Huron statement
1963
Civil rights march on Washington, Martin Luther King’s “I
have a dream” speech
Friedan’s Feminine Mystique
E. N. Lorenz publishes first paper on chaos theory
1964
Free speech movement begins in Berkeley
Discovery of background cosmic radiation by Penzias and
Wilson supports big-bang theory
Quarks postulated by Gell-Mann and Zweig
Bellah’s Religious Evolution
Barthes’s Essais Critiques
Autobiography of Malcolm X
511 

1965
Escalation of U.S. war in Vietnam
Cox’s The Secular City
Heidegger’s final interview in Der Spiegel
1966
Altizer and Hamilton’s Radical Theology and the Death of
God
Commoner’s Science and Survival
Lacan’s Écrits
Bell’s theorem of nonlocality
1967
Laing’s Politics of Experience
Derrida’s L’Écriture et la Différence
White’s Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis
1968
Habermas’s Knowledge and Human Interests
Lakatos’s Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific
Research Programmes
Von Bertalanffy’s General Systems Theory
Castaneda’s The Teachings of Don Juan
Brand’s The Whole Earth Catalog
Ehrlich’s The Population Bomb
1968-70
Student rebellions, antiwar movement, counterculture at
height
1969
Landing of astronauts on the Moon
Lovelock proposes Gaia hypothesis
Roszak’s The Making of a Counter Culture
Millett’s Sexual Politics
512 

Abbey’s Desert Solitaire
Perls’s Gestalt Therapy Verbatim
Kristeva’s Semiotikè
Ricouer’s The Conflict of Interpretations
1970
First Earth Day
Bellah’s Beyond Belief
1971
Gutiérrez’s Theology of Liberation
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective’s Our Bodies,
Ourselves
Pribram’s Languages of the Brain
Thompson’s At the Edge of History
1972
Bateson’s Steps to an Ecology of Mind
Meadows’s The Limits to Growth
1973
Schumacher’s Small Is Beautiful
Geertz’s Interpretation of Cultures
Daly’s Beyond God the Father
Naess’s The Shallow and the Deep Ecology Movements
1974
Ruether’s Religion and Sexism
Gimbutas’s The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe
1975
Grof’s Realms of the Human Unconscious
Hillman’s Re-Visioning Psychology
Capra’s Tao of Physics
Wilson’s Sociobiology
Singer’s Animal Liberation
513 

Feyerabend’s Against Method
1978
Goodman’s Ways of Worldmaking
Chodorow’s The Reproduction of Mothering
1979
Rorty’s Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
1980
Emergence of personal computers
Development of biotechnology
Bohm’s Wholeness and the Implicate Order
Prigogine’s From Being to Becoming
Merchant’s The Death of Nature
1981
Sheldrake’s A New Science of Life
1982
Gilligan’s In a Different Voice
Aspect experiment confirms Bell’s theorem
Schell’s The Fate of the Earth
1983
Discovery of Wand Z subatomic particles
1984
Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition
1985
Keller’s Reflections on Gender and Science
Gorbachev initiates perestroika in Soviet Union
1985-90
Rapid rise of public awareness of planetary ecological crisis
1989-90
End of Cold War, collapse of Communism in Eastern
Europe
514 

Notes
Introduction
Because the issue of gender is especially significant today, and because it directly affects the
language of the present narrative, an introductory comment is in order. In a historical account such
as this, the distinction between the author’s view and the various views he or she is describing can
sometimes be obscured, so that a prior note of clarification can be valuable. Like many others, I do
not consider it justifiable for a writer today to use the word “man” or “mankind,” or the traditional
masculine generic pronouns “he” and “his,” when straightforwardly referring to the human species or
the generic human individual (as in “the destiny of man” or “man’s relationship to his environment”
or similar expressions). I recognize that many responsible writers and scholars—mainly men, but
some women as well—continue to employ such terms in this way, and I appreciate the problem of
changing deeply ingrained habits, but in the long run I do not believe that such usage can be
successfully defended for what boils down largely to reasons of style (brevity, elegance, rhetorical
vigor, tradition). The motive, worthy in itself, is insufficient to justify the implied exclusion of the
female half of the human species.
Such usage, however, is appropriate—and, indeed, necessary for semantic precision and historical
accuracy—when the task is specifically that of articulating the mode of thinking, the world view, and
the image of the human expressed by most of the principal figures of Western thought from the time
of the Greeks until very recently. For most of its existence, the Western intellectual tradition was an
unequivocally patrilineal tradition. With a uniform consistency that we today can scarcely appreciate,
that tradition was formed and canonized almost exclusively by men writing for other men, with the
result that an androcentric perspective was implicitly assumed to be the “natural” one. Perhaps not
coincidentally, it has been characteristic of all the major languages within which the Western
intellectual tradition developed, both ancient and modern, to denote the human species and the
generic human being with words that are masculine in gender and, to varying degrees, in
implication (e.g., Greek anthrōpos, Latin homo, Italian l’uomo, French l’homme, Spanish el hombre,
Russian chelovek, German der Mensch, English man). In addition, generalizations about human
experience were regularly made using words that in other contexts explicitly denoted members of
the male sex alone (e.g., Greek anēr, andres; English man, men). Many complexities are involved in
analyzing these tendencies: each language has its own grammatical conventions for gender, and its
own semantic peculiarities, nuances, and overtones; different words in different contexts suggest
different degrees and forms of inclusiveness or bias; and all of these variables can differ from one
writer to another and from one era to another. But running through all these complexities is evident a
fundamental masculine linguistic bias that has been embedded in and intrinsic to virtually the entire
progression of world views discussed in this book. That bias cannot be excised without distorting the
essential meaning and structure of those cultural perspectives. The bias does not represent merely an
isolated linguistic peculiarity; rather, it is the linguistic manifestation of a deep-seated and systemic, if
generally unconscious, masculine predisposition in the character of the Western mind.
When major thinkers and writers of the past used the word “man” or other masculine generics to
indicate the human species—as, for example, in The Descent of Man (Darwin, 1871), or De hominis
dignitate oratio (“Oration on the Dignity of Man,” Pico della Mirandola, 1486), or Das Seelenproblem
des modernen Menschen (“The Spiritual Problem of Modern Man,” Jung, 1928)—the meaning of the
term was pervaded by a fundamental ambiguity. It is usually clear that a writer who employed such
515 

an expression in this kind of context intended to personify the entire human species, not only
members of the male sex. Yet it is also evident from the larger framework of understanding within
which the word appears that such a term was generally intended to denote and connote a decisively
masculine contour in what the writer understood to be the essential nature of the human being and
the human enterprise. This shifting but persistent ambiguity of diction—both gender-inclusive and
masculine-oriented—must be accurately conveyed if one is to understand the distinctive character of
Western cultural and intellectual history. The implicit masculine meaning of such terms was not
accidental, even if it was largely unconscious. If the present narrative were to attempt to convey the
mainstream traditional Western image of the human enterprise by systematically and unvaryingly
using gender-neutral expressions such as “humankind,” “humanity,” “people,” “persons,” “women and
men,” and “the human being” (along with “she or he” and “his or her”), instead of what would actually
have been used—man, anthropos, andres, homines, der Mensch, etc.—the result would be roughly
comparable to the work of a medieval historian who, when writing about the ancient Greek view of
the divine, conscientiously substituted the word “God” every time the Greeks would have said “the
gods,” thereby correcting a usage that to medieval ears would have seemed both wrong and
offensive.
My aim in this historical narrative has been to recount the evolution of the Western world view as
it was articulated within the mainstream Western intellectual tradition, and I have attempted to do so
as far as possible from the unfolding point of view of the tradition itself. By the careful choice and
variation of specific words and expressions within the continuum of the narrative, using the idioms of
only one language, modern English, I have tried to capture the spirit of each major perspective that
emerged from this tradition. For the sake of historical fidelity, therefore, this narrative employs where
appropriate certain English terms and expressions, such as “man,” “mankind,” “modern man,” “man
and God,” “man’s place in the cosmos,” “man’s emergence from nature,” and the like, when these
would reflect the spirit and characteristic style of discourse of the individual or era under discussion.
To avoid such locutions in this context would bowdlerize the history of the Western mind and
misrepresent its fundamental character, making much of that history unintelligible.
The issue of gender ideology, and more deeply the issue of the archetypal dialectic between
masculine and feminine, is essential, not peripheral, to understanding the character of a cultural
world view, and language provides a vivid reflection of those underlying dynamics. In the
retrospective analysis that follows the narrative, I will address this critical subject more fully, and
suggest a new conceptual framework for approaching it.
Part I. The Greek World View
1. John H. Finley, Four Stages of Greek Thought (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1966), 95-96.
Closely related to this discussion about gods and Ideas is a valuable point originally made by the
German scholar Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, and recounted by W. K. C. Guthrie: “. . . theos, the Greek
word which we have in mind when we speak of Plato’s god, has primarily a predicative force. That is
to say, the Greeks did not, as Christians or Jews do, first assert the existence of God and then proceed
to enumerate his attributes, saying ‘God is good,’ ‘God is love’ and so forth. Rather they were so
impressed or awed by the things in life or nature remarkable either for joy or fear that they said ‘this
is a god’ or ‘that is a god.’ The Christian says ‘God is love,’ the Greek ‘Love is theos,’ or ‘a god.’ As
another writer has explained it: ‘By saying that love, or victory, is god, or, to be more accurate, a god,
was meant first and foremost that it is more than human, not subject to death, everlasting. . . . Any
power, any force we see at work in the world, which is not born with us and will continue after we
are gone could thus be called a god, and most of them were’ [Georges M. A. Grube, Plato’s Thought
516 

(Boston: Beacon Press, 1958), 150].
“In this state of mind, and with this sensitiveness to the superhuman character of many things
which happen to us, and which give us, it may be, sudden stabs of joy or pain which we do not
understand, a Greek poet could write lines like: ‘Recognition between friends is theos.’ It is a state of
mind which obviously has no small bearing on the much-discussed question of monotheism or
polytheism in Plato, if indeed it does not rob the question of meaning altogether” (W. K. C. Guthrie,
The Greek Philosophers: From Thales to Aristotle [New York: Harper Torchbook, 1960], 10-11).
2. By the time of Homer, an essential transformation in the Greek mythological sensibility had already
taken place, with the more animistic, mystical, and nature-oriented matrifocal mythology—
immanent, all-permeating, organic, nonheroic—having been subordinated to the Olympian
patriarchal mythology, the character of which was more objectified, transcendent, articulated, heroic
and autonomy-supporting. See, for example, Jane Ellen Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922), and Charlene Spretnak, Lost Goddesses of
Early Greece (Boston: Beacon Press, 1984). Yet as Joseph Campbell pointed out in The Masks of God:
Occidental Mythology (New York: Viking, 1964), suggestive signs of the Greeks’ dual mythological
heritage can be seen even within the Homeric canon itself, in the striking shift from the world of the
Iliad to that of the Odyssey.
The Iliad is an historical epic, and sings of the great patriarchal themes: of the wrath of Achilles, of
the courage, pride, and excellence of noble warriors, of manly virtue, strength, and warcraft. It is
staged in the day-world of public activity, where heroic men strive on the battlefield of life. Yet that
life, though glorious, is short, and death tragically final, beyond which is nothing of value. The
greatness of the Iliad rests especially on its epic rendering of that tragic tension. By contrast, the
Odyssey, rather than a commemoration of a collective historical event, is an epic of an individual
journey with a distinctly imaginal character; it deals throughout with magical and fantastical
phenomena, is informed by a different sense of death, and is more concerned with the feminine.
Odysseus, the wisest of the Greek heroes at Troy, undergoes a transformative series of adventures and
trials—encountering a succession of magical women and goddesses, entering the underworld, being
initiated into dark mysteries, experiencing several sequences of death and rebirth—and is thereby
finally enabled to return home in triumph, twice-born, to reunite with Penelope, the beloved
feminine. In this reading, the shift from the Iliad to the Odyssey reflects a continuing dialectic in the
Greek cultural psyche between its patriarchal and matriarchal roots, between the Olympian public
religion and the ancient mysteries. (See Campbell, The Masks of God: Occidental Mythology, 157–
176.)
The Odyssey still evidences the Iliad’s appreciation of the individual and the heroic, rooted in that
ancient Indo-European admiration for individual prowess in war that would so profoundly influence
the character and history of the West; but the heroism has taken on a decisively new and more
complicated form. An important later expression of this same dialectic can be found in Plato’s
Symposium, where it is the wise woman Diotima who plays the pivotal role in Socrates’s initiation into
the transcendent knowledge of the Beautiful. As with Homer’s Odysseus, the element of individual
heroism is clearly present in Plato’s Socrates, but in yet a further metamorphosis—more intellectual,
spiritual, inward, self-conquering.
3. Both of Thales’s successors in Miletus, Anaximander and Anaximenes (both fl. sixth century B.C.),
made contributions of importance for later Western thought. Anaximander proposed that the primary
substance or essential nature (arche) of the cosmos was an infinite and undifferentiated substance he
called the apeiron (the “boundless”). Within the apeiron arose the opposites of hot and cold, whose
struggle in turn produced the various phenomena of the world. Anaximander thereby introduced the
517 

notion, essential for later philosophy and science, of going beyond perceptible phenomena (such as
water) to a more fundamental, nonperceptible substance whose nature was more primitive and
indefinite than the familiar substances of the visible world. Anaximander also postulated a theory of
evolution in which life originated in the sea, and appears to have been the first person to attempt to
draw a map of the entire inhabited Earth.
Anaximander’s successor, Anaximenes, in turn posited air as the primary substance, and attempted
to demonstrate the manner in which that single substance could change itself into other forms of
matter through the processes of rarefaction and condensation. Anaximenes’s proposal that a specific
element, air, rather than an undifferentiated substance like the apeiron, was the origin of things
could be viewed as a less sophisticated theory than Anaximander’s—a step back toward Thales’s
water. But by pursuing his analysis of how one primary element underwent change into other types
of matter while still retaining its essential nature, Anaximenes introduced the crucial idea that a basic
essence could remain itself while undergoing many transformations. Thus the notion of arche, which
had previously signified the beginning or originating cause of things, now took on the additional
significance of “principle“—something that eternally maintains its own nature while transmuting
itself into the many transient and changing phenomena of the visible world. Subsequent philosophical
and scientific developments concerning first principles, the dependence of phenomena on a
continuing underlying primary reality, and the various laws of conservation in physics all owe
something to Anaximander’s and Anaximenes’s rudimentary conceptions. Both men also made pivotal
contributions to early Greek astronomy.
4. Of this important fragment from Xenophanes, W. K. C. Guthrie states: “The emphasis on personal
search, and on the need for time, marks this as the first statement in extant Greek literature of the
idea of progress in the arts and sciences, a progress dependent on human effort and not—or at least
not primarily—on divine revelation” (A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 1, The Earlier Presocratics
and the Pythagoreans [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962], 399–400).
5. The evolution of the Greek view of human history and of the human relation to the divine can be
discerned in the shifting nature and status of the mythological Prometheus. Hesiod’s earlier depiction
of Prometheus as the trickster who stole fire from Olympus for mankind against Zeus’s wishes was
greatly expanded by Aeschylus in Prometheus Bound, whose titanic protagonist gave mankind all the
arts of civilization and thereby brought it from a state of primitive savagery to intellectual mastery
and dominion over nature. Hesiod’s seriocomic figure became for Aeschylus a tragic hero of
universal stature; and while Hesiod had viewed human history as an inevitable regress from an
aboriginal golden age, Aeschylus’s Prometheus celebrated mankind’s progress to civilization.
Nevertheless, in contrast with later conceptions of the same myth, Aeschylus’s version regarded the
divine Prometheus, not man, as the source of human progress, thus tacitly acknowledging a divine
priority in the scheme of things. While it is difficult to ascertain Aeschylus’s precise view of the
myth’s ontological significance, it would seem that he conceived of Prometheus and man in essentially
mythopoeic terms as a symbolic unity.
For fifth-century Greeks after Aeschylus, however, the figure of Prometheus became merely a
straightforward allegorical representation of man’s own intelligence and restless striving. In a
fragment from a comedy called The Sophists, Prometheus is simply equated with the human mind; in
another work, Prometheus is used as a metaphor for “experience” to explain humanity’s progress to
civilization. This demythologizing of Prometheus to the status of allegory is also evident in the Sophist
Protagoras’s account of the myth in Plato’s Protagoras (see page 14 above). As the Greek mind
evolved from archaic poetry to humanist philosophy, with classical tragedy marking a midpoint, the
Greek view of history moved from regress to progress, with the source of human achievement
518 

moving from the divine to man. See E. R. Dodds, “Progress in Classical Antiquity,” in Dictionary of the
History of Ideas, edited by Philip P. Weiner (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973) 3: 623–626.
6. Socrates’s combination of intellectual humility with faith in an intelligible order is nicely suggested
in R. Hackforth’s phrase “an ideal of knowledge unattained” (quoted in Guthrie, The Greek
Philosophers, 75).
7. For the Platonic linking of the irrational and physical with the female sex, and of the rational and
spiritual with the male sex, and also for the important association of Platonic epistemology with Greek
homoeroticism, see Evelyn Fox Keller, “Love and Sex in Plato’s Epistemology,” in Reflections on Gender
and Science (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), 21–32. See also the valuable discussion of
Plato’s homoeroticism by Gregory Vlastos in his essay “The Individual as an Object of Love in Plato,” in
Platonic Studies (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973), 3–42. Vlastos points out, however, that
Plato’s climactic argument in the Symposium (206-212) shifts suddenly from a homosexual paradigm
to a procreative heterosexual one when Diotima describes the highest fulfillment of Eros as the
philosopher’s conjugal union with the Idea of Beauty, which brings forth the birth of wisdom. In the
same essay, Vlastos offers an illuminating analysis of how Plato’s exaltation of the universal Idea of
Beauty in the context of personal relations tends to depreciate the concrete individual beloved person
as a valuing subject, potentially worthy of love for his or her own sake—just as, in the context of
political theory, Plato’s exaltation of the ideal republic tends to depreciate individual citizens as ends
in themselves, and in so doing deprives them of their civil liberty.
8. “The tradition that detailed astronomical observations supply the principal clues for cosmological
thought is, in its essentials, native to Western civilization. It seems to be one of the most significant and
characteristic novelties that we inherit from the civilization of ancient Greece” (Thomas S. Kuhn, The
Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy and the Development of Western Thought [Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1957], 26).
9. Cited in Sir Thomas L. Heath, Aristarchus of Samos: The Ancient Copernicus (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1913), 140. See also Plato’s Laws, VII, 821–822.
10. Finley, Four Stages of Greek Thought, 2. Owen Barfield, speaking of Coleridge’s lectures on the
history of philosophy, described the Greek phenomenon in similar terms: “The birth of self-
consciousness, the birth of individuality . . . was taking place with the dawn of Greek civilization. . . .
The whole thing was like an awakening. When you first awaken in the morning you are very much
aware of the world around you in a way that you are not when you get used to it during the course of
the day” (Owen Barfield, “Coleridge’s Philosophical Lectures,” Towards 3, 2 [1989]: 29).
Part II. The Transformation of the Classical Era
1. It has been suggested on the basis of passages in the Laws and the Epinomis that Plato himself may
have implicitly supported the hypothesis of a moving Earth as the way to save the appearances
mathematically and reveal the single, uniform planetary orbits, and that in the Timaeus (40b–d) he
may have described a heliocentric system. See R. Catesby Taliaferro, Appendix C to his translation of
Ptolemy’s Almagest, in Great Books of the Western World, vol. 16 (Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica,
1952), 477–478.
2. The preeminent Hellenistic supreme deity was the Greco-Egyptian Sarapis, a synthesis of Osiris,
519 

Zeus, Dionysus, Pluto, Asclepius, Marduk, Helios, and Yahweh. Established as the ruling city-god of
Alexandria by Ptolemy I (reigned 323–285 B.C.), and eventually worshiped throughout the
Mediterranean world, Sarapis illustrates the Hellenistic tendency of theological syncretism and
henotheism (the worship of one deity without denying the existence of others).
3. Recent scholarship has underscored the abiding vigor of the pagan tradition in the late classical
era (see in particular Robin Lane Fox, Pagans and Christians [New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987]), in
contrast with earlier views which tended to suggest the inevitability of the Christian triumph. For vast
numbers of pagans, the ancient gods and goddesses continued to hold meaning, and pagan
ceremonies and rituals were attended to with energetic piety. Considered as a whole, the Hellenistic
period was an era of intense and multiform religiosity of which Christianity was one characteristic
expression. The Christian faith spread gradually among the urban populations in the form of small
churches led by bishops and fortified by strict ethical and doctrinal norms, yet by the early fourth
century it had not penetrated most of the rural areas, and for many pagan intellectuals the Christian
arguments still seemed implausible and eccentric. It was the conversion of Constantine (c. 312 A.D.)
that marked the great shift in Christianity’s fortunes, yet even then its ascendance was significantly
challenged in the following generation by the emperor Julian’s brief but spirited attempt to restore
pagan culture (361–363).
4. It has also been said that Greco-Roman culture was engrafted onto the Judaeo-Christian religion,
or that both were engrafted onto the barbarian Germanic peoples, with what is considered the West’s
fundamental or primary inheritance changing in each instance. All three perspectives have
arguments in their favor, and the truth, like the West itself, can perhaps best be understood as their
complex synthesis.
Part III. The Christian World View
1. “Yahweh” (originally, “YHWH”) has been variously translated: e.g., “I Am Who Am”; “He Brings
Into Existence Whatever Exists”; and “I Am / Shall Be Who I Am / Shall Be,” wherein the complex
ambiguity between present and future tense is unresolved. The meaning of the word remains
controversial.
2. Whether the historical Jesus explicitly claimed to be the Messiah as such, or the prophesied “Son of
man,” remains unclear. Whatever his private self-understanding, it appears unlikely that he publicly
claimed to be the Son of God. A similar ambiguity exists as to whether Jesus intended to initiate a new
religion or rather a radical eschatological reformation of Judaism. See Raymond E. Brown, “ ‘Who Do
Men Say That I Am?’—A Survey of Modern Scholarship on Gospel Christology,” in Biblical Reflections
on Crises Facing the Church (New York: Paulist Press, 1975), 20–37.
3. The other side of the Jewish-Christian paradox (that Christianity was comparatively so unsuccessful
among the very people from which it sprung) was that Christians in subsequent centuries so
pervasively distanced themselves from, deprecated, abused, and persecuted their Jewish
contemporaries, while embracing the ancient Judaic scripture and history as the indispensable
foundation of their own religion.
4. The philosophical integration of Hellenism with Judaism was initiated by Philo of Alexandria (b. c.
15–10 B.C.), who identified the Logos in Platonic terms as the Idea of Ideas, as the summation of all
520 

Ideas, and as the source of the world’s intelligibility; and in Judaic terms as God’s providential
ordering of the universe and as mediator between God and man. The Logos was thus both the agent
of creation and the agent by which God was experienced and understood by man. Philo taught that
the Ideas were God’s eternal thoughts, which he created as real beings prior to the creation of the
world. Later Christians held Philo in high regard for his views of the Logos, which he called the first-
begotten Son of God, the man of God, and the image of God. Philo appears to have been the first
person to have attempted to integrate revelation and philosophy, faith and reason—the basic impulse
of Scholasticism. Little recognized in Judaic thought, he had a marked influence on Neoplatonism and
medieval Christian theology.
5. This generalization about the Greeks’ cyclical sense of history should be balanced by the discussion
of the Greek experience and conception of progress in the subchapter on the Greek Enlightenment,
pages 25–31, and also in note 5, part 1, concerning the figure of Prometheus.
6. Augustine differed from Plotinus in positing an increased distinction between Creator and creation
as well as a more personal relation between God and the individual soul; in stressing God’s freedom
and purposefulness in the creation; in upholding the human need for grace and revelation; and
above all in embracing the doctrine of the Incarnation.
7. Enchiridion, in Augustine, Works, vol. 9, edited by M. Dods (Edinburgh: Clark, 1871–77), 180–
181.
8. Ironically, the spirit of Christian dogmatic intolerance was foreshadowed by Plato himself in such
dialogues as the Republic and the Laws. Similarly mindful of the need to protect the young from
temptation and misleading thoughts, and similarly certain of possessing knowledge of absolute truth
and goodness, Plato outlined a wide range of prohibitions and strictures for his ideal state that were
not unlike those later established by Christianity.
9. A few revelant dates and events for the transition from the classical to the medieval era: In the late
summer of 386, Augustine experienced his conversion to Christianity in Milan. In 391, the Sarapeum,
the Alexandrian temple to the Hellenistic supreme deity Sarapis, was destroyed by the patriarch
Theophilus and his followers, marking the triumph of Christianity over paganism in Egypt and
throughout the empire. In 415, in the same decade in which the Visigoths overran Rome and
Augustine was writing The City of God, a Christian mob in Alexandria murdered Hypatia—leader of
the Neoplatonic school of philosophy in Alexandria, daughter of the last known member of the
Museum, and the personal symbol of pagan learning. With her death, many scholars left Alexandria,
marking the beginning of that city’s cultural decline. In 485, Proclus, the greatest systematic
expositor of late classical Neoplatonism and the last major Greek philosopher of antiquity, died in
Athens. In 529, the Christian emperor Justinian closed the Platonic Academy in Athens, the last
physical establishment of pagan learning. That year has often been used as a convenient date for the
end of the classical period and the beginning of the Middle Ages, for also in 529 Benedict of Nursia,
the father of Christian monasticism in the West, founded the first Benedictine monastery at Monte
Cassino in Italy (the same monastery where Thomas Aquinas would be brought as a child almost
precisely seven hundred years later).
10. An influential statement of this position was that of the Alexandrian Christian Neoplatonist Origen
(c. 185–c. 254), for whom hell could not be absolute because God in his infinite goodness could
never finally abandon any of his creatures. The experience of damnation was based on an
521 

individual’s self-imposed condemnation, a deliberate turning away from God that effectively cut off
the individual soul from God’s love; hell thus consisted in the complete absence of God. But for
Origen this experience of alienation was ultimately a temporary condition in a larger educational
process through which every soul would be reunited with God, whose love was all-conquering. In
respect of humanity’s inherent freedom, God’s redemptive process might necessarily be prolonged,
but until universal redemption had occurred Christ’s mission remained unfulfilled. Similarly, Origen
viewed the negative events of human existence not as divine retribution but as instruments of
spiritual formation. Popular piety might perceive them as punitive acts of a vengeful God, but such
views were based on a distorted understanding of God’s activity, which was ultimately informed by
unlimited benevolence. As with hell, heaven also was not necessarily absolute, for in their continuing
free will the redeemed souls could, at the conclusion of the redemptive process, initiate once again
the entire drama. Origen’s theology rested throughout on the simultaneous affirmation of God’s
goodness and the soul’s freedom, with the soul’s ascent to divinity marked by a hierarchy of stages
culminating in mystical union with the Logos: the restoration of the soul from matter to spirit, from
image to reality.
Although Origen has been regarded by many as the greatest teacher of the early Church after the
apostles, his orthodoxy has been sharply questioned by others on various matters, including his
doctrines on universal salvation, the preexistence of the individual soul, the Neoplatonic devaluation
of the Son as a hypostatic step down from the One, his spiritualizing of the resurrection of the body,
his allegorical transformation of salvational history into a timeless archetypal process, and his
speculations on world cycles. See Henry Chadwick, Early Christian Thought and the Classical
Tradition: Studies in Justin, Clement and Origen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966).
11. Scholars have often noted the many striking thematic parallels between the biblical Book of Job
(c. 600–300 B.C.) and Aeschylus’s approximately contemporaneous tragedy Prometheus Bound.
Comparable historical and literary parallels have been recognized between the earlier Mosaic books
of the Bible and the Homeric epics.
12. In his desire to establish a world church and thus to make the Christian gospel intelligible to those
from different cultural backgrounds, Paul modulated his teachings accordingly, speaking “as a Jew to
the Jews,” “as a Greek to the Greeks.” To the church community in Rome, with its strong Jewish
influence, he emphasized the doctrine of justification, but in letters to communities with a more
Hellenistic background, he described salvation in terms reminiscent of the Greek mystery religions—
the new man, sonship with God, the process of divine transformation, and so forth.
13. The papacy of Gregory the Great (590–604) established many of the most characteristic features
of medieval Western Christendom. Born in Rome and deeply influenced by the teachings of
Augustine, Gregory centralized and reformed the papal administration, elevated the status of priests,
expanded the Church’s care for the poor and distressed, and pressed for the pope’s recognition as
ecumenical leader of Christendom over the claims of the Byzantine patriarch. He also helped
establish the papacy’s temporal authority by consolidating what would become the Papal States in
Italy and, more generally, by his efforts to influence and compel secular authorities through the
exercise of ecclesiastical authority. His ideal was to build a universal Christian society pervaded by
charity and service to others. It was Gregory who especially recognized the importance of the
migrating barbarians for the future of Christianity in the West, and he vigorously pursued missionary
activities in Europe (including the historically significant mission to England). Although at times he
recommended a sensitive respect for indigenous views and practices, as in England, on other
occasions he advocated the use of force in his conversion efforts. A highly popular pope and widely
522 

venerated in his own lifetime, Gregory sought to make the Christian faith more comprehensible to the
masses of uneducated Europeans by reforming the Mass and by popularizing miracles and the
doctrine of purgatory. He encouraged the growth of monasticism, and established rules for the lives
of the clergy. Gregorian chant, the liturgical music of the Catholic Church, was named after him,
having been codified during his reign.
14. The separation between the Eastern and Western churches began in the fifth century, and a
formal schism was declared in 1054. Whereas the Roman Catholic Church insisted on Roman and
papal primacy (on the basis of its interpretation of Christ’s words to Peter in the Gospel according to
Matthew, 16:18), Eastern Orthodox Christianity remained more of an ecumenical association of
churches bound together by the communion of faith, with the laity playing a greater role in religious
affairs. On the other hand, instead of the state-church dialectic of the West (created in large part by
the barbarian invasions and the consequent political and cultural break with the old Western Roman
Empire), the Eastern church remained closely associated with the continuing political system of the
Byzantine Empire. The patriarch of Constantinople was often subordinate to the Eastern emperor, who
regularly exercised his authority in ecclesiastical matters.
In general, the sense of the need for authoritatively defined and meticulously detailed doctrinal
orthodoxy was less pronounced in the East than in the West, and the ecumenical council, rather than
the pope, was the highest authority in doctrinal matters. Christian truth was viewed as a living reality
experienced within the Church, rather than, as in the West, a fully articulated dogmatic system that
attempts to contain that truth according to specific criteria of justification. Whereas the dominant
influence in the Latin West was Augustinian, Eastern theology was rooted in the Greek fathers. Its
doctrinal tendency was more mystical, placing emphasis not on human beings’ individual justification
by the Church (as in the West), but on their communal divinization within the Church, as well as on
their individual divinization through contemplative asceticism. The juridical relation between God
and man characteristic of Western Christianity was absent in the East, where the sovereign themes
were the incarnation of God, the deification of humanity, and the divine transfiguration of the
cosmos. Generally speaking, Eastern Christianity remained closer to the Johannine unitive mystical
impulse in the Christian faith, while the West pursued a more dualistic Augustinian direction.
15. The reconceiving of the Kingdom of Heaven in terms of the Church reflected a fundamental self-
transformation of Christian belief which began in the first generations of the Christian religion in
response to the delay in Christ’s Second Coming. Early Christians had expected an imminent Second
Coming, with the arrival of the Kingdom of Heaven to be preceded by a time of rebelliousness and
evil, when false prophets and messiahs would arise and lead many astray with signs and wonders;
then would occur a global apocalypse, followed by a dramatic opening of the heavens revealing God
in his full glory, with Christ descending from the heavens to embrace and liberate the faithful.
Already in the New Testament, and particularly in the Gospel according to John, there appeared to be
a progressive awareness of the Second Coming’s delay—though it was still considered near—and an
apparent compensation for that delay expressed through an increasingly exalted interpretation of
Jesus’s life and death, the coming of the Spirit, and the significance of the young Church community.
Jesus’s presence in history was seen as having already inaugurated the salvational transformation. In
Christ’s resurrection was mankind’s resurrection, its new life. Through the presence of his Spirit,
Christ had risen into the life of the new community of the faithful, his mystical body, the living and
growing Church. Thus the delay of the Parousia had been answered for the present: its arrival had
been relocated to a more distant future, and Christ’s spiritual power had been already claimed and
experienced in the continuing life of the Church faithful.
Yet, contrary to expectation, the world continued to endure, and thus the Church, initially
523 

conceived as having a brief transitional existence prior to the end time, was encouraged to take on a
more substantial role, with a corresponding change in its self-interpretation: rather than the small
body of the elect who would be present and saved in the coming apocalypse, the Church now
recognized itself as an ongoing, expanding sacramental institution—baptizing, teaching, disciplining,
saving. From such a foundation the Church grew, increasingly moving from its earlier, flexible form
of communities of the faithful to a complex institution with highly defined structures of hierarchical
power and doctrinal tradition, and with an essential distinction drawn between the ecclesiastical elite
and the lay congregation over which it presided.
The final outcome of this process emerged in the last centuries of the classical era. With
Constantine’s conversion, and with the subsequent welding of the Roman state to the Christian
religion, a new mood began to appear in the Church: The eschatological expectations of the early
Christian community were now submerged by the new sense of a strong earthly Church, whose
present triumph overshadowed the demand for and likelihood of an apocalyptic shift. Without
persecutions, the Christian community’s psychological need for an immediate apocalypse was less
intense, and with Christianity now the favored imperial religion, Rome’s previous role as the
preapocalyptic Antichrist was no longer appropriate.
Concurrently, under the influence of Neoplatonic and Hellenic allegorical thought, Origen and
Augustine reformulated the Kingdom of Heaven in terms that were less literal and objective, and
instead more spiritual and subjective. For Origen, the genuine religious quest was to experience the
Kingdom of Heaven in one’s own soul—a metaphysical rather than a historical transformation.
Augustine’s view was similarly Neoplatonic, but with a more decisively polarized attitude concerning
the relationship between this world and the Church. Living during the death throes of classical
civilization, Augustine viewed the present world as a realm inherently susceptible to evil, just as did
those who had earlier awaited the apocalypse; and he too saw humanity juridically divided between
the elect and the damned. Yet the salvational solution he recognized was not that of an apocalyptic
renovation of this world, but a sacramental renovation of the soul through the Church. The secular
world was not destined for salvation; that condition was a spiritual one only and was already available
through the Church.
Thus the Christian anticipation of an imminent end time was substantially weakened and began to
disappear as a dominant motivating force in the religion. The institutional Church was thereby
solidified and reconceived as the enduring historical representative of the Kingdom of God on earth.
Between the Resurrection and the Second Coming was the reign of the Church, and its sacraments
were already the means by which Christians began their own “resurrection” and entrance into the
heavenly kingdom. Concern with the individual Christian’s relation to God and interior spiritual
condition replaced the earlier stress on the collective, the universal and the objectively historical. The
collective and historical import of early Christian eschatology was now subsumed by the Church,
which enacted its historical imperative by its public responsibility in preserving and propagating the
faith, and by providing the community of believers with the grace-giving sacraments. For the
established forms of Christianity from Augustine’s time on, eschatology was understood symbolically,
with its literal historical expectation seen as a primitive mythological misunderstanding of the biblical
revelation, without genuine relevance to humanity’s present spiritual condition.
The original eschatological impulse, however, never entirely disappeared. On the one hand, it lived
on as an undercurrent in which history was still implicitly seen as moving teleologically toward a
spiritual climax, but with Christ’s return at the end time, though inevitable, postponed to the
indefinite future. On the other hand, fresh expectations of an imminent apocalypse and Second
Coming periodically emerged in specific individuals and communities, accompanied by a marked
intensification of religious fervor, and based on new interpretations of the biblical prophecies or on
524 

new recognitions of the evil and chaotic character of the contemporary age. But such expectations
were usually fostered on the fringes of the established Church, especially by heretical sects suffering
persecutions. The Church discouraged literal interpretations of eschatology and recommended that
faith be placed in its sacraments, by which such anxieties could be overcome. To calculate the end
time was futile, it taught, since for God a thousand years might equal a day, or vice versa.
Finally, with the rise of modern humanism and the modern mind’s increased awareness of history
and evolution, Christian conceptions of the millennial transformation took on a more progressive and
immanent quality, with humanity’s moral, intellectual, and spiritual development culminating in some
form of human or cosmic divinization—a conceptual shift visible from the time of Erasmus and
Francis Bacon, and achieving more elaborate formulation in later thinkers such as Hegel and Teilhard
de Chardin (and, in a different spirit, in Nietzsche). In connection with some ambiguous symbolism
contained in several biblical prophecies, especially in the Book of Revelation, and in response to
various historical developments (e.g., the European discovery and settling of America, the papal
declaration of the dogma of the Assumption, the nuclear and ecological threats of planetary
catastrophe), it has frequently been suggested that the Second Coming would occur at the end of the
two-thousand-year Christian aeon. (See, for example, Carl G. Jung’s extraordinary discussion in
“Answer to Job,” in Collected Works of Carl Gustav Jung, vol. 11, translated by R. F. C. Hull, edited by
H. Read et al. [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969].)
16. As the Mother of the Logos, Mary took on attributes of the Judaic biblical figure of Sophia, or
Wisdom—described in Proverbs and Ecclesiasticus as God’s eternal creation, a celestial feminine
being who personified divine wisdom and mediated humanity’s knowledge of God. In Roman
Catholic theology, Mary was explicitly identified with Sophia. The relationship of the Old Testament
Sophia to the New Testament Logos, both of which represented the divine creative and revelatory
wisdom, was thus obliquely reflected in the relationship of Mary to Christ. The figure of the Virgin
Mother also absorbed some of the original meaning and function of the Holy Spirit—as principle of
divine presence in the Church, as comforter, as mediator of wisdom and spiritual birth, and as
instrument of Christ’s entrance into the world.
More generally, Catholicism’s partial transformation of God into a sheltering and forgiving
maternal-like figure prompted Erich Fromm to comment that “Catholicism signified the disguised
return to the religion of the Great Mother who had been defeated by Yahweh” (The Dogma of Christ
and Other Essays on Religion, Psychology, and Culture [New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963],
90-91). In the mystical literature of Christian spirituality (e.g., Clement of Alexandria, John of the
Cross), explicitly maternal qualities, such as nourishing breasts, were ascribed to God and Christ. For a
discussion of both the presence and the suppression of the feminine in Christian theology and
worship, see Joan Chamberlain Engelsman, The Feminine Dimension of the Divine (Wilmette, Ill.:
Chiron, 1987).
17. Despite the exaltation of the feminine suggested by the Mother Church and Virgin Mary themes,
a patriarchal authoritarianism, often theologically justified by reference to the Genesis account of
Eve’s role in the Fall, continued to express itself through the Church’s systematic depreciation of
women, of women’s spirituality and capacity for religious authority, and (in accord with the sin of Eve
and the idealization of the Virgin Mary) of human sexuality.
In both the organization and the self-image of the Church, two polar aspects were expressed
which were gender-related. Considered as the ecclesiastical hierarchy, the Church took on the role
of Yahweh in the Old Testament, the masculine divine authority of God, with corresponding traits of
juridical sovereignty, dogmatic certainty, and paternal guardianship and care. By contrast, considered
as the body of the faithful, the Church took on the role of Israel in the Old Testament, the feminine
525 

beloved of God (later incarnate in the Virgin Mary), with the corresponding Christian inculcation of
such “feminine” virtues as compassion, purity, humility, and obedience. The pope, bishops, and priests
represented the divine authority on earth, while the laity represented that which needed to be
instructed, justified, and saved. This same polarity was expressed as that of the “head” of the Church
and the “body” of the Church. Theologically, the polarity was overcome in the doctrinal
understanding of Christ as fulfillment and synthesis of both sides of the Church (just as Christ was
seen as fruit of the marriage between Yahweh and Israel).
18. The Church sustained the ancient ordering of events according to archetypal cycles through its
liturgical calendar, which provided a ritual living through of the Christian mystery in the context of
nature’s annual cycle: Christ’s Advent in the darkness of winter, his birth at Christmas (coincident
with the winter solstice and the birth of the Sun), the preparatory period of purification during Lent
in the late winter in anticipation of the Last Supper on Holy Thursday, the Crucifixion on Good Friday,
and finally the Resurrection on Easter Sunday amidst the rebirth of spring. Many antecedents for the
Christian calendar can be seen in the classical pagan mystery religions.
19. An important qualification should be made here concerning the universality of Christianity in
medieval Europe in view of the continuing vestiges of pagan myth and animism in much of the
popular culture, as well as the existence of Judaism, Gnosticism, millennialism, witchcraft, Islamic
influences, various esoteric traditions, and other minority and underground cultural forces unrelated
or resistant to Christian orthodoxy.
Part IV. The Transformation of the Medieval Era
1. Boethius (c. 480–524) was a pivotal figure between the classical and medieval eras—a Roman
statesman, one of the last Roman philosophers of antiquity, “the first Christian Scholastic,” and the last
layman in Christian philosophy for almost a thousand years. Born in Rome of an ancient aristocratic
family that had been Christian for a century, he was educated in Athens and became a consul and
minister in Roman government. Boethius’s unfulfilled goal was to translate and comment upon all the
works of Plato and Aristotle, and to forge a “restoration of their ideas into a single harmony.” His
completed works—especially those on Aristotelian logic, a few short theological treatises, and his
Platonist manifesto The Consolation of Philosophy—were to have considerable influence on medieval
thought. Falsely accused of treason by the barbarian king Theodoric, Boethius was sentenced to prison
(where he wrote the Consolation) and executed. When Boethius’s senatorial colleague Cassiodorus
later decided to retire from Roman political life to the monastery he founded, he brought with him
his Roman library and placed Boethius’s works on the reading list for the education of his monks.
Thus the scholarly ideals of the later classical era, and in particular of the educated Roman
aristocracy, were transmitted into the Christian monastic tradition. It was Boethius who first
formulated the essential Scholastic principle, “As far as possible, join faith to reason.” And it was a
passage in his commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge (a Greek introduction to Aristotelian logic) that
initiated the long medieval controversy between nominalism and realism concerning the nature of
universals.
2. Hugh of Saint-Victor (1096–1141) also helped forge the new medieval awareness of human
history as a temporal development of inherent significance. He noted, for example, the peculiar
tendency of human civilization to move over time from East to West—a fact that suggested to him the
approach of the end time, since the limit of the West had apparently already been reached at the
526 

Atlantic coast. Hugh also argued against Augustine’s interpretation of Genesis as atemporal metaphor,
instead affirming a true temporal succession of creative acts, and he upheld the value of salvational
history’s concrete actuality prior to the imposition of allegorical interpretations of that history. See M.
D. Chenu, “Theology and the New Awareness of History” in Nature, Man and Society in the Twelfth
Century: Essays on New Theological Perspectives in the Latin West, edited and translated by J. Taylor
and L. K. Little (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), 162–201.
3. The Dominican and Franciscan mendicant orders also represented a force for social revolution in
the high Middle Ages. Their commitment to poverty and humility was both a return to the apostolic
life of the primitive church and a break from the feudal system and its propertied ecclesiastical
hierarchy. In the latter respect, the evangelical friars were similar to the new urban class of
merchants and artisans who had also defected from the feudal economy, and it was especially from
this class that the orders would draw their numbers. A similar parallel existed in the intellectual
revolution that emerged from the Dominican and Franciscan theologians. Just as the evangelical
movements found new sources of inspiration in the literal meaning of Scripture against the
allegorizing glosses favored by traditional theologians, so this same tendency was reflected in the
Scholastics’ increasing philosophical respect for the concrete empirical world against the
otherworldly idealism of the Augustinian-Platonist tradition. See Chenu, “The Evangelical
Awakening,” ibid., 239–269.
4. In a sense, Aquinas outdid Aristotle in his positive valuation of the body. Aquinas’s doctrine of the
Resurrection held that the perfect human being was a full composite of soul and body, and that with
the purification of the soul would come a reunion with and glorification of the body. Whereas for
Aristotelians the intimate soul-body relation implied the mortality of the soul, for Aquinas that same
intimacy supported the immortality of the redeemed body.
5. The polarity represented by Aquinas and Augustine (and their respective affinities for Aristotle and
Plato) may be understood in part as deriving from their individual intellectual responses to the
radically different cultural tempers of their historical periods. If Augustine’s Platonic otherworldliness
and emphasis on supersensible knowledge can be seen as a reaction to and development out of the
pagan sensualism and skeptical secularism of the later classical era, Aquinas’s Aristotelian embrace of
empiricism and materiality can be seen as a reaction to and development out of the Christian
antiworldliness and fideist anti-intellectualism of the earlier medieval era. The contrast of Augustine’s
pessimism concerning humanity and nature with Aquinas’s more optimistic views also has cultural
reflections. Living during the last years of the classical era, Augustine was confronted with the
decadence and disintegration of Roman civilization amidst the barbarian invasions. Aquinas, however,
lived when European civilization was experiencing a new era of stabilization and rapid development
during the high Middle Ages, with the forces of nature increasingly controlled by the human intellect
and with the European continent relatively free of external threats. For Augustine, the spirit of the
secular world around him must have seemed fraught with decay, suffering, and evil, with the human
capacity for positive self-determination minimal; Aquinas’s milieu was decidedly more progressive.
6. Aquinas’s rationalism was always in tension with a suprarational mysticism showing the influence
of Dionysius the Areopagite. Probably a fifth-century Syrian monk who assumed the name of Paul’s
New Testament convert at Athens, Dionysius set forth a Neoplatonic Christian mysticism that stressed
the ultimate unknowability of God: Whatever qualities the human mind attributes to God cannot be
considered ultimately valid, for if they are humanly comprehensible, they must be limited to the
finiteness of human understanding, and cannot therefore be said to comprehend the infinite nature of
527 

God. Even the concepts of “being” and “reality” cannot be attributed to God, since such concepts could
only be derived from things that God has created, and the nature of the Creator must be of a
fundamentally different character from the nature of his creation. Hence any affirmation of God’s
nature must be complemented by its negation, and both affirmation and negation are ultimately
transcended by God, who surpasses anything the human mind can conceive. These considerations
(basic to the via negativa, the tradition of negative or apophatic theology which was especially
characteristic of Eastern Christianity) perhaps throw light on the statement Aquinas made after a
mystical experience he had while celebrating Mass shortly before he died: “. . . such things have been
revealed to me that all that I have written seems to me as so much straw.”
7. According to Aristotle, any motion other than that caused by the natural tendencies of the different
elements must be caused by a constantly applied force. A stone at rest will remain at rest, or will
move directly toward the center of the Earth as befits the natural motion of all heavy objects. To
explain the difficult case of projectile motion, however, in which a thrown stone continues to move
long after it has left the thrower’s hand without any visible constantly applied push, Aristotle
suggested that the air disturbed by the stone’s movement would continue to push the stone after it left
the hand. Later Aristotelians criticized this theory for its various weaknesses, but it was Buridan in the
fourteenth century who presented a coherent solution: When a projectile is thrown, it is impressed
with a motive force, an impetus proportional to its speed and mass, which continues to propel the
projectile after it has left its original projector. In addition, Buridan adumbrated the idea that a falling
body’s weight impresses equal increments of impetus in equal intervals of time.
Buridan also suggested that when God created the heavens, he may have impressed an impetus in
the celestial bodies, which continued to move ever afterward (when God rested on the seventh day)
by virtue of that impetus, since there was no resistance to their motions. By this means, Buridan could
hypothetically dispense with angelic intelligences as the movers of the celestial bodies, since they
were neither mentioned in the Bible nor physically necessary to explain the motions. This was
perhaps the first major application of a principle of terrestrial physics to celestial phenomena. In turn,
Buridan’s successor, Oresme, conceived of such a universe as resembling a mechanical clock
constructed and left running by God.
Among other contributions, Oresme introduced the use of mathematical tabulations by equivalent
graphing, anticipating Descartes’s development of analytic geometry. But in reference to the problem
of the celestial movements, Oresme argued that the apparent rotation of the entire heavens could just
as easily be explained by the rotation of the Earth—a more plausible smaller movement by a single
body compared with the immensely greater and swifter movement of all the heavenly bodies through
vast spaces in a single day (which Oresme deemed “unbelievable and unthinkable”). In viewing the
stars each night or the Sun each day, the observer can be certain only of the fact of movement;
whether that movement is produced by the heavens or the Earth cannot be ascertained by the senses,
which would register the same phenomenon in either case.
Oresme also argued against Aristotle that material objects may fall to the Earth not because the
Earth is the center of the universe, but because material bodies naturally move toward each other. A
thrown stone falls back to the Earth wherever in the universe the Earth may be, because the Earth is
near the thrown stone and has its own attractive center, while another earth elsewhere would receive
nearby loose stones to its own center. Thus matter may be naturally attracted to other matter. Such a
theoretical alternative to Aristotle’s explanation of falling bodies in terms of a central Earth was
prerequisite to the later heliocentric hypothesis. Also, by assuming Buridan’s impetus theory, Oresme
argued that a vertically falling body would fall straight down to the Earth, even if the Earth was
moving, just as a man on a moving ship could move his hand downward in a straight line alongside
528 

the mast without noticing any deviation. The ship carries and maintains the hand’s straight line
relative to itself, just as the Earth would a falling stone. Yet having made these various astute points
against Aristotle, and having asserted that only by faith—not by reason or observation or Scripture—
could one assert that the Earth is stationary, Oresme then discarded his arguments for the Earth’s
rotation. In a later and different scientific context, Copernicus and Galileo did not discard them.
The work of Buridan and Oresme in the fourteenth century thus laid the mandatory groundwork
for a planetary Earth, the law of inertia, the concept of momentum, the law of uniform accelerated
motion for freely falling bodies, analytic geometry, the removal of the terrestrial-celestial distinction,
and a mechanistic universe with a clockmaker God. See Thomas S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution:
Planetary Astronomy and the Development of Western Thought (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1957), 115-123.
8. Ockham himself used formulations, somewhat different from that now known as Ockham’s razor,
such as “Plurality is not to be assumed without necessity” and “What can be done with fewer
[assumptions] is done in vain with more.”
9. Translated by Mary Martin McLaughlin in The Portable Renaissance Reader, edited by J. B. Ross
and M. M. McLaughlin (New York: Penguin, 1977), 478.
Part V. The Modern World View
1. Tycho de Brahe also proposed a system intermediate between those of Copernicus and Ptolemy, in
which all the planets except the Earth revolve about the Sun, while the entire Sun-centered system
revolves about the Earth. Essentially a modification of the ancient system of Heraclides, the first part
preserved many of the superior Copernican insights, while the second part preserved Aristotelian
physics, the fixed central Earth, and the literal interpretation of Scripture. Brahe’s system furthered
the Copernican cause, by explicating some of its advantages and problems, but also because some of
the new orbital paths of the Sun and planets intersected each other, bringing into question the
physical reality of the separate aetheric spheres within which each planet was supposed to be
embedded. In addition, Brahe’s observations of comets, now calculated to be beyond the Moon, as
well as of a nova that appeared in 1572, began to convince astronomers that the heavens were not
immutable, a view subsequently supported by Galileo’s telescopic discoveries. Like Brahe’s
compromise arrangement of the planetary orbits, the observed movements of the comets also made
less plausible the existence of the aetheric spheres, which Aristotle had considered to be composed of
an invisible but solid crystalline substance. The comets were now recognized as moving through
spaces traditionally thought to be filled by the solid crystalline spheres, thereby casting further doubt
on their physical reality. Kepler’s ellipses would make the circular-moving spheres altogether
untenable. See Thomas S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy and the
Development of Western Thought (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957), 200–209.
2. Translated and quoted by James Brodrick, The Life and Work of Blessed Robert Francis Cardinal
Bellarmine, S.J., vol. 2 (London: Longmans, Green, 1950), 359.
3. Galileo’s final work and his most important contribution to physics, Two New Sciences, was
completed in 1634, when he was seventy years old. It was published four years later in Holland, after
the manuscript had been smuggled out of Italy (apparently with the assistance of the French
ambassador to the Vatican, Galileo’s former pupil the Duke of Noailles). In that same year, 1638, John
529 

Milton traveled from England to Italy where he visited Galileo, an event later recorded in
Areopagitica (1644), Milton’s classic argument for freedom of the press: “I have sat among their
learned men, (for that honor I had,) and been counted happy to have been born in such a place of
philosophic freedom, as they supposed England was, while themselves did nothing but bemoan the
servile condition into which learning amongst them was brought; that this was it which had damped
the glory of Italian wits; that nothing had been there written now these many years but flattery and
fustian. There it was that I found and visited the famous Galileo, grown old, a prisoner to the
inquisition, for thinking in astronomy otherwise than the Franciscan and Dominican licensers
thought” (John Milton, Areopagitica and Other Prose Writings, edited by W. Haller [New York: Book
League of America, 1929], 41).
4. Implicit in this division between the human mind and the material world was a nascent skepticism
concerning the mind’s ability genuinely to penetrate beyond appearances to an intrinsic order in the
world—i.e., concerning the capacity of the subject to bridge the gap to the object. Yet this skepticism,
broached by Locke, made explicit by Hume, and critically reformulated by Kant, did not generally
affect the scientific understanding as it developed through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
and well into the twentieth.
5. Mention should be made here of Alfred Russel Wallace’s independent formulation of the theory of
evolution in 1858, which impelled Darwin to make public his own work after not doing so for twenty
years. Among Darwin’s and Wallace’s important predecessors, Buffon, Lamarck, and Darwin’s
grandfather Erasmus Darwin stand out, as does Lyell in geology. In addition, Diderot, La Mettrie,
Kant, Goethe, and Hegel were all moving toward an evolutionary world conception.
6. W. Carl Rufus, “Kepler as an Astronomer,” in The History of Science Society, Johannes Kepler: A
Tercentenary Commemoration of His Life and Work (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1931), 36.
7. This sentence should be qualified by the fact that the nongeocentric cosmologies were generally
offshoots of the Platonic-Pythagorean tradition, and were more emphatically opposed by the
Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology than by Platonism. See also note 1, part 2, on Plato’s possible
heliocentrism.
8. Recent historical analyses have suggested that the rapid decline of Renaissance esotericism in
Restoration England was influenced by the highly charged social and political environment that
marked seventeenth-century British history. During the revolutionary upheavals of the English Civil
War and Interregnum (1642–60), esoteric philosophies such as astrology and Hermeticism were
extremely popular, and their close association with radical political and religious movements was
widely perceived as threatening to the established Church and propertied classes. Astrological
almanacs outsold the Bible during this period of broken censorship, and influential astrologers such
as William Lilly encouraged the forces of rebellion. On a conceptual level, the esoteric philosophies
supported a world view highly compatible with the antiauthoritarian political and religious activism
of the radical movements, with direct spiritual illumination seen as potentially available to every
individual of whatever rank or sex, and with nature seen as alive, permeated at all levels by divinity,
and perpetually self-transforming. After the Restoration in 1660, leading philosophers, doctors, and
clergymen stressed the importance of a sober natural philosophy, such as the recently published
mechanical philosophy of inert material particles governed by permanently fixed laws, to undercut
the passion-inflaming “enthusiasm” supported by the esoteric world view and the radical sects.
With the specter of the previous decades’ social chaos in the background, Hermetic ideas were
530 

increasingly attacked, astrology ceased to be favored by upper-class patronage or taught at the
universities, and the science that developed within the Royal Society (founded 1660) upheld the
mechanistic view of nature as a despiritualized world of hard matter. Major founding figures in the
Royal Society such as Robert Boyle and Christopher Wren continued, at least in private, to consider
astrology to be valid (believing, like Bacon, that astrology should be scientifically reformed rather
than rejected), but the political climate was increasingly inhospitable; Boyle, for example, did not
allow his defense of astrology to be published until after his death. This same context appears to have
influenced Newton and his literary executors to suppress the esoteric, Hermetic background of
Newton’s scientific ideas. See David Kubrin, “Newton’s Inside Out: Magic, Class Struggle, and the Rise
of Mechanism in the West,” in The Analytic Spirit, edited by H. Woolf (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1980); Patrick Curry, Prophecy and Power: Astrology in Early Modern England (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1989); Christopher Hill, The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas
During the English Revolution (New York: Viking, 1972); and P. M. Rattansi, “The Intellectual Origins
of the Royal Society,” in Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 23 (1968): 129–143.
For two further analyses of the same intellectual revolution in terms of the epistemological conflict
between two different perspectives toward gender (the Hermetic ideal of knowledge as an erotic
union of masculine and feminine, reflecting a view of the universe as a cosmic marriage, versus the
Baconian program of male dominance), see Evelyn Fox Keller, “Spirit and Reason in the Birth of
Modern Science,” in Reflections on Gender and Science (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985),
43–65; and Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution
(San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1980).
9. Galileo, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, 328: “You wonder that there are so
few followers of the Pythagorean opinion [that the Earth moves] while I am astonished that there have
been any up to this day who have embraced and followed it. Nor can I ever sufficiently admire the
outstanding acumen of those who have taken hold of this opinion and accepted it as true: they have,
through sheer force of intellect done such violence to their own senses as to prefer what reason told
them over that which sensible experience showed them to be the contrary. For the arguments against
[the Earth’s rotation] we have examined are very plausible, as we have seen; and the fact that the
Ptolemaics and the Aristotelians and all their disciples took them to be conclusive is indeed a strong
argument of their effectiveness. But the experiences which overtly contradict the annual movement
[of the Earth around the Sun] are indeed so much greater in their apparent force that, I repeat, there
is no limit to my astonishment when I reflect that Aristarchus and Copernicus were able to make
reason so conquer sense that, in defiance of the latter, the former became mistress of their belief.”
10. Kepler, Harmonies of the World, V: “Now, since the dawn eight months ago, since the broad
daylight three months ago, and since a few days ago, when the full sun illuminated my wonderful
speculations, nothing holds me back. I yield freely to the sacred frenzy; I dare frankly to confess that
I have stolen the golden vessels of the Egyptians to build a tabernacle for my God far from the bounds
of Egypt. If you pardon me, I shall rejoice; if you reproach me, I shall endure. The die is cast, and I
am writing the book—to be read either now or by posterity, it matters not. It can wait a century for a
reader, as God himself has waited six thousand years for a witness.”
11. Here was perhaps the most fundamental distinction between classical and modern science: While
Aristotle had postulated four causes—material, efficient, formal, and final—modern science
considered only the first two empirically justifiable. Thus Bacon praised Democritus for removing
God and mind from the natural world, in contrast to Plato and Aristotle who repeatedly introduced
final causes into scientific explanations. See also the more recent statement by the biologist Jacques
531 

Monod: “The cornerstone of scientific method is . . . the systematic denial that ‘true’ knowledge can
be got at by interpreting phenomena in terms of final causes—that is to say, of ‘purpose’ “ (Jacques
Monod, Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modem Biology (translated by A.
Wainhouse) [New York: Random House, 1972], 21).
12. This was the celebrated reply of the French astronomer and mathematician Pierre Simon Laplace
to Napoleon, when questioned about the absence of God in his new theory of the solar system, which
had perfected the Newtonian synthesis. Because of certain apparent irregularities in the planetary
movements, Newton had believed that the solar system required occasional divine adjustments to
maintain stability. Laplace’s reply reflected his success in demonstrating that every known secular
variation (such as the changing speeds of Jupiter and Saturn) was cyclical, and that therefore the
solar system was entirely stable on its own account without divine intervention.
13. The character and composition of the Church clergy in France also played a complex role in
these developments. The clergy’s upper ranks were typically occupied by the aristocracy’s younger
sons, who took the positions as sinecures, and whose style of life was generally indistinguishable from
that of nonclerical aristocrats. Religious fervor at this level of the Church was infrequent, and was
distrusted in others. The interests of the institutional Church seemed to lie less in the pastoral mission
of religious salvation than in the enforcement of orthodoxy and the preservation of political
advantage. Further complicating the issue was the growing embrace of Enlightenment rationalism by
members of the aristocratic clergy itself, thus strengthening the secular forces from within the
Church structure. See Jacques Barzun, “Society and Politics,” in The Columbia History of the World,
edited by John A. Garraty and Peter Gay (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), 694–700.
14. “Those who set out to serve both God and Mammon soon discover that there is no God” (Logan
Pearsall Smith).
15. Such a view was controverted by Christians who interpreted that command as signifying
“stewardship” rather than exploitation, the latter seen as reflecting the alienation of the Fall.
Part VI. The Transformation of the Modern Era
1. On the basis of Kant’s second preface to the Critique of Pure Reason, it has often been said that
Kant called his insight a “Copernican revolution” (e.g., by Karl Popper, Bertrand Russell, John Dewey,
and the fifteenth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, among many others). I. B. Cohen has
pointed out (in Revolution in Science [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985], 237–243) that
Kant does not appear to have made that specific statement. On the other hand, Kant explicitly
compared his new philosophical strategy to Copernicus’s astronomical theory, and although strictly
speaking the term “Copernican revolution” may postdate both Copernicus and Kant, both the term
and the comparison are accurate and illuminating.
2. “I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics” (Richard Feynman).
3. Quoted in Huston Smith, Beyond the Post-Modern Mind, rev. ed. (Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 1989), 8.
4. Kuhn’s ideas, first set forth in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), were in part the
outgrowth of significant advances in the study of the history of science made a generation earlier,
notably the work of Alexandre Koyré and A.O. Lovejoy. Also important were major developments
532 

within academic philosophy such as those associated with the later Wittgenstein, and with the
progress of argument in the school of logical empiricism from Rudolf Carnap through W. V. O.
Quine. The widely accepted conclusion of that argument essentially affirmed a relativized Kantian
position: i.e., one cannot, in the last analysis, logically compute complex truths out of simple elements
based in direct sensation, because all such simple sensory elements are ultimately defined by the
ontology of a specific language, and there exist a multiplicity of languages, each with its own
particular mode of construing reality, each one selectively eliciting and identifying the objects it
describes. The choice of which language to employ is finally dependent on one’s purposes, not on
objective “facts,” which are themselves constituted by the same theoretical and linguistic systems
through which those facts are judged. All “raw data” are already theory-laden. See W. V. O. Quine,
“Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” in From a Logical Point of View, 2nd ed. (New York: Harper & Row,
1961), 20–46.
5. The crucial word through which Hegel expressed his concept of dialectical integration was
aufheben, meaning both “to cancel” and “to lift up.” In the moment of synthesis, the antithetical state is
both preserved and transcended, negated and fulfilled.
6. Ronald Sukenick, “The Death of the Novel,” in The Death of the Novel and Other Stories (New
York: Dial, 1969), 41. On a less futile note, perhaps the actor may be said to epitomize the
postmodern artistic ethos, and to personify the postmodern identity generally, for his or her reality
remains deliberately and irreducibly ambiguous. Irony pervades action; performance is all. The actor
is never univocally committed to an exclusive meaning, to a literal reality. Everything is “as if.”
7. Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979),
176.
8. Ihab Hassan, quoted in Albrecht Wellmer, “On the Dialectic of Modernism and Postmodernism,”
Praxis International 4 (1985): 338. See also Richard J. Bernstein’s discussion of the same passage in his
1988 Presidential Address to the Metaphysical Society of America (“Metaphysics, Critique, Utopia,”
Review of Metaphysics 42 [1988]: 259-260), where he characterizes the postmodern intellectual
attitude as sometimes resembling Hegel’s description of a self-fulfilling abstract skepticism, “which
only ever sees pure nothingness in its result . . . [and] cannot get any further from there, but must
wait to see whether something new comes along and what it is, in order to throw it too into the same
empty abyss” (G. W. F. Hegel, The Phenomenology of Spirit, translated by A. V. Miller [Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1977], 51).
9. Arnold J. Toynbee, in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., s.v. “time.”
10. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, translated by W. Kaufman (New York: Random House,
1974), 181.
11. Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, translated by Talcott Parsons (New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1958), 182.
12. Carl G. Jung, “The Undiscovered Self,” in Collected Works of Carl Gustav Jung, vol. 10, translated
by R. F. C. Hull, edited by H. Read et al. (Princeton: Princetor University Press, 1970), pars. 585-586.
Part VII. Epilogue
533 

1. John J. McDermott, “Revisioning Philosophy” conference, Esalen Institute, Big Sur, California, June
1987.
2. The double bind theory was an application of Bertrand Russell’s theory of logical types (from
Russell and Alfred North Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica) to a communications analysis of
schizophrenia. See Gregory Bateson et al., “Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia,” in Bateson, Steps to an
Ecology of Mind (New York: Ballantine, 1972), 201–227.
3. Ernest Gellner, The Legitimation of Belief (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), 206–
207.
4. Vincent Brome, Jung: Man and Myth (New York: Atheneum, 1978), 14.
5. Jung, “Psychological Commentary on ‘The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation,’” in Collected
Works of Carl Gustav Jung, vol. 11, translated by R. F. C. Hull, edited by H. Read et al. (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1969), par. 759.
6. The most comprehensive presentations of Grof’s clinical evidence and its theoretical implications
can be found in Stanislav Grof, Realms of the Human Unconscious: Observations from LSD Research
(New York: Viking, 1975) and LSD Psychotherapy (Pomona, Calif.: Hunter House, 1980). A more
recent popular account is his Beyond the Brain: Birth, Death, and Transcendence in Psychotherapy
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1985).
7. The clinical evidence from Grof’s research concerning the perinatal experience should not be
misunderstood as suggesting the operation of a Freudian, linear-mechanistic kind of causality, in
which the individual birth trauma is viewed as mechanically producing specific psychological and
intellectual syndromes in the same, more or less “hydraulic” manner that a childhood Oedipal trauma
was seen by traditional psychoanalysts as producing specific pathological symptoms. The evidence
suggests, rather, what might be called an archetypal form of causation, in which the individual’s
reliving of the birth process appears to mediate participation in a much larger, transpersonal,
archetypal death-rebirth process, with the individual and collective levels of the psyche radically
interpenetrating. The perinatal sequence does not seem to be ultimately grounded in or reducible to
the individual’s original experience of biological birth; instead, biological birth itself appears to
reflect a more encompassing archetypal reality which is directly accessed by those undergoing the
perinatal process, either spontaneously (as in personal experiences of “the dark night of the soul”), in
religious ritual, or in experiential psychotherapy. The birth experience is here viewed not as an
ultimate root, a reductionist cause in a closed system, but as an amplifying pivot, an experiential
transduction point between personal and transpersonal realities.
Grof’s evidence thus suggests a more complex understanding of causation than that offered by the
conventional modern scientific conception of linear-mechanistic causality, and, in agreement with
recent data and theories emerging from several other fields, points toward a conception that
incorporates participatory, morphic, and teleological forms of causation—closer in character to
classical Platonic and Aristotelian notions of archetypal, formal, and final causation, as well as to the
later Jungian archetypal understanding. The organizing principles of this epistemology are symbolic,
nonliteral, and radically multivalent in character, suggesting a nondualistic ontology that is
metaphorically patterned “all the way down“—an understanding developed in recent decades by
thinkers as diverse as Owen Barfield, Norman O. Brown, James Hillman, and Robert Bellah.
534 

8. James Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology (New York: Harper & Row, 1975), 126.
9. Writers and editors today often comment on the difficulty they have in revising many sentences
that were originally written with the traditional generic “man,” which they seek to replace with a
term that is not gender-biased. Partly the difficulty is created by the fact that no other term
simultaneously attempts to denote both the human species (i.e., all human beings) and a single
generic human being. That is, the word “man” is uniquely capable of indicating a metaphorically
singular and personal entity who is also intrinsically collective in character: “man” denotes a universal
individual, an archetypal figure, as “human beings,” “humankind,” “people,” and “men and women”
do not. But I believe that the deeper reason for the difficulty in revising such sentences is that the
entire meaning of such a sentence as originally conceived was implicitly structured around this
specific image of the masculine archetypal human. As a close reading of the many relevant texts—
Greco-Roman, Judaeo-Christian, and modern scientific-humanistic—makes clear, both the
syntactical structure and the essential meaning of the language that most major Western thinkers
have used to represent the human condition and the human enterprise, including its drama, its
pathos, and its hubris, are inextricably associated with the unconscious presence of this archetypal
figure, “man.” At one level, the “man” of the Western intellectual tradition can be seen as simply a
socially constructed “false universal,” the use of which both reflected and helped shape a male-
dominated society. More profoundly, however, “man” has also represented a living archetype in
which members of both sexes, willy-nilly, have participated. An entire civilization and world have
been constellated by its active, creative, problematic presence. This book has indeed told the story of
“Western man,” in all his tragic glory, blindness, and, I believe, growth toward self-transcendence.
At some point in the future, unthinking use of masculine generics will very likely disappear. If this
book should be read in that new context, the essential role played in the narrative by the particular
construction of the human signified by the generic “man” will stand out all the more conspicuously,
and the many ramifications of that historical usage—psychological, social, cultural, intellectual,
spiritual, ecological, cosmological—will be commensurately more evident. When gender-biased
language is no longer the established norm, the entire cultural world view will have moved into a
new era. The old kinds of sentences and phrases, the character of the human self-image, the place of
humanity in the cosmos and in nature, the very nature of the human drama, all will have been
radically transformed. As the language goes, so goes the world view—and vice versa.
10. Two important complexities in this overarching dialectic may be mentioned here. First, as the
narrative and various notes have suggested, the evolution of the Western mind can be seen as having
been marked at every stage by a complex interplay of the masculine and feminine, with significant
partial reunions with the feminine having occurred in coincidence with the great creative
watersheds of Western culture from the birth of Greek civilization onward. Each synthesis and birth
has constituted a stage in the much larger overarching dialectic between the masculine and feminine
that I believe comprehends the history of the Western mind as a whole.
Yet interwoven with this unfolding masculine-feminine evolution is a second dialectical process,
which has played a more explicit role in the historical narrative, and which involves a basic
archetypal polarity within the nature of the masculine itself. On the one hand, the masculine
principle (again, in both men and women) can be understood in terms of what may be called the
Promethean impulse: restless, heroic, rebellious and revolutionary, individualistic and innovative,
eternally seeking freedom, autonomy, change, and the new. On the other hand, there is its
complement and opposite, what can be called the Saturnian impulse: conservative, stabilizing,
controlling, dominating, that which seeks to sustain, order, contain, and repress—i.e., the juridical-
structural-hierarchical side of the masculine that has expressed itself in patriarchy.
535 

The two sides of the masculine—Prometheus and Saturn, son and father—are implications of each
other. Each requires, calls forth, and grows into its opposite. On a broad scale, the dynamic tension
between the two principles can be seen as constituting the dialectic that propels “history” (political,
intellectual, spiritual). It is this dialectic that has driven the internal drama throughout The Passion of
the Western Mind: the unceasing dynamic interplay between order and change, authority and
rebellion, control and freedom, tradition and innovation, structure and revolution. I am suggesting,
however, that this powerful dialectic ultimately propels and is propelled by—is, as it were, in the
service of—yet a larger overarching dialectic involving the feminine, or “life.”
536 

Bibliography
Aeschylus. The extant plays in 2 vols. of The Complete Greek Tragedies. Edited by D. Grene and R.
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953–56.
Aquinas, Thomas. An Aquinas Reader. Edited, with an introduction by Mary T. Clark. Garden City,
N.Y.: Doubleday, 1972.
. 
Basic Writings of St. Thomas Aquinas. Edited by A. C. Pegis. 2 vols. New York: Random House,
1945.
. 
Summa Theologica. Translated by the English Dominican Fathers. 3 vols. New York: Benziger,
1947–48.
Aristotle. The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation. Edited by J. Barnes. 2 vols.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Armitage, Angus. Copernicus, The Founder of Modern Astronomy. New York: Thomas Yoseloff, 1957.
Armstrong, A. H., ed. The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967.
Augustine. An Augustine Reader. Edited, with an introduction by J. J. O’Meara. Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1973.
. 
Basic Writings of Saint Augustine. Edited by W. J. Oates. 2 vols. New York: Random House, 1948.
. 
The City of God. Translated by M. Dods. New York: Modern Library, 1950.
. 
The Confessions. Translated by J. K. Ryan. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1960.
. 
Works. Edited by M. Dods. Edinburgh: Clark, 1871–77.
Bacon, Francis. Advancement of Learning; Novum Organum; The New Atlantis. In Great Books of the
Western World, Vol. 30. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
Bainton, Roland. The Reformation of the Sixteenth Century. Boston: Beacon Press, 1985.
Barbour, Ian. Myths, Models, and Paradigms: A Comparative Study in Science and Religion. New
York: Harper & Row, 1974.
Barfield, Owen. “Coleridge’s Philosophical Lectures.” Towards 3, 2 (1989): 27–30.
. 
Saving the Appearances: A Study in Idolatry. 2nd ed. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University
Press, 1988.
Barnett, Lincoln. The Universe and Dr. Einstein. Rev. ed. New York: William Morrow, 1972.
Barnhart, Bruno. “Monastic Wisdom and the World of Today.” Monastic Studies 16 (1985): 111–138.
. “The Sophia Hypothesis.” Paper presented at symposium, The Feminine Wisdom Traditions and
Creation Spirituality in Christianity; at conference, Gaia Consciousness: The Goddess and the Living
Earth, California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, April 1988.
Barzun, Jacques. Classic, Romantic, and Modern. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
. 
Darwin, Marx, Wagner: Critique of a Heritage. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1981.
Bate, William Jackson. “The Crisis in English Studies.” Harvard Magazine, Sept.-Oct. 1982: 46–53.
537 

Bateson, Gregory. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: Dutton, 1979.
. 
Steps an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine, 1972.
Baudelaire, Charles. Les Fleurs du Mal. Translated by F. Duke. Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia, 1961.
Baynes, Kenneth, James Bohman, Thomas McCarthy, eds. After Philosophy: End or Transformation?
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987.
Beauvoir, Simone de. The Second Sex. Translated and edited by H. M. Parshley. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1953.
Beckett, Samuel. Endgame. New York: Grove Press, 1958.
. 
Waiting for Godot. New York: Grove Press, 1954.
Bellah, Robert N. Beyond Belief: Essays on Religion in a Post-Traditional World. New York: Harper &
Row, 1970.
Benz, Ernst Wilhelm. The Eastern Orthodox Church: Its Thought and Life. Translated by R. Winston
and C. Winston. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1963.
. 
Evolution and Christian Hope: Man’s Concept of the Future from the Early Fathers to Teilhard de
Chardin. Translated by H. G. Frank. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1968.
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. Translated by A. Mitchell. New York: Modern Library, 1944.
Berkeley, George. The Principles of Human Knowledge. In Great Books of the Western World, Vol.
35. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
Bernstein, Richard J., ed. Habermas and Modernity. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985.
. “Metaphysics, Critique, Utopia.” 
Review of Metaphysics 42 (1988): 255–273.
Bible. Authorized King James Version. Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House, 1981.
Bible. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. Expanded ed. Revised Standard Version.
Edited by H. G. May and B. M. Metzger. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Blake, William. The Poetry and Prose of William Blake. Edited by D. V. Erdman. Commentary by H.
Bloom. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970.
Boas, George. Dominant Themes of Modern Philosophy: A History. New York: Ronald, 1957.
Boethius. The Consolation of Philosophy. Translated by R. Green. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1962.
Bohm, David. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
Bohr, Niels. Atomic Physics and the Description of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1934.
Bonner, Gerald. “The Spirituality of St. Augustine and Its Influence on Western Mysticism.” Sobornost
4, 2 (1982): 143–162.
Bornkamm, Gunther. Jesus of Nazareth. Translated by I. McLuskey and F. McLuskey with J. M.
Robinson. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.
Bouyer, Louis. The Spirituality of the New Testament and the Fathers. Translated by M. P. Ryan. New
York: Seabury, 1982.
Bridgman, P. W. The Logic of Modern Physics. New York: Macmillan, 1946.
Brodrick, James. The Life and Work of Blessed Robert Francis Cardinal Bellarmine, S.J. 2 vols. London:
538 

Longmans, Green, 1950.
Brome, Vincent. Jung: Man and Myth. New York: Atheneum, 1978.
Bronowski, Jacob, and Bruce Mazlish. The Western Intellectual Tradition: From Leonardo to Hegel.
New York: Harper & Row, 1960.
Brown, Norman O. Love’s Body. New York: Random House, 1968.
Brown, Raymond E. Biblical Reflections on Crises Facing the Church. New York: Paulist Press, 1975.
Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. Translated by S. G. C. Middlemore.
New York: Harper Torchbook, 1958.
Burnaby, J. Amor Dei: A Study of the Religion of Saint Augustine. London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1938.
Butterfield, Herbert. The Origins of Modern Science, 1300–1800. Rev. ed. New York: Free Press,
1965.
. 
Writings on Christianity and History. Edited by C. T. McIntyre. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1979.
Byron, George Gordon. Lord Byron: Selected Letters and Journals. Edited by L. A. Marchand.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982.
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. 2nd ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1968.
. 
The Masks of God. Vol. 3, Occidental Mythology. New York: Viking, 1964.
Camus, Albert. The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays. Translated by J. O’Brien. New York: Random
House, 1959.
. 
The Stranger. Translated by S. Gilbert. New York: Random House, 1954.
Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Paralles Between Modern Physics and Eastern
Mysticism. Berkeley: Shambhala, 1975.
. 
The Turning Point: Science, Society, and the Rising Culture. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982.
Carnap, Rudolf. “The Rejection of Metaphysics.” In 20th Century Philosophy: The Analytic Tradition,
edited by M. Weitz. New York: Free Press, 1966.
Caspar, Max. Kepler. Translated and edited by C. D. Hellman. London: Abelard-Schuman, 1959.
Cassirer, Ernst. The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms. Translated by R. Manheim. 3 vols. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1955–57.
Castiglione, Baldesar. The Book of the Courtier. Translated by G. Bull. Baltimore: Penguin, 1976.
Cellini, Benvenuto. The Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellni. Translated by J. A. Symonds. New York:
Modern Library, 1985.
Chadwick, Henry. Early Christian Thought and the Classical Tradition: Studies in Justin, Clement and
Origen. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966.
Chenu, M. D. Nature, Man and Society in the Twelfth Century: Essays on New Theological
Perspectives in the Latin West. Edited and translated by J. Taylor and L. K. Little. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1983.
. 
Toward Understanding Saint Thomas. Translated by A. M. Landry and D. Hughes. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1964.
539 

Chodorow, Nancy J. Feminism and Psychoanalytic Theory. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989.
. 
The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender. Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1978.
Chroust, Anton-Hermann. Aristotle: New Light on His Life and on Some of His Lost Works. 2 vols.
Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1973.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. The Basic Works of Cicero. Edited by M. Hadas. New York: Modern Library,
1951.
. 
De Natura Deorum; Academica. With an English translation by H. Rackham. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1972.
Clement of Alexandria. The Exhortation to the Heathen. In The Ante-Nicene Fathers, edited by A.
Roberts and J. Donaldson, Vol. 2. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1967.
Cohen, I. B. Revolution in Science. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. The Portable Coleridge. Edited by I. A. Richards. New York: Viking, 1950.
Colorado, Pam. “Bridging Native and Western Science.” Convergence 21, 2/3 (1988): 49–68
Comte, Auguste. Introduction to Positive Philosophy. Edited by F. Ferre. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1970.
Condorcet, Antoine-Nicolas, Marquis de. Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human
Mind. Translated by J. Barraclough. Westport, Conn.: Hyperion, 1979.
Copernicus, Nicolaus. On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres. Translated by C. G. Wallis. In
Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 16. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
. 
Three Copernican Treatises: The Commentariolus of Copernicus, the Letter against Werner, the
Narratio Prima of Rheticus. Translated, with an introduction by E. Rosen. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1939.
Cornford, F. M. Plato’s Cosmology. London: Routledge, 1966.
Curry, Patrick. Prophecy and Power: Astrology in Early Modern England. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1989.
Cutler, Donald R., ed. The Religious Situation: 1968. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968.
Dante. The Banquet. Translated by K. Hillard. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1889.
. 
The Divine Comedy. Translated by C. S. Singleton. 3 vols. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1973–75.
Danto, Arthur C. The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art. New York: Columbia University Press,
1986.
Darwin, Charles. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1981.
. 
The Origin of Species. New York: Dutton, Everyman’s University Library edition of the 6th ed.
(1882), 1971.
de Beer, Sir Gavin. Charles Darwin: A Scientific Biography. Garden City, N.Y.: Double-day, 1965.
Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. Translated by A. Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1982.
. 
Writing and Difference. Translated by A. Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.
540 

Descartes, René. The Philosophical Works of Descartes. Translated by E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross.
2 vols. New York: Dover, 1955.
Dewey, John. Experience and Nature. Rev. ed. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1971.
. 
The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of Knowledge and Action. New York: Minton,
Balch, 1929.
Dijksterhuis, E. J. The Mechanization of World Picture: Pythagoras to Newton. Translated by C.
Dikshoorn. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Dodds, E. R. The Ancient Concept of Progress. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
. 
The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1951.
. 
Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety: Some Aspects of Religious Experience from Marcus
Aurelius to Constantine. New York: Norton, 1970.
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. The Brothers Karamazov. Translated by C. Garnett. New York: Modern Library,
1933.
. 
Crime and Punishment. Translated by C. Garnett. New York: Modern Library, 1950.
. 
Notes from Underground. Edited and translated by M. Katz. New York: Norton, 1989.
Dreyer, J. L. E. A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler. 2nd ed. New York: Dover, 1953.
Duhem, Pierre. To Save the Phenomena: An Essay on the Idea of Physical Theory from Plato to Galileo.
Translated by E. Doland and C. Maschler. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Eckhart, Meister. The Essential Sermons, Commentaries, Treatises, and Defense. Translated, with an
introduction by E. Colledge and B. McGinn. New York: Paulist Press, 1981.
Eckman, Barbara. “Jung, Hegel, and the Subjective Universe.” Spring 1986 (Dallas: Spring
Publications, 1986): 88–89.
Edinger, Edward F. Ego and Archetype: Individuation and the Religious Function of the Psyche.
Baltimore: Penguin, 1973.
Edwards, Jonathan. Apocalyptic Writings. In The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Vol. 5, edited by S. J.
Stein. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977.
Einstein, Albert. The Meaning of Relativity. 5th ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956.
. 
Relativity: The Special and the General Theory. Translated by R. W. Lawson. New York: Crown,
1961.
Eliade, Mircea. Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return. Translated by W. R. Trask. New
York: Harper & Row, 1954.
Eliot, T. S. Complete Poems and Plays. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1971.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. The Collected Works. 4 vols. Edited by A. R. Ferguson et al. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1979–87.
Engelsman, Joan Chamberlain. The Feminine Dimension of the Divine. Wilmette, Ill.: Chiron, 1987.
Erasmus. The Epistles of Erasmus. Translated by F. M. Nichols. London: Longmans, Green, 1901.
Erikson, Erik. Childhood and Society. 2nd ed. New York: Norton, 1950.
Euripides. The extant plays in 5 vols, of The Complete Greek Tragedies. Edited by D. Grene and R.
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955–59.
541 

Evans, Donald. “Can We Know Spiritual Reality?” Commonweal, 13 July 1984.
Fairbairn, W. R. D. An Object-Relations Theory of the Personality. New York: Basic Books, 1952.
Fenichel, Otto. The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis. New York: Norton, 1945.
Ferenczi, Sandor. Thalassa: A Theory of Genitality. Translated by H. A. Bunker. New York: Norton,
1968.
Ferguson, W. K., et al. Renaissance: Six Essays. New York: Harper Torchbook, 1962.
Feyerabend, Paul. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. Rev. ed. London:
Verso, 1988.
. 
Science in a Free Society. London: Verso, 1978.
Ficino, Marsilio. The Book of Life. Translated by C. Boer. Irving, Tex.: Spring Publications, 1980.
. 
The Letters of Marsilio Ficino. Translated by members of the Language Department of the School
of Economic Science, London. 2 vols. Preface by P. O. Kristeller. London: Shepheard-Walwyn,
1975.
. 
Platonic Theology. Selected passages translated by J. L. Burroughs. Journal of the History of Ideas,
5, 2 (1944): 227–239.
Findlay, J. N. Ascent to the Absolute. London: Allen and Unwin, 1970.
. 
Hegel: A Re-examination. New York: Humanities Press, 1958.
Finley, John H. Four Stages of Greek Thought. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1966.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge. Translated by A. M. Sheridan Smith. London:
Tavistock, 1972.
. 
Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings. Edited by C. Gordon. New York:
Pantheon, 1980.
Fox, Robin Lane. Pagans and Christians. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987.
Frank, Francine Wattman, and Paula A. Treichler. Language, Gender, and Professional Writing. New
York: Modern Language Association, 1989.
Freeman, Kathleen, ed. and trans. Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A Complete Translation of
the Fragments. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983.
Freud, Anna. The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense. Rev. ed. New York: International Universities
Press, 1966.
Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud. Edited by J.
Strachey. 21 vols. New York: Hogarth, 1955–61.
Fromm, Erich. The Dogma of Christ and Other Essays on Religion, Psychology, and Culture. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Truth and Method. Translated by G. Barden and J. Cumming. New York:
Seabury, 1970.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. The New Industrial State. 4th ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1985.
Galilei, Galileo. Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems—Ptolemaic and Copernican.
Translated by S. Drake. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1953.
. 
Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo. Translated by S. Drake. New York: Double-day, 1957.
542 

. 
Sidereus Nuncius, or, The Sidereal Messenger. Translated, with an introduction by A. van Helden.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
. 
Two New Sciences. Translated by S. Drake. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974.
Garin, Eugenio, Italian Humanism. Translated by P. Munz. Oxford: Blackwell, 1965.
Garraty, John A., and Peter Gay, eds. The Columbia History of the World. New York: Harper & Row,
1972.
Geertz, Clifford. “From the Native’s Point of View: On the Nature of Anthropological Understanding.”
In Interpretive Social Science: A Reader, edited by P. Rabinow and W. M. Sullivan. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1979.
Gellner, Ernest. The Legitimation of Belief. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
Geymonat, Ludovico. Galileo Galilei. A Biography and Inquiry into His Philosophy of Science.
Translated by S. Drake. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Gibbon, Edward. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 3 vols. New York: Modern Library, 1977.
Gilkey, Langdon. Religion and Scientific Future: Reflections on Myth, Science, and Theology. New
York: Harper & Row, 1970.
Gilligan, Carol. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1982.
Gilson, Etienne. The Christian Philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas. Translated by L. K. Shook. New York:
Random House, 1956.
. 
History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages. New York: Random House, 1955.
Gimbutas, Marija. The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe, 6500–3500 B.C.: Myths and Cult Images.
Rev. ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.
. 
The Language of the Goddess: Unearthing the Hidden Symbols of Western Civilization. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1989.
Gingerich, Owen. “From Copernicus to Kepler: Heliocentrism as Model and as Reality.” Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 117 (1973): 513–522.
. “Johannes Kepler and the New Astronomy.” 
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society
13 (1972): 346–373.
Gleick, James. Chaos: Making a New Science. New York: Viking, 1988.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von. Faust Parts One and Two. Translated by G. M. Priest. In Great Books of
the Western World. Vol. 47. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
Gombrich, E. H. Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. 2nd ed., rev.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961.
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. 2 vols. Rev. ed. New York: Penguin, 1960.
Grenet, Paul. Thomism. Translated by J. F. Ross. New York: Harper & Row, 1967.
Grof, Stanislav. Beyond the Brain: Birth, Death, and Transcendence in Psychotherapy. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1985.
. LSD 
Psychotherapy. Pomona, Calif.: Hunter House, 1980.
. 
Realms of the Human Unconscious: Observations from LSD Research. New York: Viking, 1975.
543 

Grube, Georges M. A. Plato’s Thought. Boston: Beacon Press, 1958.
Gusdorf, Georges. Speaking. Translated, with an introduction by P. T. Brockelman. Evanston, Ill.:
Northwestern University Press, 1965.
Guthrie, W. K. C. The Greek Philosophers: From Thales to Aristotle. New York: Harper Torchbook,
1960.
. 
A History of Greek Philosophy. 6 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962–81.
Habermas, Jurgen. Knowledge and Human Interests. Translated by J. J. Shapiro. Boston: Beacon Press,
1971.
Hall, Nor. The Moon and the Virgin: Reflections on the Archetypal Feminine. New York: Harper &
Row, 1980.
Hanson, N. R. Patterns of Discovery: An Inquiry into the Conceptual Foundations of Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958.
Harding, Sandra. “Is Gender a Variable in Conceptions of Rationality?” Dialectica 36 (1982): 225–
242.
Harrison, Jane Ellen. Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion. 3rd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1922.
Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Heath, Sir Thomas L. Aristarchus of Samos: The Ancient Copernicus. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913.
Hegel, G. W. F. Early Theological Writings. Translated by T. M. Knox, with an introduction and
fragments translated by R. Kroner. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971.
. 
The Essential Writings. Edited by F. G. Weiss. New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
. 
Introduction to the Lectures on the History of Philosophy. Translated by T. M. Knox and A. V.
Miller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
. 
The Phenomenology of Spirit. Translated by A. V. Miller. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.
. 
Philosophy of Mind. Translated by W. Wallace, with the Zusätze in Boumann’s text translated by
A. V. Miller. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971.
. 
Reason in History. Translated by R. S. Hartman. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1953.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. New York: Harper
& Row, 1962.
. “‘Only a God Can Save Us’: The 
Spiegel Interview (1966).” Translated by W. J. Richardson. In
Heidegger: The Man and the Thinker, edited by T. Sheehan. Chicago: Precedent, 1981.
Heilbroner, Robert. The Worldly Philosophers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1980.
Heisenberg, Werner. Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Physics. New York: Harper &
Row, 1962.
Herbert, Nick. Quantum Reality: Beyond the New Physics. Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday, 1985.
Herder, Johann Gottfried. Reflections on the Philosophy of the History of Mankind. Abridged, with
introduction by F. E. Manuel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968.
Hesiod. The Works and Days; Theogony; The Shield of Heracles. Translated by R. Lattimore. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1959.
544 

Hesse, Mary. Revolutions and Reconstructions in the Philosophy of Science. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1980.
Hill, Christopher. The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English Revolution. New
York: Viking, 1972.
Hillman, James. “Anima Mundi: The Return of the Soul to the World.” Spring 1982 (Dallas: Spring
Publications, 1982): 71–93.
.
 Re-Visioning Psychology. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.
Hollingdale, R. J. Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1965.
Homer. The Iliad. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1974.
. 
The Odyssey. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1961.
Hugh of Saint-Victor. Didascalicon: A Medieval Guide to the Arts. Translated, with an introduction by
J. Taylor. New York: Columbia University Press, 1961.
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. In Great Books of the Western World,
Vol. 35. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
. 
A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford: Clarendon, 1967.
Huxley, Aldous. The Doors of Perception. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.
Irenaeus. Against Heresies. In The Ante-Nicene Fathers, edited by A. Roberts and J. Donaldson, Vol. 1.
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1967.
Jackson, Timothy. “The Theory and Practice of Discomfort: Richard Rorty and Pragmatism.” The
Thomist 51, 2 (1987): 270–298.
Jaeger, Werner. Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of His Development. Translated by R. Robinson.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
James, Henry. The Art of Criticism: Henry James on the Theory and Practice of Fiction. Edited by W.
Veeder and S. Griffin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
James, William. A Pluralistic Universe. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1977.
. 
Pragmatism and the Meaning of Truth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978.
. 
The Principles of Psychology. 2 vols. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
. 
Varieties of Religious Experience. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
. 
The Will to Believe. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979.
Janson, H. W. History of Art. 3rd ed. New York: Abrams, 1986.
Jeans, Sir James. Physics and Philosophy. New York: Macmillan, 1943.
John of the Cross, Saint. Dark Night of the Soul. Translated and edited by E. Allison Peers. Garden City,
N.Y.: Image Boob, 1959.
Jones, Ernest. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud. 3 vols. New York: Basic Books, 1953–57.
Jung, Carl G. Collected Works of Carl Gustav Jung. 20 vols. Translated by R. F. C. Hull; edited by H.
Read, M. Fordham, G. Adler, and W. McGuire. Bollingen Series XX. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1953–79.
. 
Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Rev. ed. Recorded and edited by A. Jaffe, translated by R. Winston
545 

and C. Winston. New York: Pantheon, 1973.
Kafka, Franz. The Complete Stories. Edited by N. N. Glatzer. New York: Schocken, 1971.
. 
The Trial. Translated by W. Muir and E. Muir, revised by E. M. Butler. New York: Modern Library,
1964.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Practical Reason. Translated by L. W. Beck. New York: Bobbs-Merrill,
1956.
. 
Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by N. K. Smith. London: Macmillan, 1968.
. 
Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone. 2nd ed. Translated by T. M. Greene and H. H. Hudson.
La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1960.
Keats, John. Poems. 5th ed. Edited, with an introduction by E. De Selincourt. London: Methuen, 1961.
Keepin, William. Some Deeper Implications of Chaos Theory. Draft. San Francisco: California Institute
of Integral Studies, 1990.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock. San
Francisco: Freeman, 1983.
. 
Reflections on Gender and Science. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985.
Kempis, Thomas à. The Imitation of Christ. Translated by L. Sherley-Price. Harmondsworth, England:
Penguin, 1952.
Kepler, Johannes. The Harmonies of the World (V), and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (IV and V).
Translated by C. G. Wallis. In Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 16. Chicago: Encyclopaedia
Britannica, 1952.
. “On the More Certain Fundamentals of Astrology.” Foreword and notes by J. B. Brackenridge,
translated by M. A. Rossi. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 123, 2 (1979): 85–
116.
Kirk, Geoffrey S. The Songs of Homer. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Kirk, G. S., and J. E. Raven, eds. The Presocratic Philosophers: A Critical History with a Selection of
Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1957.
Koyré, Alexandre. The Astronomical Revolution: Copernicus, Kepler, Borelli. Translated by R. E. W.
Maddison. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1973.
. 
From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968.
Kubrin, David. “Newton’s Inside Out: Magic, Class Struggle, and the Rise of Mechanism in the West.”
In The Analytic Spirit, edited by H. Woolf. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1980.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy and the Development of Western
Thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957.
. 
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Laing, R. D. The Divided Self. New York: Penguin, 1965.
. 
The Politics of Experience. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1967.
Lakatos, Imre, and Alan Musgrave, eds. Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1974·
Landes, David S. A Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1983.
546 

Lasch, Christopher. The Culture of Narcissism: American Life in an Age of Diminishing Expectations.
New York: Norton, 1979.
Leff, Gordon. The Dissolution of the Medieval Outlook: An Essay on Intellectual and Spiritual Change
in the Fourteenth Century. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.
Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo da Vinci. Edited by G. Nicodemi et al. New York: Reynal, in association
with William Morrow, 1956.
Letwin, Shirley R. Pursuit of Certainty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965.
Levi, Albert William. Philosophy and the Modern World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. Structural Anthropology. Translated by C. Jacobson and B. G. Schoepf. New
York: Doubleday, 1967.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. In Great Books of the Western World, Vol.
35. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
Lovejoy, Arthur O. The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1936.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Lucretius. De Rerum Natural Edited by C. Bailey. 3 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Luther, Martin. The Bondage of the Will. Translated by H. Cole, with corrections by H. Atherton.
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1931.
. 
Martin Luther’s Basic Theological Writings. Edited by T. F. Lull. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1989.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Translated by G.
Bennington and B. Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984.
Machiavelli, Niccolò. The Prince. Translated by H. C. Mansfield, Jr. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985.
Magee, Bryan. Karl Popper. New York: Viking, 1973.
Marcuse, Herbert. Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud. Boston: Beacon, 1974.
Marx, Karl. Capital. Translated by S. Moore and E. Aveling. 3 vols. Moscow: Foreign Languages
Publishing House, 1954–62.
. 
The Communist Manifesto. Edited by A. J. Taylor. Baltimore: Penguin, 1968.
. 
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts. In The Marx-Engels Reader, edited by R. C. Tucker.
New York: Norton, 1972.
McDermott, John J. The Culture of Experience: Essays in the American Grain. New York: New York
University Press, 1976.
McDermott, Robert A. “Toward a Modern Spiritual Cognition.” Revision 12 (Summer 1989): 29–33.
McInerny, Ralph. St. Thomas Aquinas. Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press, 1982.
McKibben, Bill. The End of Nature. New York: Random House, 1989.
McNeill, William H. The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1963.
Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick, or the Whale. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.
Merchant, Carolyn. The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution. San
547 

Francisco: Harper & Row, 1980.
Merton, Thomas. “The Self of Modern Man and the New Christian Consciousness.” In Zen and the
Birds of Appetite, 15–32. New York: New Directions, 1968.
Michelangelo. The Complete Works of Michelangelo. Edited by M. Salmi et al. New York: Reynal, in
association with William Morrow, 1965.
Miller, David L. The New Polytheism. 2nd ed. Dallas: Spring Publications, 1981.
Miller, Jean Baker, ed. Psychoanolysis and Women. New York: Penguin, 1973.
Milton, John. Areopagitica and Other Prose Writings. Edited by W. Haller. New York: Book League of
America, 1929.
Moltman, Jürgen D. The Theology of Hope: On the Ground and the implications of a Christian
Eschatology. Translated by J. W. Leitch. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.
Monod, Jacques. Chance and Necessity An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modem Biology.
Translated by A. Wainhouse. New York: Random House, 1972.
Montaigne, Michel de. The Complete Essays. Translated by D. M. Frame. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1958.
Morgan, Elaine. The Descent of Woman. London: Souvenir, 1972.
Mumford, Lewis. The Myth of the Machine. 2 vols. New York: Harcourt, Brace – World, 1967-70.
Nehamas, Alexander. Nietzsche: Life as Literature. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Neugebauer, O. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. 2nd ed. Providence: Brown University Press, 1957.
Newton, Isaac. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. 3rd ed. (1726), with variant readings,
assembled by A. Koyré, I. B. Cohen, and A. Whitman. 2 vols. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1972.
. 
The Opticks. 4th ed. New York: Dover, 1952.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Basic Writings of Nietzsche. Edited and translated by W. Kaufman. New York:
Modern Library, 1968.
. 
The Gay Science. Translated by W. Kaufman. New York: Random House, 1974.
. 
Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Translated, with an introduction by R. J. Hollingdale. New York: Penguin,
1969.
Ockham, William of. Ockham’s Theory of Propositions. Part II of the Summa Logicae. Translated by
A. J. Freddoso and H. Schuurman, with an introduction by A. J. Freddoso. Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame, 1980.
. 
Ockham’s Theory of Terms. Part I of the Summa Logicae. Translated, with an introduction by M. J.
Loux, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1975.
O’Meara, John J. The Young Augustine. New York: Alba House, 1965.
Origen, Contra Celsum. Translated by H. Chadwick. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Ovid. Metamorphoses. Edited by E. J. Kenney. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Pagels, Elaine. The Gnostic Gospels. New York: Random House, 1979.
Pagels, Heinz R. The Cosmic Code: Quantum Physics as the Language of Nature. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1982.
548 

Palmer, R. R., and Joel Colton. A History of the Modern World. 5th ed. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1978.
Panofsky, Erwin. Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art. New York: Harper & Row, 1969.
Pascal, Blaise. Pensées. Translated, with an introduction by A. J. Krailsheimer. Harmondsworth,
England: Penguin, 1966.
Pauli, Wolfgang. “The Influence of Archetypal Ideas on the Scientific Theories of Kepler.” Translated
by P. Silz. In C. G. Jung and W. Pauli, The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche. New York:
Pantheon, 1955.
Pelikan, Jaroslav. The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine. 5 vols. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1971-89.
Perls, Fritz. Gestalt Therapy Verbatim. New York: Bantam, 1976.
Petrarch, Francesco. Petrarch, the First Modern Scholar and Man of Letters: A Selection From His
Correspondence. 2nd ed., rev. and enlarged. Translated by J. H. Robinson and H. W. Rolfe. New
York: Greenwood, 1969.
Piaget, Jean. The Child’s Conception of the World. Translated by J. Tomlinson and A. Tomlinson.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960.
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni. “The Dignity of Man.” In The Portable Renaissance Reader, edited by
J. B. Ross and M. M. Mc Laughlin. New York: Penguin, 1977.
Pieper, Josef. St. Thomas Aquinas. Translated by D. MacLaren. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1948.
. 
Scholasticism: Personalities and Problems of Medieval Philosophy. Translated by R. Winston and C.
Winston. New York: Pantheon, 1960.
Pindar. The Odes of Pindar. Translated by R. Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Plato. The Collected Dialogues. Edited by E. Hamilton and H. Cairns. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1961.
. 
Philebus and Epinomis. Translated by A. E. Taylor, with an introduction by R. Klibansky. London:
Thomas Nelson, 1956.
Plotinus. The Enneads. Translated by S. MacKenna. 3rd rev. ed., by B. S. Page. Introduction by P.
Henry. London: Faber and Faber, 1962.
Plutarch. Lives. Translated by J. Dryden. New York: Modern Library, 1967.
Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge. New York: Harper & Row, 1964.
Pope, Alexander. The Poetical Works of Alexander Pope. Edited by A. W. Ward. London: Macmillan,
1924.
Popper, Karl R. Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge. New York: Harper
Torchbook, 1968.
. 
The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Rev. ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1968.
Prabhu, Joseph. “Blessing the Bathwater.” In “On Deconstructing Theology: A Symposium.” Journal of
the American Academy of Religion 54, 3 (1987): 534-543.
Prigogine, Ilya. From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in the Physical Sciences. San
Francisco: Freeman, 1980.
Ptolemy. The Almagest. Translated by R. C. Taliaferro. In Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 16.
549 

Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952.
. 
The Tetrabiblos. Translated by J. M. Ashmand. North Hollywood, Calif.:
Symbols and Signs, 1976.
Quine, W. V. From a Logical Point of View. 2nd ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1961.
Rahner, Karl. Hearers of the Word. Translated by M. Richards. Montreal: Palm, 1969.
. 
Theological Investigations. Vol. 13, Theology, Anthropology, Christology. Translated by D. Bourke.
New York: Seabury, 1975.
Raine, Kathleen. Blake and Tradition. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968.
Randall, John Herman. The Making of the Modern Mind. New York: Columbia University Press, 1976.
Rank, Otto. The Trauma of Birth. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1929.
Raphael. The Complete Work of Raphael Edited by M. Salmi et al. New York: Harrison House, 1969.
Rattansi, P. M. “The Intellectual Origins of the Royal Society.” Notes and Records of the Royal Society
of London 23 (1968): 129-143.
Ravetz, Jerome R. Scientific Knowledge and Its Social Problems. London: Oxford University Press,
1971.
Redondi, Pietro. Galileo: Heretic. Translated by R. Rosenthal. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1987.
Reich, Wilhelm. Character Analysis. New York: Noonday, 1949.
Rilke, Rainer Maria. Duino Elegies. Translated by C. F. Macintyre. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1961.
Ronan, Colin A. Galileo. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1974.
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979.
Rosen, Edward. Copernicus and the Scientific Revolution. Malabar, Fla. : Krieger Publications, 1984.
Ross, J. B., and M. M. McLaughlin, eds. The Portable Renaissance Reader. Rev. ed. New York: Penguin,
1977.
Ross, Sir William David. Aristotle. 5th ed. New York: Methuen, 1964.
. 
Plato’s Theory of Ideas. London: Oxford University Press, 1971.
Roszak, Theodore. The Making of a Counter Culture. New York: Doubleday, 1969.
Rothberg, Donald. “Philosophical Foundations of Transpersonal Psychology.” Journal of Transpersonal
Psychology 18, 1 (1986): 1-34.
Rouner, Leroy S., ed. On Nature. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1984.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. Confessions. Translated by J. M. Cohen. Baltimore: Penguin, 1953.
. 
Émile, or Treatise of Education. Translated by B. Foxley. New York: Dutton, 1955.
Ruether, Rosemary Radford, ed. Religion and Sexism: Images of Woman in the Jewish and Christian
Traditions. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1974.
. 
Sexism and God-Talk: Toward a Feminist Theology. Boston: Beacon, 1983.
Rufus, W. Carl. “Kepler as an Astronomer.” In The History of Science Society, Johannes Kepler: A
Tercentenary Commemoration of His Life and Work. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1931.
550 

Rupp, E. Gordon. Luther’s Progress to the Diet of Worms, 1521. New York: Harper & Row, 1964.
Russell, Bertrand. The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell. Edited by R. E. Egner and L. E. Dennon. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1967.
. A 
History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1945.
. 
Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects. New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1967.
Salinger, J. D. Franny and Zooey. Boston: Little, Brown, 1961.
Samuels, Andrew. Jung and the Post-Jungians. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985.
Santillana, Giorgio de. The Crime of Galileo. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955.
Sarton, George. Introduction to the History of Science. 5 vols. Huntington, New York: Krieger, 1975.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness: A Phenomenological Essay on Ontology. Translated, with an
introduction by H. E. Barnes. New York: Citadel Press, 1956.
. 
Existentialism and Humanism. Translated by P. Mairet, London: Methuen, 1948.
. 
Nausea. Translated by Lloyd Alexander. New York: New Directions, 1959.
. 
No Exit & The Flies. Translated by S. Gilbert. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1946.
Schilpp, P. A., ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist. New York: Tudor, 1951.
, ed. 
The Philosophy of Karl Popper. 2 vols. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1974.
Scott, Joan Wallach. Gender and the Politics of History. New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Sextus Empiricus. Scepticism, Man and God: Selections from the Major Writings. Translated by S.
Etheridge, edited by P. P. Hallie. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1964.
Shakespeare, William. The Complete Works of Shakespeare. The Cambridge Edition Text, edited by
W. A. Wright. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1936.
Sheehan, Thomas, ed. Heidegger: The Man and the Thinker. Chicago: Precedent, 1981.
Sheldrake, Rupert. A New Science of Ufe: The Hypothesis of Formative Causation. Los Angeles:
Tarcher, 1981.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe. Prometheus Unbound. Edited by L. J. Zillman. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1968.
Sherrard, Philip. “The Christian Understanding of Man.” Sobomost 7, 5 (1977): 329-343.
Skinner, B. F. Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York: Bantam, 1972.
Skinner, Quentin, ed. The Return of Grand Theory in the Human Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985.
Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Edited, with an
introduction by E. Cannan. New York: Modern Library, 1937.
Smith, Huston. Beyond the Post-Modern Mind. Rev. ed. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 1989.
Snow, C. P. Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959.
Sophocles. The extant plays in 2 vols, of The Complete Greek Tragedies. Edited by D. Grene and R.
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954-57.
Spengler, Oswald. The Decline of the West. Translated by C. F. Atkinson. 2 vols. New York: Alfred A.
551 

Knopf, 1945.
Spretnak, Charlene. Lost Goddesses of Early Greece. Boston: Beacon Press, 1984.
Squire, Aelred. “The Doctrine of the Image in the De Veritate of St. Thomas.” Dominican Studies 4
(1951): 164-177.
Stein, Murray, and Robert L. Moore, eds. Jung’s Challenge to Contemporary Religion. Wilmette, Ill.:
Chiron, 1987.
Steiner, Rudolf. The Essential Steiner. Edited, with an introduction by Robert A. McDermott. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1984.
. 
The Riddles of Philosophy. Spring Valley, N.Y.: Anthroposophic Press, 1973.
. A 
Theory of Knowledge Based on Goethe’s World Conception. Translated by O. Wannamaker.
Spring Valley, N.Y.: Anthroposophic Press, 1968.
Stendahl, Kristen. Meanings: The Bible as Document and Guide. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984.
Sukenick, Ronald. The Death of the Novel and Other Stories. New York: Dial, 1969.
Taylor, A. E. Socrates: The Man and His Thought. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1954.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. The Phenomenon of Man. Translated by B. Wall, with an introduction by
Julian Huxley. New York: Harper & Row, 1959.
Tester, S. J. A History of Western Astrology. Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell, 1987.
Thomas, Keith. Religion and the Decline of Magic. New York: Scribner, 1986.
Thorndike, Lynn. A History of Magic and Experimental Science. 8 vols. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1923–58.
Tolstoy, Leo. Anna Karenina. Translated by C. Garnett. New York: Modern Library, 1935.
. 
The Death of Ivan Ilyich. Translated by L. Solotaroff. New York: Bantam, 1981.
. 
The Kingdom of God Is Within You. Translated by C. Garnett. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1984.
. 
War and Peace. Translated by C. Garnett. New York: Modern Library, 1931.
Tomlin, E. W. F. The Western Philosophers. New York: Harper & Row, 1957.
Torrance, Thomas F. Theological Science. London: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Toulmin, Stephen. Human Understanding: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1972.
Toynbee, Arnold J. A Study of History. Abridgement of vols. I–VI, by D. C. Somervell. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1947.
Vasari, Giorgio, Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. Translated by J. Foster.
London: George Bell’s Sons, 1890.
Virgil. The Aeneid. Translated by Robert Fitzgerald. New York: Random House, 1983.
Vlastos, Gregory. Platonic Studies. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973.
Voltaire. Philosophical Letters. Translated by E. Dilworth. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1961.
Voogd, Stephanie de. “C.G. Jung: Psychologist of the Future, ‘Philosopher’ of the Past.” Spring 1977
(New York and Zurich: Spring Publications, 1977): 175–182.
552 

Vrooman, J. R. René Descartes: A Biography. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1970.
Walsh, William H. Metaphysics. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1966.
Watts, Alan. Beyond Theology. New York: Pantheon, 1964.
. 
Psychotherapy East and West. New York: Pantheon, 1961.
Weber, Max. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Talcott Parsons. New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1958.
Weinberg, Steven. The First Three Minutes: A Modern View of the Origin of the Universe. New York:
Basic Books, 1988.
Weinstein, Donald, and Rudolph M. Bell. Saints and Society: The Two Worlds of Western
Christendom, 1000 to 1700. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Wellmer, Albrecht. “On the Dialectic of Modernism and Postmodernism.” Praxis International 4
(1985): 337–362.
Westfall, Richard S. Force in Newton’s Physics: The Science of Dynamics in the Seventeenth Century.
New York: American Elsevier, 1971.
White, Lynn. “The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis.” Science 155 (1967): 1203–1207.
Whitehead, Alfred North. Process and Reality. Corrected ed. Edited by D. R. Griffin and D. W.
Sherburne. New York: Free Press, 1978.
. 
Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan, 1925.
Whitehead, Alfred North, and Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica. 3 vols. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1927.
Whitfield, J. H. Petrarch and the Renascence. New York: Haskell House, 1969 (reprint of 1943
edition).
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf.
Edited by J. B. Carroll. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1956.
Whyte, Lancelot Law. The Unconscious Before Freud. New York: Basic Books, 1960.
Wilkinson, Elizabeth M., and Leonard A. Willoughby. Goethe, Poet and Thinker. New York: Barnes &
Noble, 1962.
Wind, Edgar. Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance. Rev. and enlarged ed. New York: Norton, 1968.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. 3rd ed. New
York: Macmillan, 1968.
. 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Translated by D. F. Pears and B. F. McGuinness, with an
introduction by Bertrand Russell. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961.
Wollstonecraft, Mary. Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Edited by M. Kramick. New York: Viking
Penguin, 1978.
Wordsworth, William. Poetical Works. Rev. ed. Edited by T. Hutchinson and E. De Selincourt. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1950.
Wordsworth, William, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Lyrical Ballads, 1798. 2nd ed. Edited by W. J.
Owen. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969.
Yates, Frances A. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. London: Routledge, 1964.
553 

Yeats, William Butler. The Collected Poems. London: Macmillan, 1952.
. A 
Vision. New York: Macmillan, 1956.
Reference Works
Bullock, Alan, and R. B. Woodings, eds. 20th Century Culture: A Biographical Companion. New York:
Harper & Row, 1983.
Edwards, Paul, ed. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 8 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1967.
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 15th ed. 30 vols. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1977.
Flew, Antony, ed. A Dictionary of Philosophy. 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin’s, 1984.
Gillispie, C. C., ed. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 16 vols. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970.
Harvey, Sir Paul, ed. The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974.
Kinder, Hermann, and Werner Hilgemann. The Anchor Atlas of World History. Translated by E. A.
Menze. 2 vols. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1974.
Liddell, H. G., and R. Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon. 9th ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968.
Oxford English Dictionary. Compact ed. 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.
Rahner, Karl, et al., eds. Sacramentum Mundi. An Encyclopedia of Theology. 6 vols. New York: Herder
and Herder, 1968.
Trager, James, ed. The People’s Chronology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1979.
Wiener, Philip P., ed. Dictionary of the History of Ideas. 5 vols. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1973.
554 

Acknowledgments
The long project of writing this book has left me deeply indebted to more
people than I can hope adequately to acknowledge. I am very grateful to the
following men and women who read the manuscript in its entirety, in
several cases more than once, and who gave me invaluable critical comment
and support: Stanislav Grof, Bruno Barnhart, Robert McDermott, Joseph
Campbell, Huston Smith, David L. Miller, Cathie Brettschneider, Deane
Juhan, Charles Harvey, Renn Butler, Bruce Newell, William Keepin, and
Margaret Garigan. I also wish to thank the many individuals who read and
responded to specific sections of the manuscript at various stages of the
writing, including James Hillman, Robert Bellah, Fritjof Capra, Frank Barr,
William Webb, Gordon Tappan, Aelred Squire, William Birmingham, Roger
Walsh, John Mack, and Joseph Prabhu. An especially important reader of the
book throughout the many years of its composition has been my wife
Heather Malcolm Tarnas, whose meticulous editorial eye, probing questions,
and sensitive judgment have deeply influenced the final result.
There are probably few sentences in this work that could not have been
footnoted in recognition of some book or essay, lecture, letter, or
conversation that has influenced my understanding of an idea or how best to
articulate it. The bibliography attempts to list some portion of my many
intellectual debts, but brief citations scarcely do justice to the contributions
of scholars such as W. K. C. Guthrie, M. D. Chenu, Josef Pieper, Ernst
Wilhelm Benz, Herbert Butterfield, William McNeill, Robert Bellah, and
Thomas Kuhn, to name only a few of those whose influence on this book
was especially marked. In addition, a number of individuals contributed
directly to my working out of the book’s overall historical conception, and
here I particularly wish to acknowledge my appreciation for innumerable
stimulating discussions with Stanislav Grof, Bruno Barnhart, James Hillman,
Robert McDermott, Deane Juhan, Huston Smith, Joseph Campbell, and
Gregory Bateson.
For the publication of the book, I am greatly indebted to my agent
Frederick Hill and his associate Bonnie Nadeli; to Robert Wyatt and Teri
Henry of Ballantine Books; to Peter Guzzardi, Margaret Garigan, James
555 

Walsh, and John Michel of Harmony Books; and to Bokara Legendre for
initiating the whole process. I am very grateful for the generous financial
support provided by Joan Reddish, Arthur Young, Bokara Legendre,
Christopher Bird, and Philip Delevett, as well as by members of the Tarnas
and Malcolm families, which enabled me to devote sufficient time to the task
of writing and research. My work on the book was also aided in important
ways by Michael Murphy, Richard Price, Albert Hofmann, Anne Armstrong,
Roger Newell, Jay Ogilvy, the Institute for the Study of Consciousness, and
the Princeton University Press. A grant from Laurence S. Rockefeller allowed
me to participate in the Esalen Project for Revisioning Philosophy, a three-
year series of conferences with leading philosophers, theologians, and
scientists. The remarkable discussions that took place during these
gatherings played a significant role in pressing me to articulate the
evolutionary conception of Western intellectual and spiritual history that is
set forth in the epilogue of the present book, and that was first presented at
the project’s concluding conference, “Philosophy and the Human Future,”
held at Cambridge University in August 1989.
These acknowledgments would be incomplete without mention of my
deep appreciation for the formative role played in my life by Esalen Institute,
where I lived from 1974 to 1984; by Harvard University, which I attended
from 1968 to 1972; and by the Jesuit teachers of my youth. In some sense
this book can be seen as the natural outgrowth of having been educated in,
and having to integrate the diverse intellectual influences of, just those
particular learning communities. I hope this book can also be seen as an act
of gratitude to each of them, and to the many dedicated men and women
who shared with me their knowledge and insights.
I also want to acknowledge my gratitude to the land and spirit of Big Sur
on the Pacific coast, which nurtured, challenged, and inspired me through
all the years I worked on the book.
Finally, I wish to thank my parents, my wife, and my children. Without
their faith and loving support, this book could not have been written. I am
deeply grateful to each of them.
556 

