Elitza Katzarova
POLITICAL 
CORRUPTION 
& GOVERNANCE
THE SOCIAL
CONSTRUCTION OF
GLOBAL CORRUPTION
From Utopia to Neoliberalism

Series Editors
Dan Hough  
University of Sussex  
Brighton, UK
Paul M. Heywood  
University of Nottingham  
Nottingham, UK
Political Corruption and Governance

This series aims to analyse the nature and scope of, as well as possible 
remedies for, political corruption. The rise to prominence over the last 
20 years of corruption-related problems and of the ‘good governance’ 
agenda as the principal means to tackle them has led to the develop-
ment of a plethora of (national and international) policy proposals, inter-
national agreements and anti-corruption programmes and initiatives. 
National governments, international organisations and NGOs all now 
claim to take very seriously the need to tackle issues of corruption. It is 
thus unsurprising that over couple of decades, a significant body of work 
with a wide and varied focus has been published in academic journals and 
in international discussion papers. This series seeks to provide a forum 
through which to address this growing body of literature. It invites not 
just in-depth single country analyses of corruption and attempts to com-
bat it, but also comparative studies that explore the experiences of dif-
ferent states (or regions) in dealing with different types of corruption. 
We also invite monographs that take an overtly thematic focus, analysing 
trends and developments in one type of corruption across either time or 
space, as well as theoretically informed analysis of discrete events.
More information about this series at  
http://www.palgrave.com/gp/series/14545

Elitza Katzarova
The Social 
Construction  
of Global Corruption
From Utopia to Neoliberalism

Elitza Katzarova
Braunschweig University  
of Technology
Braunschweig, Germany
Political Corruption and Governance
ISBN 978-3-319-98568-8 	
ISBN 978-3-319-98569-5  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018951567
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights 
of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction 
on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and 
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and 
information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. 
Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have 
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover image: © Daniel Day/Photodisc/Getty Images
Cover design by Akihiro Nakayama
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

v
Preface and Acknowledgements
When my interest in corruption studies first developed about nine years 
ago, I had no interest in writing about global corruption. I started with 
an interest in two corrupt countries—Bulgaria and Italy. I was, at the 
time, a Bulgarian living in Italy, so that made a lot of sense. The more 
I read about corruption however, the more I realized that there was an 
aspect of how corruption became a global governance issue that had not 
been properly accounted for. How corruption became a global problem 
has a lot to tell us not just about corruption but also about how interna-
tional affairs work, how are problems defined and how is the regulatory 
response to them globalized.
The Latin root of the word ‘corruption’ means ‘to break.’ Our current 
preoccupation with global corruption can be seen to imply that the world 
is broken. Arguably, the exponentially increasing demand for global solu-
tions to complex problems encounters one insurmountable difficulty, 
which is that the world itself is also broken: it is broken into nation states. 
The attempt to tackle global problems that exhibit ever-increasing sophis-
tication has to overcome the broken landscape of international affairs. 
The world is broken also by conditions that necessitate collective defini-
tions and collective responses. This study brought all of these elements 
together in accounting for how governments constructed and negotiated 
a global corruption problem, and how the resulting global governance 
structures shaped our thinking not just on what corruption is, but also on 
what government—business relations ought to look like.

vi     Preface and Acknowledgements
Much of this story is about the United States and the Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). The story of the internationalization of 
the FCPA is fascinating, and it was what attracted me to this study in 
the first place. A world without bribery would be a better world and 
definitely one that is better for developing countries. The point that this 
book tries to make is that maybe the US-sponsored issue of bribery is 
not the epitome of corruption. Corruption can be seen to operate at a 
much grander scale in the way in which business engulfed politics under 
the neoliberal transformation of governments and societies. Perhaps the 
task of the anti-corruption scholar is to start studying the potential con-
flicts of interest in well-established (and often legal) practices, such as the 
revolving door in politics, legal corporate campaign financing, corporate 
welfare, as well as the socialization of losses and privatization of profits 
that has become the new normal with the latest financial crisis. If we are 
to reconsider some of the early claims on corrupt influence, launched by 
developing nations, there might be something much more fundamentally 
broken with the world than brown envelopes slipped under tables.
There are many people who have helped me in my journey of com-
pleting this book. I would like to thank Paul Heywood, Vincent della 
Sala, Steven Sampson, Anja Jakobi, Jasmine Haunschild, Bastian Loges, 
Giorgio Fodor, Silvia Tomaselli, Rosaria Astarita, Jan-Anno Schuur 
from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) Archives in Paris and Marvin Córdova from the United Nations 
(UN) Archives in New York. Finally, I would like to thank my mother 
and my husband for their love and support. I would like to dedicate this 
book to the family that I lost over the last years, my father Elko, and my 
grandparents Atanas and Liliana.
Sozopol, Bulgaria  
June 2018
Elitza Katzarova

vii
Contents
1	 Introduction: The Origin Story of Global  
Anti-Corruption Governance	
	
1
2	 Corruption and Its Discontents	
	
9
3	 The Social Construction of Global Problems	
	
43
4	 Building a New World: Global Claims in the 1970s	
	
75
5	 The Corporate Watergate	
	 105
6	 The Road to the New Orthodoxy	
	 133
7	 The OECD Convention and Beyond: State-Powered 
Coalition Building in a Broken World	
	 171
8	 Global Anti-Corruption Talks in the 1970s and 1990s: 
The Story of Two Utopias	
	 213
Index	
	 235

ix
Abbreviations
ACRN	
Anti-Corruption Research Network
BAE	
British Aerospace
BIAC	
Business and Industry Advisory Committee
CCL	
Corporate Criminal Liability
CIME	
Committee on International Investment and Multinational 
Enterprises
CIPE	
Center of International Private Enterprise
CoE	
Council of Europe
CPI	
Corruption Perceptions Index
DAFFE	
Directorate for Financial, Fiscal and Enterprise Affairs
ECOSOC	
United Nations Economic and Social Council
EU	
European Union
FATF	
Financial Action Task Force
FCPA	
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
FDI	
Foreign Direct Investment
FIDIC	
Business Integrity Management Clearing House of the 
International Federation of Consulting Engineers
G7	
Group of 7
G20	
Group of 20
G77	
Group of 77
GATT	
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GFC	
Global Financial Crisis
GIACC	
Global Infrastructure Anti-Corruption Centre
ICC	
International Chamber of Commerce
IFIs	
International Financial Institutions

x     Abbreviations
IME	
Committee on International Investment and Multinational 
Enterprises
IMF	
International Monetary Fund
ITT	
International Telephone & Telegraph
NIE	
New Institutional Economics
OAS	
Organization of American States
OECD	
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PACI	
Partnering Against Corruption Initiative
PPP	
Public–Private Partnership
RBIBT	
Recommendation on Bribery in International Business 
Transactions
SEC	
Securities and Exchange Commission
SME	
Small and Medium Enterprises
TI	
Transparency International
TI USA	
Transparency International United States of America
TNC	
Trans-National Corporation
TUAC	
Trade Union Advisory Committee
UK	
United Kingdom
UN	
United Nations
UNCAC	
United Nations Convention Against Corruption
UNCTAD	
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNICORN	
Unions Anti-Corruption Network
UNODC	
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNTERM	
United Nations Terminated Missions
UNTOC	
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime
US	
United States
WGI	
Worldwide Governance Indicators
WTO	
World Trade Organization

xi
List of Tables
Table 3.1	
National and global claims-makers	
	
62
Table 6.1	
Issue controversy	
	
152

1
The origin story of global anti-corruption governance reads like a  
heroic quest for justice and transparency. It is a reassuring story of ­liberal 
triumphalism. It is a cautionary tale for corrupt public officials and 
­governments. It is a shameful reminder for the corrupt countries of the 
Global South to upend their ways and join the peaceful yellow of the 
North on Transparency International’s (TI) world map. It is also a story 
that in most academic literature occupies an introductory paragraph. It is 
a story that, albeit uplifting, deserves little thought.
This book looks into an aspect of the global governance of corruption 
that was previously considered unworthy of scholarly attention. To the 
extent that global anti-corruption efforts prior to the mid-1990s were 
mentioned, it was usually as a brief note on a ‘false start’. The lack of 
attention to the intergovernmental talks, that by the mid-1990s were 
ongoing for 25 years, has led to some persistent myths in the origin story 
of global anti-corruption governance. One of these myths is that TI and 
the World Bank were pioneers in the process. The founding of TI in the 
early 1990s and the acclaimed Wolfensohn speech on the ‘cancer of cor-
ruption’ in 1996 were events much more visible than the workings of ad 
hoc groups and confidential intergovernmental talks, and it was the for-
mer, rather than the latter, that came to symbolize the new era of global 
anti-corruption efforts.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction: The Origin Story of Global 
Anti-Corruption Governance
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_1

2   E. KATZAROVA
In addition to the ‘founding fathers’ myth, another persistent myth 
in the origin story of global corruption is that there was no conflict 
on the definition of a global corruption problem. On the contrary, the 
social construction of a global corruption problem was ridden with 
strife, and in the process of contention, corruption became subject to 
a radical metamorphosis. Corruption was transformed from corporate 
abuse of power in the 1970s to government abuse of power in the 
1990s. The trope of the corrupt corporation came to be supplanted by 
the tropes of the corrupt politician, corrupt public official and corrupt 
country. In the process, the blame for corruption was shifted from 
developed countries (and their corporations) to the developing coun-
tries (and their governments). As the current study aims to show, the 
nature of global problems is not devoid of power struggles and battles 
for meaning. Shaping governance responses to global problems also 
means shaping the world.
What makes this study distinctive is that it is the first International 
Relations (IR) monograph to systematically examine the rise of corrup-
tion as a global governance problem from the 1970s onward. While 
many articles and studies tackle the question tangentially (Naim 1995; 
Elliott 1997; McCoy and Heckel 2001; Bukovansky 2002; Krastev 2004; 
Pieth 2007; Jakobi 2013), this book puts the question of how corruption 
rose and developed as a global governance issue in the center of inves-
tigation. As the book argues, this gap in the literature is due to a sig-
nificant extent to the lack of theoretical and methodological tools in IR 
that can trace the development of global social problems. In sociological 
research on the contrary, the study of the emergence of (national) social 
problems has a long research pedigree (Spector and Kitsuse 2009). The 
book offers a sociological approach for the study of problems in IR and 
makes a contribution to the constructivist agenda in IR by showing how 
sociological models for the study of social problems are applicable to 
international politics. Using the case of corruption, the book shows how 
global problems are negotiated and constructed and how global gov-
ernance structures have emerged from them. The findings presented in 
the book are based on previously unexamined archival sources from the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
and the United Nations (UN) which would be of interest to academics 
and anti-corruption practitioners but also to a wider audience of readers 
to which it would also provide a glimpse into the work of international 
organizations that usually appear as black boxes to the general public.

1  INTRODUCTION: THE ORIGIN STORY OF GLOBAL …   3
Since the mid-1990s, the topic of corruption has started to 
­dominate the global policy agenda; corruption has increasingly been 
understood as a global policy problem that cannot be adequately 
­tackled within the jurisdictional boundaries of the nation state. In the 
period 1994–1997, corruption as a global problem entered a stage of 
institutionalization after the formal introduction of the subject in a 
number of regional organizations such as the Organization of American 
States (OAS), the Council of Europe (CoE) and the European Union 
(EU). Yet, the formal agreements produced by these organizations as 
well as the OECD and the UN appear to have failed at ameliorating 
corruption across the globe. In academic research, this post-institu-
tionalization phase is also referred to as a ‘legitimacy crisis’ stage and 
has produced a shift from the study of corruption to the study of anti- 
corruption work across different fields, in particular political science, 
sociology and social anthropology (Krastev 2004; Haller and Shore 
2005; Sampson 2005; Bracking 2007; Roden 2010; Brown and Cloke 
2011). The legitimacy crisis that counter-corruption measures have 
entered has led scholars in these disciplines to question the definition, 
scope and ways to tackle corruption internationally and has paradoxically 
revived issues that were hotly debated at international organizations 
prior to institutionalization.
The book offers new ways of thinking about corruption by examining 
the two distinct ways in which policy approaches and discourse on cor-
ruption developed in the UN and the OECD. One of these approaches 
extrapolated bribery as the main form of corrupt practices and advocated 
a single-actor, limited scope offense, while the other approach tackled 
the broader structure of the global economic system and the increasing 
power of transnational corporations. One offered a ban on bribery—the 
other international regulation of transnational corporations. This study 
traces how these two interpretations of corruption as bribery and cor-
ruption as undue power of big corporations emerged from different state 
sponsors and how these two versions of what business–state relations 
should look like evolved over two decades of pre-negotiation talks at 
the UN and the OECD (as well as other organizations) until the under-
standing of corruption as bribery prevailed in the mid-1990s. The book 
concludes that the outcome of these debates has to a significant extent 
shaped the global economy as we know it today and that the discussed 
issues still resonate powerfully with current debates about the power of 
global economic actors and corporations that are ‘too big to fail.’

4   E. KATZAROVA
Chapter 2 provides a roadmap through the complex landscape of the 
global governance of corruption and an introduction to the implicit and 
explicit hypotheses that have been generated by the academic literature 
on the factors and agents responsible for the global anti-corruption erup-
tion in the 1990s. The first part of the chapter presents an outline of the 
major global anti-corruption initiatives and introduces the main actors in 
five different groups. The second part of the chapter starts to analyze the 
question as to why there has been a global anti-corruption eruption and 
who are the major actors responsible for this development. This section 
starts to problematize corruption as a global issue by introducing the six 
factors that have contributed to the rise of corruption as a global policy 
problem: the end of the Cold War, the good governance agenda of the 
World Bank, the coalition building of TI, the quantification of corrup-
tion through the publication of international perception-based indices, 
the instrumental use of the issue of corruption as a smoke screen for pol-
icies of liberalization and finally, the role of the United States in raising 
corrupt payments on the global agenda. The third part of the chapter 
then proceeds to examine four major ways of conceptualizing global 
anti-corruption work: anti-corruption as an issue for global governance, 
as an international regime or regimes, as a movement and as an industry.
Chapter 3 argues for the relevance of sociological approach to social 
problem to the study of global problems and IR. To account for the 
social construction of a problem means to provide for historical contin-
gencies and to understand problems as evolving products of collective 
definition that are in a dynamic relation to the condition they refer to. 
This book studies the process of definition through claims-making and 
other discursive strategies and practices that are presented in this chap-
ter and are applied in the empirical chapters. In order to clarify what is 
meant by construction of a global problem, the chapter proceeds in three 
steps. First, the concept of social construction and different types of 
social constructs are examined in order to show that the social construc-
tion of problems provides a useful analytical vehicle in relation to factual 
relativism. Second, the long tradition of the study of social problems in 
sociology is briefly introduced, and the theory of Spector and Kitsuse on 
claims-making is given further attention and is adapted to IR and the 
cast of actors that are present on the global arena. Third, other theo-
retical and conceptual issues are tackled before the presentation of the 
cases and the data sources. The chapter concludes that the application 

1  INTRODUCTION: THE ORIGIN STORY OF GLOBAL …   5
of the Spector and Kitsuse approach to IR can help elucidate the role 
of power, contestation and conflict in the social construction of global 
issues, and in this way, it can counteract what some scholars consider to 
be an implicit liberal bias in much of constructivist IR scholarship.
Chapter 4 examines the first anti-corruption discussions at global 
venues and the first instances of global institutional legitimation. Since 
the 1970s, claims on corruption within international organizations 
developed in two major directions. The chapter argues that these clash-
ing interpretations of the same condition can be called the Chilean and 
the American (US) legacies. The major difference between these two 
approaches was that the Chilean legacy developed at the UN and defined 
corruption as corporate influence on politics, while the American legacy 
developed predominantly at the OECD and defined corruption as brib-
ery. The chapter examines the content of global claims at the OECD and 
the UN in the 1970s and argues that the successful campaign to estab-
lish corruption as a global governance problem in the 1990s can only 
be understood as the legacy of the 1970s. By showing that nation states 
pioneered the process of global social construction, the chapter lays the 
groundwork for the argument that state power is essential in the creation 
of global problems and that powerful states can be proactive participants 
in this process.
Chapter 5 traces the steps that led to the re-launch of global 
claims-making in 1989 and shows how the US concern with illicit/ 
corrupt payments emerged in the first place. The main reason for the 
US initiative of 1989 was the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), 
which can be seen as a product of Watergate, as much as a product of the 
International Telephone & Telegraph (ITT) aftermath. While the ITT 
affair triggered debates in the United States on the foreign policy reper-
cussions of corporate misconduct, Watergate made these debates more 
domestically oriented. It was the combined work of the Subcommittee on 
Multinational Corporations, the Watergate Special Prosecution Force, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and a number of follow-up 
Senate committees that shed light on the illicit payments problem and 
informed much of the thinking behind the FCPA. Furthermore, the US 
Congressional hearings after the ITT affair were the main source of infor-
mation for other governments to start their own investigations into cor-
porate and government misconduct. As such, these testimonies provide 
information on the putative condition out of which global claims on cor-
ruption emerged. This is why this chapter discusses the content of the US  

6   E. KATZAROVA
Congress hearings on multinational corporations and foreign corporate 
payments. The chapter further establishes the re-emergence of claims 
after the 1988 Amendment to the FCPA, when the United States chose 
the OECD as the most appropriate international forum in which to 
achieve consensus on corrupt practices.
Chapter 6 accounts for the 1980s as the ‘middle years.’ In the 1980s, 
a counterrevolution that re-configured the relationship between state 
and market took place. The idea that the free market provides the best 
governance mechanism, of course, delegitimized the role of the state as 
defender of the public interest against the excesses of global corporate 
profit maximization. If in the 1970s anti-corruption debates in inter-
national organizations were dominated by the problem of corporations 
as political agents, in the 1990s the role of the state as economic agent 
came center stage. The Global South lost its strategic importance with 
the end of the Cold War, but also much changed with the Third-World 
foreign debt crisis. Yet, the UN venues dominated by developing coun-
tries, such as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD), the Group of 77 (G77) and the United Nations Center on 
Transnational Corporations (UNCTC), continued to argue for regula-
tory activism in the developing world and that the US-sponsored issue of 
bribery should be understood within the broader agenda of international 
regulation of multinationals. When the United States re-introduced the 
issue of bribery at the OECD in 1989, other major competitors from 
the Global North seemed largely uninterested in the appeal to ban trans-
national bribery. This chapter traces the position of OECD member 
states, as well as the work of the OECD Working Group in controversy  
management. The chapter further discusses the anti-corruption debates 
at the UN after 1980, and the different take that developing nations had 
on the good governance agenda, which emerged in the early 1990s.
Chapter 7 accounts for the making of the global anti-corruption erup-
tion in the 1990s. In the period 1994–1997, the foundation of the global 
anti-corruption governance was laid out. As this chapter shows, the suc-
cess of the anti-corruption endeavor was to a large extent determined by 
a systematic approach of state-sponsored coalition building. The advance-
ment of talks at the OECD and the adoption of the Recommendation 
on Bribery in International Business Transactions (RBIBT) led OECD 
member states to introduce the topic of corrupt practices in the OAS, 
the CoE, the EU, the UN and the G7/8. Non-state actors contributed 
to the process of coalition building, but much of what they achieved was 

1  INTRODUCTION: THE ORIGIN STORY OF GLOBAL …   7
shaped by previous efforts of state actors, in particular the United States,  
and the ongoing intergovernmental dynamics. The instrumental use 
of ­publicity and the change of venues contributed to the success of the 
OECD initiative to outlaw transnational corrupt payments and led to the 
spread of talks in a number of regional organizations. The formal agree-
ments reached at organizations such as the OAS, the CoE, the EU, the 
OECD and the World Bank then provided the legal and discursive under-
pinnings for the re-introduction of the subject at the UN. Building on 
Chapter 6, the first part of this chapter zooms closer in on the way in 
which the decision for the RBIBT was reached and discursively shaped. 
The second part then goes on to zoom out and shows the bigger picture 
of how, in relation to progress at the OECD, the subject of corruption 
was introduced in regional organizations. In this way, this chapter works 
toward striking a balance between showing how the social construction 
of problems is negotiated within organizations and how the interconnec-
tion and overlaps between organizations also shape the processes of col-
lective definition and the formulation of an official plan of action.
Chapter 8 compares global anti-corruption debates in the 1970s and 
1990s in order to provide the big picture in the development of a global 
corruption problem. The chapter analyzes the main differences in terms 
of problem content, venues and external events, as well as the strategy of 
the US executive and the level of uncertainty within which this strategy 
operated. The chapter argues that anti-corruption rhetoric was indeed 
neoliberalized in the 1990s, but the link between anti-corruption, as 
part of a broader agenda to regulate multinationals, and neoliberalism, 
as an agenda for deregulation, could be more complex than previously 
thought. The chapter suggests that, rather than being used as neoliberal 
window-dressing, the question of corruption in global venues was to 
some extent constitutive of a neoliberal agenda; anti-corruption policies 
were about the making of neoliberalism itself. The diachronic compar-
ison shows that depending on their membership base different venues, 
such as the UNCTAD, the G77 and the UNCTC on the one hand and 
the G7, the OECD and the World Bank on the other, have offered two 
distinctive competing versions of how is corruption to be understood 
and how it should be tackled. These competing narratives are indica-
tive of two different projects of world building proposed by the Global 
South and the Global North, and their convergence in the 1990s is what 
made the institutionalization of corruption as a global governance issue 
possible.

8   E. KATZAROVA
References
Bracking, Sarah, ed. 2007. Corruption and Development: The Anti-corruption 
Campaigns. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brown, Ed, and Jonathan Cloke. 2011. “Critical Perspectives on Corruption: An 
Overview.” Critical Perspectives on International Business 7 (2): 116–124.
Bukovansky, Mlada. 2002. “Corruption Is Bad: Normative Dimensions of the Anti-
corruption Movement.” Working Paper 2002/5, Department of International 
Relations, Australian National University. Accessed October 20, 2017. https://
digitalcollections.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/40136/3/02-5.pdf.
Elliott, Kimberly Ann. 1997. “Corruption as an International Policy Problem: 
Overview and Recommendations.” In Corruption and the Global Economy, 
edited by Kimberley A. Elliott, 175–233. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute 
for International Economics.
Haller, Dieter, and Cris Shore, eds. 2005. Corruption: Anthropological 
Perspectives. London: Pluto Press.
Jakobi, Anja P. 2013. “The Changing Global Norm of Anti-corruption: 
From Bad Business to Bad Government.” Zeitschrift Für Vergleichende 
Politikwissenschaft 7 (1): 243–264.
Krastev, Ivan. 2004. Shifting Obsessions: Three Essays on the Politics of 
Anticorruption. Budapest: Central European University Press.
McCoy, Jennifer L., and Heather Heckel. 2001. “The Emergence of a Global 
Anti-corruption Norm.” International Politics 38 (1): 65–90.
Naim, Moses. 1995. “Corruption Eruption.” Brown Journal of World Affairs 2 
(2): 245–261.
Pieth, Mark. 2007. “Introduction.” In The OECD Convention on Bribery: A 
Commentary, edited by Mark Pieth, Lucinda A. Low, and Peter J. Cullen, 
3–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roden J. 2010. “The International Anti-corruption Crusade: Neo-Liberal 
Institutional Structures, Moralization, and Social Capital.” Undercurrent 
Journal 7 (1): 12–22.
Sampson, Steven. 2005. “Integrity Warriors: Global Morality and the Anti-
corruption Movement in the Balkans.” In Corruption: Anthropological 
Perspectives, edited by Cris Shore and Dieter Haller, 103–131. London and 
Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press.
Spector, Malcolm, and John Kitsuse. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. 
Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

9
Corruption appears to be one of the most pressing global problems at 
the beginning of the twenty-first century. A global survey conducted 
for the BBC in 2010 and 2011 ranked corruption as the second most 
serious global problem. Since the mid-1990s, corruption has also 
become the center of an impressive global governance architecture. 
International organizations, global business associations and international  
non-governmental organizations (INGOs) have all taken a tough stance 
against corruption. The fairy-tale version of how this collective global 
governance response took shape usually features Tl. The setting of the 
fairy tale is the end of the Cold War when non-partisan, non-govern-
mental organizations (NGOs) could finally get down to the business of 
fixing global problems. While TI definitely played a catalytic role in the 
mid-1990s, the fairy-tale version of anti-corruption governance exagger-
ates the INGOs impact. It does so, perhaps, in an idealistic attempt to 
carve a place for solving global problems outside of politics. This is where 
the setting of the fairy tale comes into place. After the end of the Cold 
War, we woke up in a crisp new world beyond politics, a world in which 
technical problems could finally be solved pragmatically and without gen-
erating controversy. Corruption, however, is not a technical or natural 
problem. What came to be defined as global corruption was dependent 
on the ideas and interests of a number of collective and individual actors. 
Anti-corruption discourse and practice are not neutral, technocratic and 
devoid of struggles for power. In a similar way, the process through which  
CHAPTER 2
Corruption and Its Discontents
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_2

10   E. KATZAROVA
the problem rose on the global agenda was laden with power struggles 
and controversies over the future direction of the global economy. An 
understanding of global problems as natural phenomena, which come 
clearly defined and pre-packaged, obscures the power and ideational 
struggles of collective definitions. This chapter systematizes the state of 
the art of global anti-corruption governance before setting on to analyze 
the social construction of a global corruption problem.
The expansion of global anti-corruption initiatives has been so 
impressive in the past two decades (1996–2018) that enumerating and 
systematizing its manifestations across the globe have become a daunt-
ing task. The purpose of this chapter is, firstly, to present a map of the 
‘anti-corruption eruption’ that has swept the globe; secondly, to frame 
the anti-corruption initiatives conceptually and tackle the reasons for 
their rapid emergence and expansion according to the existing literature; 
and thirdly, to delineate the main actors involved in the process. To this 
purpose, the first part of the chapter presents an outline of the major 
global anti-corruption initiatives and introduces the main actors in five 
different groups. The second part of the chapter starts to analyze the 
question as to why there has been a global anti-corruption eruption and 
who are the major actors responsible for this development. This section 
starts to problematize corruption as a global issue by introducing the six 
factors that have contributed to the rise of corruption as a global policy 
problem: the end of the Cold War, the good governance agenda of the 
World Bank, the coalition building of TI, the quantification of corrup-
tion through the publication of international perception-based indices, 
the instrumental use of the issue of corruption as a smoke screen for pol-
icies of liberalization and finally, the role of the United States in raising 
corrupt payments on the global agenda.
The third part of the chapter then proceeds to examine four major 
ways of conceptualizing global anti-corruption work: anti-corruption as 
an issue for global governance (Rosenau and Wang 2001; Eigen 2013; 
Kirton et al. 2013), as an international regime or regimes (Bukovanvsky 
2002; von Rosenvinge 2009; Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010), as a 
‘movement’ (Yao 1997; Sampson 2005; Hough 2013) and as an indus-
try (Sampson 2010). Two of the four concepts and their compatibility 
are given further consideration—that is the existence of an international 
anti-corruption regime and its relation to the theoretical framework of 
global governance. Regimes in the context of global governance litera-
ture can be seen as specific ‘governance systems,’ providing governance 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   11
in specific issue area (Ba and Hoffmann 2006; Stokke 2012). This book is 
based on the premise that global governance structures, in particular issue 
areas, emerge from problems. These global problems are not natural, but 
have to be constructed, and despite the recent focus on the role of non-
state actors in international affairs, state agency remains essential to the 
process of social construction.
In a short period of time in the mid-1990s, the question of corrup-
tion emerged in a number of venues and was addressed with a wide 
range of instruments. It seemed like a new issue had exploded onto the 
international scene after the end of the Cold War. The famous refer-
ence of Naim (1995) to a ‘corruption eruption’ was met with an equally 
imposing anti-corruption eruption that took over the major interna-
tional organizations and financial institutions and involved the business 
community and civil society actors. A number of international legal 
treaties have been adopted since the mid-1990s that tackle the subject 
of corruption. The only legal anti-corruption instrument that is truly 
global in scope is the United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
(UNCAC) adopted in 2003. A number of international conventions 
with regional scope precede the UNCAC. These are the Inter-American 
Convention Against Corruption (1996), the Convention on the Fight 
Against Corruption Involving Officials of the European Communities or 
Officials of Member States of the European Union (1997), the Council 
of Europe Criminal and Civil Law Conventions (1999a, b) and the 
African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption 
(2003). Even though the OECD Convention is not a global instru-
ment, it cannot properly be placed in the regional profile. This is pri-
marily because the membership base of the OECD is not regional, but 
also because the Convention for Combating Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials in International Business Transactions (1997) involves a strong 
transnational element with its focus on transnational bribery which has 
been incorporated into almost all of the above conventions.
A complementary, albeit ‘national,’ side of the global governance 
of corruption that further developed as a consequence of the OECD 
Convention is the application of domestic acts with extraterritorial 
reach such as the UK Bribery Act from 2010 and the US FCPA from 
1977. While other national legal acts targeting the curbing of cor-
ruption exist, these two pieces of legislation enjoy an extensive extra-
territorial application. The extraterritorial reach of the Bribery Act 
and the FCPA is partly due to their legal provisions, but also to the 

12   E. KATZAROVA
special position that both the United Kingdom and the United States 
hold in the global economy. The jurisdictional reach of the Bribery 
Act, for example, is extended to all companies that have a ‘presence’ in 
the United Kingdom, which may be an office, operations or subsidiary 
(Bribery Act 2010). The UK jurisdiction applies even to acts commit-
ted in a third country that do not bear connection to the operations of 
the liable company in the United Kingdom (Dunst et al. 2011). In this 
respect, Article 12 of the Bribery Act comes close to the provisions of 
the FCPA which came into effect after the amendments of 1998. The 
extended US jurisdiction was possible because the OECD Convention, 
adopted the previous year, allowed for amendments to the FCPA, so 
that all companies listed on a US stock exchange would be liable even 
for corrupt acts committed in a third country (Ashe 2005). The pros-
ecution of companies under these two powerful extraterritorial acts 
and under other anti-corruption national laws with similar reach are an 
important part of the global governance of corruption because of the 
broad extraterritoriality they enjoy. Since the application of the Bribery 
Act has been significantly postponed, for the time being only the FCPA 
provides robust proof that on behalf of the United States, this national 
legislation is vigorously employed in the fight against corrupt practices 
internationally, and the Siemens and BAE cases constitute point in case 
(Lord 2014). Both cases were brought to the Court of Columbia (U.S. 
v. Siemens Aktiengesellschaft and U.S. v. BAE Systems PLC). In the 
case of the BAE, the British government chose to close the case and 
evoked issues of national security as justification for the decision, but 
yet it had to concede to an investigation under the FCPA in which it 
pleaded guilty (US Department of Justice 2018).
A trans-governmental element in the global governance of corrup-
tion has developed as a consequence of the need for enforcement of the 
international conventions and the extraterritorial national laws. Delaney 
(2005) explains the trans-governmental twist in the anti-corruption 
effort as a network that has developed from the necessity for coopera-
tion between national agencies, entrusted with the power to imple-
ment national anti-corruption laws and to comply with international 
obligations.
Both private- and public-sector initiatives have developed to coun-
teract corruption internationally and have led to attempts to com-
bine business and governmental approaches to anti-corruption work 
in a comprehensive framework. Global business actors have adopted 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   13
anti-corruption practices as part of general strategies for corporate 
responsibility, or specific attempts to address national and international 
legislation on the subject. The International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC), the leading business organization worldwide, was the first inter-
national non-government organization that addressed the issue of cor-
ruption internationally in 1977 with the ICC’s Rules on Extortion and 
Bribery in International Business Transactions.
Business actors continue to be actively involved in curbing corruption. 
The scope of the OECD Convention, for example, focuses on the ‘sup-
ply side’ of bribery. While addressed at states, the Convention concen-
trates on the role of global business as the provider of bribes and does 
not scrutinize the ‘demand,’ or recipient side of the corrupt transac-
tion. Abiding to formal legal restrictions, however, is not the only way 
in which business actors contribute to the global anti-corruption cam-
paign. Voluntary action, as in the case of the ICC Rules on Extortion 
and Bribery, remains at the forefront of business attempts to curb cor-
ruption internationally.
Anti-corruption policies have become an integral ingredient of cor-
porate social responsibility. An example of how this was achieved at a 
global scale is provided by the Global Compact. The Compact is the 
most significant ‘voluntary corporate responsibility initiative in the 
world,’ and it involves close to 9000 corporate actors from 130 coun-
tries. In light of the UNCAC, in June 2004, a 10th Principle was added 
to the Global Compact which states that ‘Businesses should work 
against corruption in all its forms, including extortion and bribery’ 
(UN Global Compact 2018). Stressing the importance of voluntary 
action, the Compact aims at complementing international regulation 
and mainstreaming the ten principles of corporate responsibility and 
sustainability worldwide.
While the endorsement of self-regulating mechanisms could be an 
effective preventive mechanism against corruption for big companies, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) may find it more challenging to 
build internal integrity systems that ensure compliance. The Business 
Anti-Corruption Portal (Portal), an Internet tool, is tailored for SMEs 
that are less often placed in the media limelight, but face as many chal-
lenges, especially when investing abroad, as big companies do. The 
Portal provides tools, free training and information tailored to SMEs and 
stresses the importance of the involvement of the private sector in the 
global fight against corruption (Business Anti-Corruption Portal 2018). 

14   E. KATZAROVA
Another notable business portal with a global scope is the Resource 
Center for Business ‘Business Fighting Corruption’ of the World Bank 
Institute (World Bank 2018). While these initiatives remain business ori-
ented, they reach toward wider civil society and therefore provide a good 
platform for interaction between INGOs and global business actors.
The Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC), which repre-
sents business interests to the OECD, also takes an active stance against 
corruption and bribery and structures the plethora of formal and infor-
mal initiatives on the subject in the BIAC Anti-Bribery Resource Guide 
(BIAC 2018). Membership associations, such as TRACE International 
and Center of International Private Enterprise (CIPE), specialize in 
consulting multinational corporations on compliance with interna-
tional anti-corruption regulation (CIPE 2018). The Partnering Against 
Corruption Initiative (PACI) of the World Economic Forum is another 
‘global anti-corruption initiative, developed by companies for compa-
nies’ (World Economic Forum 2018). Notable initiatives by industry 
include the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, the Global 
Infrastructure Anti-Corruption Centre (GIACC), and the Business 
Integrity Management Clearing House of the International Federation 
of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC). The Global Unions Anti-Corruption 
Network (UNICORN) is an international trade union network, spon-
sored among others by TUAC (the Trade Union Advisory Committee to 
the OECD) which specializes in trade union anti-corruption work at the 
international level (UNODC 2018).
The G20 Anti-Corruption Action Plan, first adopted in 2010, con-
stitutes an attempt at a comprehensive reform and harmonization of the 
global governance of corruption. The Action Plan also provides an exam-
ple of the existing synergies between government and business actors 
and reveals the dense web of communication and collaboration between 
a number of international organizations on the subject of anti-corrup-
tion. The current resurgence of interest in the international fight against 
corruption can be partially attributed to fears that the global financial 
crisis (GFC) would undermine standards in business transactions. It was 
in relation to the GFC that the G20 Anti-Corruption Action Plan was 
adopted at the Seoul Summit in November 2010. Strengthening the 
existing ‘international anti-corruption regime’ appears at the front of the 
reform effort with the two pillars of the regime being the UNCAC and 
OECD Conventions (Action Plan G20 Annex III 2010).

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   15
The driving force behind efforts, such as the G20 Action Plan, is a fear 
that, especially in Western Europe, the fight against corruption in the 
interaction between business and the public sector could become subor-
dinated to the pursuit of profit, thus jeopardizing the implementation of 
the OECD Convention as the most effective insurance against this devel-
opment (Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010). At the same time, Wolf and 
Schmidt-Pfister (2010) argue, the challenges posed by the GFC may pro-
vide impetus for the future development of the anti-corruption regime and 
become a robust ‘example of politics in an era of fragmented statehood’ in 
a field as politically sensitive and multi-dimensional as corruption (16).
The OECD and G20 are cooperating for the successful implementa-
tion of the Anti-Corruption Action Plan. Together with the UN Office 
on Drugs and Crime in Vienna, which is the agency responsible for tack-
ling the implementation of the UNCAC, the OECD and G20 organize 
common events for strengthening coordination between business and 
government (OECD 2018). Currently, momentum appears to have been 
built for improving the consistency of the anti-corruption effort through 
the annual review of the action plan which aims to develop a dense net-
work of interlocutors beyond the G20 membership to tackle foreign 
bribery in particular (Action Plan G20 2015–2016).
The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the 
World Trade Organization (WTO) have addressed corruption in the 
broader framework of good governance and transparency since the mid-
1990s. The oldest provision on anti-corruption measures, Article X, 
was passed to the WTO from General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) in 1994 and has remained virtually unchanged since 1947 (Ala’i 
2008). The WTO has therefore been addressing the issue of transpar-
ency and (indirectly) corruption since its creation in 1995. The IMF has 
tackled corruption directly in the overall framework of good govern-
ance promotion since 1997. Corruption, defined as ‘the abuse of pub-
lic authority or trust for private benefit,’ undermines the legitimacy of 
government and ‘market integrity’ and is therefore a focal point of the 
IMF efforts to address poor governance globally. ‘The Partnership for 
Sustainable Global Growth’ (1996) and ‘Good Governance: The IMF’s 
Role’ (1997) are the two essential publications which laid the founda-
tions for the IMF’s anti-corruption policies (IMF 2018).
Although other regional and development banks have also developed 
anti-corruption policies in the last twenty years, the World Bank retains 
a central position on the anti-corruption frontier. The World Bank’s 

16   E. KATZAROVA
anti-corruption strategy was first made public in September 1997 and it 
evolved into a comprehensive program by 2007, when the Governance and 
Anticorruption Strategy of the World Bank Working Group was approved. 
The successful implementation of the strategy would see ‘the emergence 
of a shared vision in which countries recognize the links between govern-
ance, corruption, growth and poverty reduction’ (GAC 2007, 2). Another 
anti-corruption instrument with global magnitude is the World Bank’s 
Listing of Ineligible Firms and Individuals, which sanctions companies for a 
limited amount of time and can be used as a global reference for firms that 
breach anti-corruption regulation (World Bank 2018).
TI is undoubtedly the most significant civil society organization, oper-
ating at the global level in the field of anti-corruption. Its work is so vis-
ible that very often it has become synonymous with the global campaign 
against corruption itself. The founder of TI, Peter Eigen, left the World 
Bank at the beginning of the 1990s in order to begin a journey of coa-
lition building that would lead to the foundation of the Berlin-based 
INGO and subsequently aid significantly the rise of corruption to the 
global agenda (Rosenau and Wang 2001). TI is credited with providing 
the missing ingredient in the global attempt to curb corruption—that 
is, establishing the role of civil society and breaking down the intergov-
ernmental veto on corruption as an issue amenable to global regulation 
(Galtung and Pope 1999).
Founded in 1993, TI has become a dense network of over a hundred 
national chapters. It has pioneered innovative tools for raising awareness 
about the detrimental effects of corruption, and since 1995, it publishes 
the annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), which receives exten-
sive media coverage (TI 2018). It also coordinates the Anti-Corruption 
Research Network, an Internet hub for anti-corruption research. 
Galtung and Pope (1999) argue that TI has acquired a leading role in 
the global anti-corruption debate within a few years of its establish-
ment. The strength of TI is that while it deals with corporate responsi-
bility and works in cooperation with global business and governments, it 
can also serve as an opposition, as an independent watchdog that holds 
other actors accountable and represents the interests of unorganized civil 
society.
Another global anti-corruption watchdog is Global Integrity. 
Employing a methodology that developed from field research over 
the years to capture the opinion of local experts and citizens, Global 
Integrity started publishing the Global Integrity Index in mid-2000 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   17
(Global Integrity 2018). Global Witness is another INGO which 
addresses in particular the so-called Dutch disease or resource curse—the 
fact that countries rich in resources face more problems of corruption 
and development because of rent-seeking governments and elites (Global 
Witness 2018).
Understanding the Global Anti-Corruption Eruption
The major task of a social constructivist agenda is not to study the evi-
dent, but to show how what is now evident came to be. This book 
investigates the question of how corruption was constructed as a global 
problem, and the following sections present the main arguments for the 
process of social construction. The factors and agents discussed in the 
literature can be essentially broken down into six groups. The first, and 
most commonsensical, explanation is that corruption became a global 
problem with the end of the Cold War and the subsequent increase in 
capital movement due to the opening of new markets. This explanation 
presents the emergence of global problems as an automatic response 
to changed conditions. Other studies part with this structural explana-
tion, introducing the agents responsible for the rise of corruption to 
the global agenda. Two of these agents are the World Bank and TI. The 
‘measurement revolution’ initiated by these two organizations through 
the publication of corruption indices is also credited for the de-politiciza-
tion of corruption and its rise to the global policy agenda. Critical studies 
then present this de-politicization of corruption and the anti-corruption 
work of the World Bank in particular as a neoliberal window-dressing, 
an analytical position which argues that corruption’s rise to the global 
agenda was meant to provide a smoke screen for policies of liberalization 
and privatization. Lastly, the role of the United States in pushing cor-
ruption within the policy priorities of a number of international organ-
ization, in particular the OECD, presents another route through which 
corruption became a global problem.
The first set of explanations as to why corruption emerged on the 
global agenda is that there has been an objective increase in levels of 
corruption throughout the world. The ‘corruption eruption’ was 
a name initially given by Naim (1995) to signify a number of succes-
sive corruption scandals that broke out in the mid-1990s through-
out Europe, the United States, Latin America and other parts of the 
world. The phrase came to represent the argument that there has been 

18   E. KATZAROVA
a significant increase in the occurrences of corruption throughout the 
globe. The original article by Naim argued, however, that the corrup-
tion eruption from the mid-1990s was not due to an objective increase 
in corruption, because no reliable data existed to support this argument. 
It would be difficult to conclude whether in the 1990s there has been 
any significant increase in actual rather than perceived levels of corrup-
tion worldwide, but such an increase can be inferred indirectly from the 
rise in capital flows to emerging markets, which according to TI repre-
sentative Frank Vogl has triggered a boom in grand corruption across 
the globe (Rosenau and Wang 2001).
According to Naim (1995), the real change occurred not in the objec-
tive number of corrupt cases, but at the level of public perception that 
no longer rendered corrupt practices dismissible. The perception of a 
‘corruption eruption’ was due to the spread of democratic ideals around 
the globe, which abolished the once tacit acceptance of illicit practices. 
A ‘legitimation crisis,’ which has taken power away from the leaders and 
brought it to the public in a progressive global trend toward more open 
and democratic governance, was the essential ingredient to the public 
concern with corruption (Glynn et al. 1997). The end of the Cold War 
according to this argument was catalytic in speeding up and intensifying 
these revolutionary structural processes. With the Soviet Union removed 
as a security threat and the increased economic interdependence spread-
ing toward new markets, the problem of corruption could potentially 
be exacerbated, but the above structural changes have also provided the 
solution in terms of a historical opportunity for more transparent and 
democratic governance worldwide. This argument of interdependence 
due to the process of globalization and the end of the Cold War as a 
challenge and opportunity to democratization, despite being much more 
nuanced and explanatorily rich, provides the conventional view of how 
corruption rose to global prominence in the mid-1990s. The relationship 
between the Cold War and the corruption eruption is more complicated, 
however, and can be understood in two major ways. One is that the end 
of the Cold War and the spread of democracy led to higher expectations 
toward accountability and ethics in politics, which, in turn, alerted pub-
lic opinion to resurfacing instances of corrupt behavior, as Naim argues. 
The second is to understand corruption as a legacy of the Cold War, dur-
ing which illicit payments were used by both government and business to 
buy influence necessary to secure the loyalty of foreign governments and 
provide access to resources (Neild 2002).

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   19
The conventional story goes that in the mid-1990s, due to the 
increased level of capital movement and the entrance into the world 
economy of new national markets, corruption rose to the attention of 
international policy makers and became an issue for global governance. 
This book argues that the end of the Cold War and events in the 1990s 
provided a window of opportunity rather than the source of corrup-
tion as a global agenda item since processes of establishing the prob-
lem of corruption internationally were already in place since the 1970s. 
Structural explanations, such as the end of the Cold War, obscure agency 
and entail a degree of automaticity and determinism, which is detrimen-
tal to elucidating the concrete mechanisms through which national trou-
bles become global problems. Structural explanations that do not delve 
into how certain issues acquire the status of global policy problems, 
therefore, contribute to the ‘naturalization’ of problems and preclude 
critical examination that has theoretical and practical advantages—theo-
retical because it brings to light the agents and processes through which 
issues become policy problems; practical because it can map future direc-
tions in the redefinition of problems through the establishment of phases 
and patterns in the trajectory of otherwise disparate global issues.
The following two sub-sections highlight the role of agency in global 
affairs and start the de-naturalization of corruption as a global issue, by 
presenting the major actors that have contributed to the emergence of 
corruption as a global problem in the existing literature—international 
organizations such as the World Bank, global NGOs such as TI and state 
actors. These explanations attribute the rise of corruption as a global pol-
icy problem to the influence of these actors and the processes of de-polit-
icization and quantification of corruption that they started.
The Measurement Revolution of the World Bank and TI: 
The Advent of Global Corruption Indices
The World Bank is largely perceived to be one of the first international 
actors to start addressing corruption within the broader framework of 
good governance. Following the famous Wolfensohn speech in 1996, the 
first formal reference to corruption appeared the following year in the 
World Development Report. Weaver (2010) explains that the attempt to 
tangentially tackle the issue of corruption within the broader framework 
of institutional development dated back to the 1970s. During this dec-
ade, staff within the African branch of the World Bank started promoting 

20   E. KATZAROVA
the idea that in order to accomplish the goals of development, the inter-
national financial institution had to address problems of political char-
acter. Weaver traces the process through which this small group of what 
would later become ‘governance advocates’ managed to convince upper 
management of the importance of public institutions for the purposes 
of development, at first with limited success. With a mandate from then 
President McNamara, a task force, managed by Arturo Israel, was cre-
ated in 1979 and in 1983 a brief reference to ‘good government’ was 
included in the annual World Development Report. Weaver explains that 
it was only later, in 1989, that the more neutral term of ‘good govern-
ance’ was adopted in order to depoliticize the issue and make it part of a 
technocratic discourse (55).
Corruption only later gained a central position as an impediment 
to development in the good governance agenda of the World Bank. 
Corruption as a World Bank development prerogative can be under-
stood only within the broader framework of debates about the role 
of the state or what Israel (1990) calls the ‘quality of the state’ or the 
‘quality of politics’ in development. In this context, corruption becomes 
just one symptom of the illegitimate interaction of public and private 
interests that is peculiar to ‘bad government.’ The lack of corruption, 
however, cannot be equated with quality of government as Rothstein 
(2011) observes. Rothstein employs ‘quality of government,’ under-
stood foremost as the impartial application of public authority, as a more 
precise concept than the term ‘good governance’ which has become 
overstretched. Stressing the role of government in these conceptualiza-
tions brings them closer to a political, rather than an economic, reading 
of the exercise of public authority.
Weaver (2010) captures this opposition between politics and eco-
nomics within debates in the World Bank by stressing that the change 
of terminology from ‘government’ to ‘governance’ was ultimately one 
of the changes from political to economic development prerogatives. 
As Polzer (2001) argues, the World Bank has economized the concept 
of corruption and placed politics as inferior to economics. Questioning 
whether the pendulum between the dichotomies of politics and econom-
ics has slung too far, Israel (1990) comments on the World Development 
Report from 1988 that ‘balancing the arguments of both the public 
interest and private interest views and concentrating on the benefits and 
costs of government intervention’ is essential for changing the views on 
how development works (5). Israel’s argument that the prescription to 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   21
dismantle the state has probably gone too far was relevant for the search 
of improved ‘quality of politics’ that would inform partly what was to 
become the good governance agenda of the World Bank. In the mid-
1990s, in particular, much of the thinking between World Bank policies 
shifted from the premises of the so-called Washington Consensus to New 
Institutional Economics (NIE) and the importance of sound regulative 
institutions for economic development (Cameron 2004). The impact of 
the broader institutional framework on economic performance argued by 
Israel’s team since the late 1970s was solidified by the influence of NIE 
at the World Bank in the 1990s and, also starting in the 1990s, corrup-
tion took central stage in the good governance debate.
Currently, corruption has an almost omnipotent explanatory power in 
the development debate and questions of development are seen to have 
established corruption as a problem of global concern. Within the frame-
work of the Bank’s good governance agenda, corruption emerges as an 
impediment to development and growth, but also as a symptom of ‘bad 
government.’ From the point of view of the World Bank, as one of the 
most visible actors in the anti-corruption field, corruption emerged as a 
global problem because it was an impediment to development for the 
Bank’s borrowers and, therefore, a substantive hindrance for the effec-
tiveness of the financial institution. The attempt to address issues of cor-
ruption within the broader framework of ‘good government’ spanned 
for a few decades until it finally received central stage status in the mid-
1990s with the change of the Bank’s leadership in 1995 and the influ-
ence of NIE on policy thinking, but also with developments at major 
intergovernmental organizations such as the OECD and other regional 
venues, as well as the emergence of non-state actors such as TI.
The founding of TI in 1993 was intertwined with the African Section of 
the World Bank through the NGO’s founder Peter Eigen, who worked as 
manager in World Bank programs in Africa and Latin America. After a piv-
otal meeting in Swaziland in 1990 and extensive discussions with his col-
leagues, Eigen designed a comprehensive plan for action against corruption 
(Galtung and Pope 1999). The reception in the World Bank was hesitant 
because anti-corruption work involved going beyond the Bank’s mandate, 
which was to deal with economic issues only (Eigen 1996). Eigen set out 
to find a solution outside the World Bank, leading him to leave the finan-
cial institution; after a series of meetings around the world, he founded 
the Advisory Council of TI (Galtung and Pope 1999). Since then, TI has 
expanded into a global NGO with over a hundred national chapters.

22   E. KATZAROVA
As discussed previously, Rosenau and Wang (2001) provide an anal-
ysis of how corruption rose as an issue for global governance by con-
centrating on the role of TI. NGOs and transnational advocacy groups, 
however, are only one of a number of actors, including intergovern-
mental organizations and national governments, who have contrib-
uted to the emergence of corruption as a global problem. As Rosenau 
and Wang note, TI is not the main actor or source of change but is act-
ing as an important ‘intervening variable.’ TI is credited for building a 
non-confrontational coalition model between government, business and 
civil society actors (Galtung and Pope 1999). Raising media and pub-
lic awareness through the annual CPI and other publications makes TI 
a catalyst in the process of constructing corruption as a global problem, 
but that process remained largely intergovernmental. As later chapters 
show, TI became part of the attempt of state actors to create an interna-
tional policy response that began 20 years prior to the foundation of the 
civil society organization.
The design and publication of the CPI and the Worldwide 
Governance Indicators (WGI) changed the idea that international cor-
ruption was unquantifiable and this development is credited for raising 
the issue to the global policy agenda (TI 2018).1 The measurement rev-
olution that these subjective indices started contributed significantly to 
the visibility of corruption worldwide, whether it was by convincing pol-
icy makers that quantifiable ultimately means manageable or by promot-
ing an exponential growth in academic papers on the subject. The CPI, 
in particular, has served its purpose as a powerful public relations tool 
for raising awareness of corruption by making headlines across the globe 
with its annual publications. Both the WGI and the CPI have promoted 
a boom of academic papers, which have contributed to a rising consensus 
on how corruption relates to other development issues such as Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) and growth. According to Galtung (2006), the 
positive view of corruption has become part of the past with the help 
of studies using corruption indices. A foreign investor in a country bur-
dened with inefficient bureaucracy and incomprehensible procedures 
1 There are business-oriented data sets (such as Business International and the World 
Competitiveness Report) which predate the CPI (Ades and di Tella 1997). The indices of 
TI (CPI) and the World Bank (Control of Corruption as part of the WGI) were developed 
by Lambsdorff and Kaufmann, respectively, and cover the period from 1995 and 1996, 
respectively (TI 2018; World Bank 2018).

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   23
can find an efficient and inexpensive shortcut in the form of bribing a 
public official, the general argument went (Leff 1964; Huntington 
1968). The high cost of corruption and its negative effect on growth, 
FDI and development have only recently been broadly accepted and the 
debate whether corruption is ‘grease’ or ‘sand’ in the wheels of develop-
ment and trade has taken on a life of its own (Ades and di Tella 1997; 
Kaufman and Wei 1999; Meon and Weill 2010).
The academic studies and debates prompted by the corruption indi-
ces promoted the view that corruption can be studied internationally as 
an objective fact, although indirectly through the quantification of expert 
and lay perception (Treisman 2000; Connors et al. 2006). At the same 
time, the ‘measurement revolution’ has attracted criticism that what is 
being measured are perceived levels of corruption or quantified percep-
tion. Some authors go as far as to argue that the limited ‘Western-style’ 
definition used in the indices is a form of ‘neo-colonialism through meas-
urement’ (De Maria 2008, 184). As much as the indices of the World 
Bank and TI were turning points in the study of corruption worldwide, 
their connection to the ‘objective fact’ of corrupt exchanges remains 
ambivalent. Firstly, since what is being measured is perception, some 
amount of bias and stereotyping can occur, such as the ‘poor is bad effect’ 
which considers countries with lower economic performance to be inher-
ently more corrupt (Søreide 2006). The tendency to gather data from 
business surveys and therefore capture mainly the opinions of Western 
businessmen is another point of criticism toward the CPI (Lambsdorff 
2006). As Andersson and Heywood (2009) argue, taking into consider-
ation business transactions and understanding the corrupt exchange pre-
dominantly as bribery preclude a more nuanced and deeper quantitative 
understanding of the forms and impact of corruption. Furthermore, prox-
ies, such as overall economic performance and the stability of the political 
system, affect the estimation of corruption levels. Secondly, on their own 
turn, corruption indices affect investment decisions and can turn into a 
self-fulfilling prophecy (Warren and Laufer 2009).
Philip (2006) observes that corruption indices do not include ‘hard 
data’ about actual occurrences of corruption in ‘soft’ perception-based 
data, but it is usually the latter that is used in academic studies.2 
Lambsdorff (2006) addresses the problem that the perception indices 
2 This is due to comparability issues and discrepancies in the legal procedures of countries 
from which the data are collected (Philip 2006).

24   E. KATZAROVA
do not relate directly to real phenomena, but yet these subjective indi-
ces remain the most comprehensive way of estimating the levels of cor-
ruption worldwide. The bias in the sample of respondents is tackled by 
including data that consist of both residents (who may also be employees 
of multinational companies) and expatriates, according to the designer of 
the CPI.3 This attempt to balance the sample of respondents, however, 
does not provide a solution to generalized bias that can be common to 
both residents and expatriates. The question remains to what extent the 
perception is based on empirical evidence or on personal preconceptions 
and reproduction of media and social biases (Miller 2006). Most of this 
criticism is targeted toward the CPI as a perception-based index, but as 
Heywood and Rose (2014) show, non-perceptual measurement of cor-
ruption remains a distinct possibility, yet one less likely to generate com-
parable results and as a consequence make newspaper headlines. Despite 
these problems with studying international corruption quantitatively, the 
publication of corruption perception indices has contributed significantly 
to the global visibility of corruption in the media and has helped solidify 
consensus on the negative impact that corruption has on development 
objectives.
A growing amount of literature places the explanation of the origin 
of anti-corruption policies and discourse within the context of neolib-
eral reforms and usually adopts a critical stance toward the politics of 
anti-corruption (Brown and Cloke 2004; Krastev 2004; Whyte 2007; 
Bracking 2009; Roden 2010). Brown and Cloke (2011) offer a compre-
hensive analysis of critical studies and, despite the nuances, a common 
trend appears to be that anti-corruption work is or at least has become 
a program, providing legitimacy to a neoliberal ‘economistic’ and anti-
state paradigm. The conventional understanding of corruption presents 
the role of politics as a source of rents and promotes deregulation as 
the only way to reduce opportunities for rent-seeking (Bracking 2007). 
3 The CPI is a composite index of 13 data sources: the African Development Bank 
Governance Ratings, the Bertelsmann Foundation Sustainable Governance Indicators, the 
Bertelsmann Foundation Transformation Index, the Economist Intelligence Unit Country 
Risk Ratings, the Freedom House Nations in Transit, the Global Insight Country Risk 
Ratings, the IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook, the Political and Economic Risk 
Consultancy Asian Intelligence, the Political Risk Services International Country Risk 
Guide, the Transparency International Bribe Payers Survey, the World Bank—Country 
Policy and Institutional Assessment, the World Economic Forum Executive Opinion 
Survey (EOS) and the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index (TI 2018).

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   25
The neoliberal charge inherent to the anti-corruption movement is 
­criticized as being biased and a-historical; it is also business centered and 
privileges the interests of market actors. Civil society actors, such as TI, 
have also contributed to a program of ‘normalization’ by trying to bring 
diverging political and economic institutions in line with neoliberal cri-
teria (Hindess 2005). The anti-corruption crusade (Brown and Cloke 
2004; Roden 2010) can therefore be seen to employ a ‘hollowed out’ 
discourse (Bukovansky 2006) as a window-dressing technique for poli-
cies of sometimes aggressive liberalization.
The actual implementation of World Bank anti-corruption policies has 
also been placed under scrutiny (Harrison 2004; Carroll 2009; Brown 
and Cloke 2011). The Bank has been seen to support, through its gov-
ernance program, an ‘American-led liberal capitalist globalism’ which 
has been ascending steadily after the Second World War (Harrison 2004, 
9). Anti-corruption policies, seen from this critical perspective, provide 
a smoke screen for neoliberal policies of deregulation, privatization and 
the withdrawal of the state from the economy. In particular, through the 
work of the World Bank, a new type of ‘governance-state’ has emerged 
which has to limit its steering activities to a minimum and allow free 
market reforms to work properly (Harrison 2004). Sociologists and 
anthropologists have equally criticized the occupation of the anti-corrup-
tion discourse by economics, the establishment of quantified perception 
through the CPI and the WGI as a standard measurement for corrup-
tion, which has allowed the transformation of anti-corruption debates 
into a ‘one-size fits all’ scientific enterprise (Krastev 2004).
The critical strand of the anti-corruption literature provides a lot of 
valuable insights into the politics of anti-corruption, but could be crit-
icized for making a straw man out of neoliberalism. Even the so-called 
Washington Consensus is not such a coherent body of thought as is 
usually assumed (Williamson 2008). The term ‘Washington Consensus’ 
initially developed as a response to questions about the development of 
Latin America and Williamson, who coined the term in 1989 was the 
first to engage conceptually with what was to become the new embodi-
ment of neoliberalism. Williamson (2008) explains that as part of a con-
ference paper he wrote a list of ten policies that he ‘thought more or less 
everyone in Washington would agree were needed more or less every-
where in Latin America, and labeled this the “Washington Consensus.”’ 
(Williamson 2008, 14). The conference in 1989 was meant to capture 
the way in which development ideas that have dominated economic 

26   E. KATZAROVA
thinking in Latin America for decades ‘were being swept aside by the set 
of ideas that had long been accepted as appropriate within the OECD’ 
(Williamson 2008, 14). Williamson (2008) stated that the term he 
coined had become ‘the center of fierce ideological controversy’ (14), 
and that it has come to signify ‘a set of neoliberal policies that have been 
imposed on hapless countries by the Washington-based International 
Financial Institutions (IFIs) and have led them to crisis and misery’ 
(Williamson 2002, 11). At the same time, the World Bank good gov-
ernance agenda is supposed to be part of a post-Washington Consensus 
era since the very goal of good governance policies was to address the 
limited view on development as dependent on economic factors alone 
(Jayasuriya 2002). Rodrik (2006) calls the inclusion of anti-corruption 
and other more politically and socially oriented objectives ‘augmented’ 
Washington Consensus, while Naim (2000) stresses the incoherence of 
the ‘Washington confusion.’
Krastev (2004) has argued that the World Bank and the IMF have 
in practice redesigned the elements of the ‘Washington Consensus’ as 
anti-corruption strategies in order to silence opposition to reforms. This 
argument pertains to the improper instrumentalization of policies to 
serve other objectives, but also to the rationale behind anti-corruption 
strategies. Understood as neoliberal window-dressing, anti-corruption 
policies rose to prominence as a way to promote the interests of major 
developed states in the rest of the world.
In the Shadow of Global Hierarchies:  
The Role of the United States
Another argument for the rise of the problem of corruption to global 
prominence is the attempt of the United States to level the playing field 
in relation to the FCPA. The argument that the breakthrough of cor-
ruption as a global agenda item was due to US interests in leveling the 
playing field, however, only offers a procedural explanation; it does not 
address the more substantive question as to why the United States would 
put itself in a disadvantaged position by adopting the Act in the first 
place. The FCPA was essentially the first anti-corruption tool with poten-
tially global reach. The ‘procedural’ explanation of why corruption rose 
as an issue for global governance points to the US attempt to overcome 
the competitive disadvantage that the adoption of the anti-bribery law 
was creating for American companies since 1977. Pieth (2007) argues 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   27
that the reasons why the United States adopted the FCPA in the first 
place can be seen as threefold: (1) in order to manage publicity; (2) in 
order to keep corporate (defense) actors under check; and (3) in order to 
preserve the integrity of the free market system.
From the ITT affair to Watergate and the Lockheed scandal, the 
1970s were seen by the American public as a venal age. Under the inves-
tigation of Senator Frank Church, an increasing number of illicit deals 
were resurfacing both within and outside the borders of the United 
States. The uncovering of a chain of corporate scandals established cor-
porate bribery as a common practice (Cragg and Woof 2002). To man-
age the public outrage over the findings was one reason why the United 
States adopted the FCPA. Pieth (2007) argues that a second more covert 
agenda pursued by the US government was to prevent private defense 
interests from interfering with US security objectives during the Cold 
War. The danger of US defense companies bribing their way into cru-
cial arms markets, especially in the Middle East, can be seen as another 
reason for the adoption of a law that would proscribe the practice of 
foreign bribery and it is given further attention in the fifth chapter. The 
Watergate affair had long-lasting effects on the American public and on 
American domestic and foreign policy. As Pieth (2007) observes, based 
on case law and other evidence, the US legislator post-Watergate was try-
ing to protect the ‘free market system against the erosion of public con-
fidence’ (8). The question was not one simply of bribery but of much 
more subtle and often legal instances of private interests exerting dis-
proportionate influence over the direction of public affairs. In particular, 
Watergate led to the ‘public integrity war’ at the center of which was the 
debate about the role of government in the agendas of new progressives 
and movement conservatives (North and Doss 1997).
The focal point of the ‘integrity war’ was the interaction between 
government and corporate actors. The defenders of ‘big government’ 
tried to portray corruption scandals as the consequence of the power of 
‘special interests’ over the democratic process. According to these new 
progressives, the Industrial Revolution changed American politics irre-
trievably by placing powerful corporate actors in the political landscape 
of the country and allowing them to exhibit strong influence over the 
political system. The movement conservatives tried to portray the cor-
ruption scandals since Watergate, as a natural consequence of the ‘moral 
bankruptcy of big government’ (xii). The new progressives’ preoccupa-
tion with the ability of private actors to exert disproportionate influence 

28   E. KATZAROVA
(both legally and illegally) over the outcomes of the national political 
process influenced the ‘good government’ reform model in American 
politics. This model was also central to the initial development of the 
good governance agenda within the framework of the World Bank. In 
particular, the ‘good government’ model shaped the conviction that in 
order to reinstate ‘public trust in government…citizens must demand 
that special interests and public officials comply with strict codes of con-
duct and fully disclose their attempt to influence public officials’ (North 
and Doss 1997, 9). Protecting the legitimacy and integrity of the free 
market meant also to prove that the system could work within a politi-
cal context according to clear and ethical rules that did not compromise 
the public’s confidence in the integrity of private companies and pub-
lic officials alike. At stake was the very legitimacy of the free market, 
because the perceived venality of public power under the pressure and 
financial resources of big business fell under the scrutiny of the American 
public. The fifth chapter elaborates on the historical and ideational cli-
mate of the 1970s and further traces the causal link between the FCPA 
and the establishment of corruption as an international agenda item.
Conceptualizing the Global Anti-Corruption Eruption: 
From International Regimes to Global  
Movements and Industries
Scholars have tried to make sense of the rapidly expanding global 
anti-corruption work through the prism of different conceptual tools. 
The anti-corruption eruption has been conceptualized in the existing lit-
erature in four major categories: (1) anti-corruption as an issue of global 
governance (Rosenau and Wang 2001; Eigen 2013; Kirton et al. 2013); 
(2) as an international regime or regimes (Bukovanvsky 2002; von 
Rosenvinge 2009; Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010); (3) as a movement 
referring either to the work of TI or as a loose term addressing both 
regional and global efforts to tackle corruption (Yao 1997; Sampson 
2005; Hough 2013); and (4) as an industry in anthropological studies 
(Sampson 2010).
These four conceptualizations are neither clear-cut nor mutually exclu-
sive but they all come with different insights about the global anti-cor-
ruption resurgence. The ‘industry’ debate portrays anti-corruption work 
as ‘anti-corruptionism’ (Sampson 2010) and is critical of the effective-
ness of implementing anti-corruption projects (Haller and Shore 2005). 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   29
The practitioners of anti-corruptionism refer to it as a ‘movement’ but 
some of them are simply drawn to the ‘marketplace’ of anti-corruption 
programs, the success of which is difficult to establish. The industry 
debate offers another notable insight: Anti-corruption is not ‘innocent’ 
(Sampson 2005). The recent consensus on the high cost of corruption 
and the necessity to tackle it has mobilized support from groups with 
diverging agendas: from anti-globalization activists to liberalization 
reformers, and potentially offers a new platform for consensus on global 
governance. At the same time, this branch of the literature warns that 
global anti-corruption has been transformed into an industry that cohab-
its with the phenomenon of corruption it was intended to fight.
Studies on the global governance of corruption have stressed the role 
of non-state actors in the anti-corruption eruption. Rosenau and Wang 
(2001) set two criteria in order for an issue to qualify as the subject of 
global governance—the existence of emerging norms and the higher vis-
ibility and sensitivity on behalf of the public. The role of TI as a norm 
entrepreneur is the explanation they put forward for the rise of corrup-
tion on the global agenda. A global anti-corruption norm (McCoy and 
Heckel 2001) has emerged, and the importance of TI lies in framing 
corruption as an issue of development and accountability while translat-
ing it from a highly sensitive political problem into legal and economic 
terms.
Some academic literature poses the existence as well as the tax-
onomic characteristics of an international anti-corruption regime 
or regimes at the center of scholarly investigation (von Rosenvinge 
2009; Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010). This work tends to mix a defi-
nition of international regimes coming from the field of IR with a 
legal conceptualization of regimes in which a single treaty can repre-
sent an international legal regime; a given issue area can therefore be 
covered by a number of intersecting legal regimes. In anti-corruption 
studies, both ‘anti-corruption regime’ and ‘global governance of cor-
ruption’ are used (Rosenau and Wang 2001; Bukovanvsky 2002; von 
Rosenvinge 2009; Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010; Eigen 2013; Kirton 
et al. 2013). The two concepts are sometimes used interchangeably 
and this is due partly to the broadly perceived compatibility between 
international regimes and global governance. This book conceptualizes 
of global anti-corruption policies and initiatives as a specific issue area 
of global governance and therefore tries to clarify the conceptual over-
lap between international regimes and global governance of corruption 

30   E. KATZAROVA
since the classic definition of international regimes posed by Krasner 
(1982) could also be interpreted as the governance of a specific issue 
area.
In the development of IR as a discipline, research agendas have con-
tinuously been abandoned in favor of new ones, which offer a new per-
spective and focus on different elements of international politics. Older 
research agendas with their respective conceptual tools remain in use, 
and even though they are compatible with the new conceptual tools, 
their explicit link is rarely specified. One example of two such concepts, 
which pertain to two different, yet connected, research agendas, is inter-
national regimes and global governance. On the one hand, the difference 
between the two concepts is strictly historical. The work on international 
regimes, from the 1980s and 1990s, paved the road for the ideational 
and normative turn in the field of IR. Regime theorists developed sen-
sibility toward the ‘normative superstructures’ underlying international 
cooperation and did not conceive of regime formation simply as useful 
vehicles for solving collective action problems and reducing transaction 
costs (Puchala and Hopkins 1982).
The concept of governance was already implicitly and sometimes 
explicitly present within the theory of international regimes, and as 
global governance became an independent research agenda, the con-
cept of international regimes continued within this framework. Regimes 
in the context of the global governance literature can be seen as spe-
cific ‘governance systems’ providing governance in a specific issue area 
(Stokke 1997; Ba and Hoffmann 2006). Regimes are therefore more 
limited issue areas in the broader landscape of global governance. 
Keohane (1993) posited the question of discerning the existence of an 
international regime as the task of finding ‘the existence of explicit rules 
that are referred to in an affirmative manner by governments, even if 
they are not necessarily scrupulously observed’ (28).
The rules, referred to by Keohane, guide the behavior of actors at 
the international level or at least generate a sense of obligation toward 
appropriate behavior. This sense of obligation can also be referred to as 
an anti-corruption norm (McCoy and Heckel 2001). McCoy and Heckel 
argue that the institutionalization of the global norm took place in the 
1990s with the adoption of a number of international legal instruments. 
As discussed previously, the legal backbone of the anti-corruption regime 
consists of regional conventions adopted by the OAS, CoE, the EU and 
the African Union, as well as the UNCAC and the OECD Convention. 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   31
These ‘rules written on a piece of paper’ testify for the intergovernmen-
tal agreement that there is a problem with corrupt practices that has to 
be addressed collectively. Agreeing on the existence of a harmful con-
dition and arriving at a definition of what is problematic about it is 
essential, since in the framework of social constructivism, the problem is 
not an objective fact out there, but a product of social construction. As 
Blyth (2002) observed ‘controlling the definition…is inherently politi-
cal’ because it helps the reinterpretation of reality (105). This intersub-
jective component of the regime refers to the way in which corruption 
rose onto the global agenda and how state and non-state actors collec-
tively defined a putative condition as a global problem, a definitional 
process which constituted a necessary step for the emergence of formal 
agreements.
The global anti-corruption resurgence can also be seen as a case of a 
global prohibition regime (Nadelmann 1990). In their study of crimi-
nalization through global prohibitions, Andreas and Nadelmann (2006) 
identify five phases of prohibition regime development. During the first 
phase of non-regime, the issue is seen as a tolerable or legitimate part 
of the global landscape. During the second phase, a redefinition of the 
condition as a problem happens, which is followed by a third phase, dur-
ing which active agitation for prohibition occurs leading to the estab-
lishment of a global regime during the fourth phase. In some cases, a 
fifth phase ultimately witnesses the suppression of the prohibited activity. 
Spector and Kitsuse (2009) coming from a long tradition of social prob-
lems studies in sociology are even less optimistic about the eradication 
of social problems. They capture the development of social problems in 
four stages: (1) debate and publicity prompted by claims-making groups; 
(2) recognition of legitimacy leading to official plan for reform; (3) crit-
ical stage of dissatisfaction with official plan; and (4) rejection of official 
plan, attempt to create alternative solutions.
Work already done on the history of international ­anti-corruption 
regimes identifies five similar phases (Wolf and Schmidt-Pfister 2010). 
The first phase of non-regime lasts until the 1970s and is character-
ized by the complete absence of the issue of corruption from the global 
agenda. The second phase, which spans from the mid-1970s to the mid-
1990s, features unilateral US measures and the third one starting from 
the mid-1990s (referred to as the ‘global corruption eruption’) spans 
until 2005. Since the late 1990s, increased compliance efforts have 
marked a fourth implementation phase. Simultaneously, as early as the 

32   E. KATZAROVA
mid-2000 evidence suggests that insufficient performance and compli-
ance have led to a legitimacy crisis, which characterizes the current fifth 
phase of regime development (15–16). This chronological evolution 
can be simplified into three main non-overlapping phases of the devel-
opment of corruption as a global problem. The first phase starts in the 
early 1970s (1971–1976) from virtually no formal or informal recogni-
tion of the legitimacy of the issue as anything else, but a national concern 
and spans for approximately 20 years. From the early-1970s to the mid-
1990s, the discussion of the issue gained international momentum, but 
intergovernmental accord led to limited institutionalization. The second 
phase started in 1994 and marked the institutionalization of the issue 
and the development of an official plan. Within a decade (1995–2005), a 
plethora of formal international legal arrangements, a boom of codes of 
conduct and vast media coverage brought the problem of corruption to 
the top of the international public, media and policy agenda.
The third phase started in 2005 and is ongoing. It can be described 
as a new phase of normalization. Corruption has been transformed 
into a legitimate issue of concern for global governance. Spector and 
Kitsuse (2009) have established that the phase of institutionalization 
of a social problem is always followed by a legitimacy crisis. Based on 
decades of sociological research, they argue that the development of 
social problems follows a pattern in which the implementation phase 
leads to a loss of credibility and legitimacy, because the expected 
results are not seen. As a consequence, during the last phase compet-
ing definitions of the issue start to emerge. The attempt to strengthen 
the governance of the issue area during the legitimacy crisis stage 
goes in two major directions: attempts to consolidate efforts in order 
to ensure better compliance with the existing course of action and/
or calls to re-formulate the definition of the issue and the objectives 
of the plan of action. In the anti-corruption case, both trends are evi-
dent. The G20 Anti-Corruption Action Plan, for example, aims at the 
consolidation of the regime and the implementation of the already 
existing instruments. At the same time, the G20 Plan relates the imple-
mentation effort to the exigencies of the post-crisis economic recov-
ery without questioning the usefulness of their rationale (Action Plan 
G20 Annex III 2010). Daniel Kaufmann, former director at the World 
Bank Institute, sees the financial crisis as one of the symptoms of what 
he calls ‘legal corruption’ (Kaufmann 2010; Vicente and Kaufmann 
2005). Kaufmann (2010) calls for a re-formulation of the problem and 

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   33
redefines corruption as a form of collusion between government offi-
cials and business actors which has remained outside the grip of the 
law. This collusion may start with legal forms of influence peddling 
and lead to a subtle form of state capture in developing and developed 
countries alike. Kaufmann’s argument presents a point in case of how 
the last phase of regime development generates claims over the expan-
sive redefinition of the problem. Similarly, following the publicity of 
the ‘Panama Papers,’ former British Prime Minster David Cameron 
proposed the establishment of an international anti-corruption body 
targeting tax havens (Wintour 2016) that would significantly expand 
the anti-corruption mandate of the OECD and broaden current defini-
tions of corrupt practices.
This chapter presented the main aspects of the global anti-corrup-
tion eruption from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s. It further offered 
an overview of the main ways to think about the rapid anti-corruption 
expansion, as well as the main agents that brought forward this change. 
The existing literature is already laden with implicit or explicit hypoth-
eses about the rise of corruption as a global problem, and the second 
part of the chapter outlined the main routes through which corruption 
arose as an international agenda item by presenting structural arguments 
and explanations providing for the role of agency. A number of stud-
ies have placed the emergence of corruption as a global concern at the 
center of investigation (McCoy and Heckel 2001; Bukovansky 2002; 
Krastev 2004; Jakobi 2013). These studies offer valuable insights into 
the emergence of corruption as an issue for global governance and allow 
to varying degrees for the role of state actors in the process. By present-
ing the concepts and the main actors, involved in anti-corruption work, 
this chapter laid the ground for the contextualization of the empirical 
chapters and the elaboration of the conceptual tools that are used in this 
book and which inform the content of the next chapter.
This introduction to the intellectual puzzle sets the ground for the 
elaboration of the mechanism through which corruption was constructed 
as a global problem in the empirical chapters and for supporting the 
argument that the construction of corruption as a global problem was 
a predominantly intergovernmental endeavor in which power and inter-
ests had a strong impact on the shared construction of meaning. This 
approach to the construction of global problems can help us better 
understand the way in which specific governance issue areas emerge and 
develop.

34   E. KATZAROVA
References
Action Plan G20 Annex III. 2010. “G20 Agenda for Action on Combating 
Corruption, Promoting Market Integrity, and Supporting a Clean Business 
Environment.” Accessed April 22, 2018. http://www.oecd.org/daf/
anti-bribery/G20_Anti-Corruption_Action_Plan.pdf.
Ades, Alberto, and Rafael di Tella. 1997. “The New Economics of Corruption: 
A Survey and Some New Results.” Political Studies 45 (3): 496–515.
African Union. 2003. African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating 
Corruption. Addis Ababa: Secretariat, African Union.
Ala’i, Padideh. 2008. “The WTO and the Anti-Corruption Movement.” Loyola 
University Chicago International Law Review 6 (1): 17–54.
Andersson, Staffan, and Paul Heywood. 2009. “The Politics of Perception: 
Use and Abuse of Transparency International’s Approach to Measuring 
Corruption.” Political Studies 57 (4): 746–767.
Andreas, Peter, and Ethan Nadelmann. 2006. Policing the Globe: Criminalization 
and Crime Control in International Relations. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Ashe, Daniel Patrick. 2005. “The Lengthening Anti-Bribery Lasso of the United 
States: The Recent Extraterritorial Application of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act.” The Fordham Law Review 73 (6): 2897.
Ba, Alice D., and Matthew J. Hoffmann. 2006. Contending Perspectives on Global 
Governance: Coherence and Contestation. London: Routledge.
BBC World Service. “Global Poll: Corruption Is World’s Most Talked About 
Problem.” Accessed May 29, 2017. http://www.bbc.co.uk/pressoffice/
pressreleases/stories/2010/12_december/09/corruption.html.
BIAC. 2018. “The Fight Against Corruption.” Accessed April 17. http://biac.
org/focus-areas/the-fight-against-corruption/.
Blyth, Mark. 2002. Great Transformations: Economic Ideas and Institutional 
Change in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bracking, Sarah, ed. 2007. Corruption and Development: The Anti-Corruption 
Campaigns. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
———. 2009. “Political Economies of Corruption Beyond Liberalism: An 
Interpretative View of Zimbabwe.” Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 
30 (1): 35–51.
“Bribery Act 2010—Ministry of Justice.” Home—Ministry of Justice. N.p., 8 
April, 2010. Web. 12 December, 2012.
Brown, Ed, and Jonathan Cloke. 2004. “Neoliberal Reform, Governance 
and Corruption in the South: Assessing the International Anti-Corruption 
Crusade.” Antipode 36 (2): 272–294.
———. 2011. “Critical Perspectives on Corruption: An Overview.” Critical 
Perspectives on International Business 7 (2): 116–124.

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   35
Brown, Chris, and Kirsten Ainley. 2009. Understanding International Relations. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brytting, Tomas, Richard Minogue, and Veronica Morino. 2012. The Anatomy 
of Fraud and Corruption: Organizational Causes and Remedies. Farnham: 
Gower Publishing.
Bukovansky, Mlada. 2002. “Corruption Is Bad: Normative Dimensions of the Anti-
Corruption Movement.” Working Paper 2002/5, Department of International 
Relations, Australian National University. Accessed October 22, 2017. https://
digitalcollections.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/40136/3/02–5.pdf.
———. 2006. “The Hollowness of Anti-Corruption Discourse.” Review of 
International Political Economy 13 (2): 181–209.
Business Anti-Corruption Portal. 2018. “Compliance Resources.” Accessed April 
22. http://www.business-anti-corruption.com/.
Cameron, John D. 2004. “The World Bank and the New Institutional 
Economics: Contradictions and Implications for Development Policy in Latin 
America.” Latin American Perspectives 31 (4): 97–103.
Carroll, Toby. 2009. “‘Social Development’ as Neoliberal Trojan Horse: The 
World Bank and the Kecamatan Development Program in Indonesia.” 
Development and Change 40 (3): 447–466.
CIPE. 2018. “Anti-Corruption Compliance.” Accessed April 23. http://www.
cipe.org/.
Connors, Carmel, Arthur Shacklock, Fredrik Galtung, and Charles Sampford, 
eds. 2006. Measuring Corruption. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Council 
of 
Europe. 
1999a. 
Criminal 
Law 
Convention 
on 
Corruption = Convention Pénale Sur La Corruption. Strasbourg: Council of 
Europe Publishing.
———. 1999b. Civil Law Convention on Corruption: And Explanatory Report. 
Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publising.
Cragg, Wesley, and William Woof. 2002. “The U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act: A Study of Its Effectiveness.” Business and Society Review 107 (1): 
98–144.
Delaney, Patrick. 2005. Transnational Corruption: Regulation Across Borders. 
Canberra: Australian National University Press.
De Maria, William. 2008. “Neo‐Colonialism Through Measurement: A Critique 
of the Corruption Perception Index.” Critical Perspectives on International 
Business 4 (2/3): 184–202.
de Sousa, Luís, Peter Larmour, and Barry Hindess. 2009. Governments, NGOs 
and Anti-Corruption: The New Integrity Warriors. London: Routledge.
Dunst, Lee G., Michael S. Diamant, and Teresa R. Kung. 2011. “Hot off the 
Press: Resetting the Global Anti-Corruption Thermostat to the UK Bribery 
Act.” Business Law International 12: 257.

36   E. KATZAROVA
Eigen, Peter. 1996. “Combatting Corruption Around the World.” Journal of 
Democracy 7 (1): 158–168.
———. 2013. “International Corruption: Organized Civil Society for Better 
Global Governance.” Social Research: An International Quarterly 80 (4): 
1287–1308.
European Union. 1997. “Convention Drawn Up on the Basis of Article K. 3 
(2) (C) of the Treaty on European Union on the Fight Against Corruption 
Involving Officials of the European Communities or Officials of Member 
States of the European Union: [May 26, 1997].” International Legal 
Materials: Current Documents 37: 12–21.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (amendments), Pub.L.No. 100–418, 102 Stat. 
1415 (1988).
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, Pub.L.No. 95–23–, 91 Stat. 1494 (Codified 
as amended at 15 U.S.C. 78 m, 78dd-1 to 78dd-2, 78ff (1994) [Hereinafter 
FCPA] as amended by International Anti-bribery and Fair Competition Act of 
1998, 15 U.S.C.A. 78dd–1 to 78dd–3, 78ff (1999) [IAFCA].
GAC. 2007. “World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and 
Anticorruption.” Accessed April 17, 2016. http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/eval-
uations/world-bank-country-level-engagement-governance-and-anticorruption.
Galtung, Fredrik. 2006. “Measuring the Immesurable: Boundaries and 
Functions of (Macro) Corruption Indices.” In Measuring Corruption, 
edited by Carmel Connors, Arthur Shacklock, Fredrik Galtung, and Charles 
Sampford, 101–131. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Galtung, Fredrik, and Jeremy Pope. 1999. “The Global Coalition Against 
Corruption: Evaluating Transparency International.” In The Self-Restraining 
State: Power and Accountability in New Democracies, edited by Andreas Schedler, 
Marc Plattner, and Larry Jay Diamond, 257–285. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Global Integirty. 2018. “Global Integirty Report.” Accessed April 17. https://
www.globalintegrity.org/global-report/what-is-gi-report/.
Global Witness. 2018. “Twenty Years of Global Impact.” Accessed April 7. 
http://new.globalwitness.org/aboutus.php.
Glynn, Patrick, Stephen Kobrin, and Moises Naim. 1997. “The Globalization of 
Corruption.” In Corruption and the Global Economy, edited by Kimberly Ann 
Elliott, 7–31. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute.
Haller, Dieter, and Cris Shore, eds. 2005. Corruption: Anthropological 
Perspectives. London: Pluto Press.
Harrison, Graham. 2004. World Bank and Africa: The Construction of 
Governance States. London: Routledge.
Heywood, Paul M., and Jonathan Rose. 2014. “‘Close But No Cigar’: The 
Measurement of Corruption.” Journal of Public Policy 34 (3): 507–529.
Hindess, Barry. 2005. “Investigating International Anti-Corruption.” Third 
World Quarterly 26 (8): 1389–1398.

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   37
Hough, Dan. 2013. Corruption, Anti-Corruption and Governance. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1968. “Modernisation and Corruption.” In Political 
Corruption: Concepts and Contexts, edited by A. J. Heidenheimer and M. 
Johnston, 253–263. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
ICC, Rules of Conduct to Combat Extortion and Bribery in International 
Business Transactions, 26 March 1996, reprinted in 35 International Legal 
Materials 1306, 1996.
IMF. 2018. “Good Governance: The IMF’s Role.” Accessed April 17. https://
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/exrp/govern/govindex.htm.
International Chamber of Commerce. 1977. Extortion and Bribery in Business 
Transactions: Report Adopted by the 131st Session of the Council of the ICC, 29 
November 1977. Paris: International Chamber of Commerce.
Israel, Arturo. 1990. The Changing Role of the State: Institutional Dimensions. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.
Jakobi, Anja P. 2013. “The Changing Global Norm of Anti-Corruption: 
From Bad Business to Bad Government.” Zeitschrift Für Vergleichende 
Politikwissenschaft 7 (1): 243–264.
Jayasuriya, Kanishka. 2002. “Governance, Post-Washington Consensus and the 
New Anti-politics.” In Corruption in East Asia: Rethinking the Governance 
Paradigm, edited by T. Lindsey and H. Dick, 24–36. Sidney: Federation 
Press.
Kaufmann, Daniel. 2010. “Daniel Kaufmann on State Capture.” World Policy 
Journal 27 (1): 3–4.
Kaufmann, Daniel, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1999. “Does ‘Grease Money’ Speed Up 
the Wheels of Commerce?” Policy Research Working Paper, Series 2254, The 
World Bank, Washington. Accessed October 22, 2014. http://elibrary.world-
bank.org/doi/book/10.1596/1813-9450-2254.
Keohane, Robert. 1993. “The Analysis of International Regimes: Towards 
a European-American Research Programme.” In Regime Theory and 
International Relations, edited by Volker Rittberger, 23–45. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Kirton, John J., Michele Fratianni, and Paolo Savona. 2013. Corporate, Public 
and Global Governance: The G8 Contribution. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Krasner, Stephen D. 1982. “Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: 
Regimes as Intervening Variables.” International Organization 36 (02): 
185–205.
Krastev, Ivan. 2004. Shifting Obsessions: Three Essays on the Politics of 
Anticorruption. Budapest: Central European University Press.
Lambsdorff, Johann Graf. 2006. “Measuring Corruption—The Validity and 
Precision of Subjective Indicators (CPI).” In Measuring Corruption, edited by 
Carmel Connors, Arthur Shacklock, Fredrik Galtung, and Charles Sampford, 
89–101. Aldershot: Ashgate.

38   E. KATZAROVA
Leff, Nathaniel H. 1964. “Economic Development Through Bureaucratic 
Corruption.” American Behavioral Scientist 8 (3): 8–14.
Lord, Nicholas. 2014. Regulating Corporate Bribery in International Business: 
Anti-Corruption in the UK and Germany. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.
McCoy, Jennifer L., and Heather Heckel. 2001. “The Emergence of a Global 
Anti-Corruption Norm.” International Politics 38 (1): 65–90.
Méon, Pierre-Guillaume, and Laurent Weill. 2010. “Is Corruption an Efficient 
Grease?” World Development 38 (3): 244–259.
Miller, William. 2006. “Perception, Experience and Lies: What Measures 
Corruption and What Do Corruption Measures Measure?” In Measuring 
Corruption, edited by Carmel Connors, Arthur Shacklock, Fredrik Galtung, 
and Charles Sampford, 163–189. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Nadelmann, Ethan. 1990. “Global Prohibition Regimes: The Evolution of Norms 
in International Society.” International Organization 44 (4): 479–526.
Naim, Moses. 1995. “Corruption Eruption.” Brown Journal of World Affairs 2 
(2): 245–261.
———. 2000. “Washington Consensus or Washington Confusion?” Foreign 
Policy 118 (86): 86–104.
Neild, R. R. 2002. Public Corruption: The Dark Side of Social Evolution. London: 
Anthem Press.
North, Roberts, and Marion T. Doss. 1997. From Watergate to Whitewater: The 
Public Integrity War. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Publishing Group.
OECD. 1998. OECD Convention for Combating Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials in International Business Transactions (1997) Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. Convention on Combating 
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions: 
And Related Documents. Paris:
———. 2004. Implementing the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention Implementing 
the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention: Report on the United States 2003. Paris: 
OECD Publishing.
———. 2018. “G20-OECD Conference: ‘Joining Forces Against Corruption: 
G20 Business and Government.’” Accessed April 17. http://www.oecd.org/
daf/anti-bribery/g20-oecdconferencejoiningforcesagainstcorruptiong20busi-
nessandgovernment.htm.
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 100–418, 3001–
3604, 103 Stat. 1372 (1988) (codified as amended in scattered sections of 
U.S.C. (1988).
Organization of American States. 1996. Convención Interamericana contra la 
Corrupción = Inter-American Convention against Corruption. Washington, 
DC: Organización de los Estados Americanos, Secretaría General.

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   39
Philip, Mark. 2006. “Corruption Definition and Measurement.” In Measuring 
Corruption, edited by Carmel Connors, Arthur Shacklock, Fredrik Galtung, 
and Charles Sampford, 45–57. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Pieth, Mark. 2007. “Introduction.” In The OECD Convention on Bribery: A 
Commentary, edited by Mark Pieth, Lucinda A. Low, and Peter J. Cullen, 
3–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Polzer, Tara. 2001. “Corruption: Deconstructing the World Bank Discourse.” 
Working Paper Series No. 1–18. London School of Economics. Accessed 
April 1, 2018. http://www.lse.ac.uk/internationalDevelopment/pdf/WP/
WP18.pdf.
Puchala, Donald J., and Raymond F. Hopkins. 1982. “International Regimes: 
Lessons from Inductive Analysis.” International Organization 36 (2): 
245–275.
Roden J. 2010. “The International Anti-Corruption Crusade: Neo-Liberal 
Institutional Structures, Moralization, and Social Capital.” Undercurrent 
Journal 7 (1): 12–22.
Rodrik, Dani. 2006. “Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello Washington 
Confusion? A Review of the World Bank’s Economic Growth in the 1990s: 
Learning from a Decade of Reform.” Journal of Economic Literature 44 (4): 
973–987.
Rosenau, James, and Hongying Wang. 2001. “Transparency International and 
Corruption as an Issue of Global Governance.” Global Governance 7 (1): 25–49.
von Rosenvinge, Alison. 2009. “Global Anti-Corruption Regimes: Why Law 
Schools May Want to Take a Multi-Jurisdiction Approach.” German Law 
Journal 10: 785–802.
Rothstein, Bo. 2011. The Quality of Government: Corruption, Social Trust, and 
Inequality in International Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sampson, Steven. 2005. “Integrity Warriors: Global Morality and the Anti-
Corruption Movement in the Balkans.” In Corruption: Anthropological 
Perspectives, edited by Cris Shore and Dieter Haller, 103–131. London and 
Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press.
———. 2010. “The Anti-Corruption Industry: From Movement to Institution.” 
Global Crime 11 (2): 261–278.
Søreide, Tina. 2006. “Is It Wrong to Rank? A Critical Assessment of Corruption 
Indices.” CMI Working Paper WP 2006: 1. Accessed May 22, 2017. http://
www.cmi.no/publications/publication/?2120=is-it-wrong-to-rank.
Spector, Malcolm, and John Kitsuse. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. 
Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Stokke, Olav Schram. 1997. “Regimes as Governance Systems.” In Global 
Governance: Drawing Insights from the Environmental Experience, edited by 
Oran R. Young, 27–65. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

40   E. KATZAROVA
———. 2012. Disaggregating International Regimes: A New Approach to 
Evaluation and Comparison. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
TI. 2018. “Corruption Perceptions Index: Full Source Description.” Accessed 
April 17. http://www.transparency.org/research/cpi/overview.
Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study.” 
Journal of Public Economics 76 (3): 399–457.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2004. United Nations Convention 
Against Corruption. Vienna: United Nations.
UN Global Compact. 2018. “Anti-Corruption.” Accessed April 22. https://
www.unglobalcompact.org/issues/transparency_anticorruption/.
UNODC. 2018. “Action Against Corruption and Economic Crime.” Accessed 
April 17. http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/corruption/.
US Department of Justice. 2018. “FCPA and Related Enforcement Actions.” 
Accessed April 17. http://www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa/cases/a.html.
Vicente, Pedro, and Daniel Kaufmann. 2011. “Legal Corruption.” Economics & 
Politics 23 (2): 195–219.
Warren, Danielle E., and William S. Laufer. 2009. “Are Corruption Indices 
a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy? A Social Labeling Perspective of Corruption.” 
Journal of Business Ethics 88 (4): 841–849.
Weaver, Catherine. 2010. “Constructing Development: The World Bank’s Good 
Governance Agenda.” In Constructing the International Economy, edited by 
Rawi Abdelal, Mark Blyth, and Craig Parsons, 47–67. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Whyte, Dave. 2007. “The Crimes of Neo-Liberal Rule in Occupied Iraq.” British 
Journal of Criminology 47 (2): 177–195.
Williamson, John. 2002. “Did the Washington Consensus Fail?” Outline of 
Speech, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, 
November 6.
———. 2008. “A Short History of the Washington Consensus.” In The 
Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance, edited 
by Narcís Serra and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 14–31. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Wintour, Patrick. 2016. “Cameron to Propose Global Anti-Corruption Agency 
at Summit.” The Guardian, May 4. Accessed May 5. http://www.the-
guardian.com/world/2016/may/04/cameron-to-propose-global-anti- 
corruption-agency-at-summit.
Wolf, Sebastian, and Diana Schmidt-Pfister, eds. 2010. International Anti-
Corruption Regimes in Europe: Between Corruption, Integration, and Culture. 
Baden-Baden: Nomos.
World Bank. 2018. “WBI Governance and Anti-Corruption.” Accessed April 23. 
http://web.worldbank.org/.

2  CORRUPTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS   41
World Economic Forum. 2018. “Partnering Against Corruption Initiative.” 
Accessed April 17. http://www.weforum.org/projects/partnering-against- 
corruption-initiative.
Yao, Shuntian. 1997. “Corruption and the Anti-Corruption Movement: The 
Modelling and Analysis of the Situation in China.” Australian Economic 
Papers 36 (68): 156–165.

43
IR scholarship has studied the way in which global problems are man-
aged across different issue areas (Avant et al. 2010; Biermann and 
Pattberg 2012; Hale et al. 2013; Harman and Williams 2013; Lesage 
et al. 2016). Both the scholarship on international regimes, which con-
solidated in the 1980s, and the scholarship on global governance, which 
followed it in the 1990s, to a large extent revolve around the manage-
ment of global issues. Yet, despite the fact that problems are at the center 
of global governance structures, their social construction has not been 
seen as an analytical problem in itself. This gap is particularly obvious 
for constructivist IR, which has borrowed a lot from sociology, but not 
the long tradition on the study of social problems. This chapter argues 
for the usefulness of the social constructionist approach by Spector and 
Kitsuse for the study of global problems, and corruption in particular.
The central argument of this book is that corruption in particular and 
global problems in general are not ‘natural’ but constitute processes of 
collective definition and have to be constructed as problems to become 
focal points in issue-specific governance structures. As the previous chap-
ter showed, in less than a decade (1994–2004) a number of binding and 
non-binding anti-corruption instruments cascaded and corruption was 
CHAPTER 3
The Social Construction  
of Global Problems
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_3

44   E. KATZAROVA
brought forth as a serious problem and a legitimate topic for discus-
sion at international organizations and financial institutions. This book 
enquires into the mechanism through which this change became possi-
ble. Conventional explanations of the puzzle attribute agency to global 
civil society organizations and argue that the reason for the emergence of 
anti-corruption initiatives is nested in the post-Cold War exigencies. In 
order to provide a systematic account of how corruption became a global 
problem, the book builds on the work of Spector and Kitsuse (1973, 
2009) on the social construction of problems. The central research ques-
tion of the book is: How was corruption constructed as a global prob-
lem? This chapter lays the conceptual and theoretical foundations of the 
social construction of corruption as a global problem by adapting the 
sociological approach of Spector and Kitsuse (2009) to the field of IR.
To account for the social construction of a problem means to pro-
vide for historical contingencies and to understand problems as evolv-
ing products of collective definition that are in a dynamic relation to 
the condition they refer to. This book studies the process of definition 
through claims-making and other discursive strategies and practices 
that are presented in this chapter and are applied in the empirical stud-
ies. In order to clarify what is meant by construction of a global prob-
lem, the following sections proceed in three steps. First, the concept  
of social construction and different types of social constructs are exam-
ined in order to show that the social construction of problems provides 
a useful analytical vehicle in relation to factual relativism. Second, the 
long tradition of the study of social problems in sociology is succinctly 
introduced, and the theory of Spector and Kitsuse on claims-making is 
given further attention and is adapted to IR and the cast of actors that 
are present on the global arena. Third, other theoretical and concep-
tual issues are tackled before the presentation of the cases and the data 
sources.
The chapter concludes that the application of the Spector and Kitsuse 
approach to IR can help elucidate the role of power, contestation and 
conflict in the social construction of global issues, and in this way, it can 
counteract what Barkin (2011) calls the implicit liberal bias of much of 
constructivist IR scholarship.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   45
What Is Social Construction and the Social 
Construction of What?
The literature on global governance provides, to a large extent, an 
automated view of the process through which problems emerge and 
develop; problems are treated as natural. The way in which issue areas 
of global governance become densely institutionalized is well devel-
oped (Rosenau 1995; Barnett and Duvall 2005; Bernstein and Cashore 
2007; Weiss and Wilkinson 2014), but the way in which problems are 
socially constructed has been given close to no attention in IR schol-
arship (Hülsse 2007). In order to provide a systematic account of how 
some conditions emerge as global problems, this book argues that the 
work of Spector and Kitsuse (1973, 2009) on the social construction of 
problems would make a valuable contribution to constructivist IR. The 
book lays the conceptual and theoretical foundations of the social con-
struction of global problems by presenting and adapting the sociological 
approach of Spector and Kitsuse (2009) to the field of IR.
The literature on global governance developed to capture dramatic 
shifts in authority on the global stage (Rosenau 1995; Pierre 2000; 
Hall and Biersteker 2002; McGrew and Held 2002; Kahler and Lake 
2003; Grande and Pauly 2007). Accounts of the changes in the way 
the world is governed and, in particular, the rise of private authority 
(Cutler et al. 1999; Ronit and Schneider 1999; Scherer et al. 2006) 
have been supplemented by the study of issue areas, such as environ-
mental governance (Young 1997; Cashore 2002; Bernstein 2004; Levy 
and Newell 2005; Biermann and Pattberg 2008), energy governance 
(Florini and Sovacool 2009; Dubash and Florini 2011; Van de Graaf 
and Colgan 2016) and financial governance (Baker 2006; Underhill 
and Zhang 2008; Helleiner 2014). This fragmentation of the global 
governance literature into the study of broader and more specific issue 
areas is reminiscent of the study of international regimes (Krasner 
1982) and makes the global governance literature revolve even more 
closely around the collective management of specific global problems. 
Constructivists in IR have contributed indirectly to the global gov-
ernance literature through the study of norms, but norm research has 
neglected, according to Hofferberth and Weber (2015), the processes 
of social re-negotiation that drives normative transformations at the 

46   E. KATZAROVA
global level. One of the main objects of study in sociology, which is 
the social construction of problems, accounts for dynamic processes of 
social negotiations from which problems emerge as changing products 
of a collective definition. The study of global problems can contribute 
to the literature on global governance by accounting for both demand 
(Acharya 2016) and agency of state and non-state actors (Avant et al. 
2010; Büthe and Mattli 2011) in the social construction of transna-
tional and international issues. By denaturalizing problems that are at 
the center of global governance structures, the constructionist theory 
developed by Spector and Kitsuse also allows for the study of conflict 
and power—two essential elements of world politics.
The central argument of a constructivist reading of global problems is 
that they are not ‘natural,’ but constitute processes of collective defini-
tion. Conditions have to be socially constructed as problems to become 
focal points in issue-specific governance structures. ‘Social construc-
tion’ is one of the central concepts of social constructionism or as it has 
entered the field of IR—constructivism (Onuf 1989).1 Constructivists 
in the social sciences are interested in the construction of (social) facts. 
The process of social construction entails that the human or collective 
intentionality of agents, which has led to the construction of a particu-
lar social fact or problem, is embedded in a social context within which 
specific beliefs, ideas and interests gain currency at a given time. Social 
construction, therefore, stresses the historical contingency of social facts 
and problems.
The treatment of social facts in the social sciences has, to a signifi-
cant extent, softened the contestation that constructivism as an ontolog-
ical and epistemological approach has received from scientific realists in 
other academic fields. The question—what it means for X to be socially 
constructed—cannot be adequately addressed without first answering the 
question about what is the X that is being constructed. Facts, or social 
facts, in general, are one of a number of ‘things’ being claimed as the 
products of social construction. Social constructs are potentially innumer-
able. In ‘The Social Construction of What?’ Hacking (1999) presents an 
extensive list of items that are claimed as social constructs: from ‘quarks’ 
to ‘postmodernism.’ The number of social constructs is continuously 
1 The term social constructionism is usually used in sociology and the sociology of sci-
ence, while in the field of IR the term constructivism has become more widely accepted 
after the seminal article of Onuf (1989). This book uses the terms interchangeably.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   47
growing in sociology and politics and includes the construction of social 
agency (Meyer and Jepperson 2000), leadership (Grint 2005), literacy 
(Cook-Gumperz 2006) and deviance (Goode and Ben-Yehuda 2009). 
European Studies and IR have produced their own list of social constructs: 
from Wendt’s seminal publication (1992) on the social construction 
of power politics and anarchy through the construction of international 
politics (Wendt 1995; Hopf 2002), of pluralistic security communities 
(Barnett and Adler 1998), of ethnic identity (Fearon and Laitin 2000), to 
the ‘moral’ construction of power politics (Williams 2004) and the con-
struction of the international economy (Abdelal et al. 2010).
These examples show that different types of things are claimed as social 
constructs. The social construction of facts (Latour and Woolgar 1979) 
or reality (Berger and Luckman 1966) provides the broader ontological 
framework for different products of social construction. Sociologists of 
science have challenged the absolute objectivity of the scientific enter-
prise of the natural sciences inserting elements of sociality and subjectiv-
ity in the study of how scientists produce knowledge (Boghossian 2006). 
In the field of politics and international affairs, however, the dynamics 
have been reversed because scientific principles coming from the natu-
ral sciences have ‘naturalized’ and reified social processes. While sociol-
ogists of science have tried to socialize the natural sciences, studying the 
process of social construction in the field of politics has the function to 
‘denaturalize’ problems and reclaim the sociality of the discipline.
Within the social constructionist tradition of Spector and Kitsuse 
(2009), problems can be seen as claims that actors make about social 
reality and are, therefore, inseparable from value judgments and the nor-
mative beliefs of actors concerning what society should look like. The 
social constructionist agenda of Spector and Kitsuse does not concern 
itself with the sociology of science or the way in which scientists con-
struct scientific knowledge, but with the way in which social problems 
are collectively negotiated through claims-making. In this perspective, 
social problems are transformed from self-evident objective realities into 
activities through which particular social groups identify certain con-
ditions as harmful and in need of corrective action. The first analytical 
significance of this ‘subjective turn’ is that social problems become pro-
cesses of social interaction. The second consequence is that the existence 
and the analytical importance of an actual social condition that triggers 
the claims-making process by the social participants are kept on a dif-
ferent analytical plane. Researchers can remain agnostic of the objective 

48   E. KATZAROVA
condition that gave rise to the claims (strict constructionism) or try to 
engage with or even evaluate the claims in relation to the putative con-
dition (contextual constructionism). The analytical importance of the 
objective condition for the process of claims-making has been a debated 
issue (Holstein and Miller 1993), and the different relations between 
problem construction and an objective condition in the framework of 
contextual and strict constructionism within the discipline of sociology 
are given further attention in the following section.
Factual, rather than moral, relativism is at the center of contestation in 
debates on constructivism within the philosophy and sociology of science 
(Boghossian 2006). While only radical forms of constructionism deny 
the existence of objective facts, the social construction of global prob-
lems provides a useful shift of focus from ‘fact fabrication,’ as Goodman 
(1978) calls it, to the processes of social negotiation that construct con-
ditions as problems. The concept of ‘problem,’ in the sense of ‘bringing 
an issue forward,’ can provide a useful conceptual vehicle of reconcilia-
tion when less radical forms of constructivism are employed.2 Presenting 
the process of social construction as a problematization of a certain 
condition does not undermine the facts behind the socially constructed 
problem, but stresses that at a certain point in time these facts were 
brought forward by human agents and became problematic.3 The object 
of construction, therefore, does not refer to an objective condition, but 
to its problematization, which, by definition, is involved in a mechanism 
of cultural and social production. Hence, the subjective turn does not 
challenge the existence of objective conditions, but argues that these 
conditions are not self-evident as social problems until they become the 
center of a process of social and definitional negotiation. The contribu-
tion of Spector and Kitsuse’s subjective approach, in particular, was that 
it led to the systematization of the literature on social problems in sociol-
ogy and to the delimitation of perspectives, which had, until then, been 
based on unspecified ontological and epistemological assumptions.
2 The etymological root of the word problem comes from the Greek verb προβάλλω, 
which means to highlight or to bring forward. Oxford Dictionaries, s.v. ‘problem,’ accessed 
October 22, 2017, http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/problem.
3 Problematization has a long pedigree of scholarly interest with one of the most promi-
nent examples coming from Foucault (1985).

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   49
The ‘Subjective Turn’:  
Sociological Perspectives on Social Problems
The ‘subjective turn’ to social problems was not invented with the estab-
lishment of social constructionism, but had a long evolution in the field 
of sociology, starting with the Theory of Social Disorganization. Mooney 
et al. (2011) single out the value-conflict and the symbolic interactionist 
perspectives as providing more sophisticated analytical tools for the study 
of social problems.4 Drawing on the long pedigree of social problems 
studies in the field, the two schools started theorizing social problems by 
shifting attention to the process of social negotiation (value-conflict) or 
collective definition (symbolic interactionist) through which conditions 
become social problems.
The value judgments of the sociologist in assessing social condi-
tions were first attacked by the value-conflict perspective, which argued 
that social organization is always imperfect and sociologists should not 
base their analysis on the expectation that a return to some nonexistent 
social equilibrium is possible (Spector and Kitsuse 2009). The Value-
conflict perspective turned social problems into a subjectively defined 
condition that is selected from a number of social participants as harm-
ful and deserving of corrective action. This definitional process is also 
called a ‘negotiation’ because it is inherently political, and also because 
social conditions become problems by being defined and negotiated 
by agents. As Spector and Kitsuse (2009) argue, agents also make their 
case through ‘quasi theories’ and causal inferences in order to explain, 
provide order and restore confidence that the situation can be success-
fully handled. The discovery of a ‘cure’ and the invention of causal 
inferences to support the quasi-theory become essential parts of the 
negotiation process. While this epistemological position is far from being 
broadly accepted, the argument that the value-conflict perspective pro-
motes is that the sociologist should be, above all, interested in the pro-
cess through which prescriptions and explanations are voiced and how 
some of them prevail rather than others. This change of analytical focus 
4 Mooney et al. (2011) single out three broader perspectives that have been the most 
influential on the study of social problems: (1) structural-functionalist; (2) value-conflict; 
and (3) symbolic interactionist perspectives. Other theories and approaches to the study of 
social problems can be taxonomically ordered around these three perspectives.

50   E. KATZAROVA
transforms the role of the social scientist from a diagnostician of social 
problems to an investigator of the process through which social prob-
lems are negotiated, defined and institutionalized.
Symbolic interactionism and, in particular, the social problems analysis 
of Blumer (1971) significantly influenced social constructionism. Work 
on the trajectory of social problems has been done since the 1930s, but 
one of the early models, which clearly tracks the career of social issues, 
belongs to Blumer (1971). Blumer argues that rather than positioning 
social problems in objective conditions, the sociologist should study 
problems as a process of collective definition because it is this socially 
negotiated mechanism that determines the career of the social prob-
lem rather than its objective makeup. Without challenging the objectiv-
ity of conditions, Blumer argues that sociologists have failed to answer 
why some problems come to public attention while others do not. Thus, 
the sociologically significant question—under which conditions societies 
come to recognize putative conditions as problematic and what is the 
mechanism through which the recognition and institutionalization come 
about—remains unanswered. The negligence of this process is not only 
of theoretical concern, but also of practical concern for the reason that: 
‘The societal definition and not the objective makeup of a given social 
condition, determines whether the condition exists as a social problem’ 
(300). The social definition determines what is done at the policy level 
about the putative condition and thus, the mechanism through which 
society recognizes, defines and subsequently institutionalizes the gov-
ernance of social problems appears as an intrinsic part of their practical 
resolution.
The Blumer model (1971) systematizes the career of a social problem 
in five generic stages: (1) emergence, (2) legitimation, (3) mobilization 
of action, (4) formation of an official plan and (5) transformation of the 
official plan in its empirical implementation (301). During the first phase, 
social awareness of a condition and, consequently, the selective process 
through which the public and media recognize social conditions consti-
tute the main factors in the emergence of a social problem. If the bid for 
attention is successful, the second phase leads to legitimation. The popu-
lar recognition of the problematic situation is a necessary, but insufficient, 
condition for a certain ‘degree of respectability’ (Blumer 1971, 303)  

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   51
to be attached to the social problem so that it becomes a matter of debate 
in the public sphere. The problem could achieve some limited recogni-
tion in the first stage, but could be seen as an integral part of ‘the way 
things are done’ and can be judged as unworthy of reformative action. 
In this case, it becomes one of the many harmful conditions in society 
that are being ignored. As Blumer argues, the selectivity of the process 
through which only some harmful conditions emerge as problems cannot 
be adequately explained with some intrinsic urgency of the problem, but 
is quite often the product of influential interests that raise the problem on 
the public agenda.
Mobilization—the third stage in this process—is a controversial clash 
of competing interests and interpretations, during which the advocates 
for reform clash with the vested interests that want to bury the problem 
and exclude it from public policy. The media, at this stage, also becomes 
a hotbed for strategic moves, evaluation and falsification of claims and 
actively participates in the redefinition together with other interested 
actors who attempt to bend the definition according to their interests and 
power. This stage is characterized by intensification and, as Blumer notes, 
the mobilization stage is when the problem is radically redefined in order 
to accommodate conflicting interests, or it perishes. The fourth stage 
is when the problem enters the sphere of officialdom in the legislative 
process. At this stage, the bargaining and compromises lead to another 
redefinition of the problem: ‘This is a defining and redefining process in 
a concentrated form – the forming, the re-working and the recasting of 
a collective picture’ (304). This official definition may present the social 
problem in a completely different light than the popular sentiment. 
During the implementation phase, the problem is once again recast 
under the weight of practice with potential losers trying to undermine 
the implementation of the plan, and the public administration trying to 
sometimes adjust it subversively to their own, or somebody else’s political 
agenda. Thus, according to Blumer, rather than constituting the end of 
the definitional process, the implementation phase prompts a new phase 
in the collective redefinition of the problem. The role of contingency is 
another of Blumer’s contributions toward the study of social problems 
(Spector and Kitsuse 2009). Quite often, favorable or unfavorable events 
and social environments make or break the career of a social problem.

52   E. KATZAROVA
The Natural History of Social  
Problems and the Empirical Study of Claims
A variety of approaches analyze different aspects of social problem con-
struction, such as the literature on framing and agenda-setting, but the 
sociological approach of Spector and Kitsuse (2009) offers the most 
comprehensive framework through which to examine the entire career of 
a global issue. It provides the advantage of tracing a collective definition 
process with a focus on how a putative condition is renegotiated rather 
than concentrating on external factors, such as policy windows and focus 
events (Kingdon 2010). By concentrating on the process of collective 
definition from the first emergence of claims, to the phases of post-in-
stitutionalization, Spector and Kitsuse’s approach maps tendencies in 
the development of social problems. The Spector and Kitsuse approach 
to social problems offers some distinct benefits because of its compre-
hensive framework, which builds on a long pedigree of social problems 
studies in sociology. Spector and Kitsuse built on the ‘subjective turn’ 
in sociology in order to arrive at a theory of social problems and signif-
icantly expand the research agenda of symbolic interactionism and the 
value-conflict school on the social construction of problems.
In a series of publications dating back to the 1970s, Spector and 
Kitsuse (1973, 1975) made a pioneering attempt to systematize 
the existing literature on the study of social problems. They argued 
(2009) that the field has hitherto been ‘dominated by textbooks that 
offer compilations of facts documenting the existence of the author(s) 
arbitrary selected assortment of what they conceive to be “social 
ills”’ (ix). They offered a redefinition of social problems not as objec-
tive, self-evident conditions, but as processes in which the power of 
claims-making groups is the most crucial factor in the establishment 
of a putative condition as a problem. What Spector and Kitsuse con-
tributed to the conventional study of social problems is that they 
shifted the sociological attention from the objective condition to the 
process through which claims-makers argue for and define a problem. 
The process of claims-making can be easily documented, as it is usu-
ally discursive and the ‘claims-making activity itself can be empirically 
observed and documented without regard to the presence or ‘reality’ 
of the ‘social condition,’ which is conventionally asserted to be the  
basis of the claims’ (xi).

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   53
The five stages proposed by Blumer have been modified by Spector 
and Kistuse (2009), who have considerably expanded the implementa-
tion phase. Their four-stage model of the natural history of social prob-
lems essentially merges all the five phases of Blumer into two (Stage 1: 
debate and publicity prompted by claims-making groups and Stage 2: 
recognition of legitimacy leading to an official plan for reform). They 
introduce the third and fourth stages (Stage 3: critical stage of dissat-
isfaction with official plan and Stage 4: rejection of official plan and an 
attempt to create an alternative solution) as ‘a second generation’ social 
problem, which study what happens after legislation has been enacted 
and plans of action have been put into place (142). Spector and Kitsuse 
argue that the third and fourth stages reveal that government legislation, 
as well as civil society plans of action, usually fails to ameliorate the harm-
ful social conditions they aim to address. Furthermore, while Spector and 
Kitsuse delve substantially in the symbolic interactionist school’s theori-
zation of social problems, they dismiss the search for objective definitions 
of social problems (see below).5
The first stage of Spector and Kitsuse’s natural history of social prob-
lems concentrates on the activities of groups that argue for the existence 
of a harmful social condition, by which they may or may not be directly 
affected. This stage is essentially the attempt to transform, in the famous 
formulation of Mills (1959), private problems into public concerns. This 
is the stage at which statistically significant occurrences of otherwise pri-
vate troubles, such as unemployment or divorce, make a bid for public 
attention. Due to the fact that a lot of claims are discarded, the success 
of claims is dependent on the power of the pressing groups and their 
use of claims-making mechanisms. For Spector and Kitsuse, claims-mak-
ing is a ‘form of interaction’ in which ‘definitions of conditions as social 
problems are constructed by members of society who attempt to call 
attention to situations they find repugnant and who try to mobilize insti-
tutions to do something about them’ (78).
5 Blumer (1971) still considers, the study of the ‘objective makeup’ a valuable research 
agenda, but since the process of collective definition is ultimately politicized in his perspec-
tive, ‘the knowledge of the objective makeup of the social problem is of significance only 
to the extent that the knowledge enters into the process of collective definition’ and this 
is the process of ‘being seen and defined’ by society that ultimately determines the rise and 
demise of social problems in the public arena (305).

54   E. KATZAROVA
While the first stage can continue for an indefinite period of time, 
the beginning of the second stage is marked by the recognition of the 
claims-making group by an official agency. The success of the group 
may be achieved through mounting pressure, or the agency could rec-
ognize that it can gain dividends from assuming control over the prob-
lem.6 Spector and Kitsuse (2009) remark that often ‘commissions reform 
by public relations, in which the commissions to study the problem are 
taken to be the substance of reform itself’ (150). In the long process 
of producing a final report, the putative problem may find its prema-
ture end or go to the next level of institutionalization. When staff and 
resources are attributed to the governing of a problem, this does not 
mark the end of its career, but rather, signifies a new stage of develop-
ment. The institutionalization of the problem marks the moment when 
dealing with complaints, rather than mitigating the condition itself, may 
become a primary goal. Spector and Kitsuse mark the end of the second 
stage: ‘when complaints about some condition have become domesti-
cated and routinized by some agency that develops a vested interest in 
doing something about the complaints, though not necessarily in dealing 
with the conditions to which the complaints refer’ (151).
Stage three further complicates the relationship between the problem 
and the proposed solution due to the inability of the plan of action to 
mitigate the condition. This lack of effectiveness could be planned, due 
to the fact that reforms by public relations aim to diffuse social tension 
and take control over the solution of the problem. In the third stage of 
social problem development, ‘assertions about the inadequacy, inefficacy 
or injustice of the procedures may themselves become the conditions 
around which new activities’ become organized, often by different groups 
than the ones that achieved initial recognition (Spector and Kitsuse 2009, 
151–152). When the bureaucratic handling of the problem generates new 
6 Spector and Kitsuse adopt a grassroots approach in which groups try to get governmen-
tal recognition and push a putative condition as a ‘formal part of an institutional agenda’ 
(154). The authors, however, recognize that this is simply one route for agenda-setting in 
society and quite often the initiative comes from governmental institutions that want to 
raise a condition to the status of a social problem. The difference between ‘initiator’ and 
‘responder’ can be hard to discern, but the initiative in the construction of social problems 
can come from both grassroots movements and governmental institutions. The major indi-
cator of the successful career of a social problem in both cases, however, remains the raising 
of an issue as part of an official agenda and the enactment of legislation.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   55
predicaments, and claims start to emerge about the procedures rather 
than the problem itself, these are ‘second generation’ claims. According 
to Spector and Kitsuse, after the routinization of claims is achieved at 
the previous stage, stage three concludes with a legitimacy crisis. At the 
fourth stage, interested groups contend that it is no longer viable ‘to 
work within the system’ (153). Since the legitimacy of institutions is com-
promised, either the organizations try to reform, or new methods to ame-
liorate the condition are established at the community level.
The transition from one stage to the next is highly volatile; at each 
stage, the career of the social problem can be interrupted, as not all 
problematic situations that come to public and media attention are 
taken seriously by the administration and the government, and not all 
situations that are discussed in official institutions manage to make it to 
legislation. Furthermore, the confrontation of positions and interests 
complicates the smooth development of any social problem no matter 
how urgent its resolution appears: ‘A social problem is always a focal 
point for the operation of divergent and conflicting interests, intentions 
and objectives’ (Blumer 1971, 301).
While Spector and Kitsuse built upon sociological scholarship on 
social problems, and in particular, the work of Blumer, they carried 
the research agenda one step further by presenting social problems as 
claims-making processes. There are different empirical questions that a 
social constructionist agenda on social problems can pursue at the dif-
ferent stages of the career of a social problem. Some examples at the pri-
mary stages of claims-making would be questions such as: Who are the 
claims-makers? What is the context of their interest in the claims? What 
type of evidence do they provide? Spector and Kitsuse (2009) provide a 
dynamic conceptualization of social problems—one that shifts the under-
standing of problems from a ‘condition’ to an ‘activity.’ Claims-making 
is an interactive process in which demands are made from one group 
or organization on another: A ‘claim is a demand that one party makes 
upon another’ (83). Spector and Kitsuse (2009) explain that before mak-
ing a claim, claimants first construct an etiology of the putative problem, 
which conditions the way the claim is expressed. The empirical study of 
claims starts from isolating the first occurrence of claims-making and 
studying the background that provoked a particular group to start the 
process. As a first step, the researcher should: ‘identify the beginning 
point of a particular group’s interest and participation in the prelimi-
nary and preparatory stages of claims-making’ and recognize that many 

56   E. KATZAROVA
cases of claims-making will be unsuccessful (128). After providing this 
background, the researcher should follow the thread of continuity in 
the redefinition of social problems as they become part of the agenda 
of different organizations. Spector and Kitsuse (2009) place the legiti-
mation of the claims by a public institution as the first indicator that 
claims are being successful. The main research task in the first phase of 
the empirical analysis of claims, therefore, is to individualize the initial 
claims-makers.
Recognition by an official public institution is the usual method of 
seeding successful claims, even though public institutions themselves may 
be the generators of claims. If the claims are rendered legitimate, an ad 
hoc committee to study the issue is usually formed. The selection of the 
committee sheds light on what kind of experts are deemed authoritative, 
and what kind of definition is about to emerge, in light of sociologists, 
economists and legal experts having differing takes on the same objec-
tive condition. Whether a problem is of an economic, humanitarian or 
legal nature is not a self-evident aspect inherent to the objective condi-
tion itself, and the prism through which a problem is viewed becomes 
a strategic and, essentially, a political tool. Appeals to legal rhetoric, for 
example, can be used as a universalistic rationalization for self-interest: 
‘International talk is often moral and legal because the obligatory vocab-
ulary of moral and legal dispute between individuals is also useful for 
purely amoral strategic interactions when cooperation and coordination 
are involved’ (Posner and Goldsmith 2002, 115). The way an under-
standing of a condition is continuously shifted from the first occurrences 
of claims-making through the internal proceedings of the organizations 
that deem the claims legitimate is of high relevance to the social con-
struction of problems: ‘The data document the development of claims 
and issues as they are defined, redefined, and passed from one set of par-
ticipants to another; this thread of continuity leads through a variety of 
institutions and casts of characters’ (Spector and Kitsuse 2009, 125).
The processing of claims leads to a continuous redefinition of the 
problem and the inclusion of contributions from new participants in the 
definitional process. Excavating competing claims from the definitional 
process and contextualizing the emergence of claims-making provide 
potential clues as to what types of claims, and under which conditions, 
prevail over others, and show that other interpretations of putative con-
ditions are possible, but are neglected or overruled by more success-
ful claims. Shifting claims from ‘localized’ to ‘globalized’ changes the 

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   57
definition of the putative condition and is reflected in the negotiation of 
practical solutions. Spector and Kitsuse (2009) provide relevant empirical 
cases for how the expansion of the geographical and definitional scope of 
a problem may lead to a deadlock. Opening up the research to contro-
versial questions and proposing solutions that are too radical, and poten-
tially disconcerting in the public eye, is another route to an impasse. 
Nevertheless, the claims are still successful if they have received formal 
recognition and have become part of the agenda of international organ-
izations. Claims-making activities might go through a number of cycles 
of recognition and failure before the institutionalization of the problem.
An important aspect in the empirical study of claims is the role of the 
researcher, who studies the social construction of problems. The core of 
the constructivist argument put forward by Spector and Kitsuse (2009) 
is that as individual agents and organizations promote a problem in the 
sphere of public recognition, they become an intrinsic part of the prob-
lem construction, and this includes the social scientists investigating the 
problem. This approach argues that the sociologist who promotes aware-
ness of a social problem, or even simply studies it, is in a similar position 
to a lobbyist. Spector and Kitsuse, therefore, argue that claims-making 
activities should be at the center of investigation because any attempt to 
‘study the problem itself’ is an act of promotion of a particular interpre-
tation of the problematic situation in which the sociologist simply pro-
motes her version of reality over others. The process of social interaction 
which constructs the problem is a more suitable approach to the study of 
society: ‘how individuals and groups become engaged in collective activi-
ties that recognize putative conditions as problems, and attempt to estab-
lish institutional arrangements.’ The claims-making activities of groups 
who promote a certain version of reality, and reject others, are placed at 
the center of sociological investigation shedding light on ‘how methods 
of social control and treatment are institutionally established’ (72).
The research agenda of Spector and Kitsuse has been very influen-
tial, but their early work has been contested on the grounds of ‘onto-
logical gerrymandering’ (Woolgar and Pawluch 1985). This meant 
constructionist scholars pushed the boundary between what remained 
problematized and what remained fixed in the analytical process quite 
indiscriminately. The debate that came out of this critique led to the 
consolidation of strict and contextual constructionism (Best 2009). The 
epistemological differences between the two are elucidated in relation to 
the validity of objective conditions. While strict constructionism remains 

58   E. KATZAROVA
neutral toward the validity of claims, contextual constructionism can 
try to not only position claims within their socio-historical context, but 
also place the analyst in a position to evaluate their validity (Best 1993, 
2009). In this sense, Best offers a middle ground in the objectivist-sub-
jectivist debate by incorporating elements of both. Contextualizing the 
process of claims-making, however, does not necessarily entail that the 
analysts should expose ‘erroneous’ claims.
Best (1993) finds strict constructionism insufficient because in the 
quest for epistemological consistency and theoretical purity, Spector and 
Kitsuse are trying to fence off their research from the messy business of 
empirical analysis. A theory of social problem discourse, which studies 
only rhetoric and language, is more feasible, but it collides with the argu-
ment that constructionism is empirically grounded. Best is critical of this 
view because it renounces the sociological purpose of understanding and 
changing reality for the better, and relegates sociological studies down to 
the level of language games. The extremes of completely ignoring the ini-
tial condition or completely debunking the way the condition has been 
institutionalized are not the only two options—rather they are two points 
on a continuum. It is possible to contextualize discourse and to provide 
analysis for a variety of claims and counterclaims without making the 
final judgment on their validity. The study of social problems does offer 
practical clues to understanding the empirical realities ‘behind’ problems, 
but these clues remain implicit. By investigating who are the claims-mak-
ers and what are the interests that are fueling their activities, as well as 
what type of evidence they are providing for their claims, the construc-
tionist researcher can present a variety of clues as to the possible validity 
of claims, but not the final judgment as to proving one group of claims 
erroneous and another group of claims valid. In order to reconstruct the 
unsuccessful claims, this book will show how two interpretations emerged 
from the same putative condition. While reconstructing and arguing for 
the enduring relevance of the unsuccessful claims, the book does not aim 
to prove that the unsuccessful claims were the accurate way to under-
stand and define the problem. On the contrary, both the successful and 
unsuccessful claims were valid ways of interpreting the situation. At the 
same time, the reason why one set of claims prevailed over the other did 
not have to do with the validity of the claims, but rather with the power 
of the claims-making group. As the following section will show, the 
claims-making groups, especially in the context of international intergov-
ernmental organizations, are nation states and groups of states.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   59
The Social Construction of Global Problems:  
Agency and the ‘Globalization’ of Problems
Claims-making on global problems will differ on two major accounts. The 
first fundamental difference between global and national claims-making 
concerns the content of the claims. Global claims would not only assert 
that a problem exists, but they would be directed at proving that this 
problem is best addressed through coordinated action at the global level. 
The second major difference between global and national claims-making is 
that a different set of agents would be engaged in claims-making activities. 
These two major differences, between national and global claims-making, 
are given further attention and illustrated with relevant examples from IR 
scholarship in order to adapt the sociological approach to IR.
Spector and Kitsuse (2009) define social problems as ‘the activities 
of individuals or groups making assertions of grievances and claims with 
respect to some putative condition’ (75). This condition is in need of 
amelioration according to the etiology presented in the claims of these 
groups. Global problems are the claims-making activities of state and 
non-state actors who make assertions that some putative condition 
is a problem that can be ameliorated only through coordinated action 
at a global level. The claims as to why a problem is global, rather than 
national, are therefore an essential part of the claims-making process.
Global problems are, by definition, trans-sovereign because sovereign 
states are not able to deal with them on their own (Love 2010). The 
amelioration of global problems is often the prerogative of global gov-
ernance structures, and global governance can indeed be defined as ‘col-
lective actions to establish international institutions and norms to cope 
with the causes and consequences of adverse supranational, transnational, 
or national problems’ (Väyrynen 1999, 25). Demand for global govern-
ance is intensified through globalization, and global governance is to an 
extent a collective response to global problems. Claims-making activi-
ties that demand a global response are a necessary prerequisite for the 
social construction of global problems. While the term ‘global’ can be 
applied to a variety of problems that are encountered by nation states, as 
long as there are no demands for the creation of institutional structures 
with international, transnational or trans-sovereign character, we cannot 
speak of a global problem the way it is intended in this book. For exam-
ple, unemployment is often referred to as a ‘global problem’ because a 
lot of nation states have undesirably high unemployment rates; however, 

60   E. KATZAROVA
unemployment is still not a global problem as intended in this book. 
Unemployment has indeed reached the status of a global fright in a period 
of just a few years with the International Labor Organization (ILO) esti-
mating the global number of unemployed persons for 2017 to be over 
201 million. The BBC World Service Survey showed that unemploy-
ment has joined corruption and poverty as the most talked about global 
problems. A six fold increase in public concern with unemployment has 
been marked just from 2009 to 2011 (GlobeScan 2011). Yet, no global 
claims have been made of unemployment being in need of a systematic 
global governance approach. The IMF has made appeals for international 
coordination of policies on aggregate demand to boost job creation indi-
rectly, but has not recommended coordination of labor market policies 
(Blanchard and Gali 2010; Blanchard et al. 2013).
The ‘non-problematicity’ (Freudenburg 2000) of unemployment as 
an issue for global governance is in stark contrast with the highly insti-
tutionalized nature of corruption as a global governance issue (Rosenau 
and Wang 2001; McCoy and Heckel 2001). While unemployment rivals 
corruption in worldwide public concern, this concern is not yet matched 
by successful claims-making activities that will boost unemployment as a 
global agenda item. A global problem will start its career after claims are 
being made that the unemployment situation can be ameliorated only 
through coordinated international and global action, and not through 
more effective policies of national governments.7 Therefore, the con-
struction of unemployment as a global governance problem would begin 
with claims-making that the unemployment numbers can be tackled only 
through collective action at a global level and these claims can then be 
legitimated in the framework of different international forums. The sub-
sequent attempt to govern the problem of unemployment globally, or at 
least through coordinated international action, will mark the beginning 
of a stage of institutionalization.
That a problem is a legitimate global governance issue can become 
a major point of contestation. The social construction of problems 
is studied as an intersubjective process characterized by claims and 
counterclaims and similar dynamic processes between actors have 
already been examined in IR. The process of claims-making in the 
7 Even the IMF calls for reform are limited to coordination not of labor market policies, but 
of fiscal and monetary policies to influence aggregate demand (Blanchard and Gali 2010).

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   61
context of global governance shows some similarity to the concep-
tualization of Abbott and Snidal (2000), who distinguish between 
‘demandeurs’ and ‘resisters’ in the production of international leg-
islation. Demandeurs are ‘states (and other actors) that have worked 
to obtain commitments from others, often in the face of strong 
resistance’ (431). In international law, legal regimes often become 
‘functions of demandeur preferences’ (Gopalan 2008). The main dif-
ference between the claims-making process of Spector and Kitsuse 
and the demandeur approach of Abbott and Snidal is that in the con-
ceptual framework of the former, both demandeurs and resisters will 
be considered claims-makers. When the construction of social prob-
lems becomes the product of a process of collective definition, the 
resisters stop being presented as simply being in opposition to the 
‘problem’ and become contestant claims-makers in the construc-
tion of the problem. This shift is significant because it sheds new 
light on the production of global governance structures. If we take 
as an example the politics of contestation by developing countries 
on global environmental arrangements, the conventional perspec-
tive is that their opposition to solving the problem of environmen-
tal degradation has finally been overcome (Najam 2005). From a 
constructivist perspective, however, the same politics of contesta-
tion by the Global South becomes part of claims-making activities 
that are analyzed at the same level as the proactive politics of the 
demandeurs. A conventional understanding of social problems exist-
ing simply as an objective condition would assume that the resist-
ers are against the ‘problem,’ but according to the constructionist 
reading of the same dynamic, this may not be the case. The resisters 
or the counterclaims-makers may have a different understanding of 
the putative condition, and their rejection of the demands could be 
justified by this differing interpretation. The claims-making activities 
of the demandeurs may not be given priority, their bid for attention 
may not be taken seriously, and the claims may lack legitimacy. In 
the global arena, state and non-state claims-makers make their bids 
for legitimacy in front of official organizations and in front of each 
other. The participants in the process of claims-making will differ in 
national and international environments (Table 3.1).

62   E. KATZAROVA
One of the major tasks in denaturalizing problems is to account for 
agency. If the etymological root of the word ‘problem’ is to be taken 
seriously, the process of problematization would ‘bring forward’ a con-
dition now defined as a problem.8 The process is not automatic because 
even if state, non-state actors or international policy makers ‘spot’ a 
problem out there, they still have to engage in ontological persua-
sion at the beginning of negotiations (Hülsse 2007).9 When agency is 
accounted for, the emergence of the problem loses both its naturalness 
and its automaticity. Finnemore and Sikkink (1998) argue that interna-
tional actors ‘call attention to issues or even create issues’ (893). Usually, 
these are assumed to be disinterested non-state actors, such as INGOs 
and epistemic communities, who call attention to issues and act as norm 
entrepreneurs.
International organizations constitute another global actor who can 
engage in claims-making activities or at least provide a venue for such 
activities. Hülsse (2007) calls for the study of global problems and 
adopts a radical constructivist approach to prove that actors who are in 
8 The notion that the emergence of problems is always triggered by some objectively 
measured increase or worsening of the condition has been challenged by constructivist 
scholars. Epstein (2005), for example, argues for the explanatory weakness of material- 
based factors in the emergence of an international whaling regime by showing the causal 
irrelevance of the levels of endangerment of whales to the formation of the regime.
9 Hülsse (2007) places ontological persuasion as a prerequisite for normative persuasion. 
During the process of ontological persuasion, other actors with competing interpretations 
have to be convinced of the existence of the problem, its definitional parameters, as well as 
the causal connections between the claimed problem and other objectives on the agenda.
Table 3.1  National and global claims-makers
Source on national claims-makers: Spector and Kitsuse (2009)
National claims-makers
Global claims-makers
1. Governmental and municipal bodies and 
agencies
1. States
2. Pressure groups: political activists and lobbyists
2. International organizations
3. Moral entrepreneurs
3. Global civil society/global business
4. Academic experts: academic and social 
researchers
4. Epistemic communities
5. The traditional and social media: newspaper 
columnists, media commentators
5. Global traditional and social media

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   63
the business of managing global problems also create them. He argues 
for the agency of organizations, such as the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF), in constructing global problems. The argument that global 
actors, who have an inherent interest in expanding their mandate, trans-
form previously national prerogatives into global concerns does not, 
however, answer the question of why a particular problem emerges at 
a given time. FATF, for example, is an intergovernmental body at the 
OECD headquarters and was created with a mandate from the G7 to 
carry out work on money-laundering; that is, FATF may have an interest 
in creating global problems in general, but it was given a specific man-
date to work on money-laundering by nation states. Hülsse, therefore, 
brackets the problem by taking money-laundering for a natural problem 
and accounts only for its instrumental use. This account in which mon-
ey-laundering is taken for granted, but its instrumental use is ‘problem-
atized’ may lead to relativism (as if the problem is chosen at random). 
As one of the basic premises of constructivism is that agents of social 
construction can act instrumentally (Ruggie 1998), it is in denaturaliz-
ing problems that the task of social construction lies. This entails asking 
questions such as: Why this particular issue? Who claimed it was a prob-
lem and why? How did they define it? In order to provide a systematic 
account of a research agenda with a methodology that can answer these 
types of questions, the work of Spector and Kitsuse (1973, 1975, 2009) 
on the construction of social problems could provide useful theoretical 
and conceptual tools for researchers in IR.
Another aspect of the theoretical approach of Spector and Kitsuse 
and the work of Blumer that make them particularly suitable for the 
study of IR is the treatment of the concept of power in the social con-
struction of problems. Groups with higher membership, economic 
resources and more sophisticated organization are more likely to have 
their claims processed as legitimate. The power of a group to make 
claims is understood as the ability of a group to realize demands it 
makes on other groups, agencies and institutions. Therefore, the actual 
results that a claims-making group manages to produce are the meas-
urement of its power. The agents of social construction at the global 
level are often identified as non-state actors or international organiza-
tions; but, the neglect of state agency can lead to a neglect of a signif-
icant factor for change in the social construction of global problems. 
Barkin (2003, 2011) has criticized the implicit liberalism of construc-
tivist scholars in IR who have not provided for a satisfactory inclusion 

64   E. KATZAROVA
of state power into studies of social construction. Power in interstate 
relations is understood not solely as brute material force or violent coer-
cion, since, as Dahl (1957) famously argued, it is the ability to make 
others do what otherwise they would not have done that is at the 
core of power relations. The greatest success of power, therefore, is to 
coerce without threatening: ‘political power is ultimately about persua-
sion, about convincing others rather than forcing’ (Barkin 2011, 19). 
To adapt this argument to the construction of global problems, power 
is convincing others that your national troubles are global problems. 
Persuasion can be seen as the opposite of power, understood as material 
force and is therefore seen as the weapon of the weak. Consequently, 
the agents of persuasion at the global level are often appointed as civil 
society actors, epistemic communities and other non-state actors who 
do not possess the same material capabilities as states. In the creation 
of global problems around which policy responses are built, however, 
state actors can be central players who embark on persuasion campaigns. 
Their material power is not irrelevant, but at the same time cannot 
completely account for the outcome and the methods they use. By tak-
ing into account the role of state (as well as non-state actors) in the 
social construction of global problems, constructivism can study how 
power shapes normative transformations at the global level, and show 
that even state-centered international relations are a battlefield of ideas.
This constructivist conceptual re-formulation of power as the power 
of claims-making groups to realize demands could be particularly robust 
when adapted to the field of IR, as it allows for the study of the role of 
power in establishing ideas and promoting versions of international real-
ity. The construction of global problems as a perspective on global gov-
ernance offers a potentially new interpretation of how ideational factors 
contribute to the establishment and institutionalization of power at the 
international level, and that this power can also be ideational. The abil-
ity of some agents to establish their version of reality is inseparable from 
their relative power. The struggle of ideas at the global level can be seen 
as a power struggle in which the stronger prevail not necessarily because 
of the validity of their argument. The ideas that are established as legiti-
mate in this power struggle contribute to the social construction of one 
version of reality over another.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   65
Definition and Data Sources
Different understandings of corruption saturate academic and policy 
debates. From an expansive definition of corruption as the permeation of 
the political sphere by the logic of the market (Girling 1997), to a more 
operational understanding of corruption as a monetized exchange, set-
ting precise definitional boundaries is a difficult task. The most referenced 
and broadly accepted conceptualization is the operational definition used 
by TI: ‘the abuse of entrusted power for private gain.’ This definition is 
shared by the World Bank with a slight alteration—‘the abuse of public 
office for private gain.’ When the definition is not attributed to TI or the 
World Bank, it is mistakenly attributed to Joseph Nye, but it can actually 
be traced back to Senturia (1931). Senturia put forward the ‘misuse of 
public power for private profit’ as the definition of political corruption 
(448). The book preliminary understands corruption in the conventional 
(Senturia) sense, as the misuse of public power for private profit.
As discussed earlier, the book employs discourse and practice analysis 
methods in accordance with the strategies of Spector and Kitsuse (2009) 
for the empirical study of claims. These discursive strategies include the 
study of the definition of conditions, expression of claims and imputa-
tion of motives and values by the claims-makers, as well as practices and 
strategies of managing controversy and publicity. Spector and Kitsuse put 
forward library and archival research, analysis of documents, as well as 
unstructured elite interviews as the right methods to obtain the data for 
their definitional approach. The presentation of the data has to be highly 
detailed and includes excerpts of memos, faxes, letters, minutes of meet-
ings, commentaries and dossiers in the media.
In the empirical chapters, within-case analysis of the discursive strat-
egies of social construction of the problem of corruption in two inter-
national organizations—the OECD and the UN—is investigated in 
detail. In the process of data collection, the two discussions proved to 
be more entangled than expected. In particular, in 1977 the OECD dis-
cussion of a potential treaty on corrupt payments was made conditional 
upon the successful advancement of the same issue within the framework 
of the UN. Similarly, in the late 1990s, it was after the adoption of the 
OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials 

66   E. KATZAROVA
in International Business Transactions that the discussions within the 
UN changed and allowed for the adoption of the most comprehensive 
global instrument against corruption. The interconnection between the 
two cases enhances the argument that problematizing global issues is an 
essential step in the adoption of international treaties within the frame-
work of global governance. The successful legitimation of a global prob-
lem within one institutional framework may lead to a quick spillover to 
other international forums. Finnemore and Sikkink (1998) credit norms 
for this policy cascade, but as the empirical chapters show, the spillover 
effect can also be due to state agency.
The empirical within-case analysis of discursive strategies is based on 
primary data from three main sources—US Congressional and State 
Department archival data, as well as an extensive investigation of pre-
viously unexamined archival materials at the OECD Archives in Paris 
and the UN Archives in New York. The data analyzed are sensitive, and 
different declassification procedures apply within the different institu-
tional frameworks. Congressional and State Department archival mate-
rials, in particular from the 1970s, are available to researchers due to the 
exhaustion of the 20-year period of disclosure. In the case of the OECD, 
the Council Resolution on the Classification and Declassification of 
Information (CES/CRC(97)16) provides access to all archival materials 
(including classified) after a period of maximum 6 years. The access to 
primary documents dating before 1997 is possible under the same con-
ditions, but necessitates a special request. The OECD data provide the 
most abundant resource for the analysis with more than 20,000 docu-
ments. The review and reproduction of all types of data proved unprob-
lematic during my research period at the OECD Headquarters and the 
UN Archives. The access to some preparatory documents and minutes of 
meetings also proved possible. Lastly, the compendium of primary archi-
val sources is complemented with the examination of journalistic sources 
reproduced in the OECD press reviews in order to gain an understand-
ing of the media and public perception of the talks and the wider societal 
context.10
10 George and Bennett (2005), in a compendium of the same type of data sources, 
emphasize that classified sources require acquaintance with the wider social context 
through the reading of journalistic articles from the period corresponding to the archival 
material (97).

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   67
This chapter introduced the conceptual building blocks of the book 
by presenting the main elements of a research agenda on the social con-
struction of problems. It did so in three steps: first by presenting the 
essentials of the concept of social construction and second by channeling 
it toward the more specific agenda of Spector and Kitsuse (1973, 2009) 
on the social construction of problems. Third, adapting this sociological 
approach to the field of IR entails the consideration of a different type of 
agents, such as state actors and non-state actors. This book argues that 
the social construction of a global corruption problem remained a largely 
intergovernmental process, driven by powerful states. Finally, with this 
examination of state power in the social construction of international 
reality, this book joins the approaches that aim for integrating realist 
insights into constructivism.
The secondary aim of this chapter was to show the broader relevance 
of social problems research to IR. From that vantage point, corrup-
tion is but one example of the social construction of global problems. 
Constructivism arrived in IR with the assertion that the world is of our 
own making (Onuf 1989). While studying the role of norms and rules, 
as well as the constitutive role of discourse in the making and remaking 
of the social world, IR constructivism has so far neglected to account for 
the social construction of global problems.
Problem construction enjoys a long research pedigree in sociology 
and has been very influential in the development of social construc-
tionist thought in the field. IR constructivists can adapt the sociological 
approaches to the landscape of international affairs in order to under-
stand better how global governance structures emerge, and what actors 
and factors drive demand for global governance. The special atten-
tion that the sociological constructionist approach pays to the concept 
of the power of claims-making groups, and the role of conflict in the 
claims-making activities can help IR constructivists better understand the 
ontological battles with which global governance structures are estab-
lished. Analyzing the actors, who are successful at establishing their 
interpretation of a putative condition as a problem, facilitates the study 
of shifting authority at the global level and the deconstruction of onto-
logical warfare. The study of the problematicity of certain issues and the 
non-problematicity of others shows how state and non-state actors make 
sense of the world, and it sheds light on who is successful at persuading 
or imposing on others their own views on global social ills. Therefore, 

68   E. KATZAROVA
the sociological approach to the social construction of problems exhibits 
a constructivist understanding of power as the power of claims-making 
groups to impose their understanding of a condition and shape the social 
world.
Spector and Kitsuse’s approach is particularly well tailored for the 
empirical study of claims. A feasible working strategy for empirical 
research on claims is for the researcher to first look for institutional 
legitimation. The first occurrences of claims-making can be easily iden-
tified by the well-documented institutional legitimation of claims. 
The official recognition of a respondent is an essential tool in the iso-
lation of specific claims. The response in most organizations is rou-
tinized, and the strategies for a successful recognition become part 
of the organization of claims. The organization and processing of 
claims-making activities become, therefore, an empirical question to 
be answered because there is ‘no simple mechanical, causal relation-
ship between a condition, and the activation of responses and com-
plaints’ (Spector and Kitsuse 2009, 84). Following the identification 
of such successful claims, a step back to the historical and political 
context of the claims can be made in order to identify the putative 
condition that gave rise to such claims. The search for the historical 
context of the claims or the objective definitions that gave rise to the 
claims in the first place would depend on the researcher’s commitment 
to conventional or critical constructivism (similar to contextual and 
strict constructionism in sociology). Tracing the dynamic relation that 
claims-makers sustain with the putative condition they are addressing 
can then lead to the identification of the major claims and counter-
claims, as well as the reconstruction of alternative routes for defining 
and addressing the problem. The careers of social problems follow sim-
ilar patterns that can help the understanding of the impact of agents 
on the social construction of global issues, as well as help discern 
future trends in the development of a social problem past the legiti-
macy crisis phase and the emergence of second-generation claims.
The social construction of global problems constitutes a kaleidoscope 
of overlapping claims and definitions that accompany the understanding 
of the putative condition both theoretically and practically. The natu-
ral history or career of a social problem is a process—it is the trajectory 
through which a given society comes to recognize, legitimize and govern 
social issues. The process of social construction accommodates not sim-
ply scientific facts about the putative social condition, but also conflicting 

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   69
interpretations, diverging strategies, inequality of power and vested 
interests, as well as practical implementation predicaments. What type of 
transboundary problems remain contested as national, and for what rea-
sons is one of the relevant empirical questions through which the power 
of claims-making groups can be assessed at a global level. The denatu-
ralization of global problems and the political processes of negotiation 
and collective definition that determine the process of social construction 
can shed further light on how and by whom is meaning produced in this 
world of our making.
References
Abbott, Kenneth W., and Duncan Snidal. 2000. “Hard and Soft Law in 
International Governance.” International Organization 54 (3): 421–456.
Abdelal, Rawi, Mark Blyth, and Craig Parsons, eds. 2010. Constructing the 
International Economy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Acharya, Amitav, ed. 2016. Why Govern? Rethinking Demand and Progress in 
Global Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Avant, Deborah D., Martha Finnemore, and Susan K. Sell, eds. 2010. Who 
Governs the Globe? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baker, Andrew. 2006. The Group of Seven: Finance Ministries, Central Banks and 
Global Financial Governance. London and New York: Routledge.
Barkin, J. Samuel. 2003. “Realist Constructivism.” International Studies Review 
5 (3): 325–342.
———. 2011. Realist Constructivism: Rethinking International Relations Theory. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, Michael, and Emanuel Adler. 1998. Security Communities. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, Michael, and Raymond Duvall. 2005. Power in Global Governance. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of 
Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Anchor Books.
Bernstein, Steven. 2004. “Legitimacy in Global Environmental Governance.” 
Journal of International Law and International Relations 1: 139.
Bernstein, Steven, and Benjamin Cashore. 2007. “Can Non-state Global 
Governance Be Legitimate? An Analytical Framework.” Regulation & 
Governance 1 (4): 347–371.
Best, Joel. 1993. “But Seriously, Folks: The Limitations of the Strict 
Constructionist Interpretation of Social Problems.” In Reconsidering Social 
Constructionism: Debates in Social Problems Theory, edited by J. Holstein and 
G. Miller, 129–147. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

70   E. KATZAROVA
———. 2009. Images of Issues: Typifying Contemporary Social Problems. Rutgers, 
NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Biermann, Frank, and Philipp Pattberg. 2008. “Global Environmental 
Governance: 
Taking 
Stock, 
Moving 
Forward.” 
Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources 33 (1): 277–294.
———, eds. 2012. Global Environmental Governance Reconsidered. Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Gali. 2010. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: 
A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment.” American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics 2 (2): 1–30.
Blanchard, Olivier, Florence Jaumotte, and Prakash Loungani. 2013. Labor 
Market Policies and IMF Advice in Advanced Economies During the Great 
Recession. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, Research 
Department.
Blumer, Herbert. 1971. “Social Problems as Collective Behavior.” Social 
Problems 18 (3): 298–306.
Boghossian, Paul. 2006. Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and 
Constructivism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Büthe, Tim, and Walter Mattli. 2011. The New Global Rulers: The Privatization of 
Regulation in the World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cashore, Benjamin. 2002. “Legitimacy and the Privatization of Environmental 
Governance: How Non-State Market-Driven (NSMD) Governance Systems 
Gain Rule-Making Authority.” Governance 15 (4): 503–529.
CES/CRC(97)16. Council Resolution on the Classification and Declassification of 
Information, Adopted by the Council at the 906th Session on 10 July 1997 (29 
August 1997). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Cook-Gumperz, Jenny. 2006. The Social Construction of Literacy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cutler, A. Claire, Virginia Haufler, and Tony Porter, eds. 1999. Private Authority 
and International Affairs. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dahl, Robert Alan. 1957. The Concept of Power. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Dubash, Navroz K., and Ann Florini. 2011. “Mapping Global Energy 
Governance.” Global Policy 2 (1): 6–18.
Epstein, Charlotte. 2005. The Power of Words in International Relations: Birth of 
an Anti-Whaling Discourse. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 2000. “Violence and the Social 
Construction of Ethnic Identity.” International Organization 54 (4): 845–877.
Finnemore, Martha, and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. “International Norm Dynamics 
and Political Change.” International Organization 52 (4): 887–917.
Florini, Ann, and Benjamin K. Sovacool. 2009. “Who Governs Energy? The 
Challenges Facing Global Energy Governance.” Energy Policy 37 (12): 
5239–5248.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   71
Foucault, Michel. 1985. Discourse and Truth: The Problematization of Parrhesia. 
Edited by J. Pearson. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University.
Freudenburg, William. 2000. “Social Constructions and Social Constrictions: 
Toward Analyzing the Social Construction of ‘the Naturalized’ as Well as ‘the 
Natural’.” In Environment and Global Modernity, edited by G. Spaargaren, A. 
P. J. Mol, and F. H. Buttel, 103–119. London: Sage.
George, Alexander L., and Andrew Bennett. 2005. Case Studies and Theory 
Development in the Social Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Girling, John. 1997. Corruption, Capitalism and Democracy. East Sussex: 
Psychology Press.
GlobeScan. 2011. “Unemployment Rises as ‘Most Talked-About’ Problem: Global 
Poll.” Accessed November 10, 2017. http://www.globescan.com/news-and-anal-
ysis/press-releases/press-releases-2011/94-press-releases-2011/126-unemploy-
ment-rises-as-qmost-talked-aboutq-problem-global-poll.html.
Goode, Erich, and Nachman Ben-Yehuda. 2009. Moral Panics: The Social 
Construction of Deviance. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Goodman, Nelson. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett 
Publishing.
Gopalan, Sandeep. 2008. “A Demandeur-Centric Approach to Regime Design in 
Transnational Commercial Law.” Georgetown Journal of International Law 39 
(2): 22–51.
Grande, Edgar, and Louis W. Pauly, eds. 2007. Complex Sovereignty: 
Reconstituting Political Authority in the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Grint, Keith. 2005. “Problems, Problems, Problems: The Social Construction of 
‘Leadership’.” Human Relations 58 (11): 1467–1494.
Hacking, Ian. 1999. The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Hale, Thomas, David Held, and Kevin Young. 2013. Gridlock: Why Global 
Cooperation Is Failing When We Need It Most. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hall, Rodney Bruce, and Thomas J. Biersteker. 2002. The Emergence of Private 
Authority in Global Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harman, Sophie, and David Williams, eds. 2013. Governing the World? Cases in 
Global Governance. London and New York: Routledge.
Helleiner, Eric. 2014. The Status Quo Crisis: Global Financial Governance After 
the 2008 Meltdown. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hofferberth, Matthias, and Christian Weber. 2015. “Lost in Translation: 
A Critique of Constructivist Norm Research.” Journal of International 
Relations and Development 18 (1): 75–103.
Holstein, James, and Gale Miller. 1993. Reconsidering Social Constructionism: 
Debates in Social Problems Theory. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

72   E. KATZAROVA
Hopf, T., ed. 2002. Social Construction of International Politics: Identities & 
Foreign Policies, Moscow, 1955 and 1999. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hülsse, Rainer. 2007. “Creating Demand for Global Governance: The Making 
of a Global Money Laundering Problem.” Global Society 21 (2): 155–178.
Kahler, Miles, and David A. Lake. 2003. Governance in a Global Economy: 
Political Authority in Transition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kingdon, John W. 2010. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. London: 
Longman.
Krasner, Stephen D. 1982. “Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes 
as Intervening Variables.” International Organization 36 (2): 185–205.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Construction of 
Scientific Facts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lesage, Dries, Thijs Van de Graaf, and Kirsten Westphal. 2016. Global Energy 
Governance in a Multipolar World. London and New York: Routledge.
Levy, David L., and Peter John Newell. 2005. The Business of Global 
Environmental Governance. Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press.
Love, Maryann Cusimano. 2010. Beyond Sovereignty: Issues for a Global Agenda. 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
McCoy, Jennifer L., and Heather Heckel. 2001. “The Emergence of a Global 
Anti-corruption Norm.” International Politics 38 (1): 65–90.
McGrew, Anthony, and David Held, eds. 2002. Governing Globalization: Power, 
Authority and Global Governance. Cambridge: Polity.
Meyer, John W., and Ronald L. Jepperson. 2000. “The ‘Actors’ of Modern 
Society: The Cultural Construction of Social Agency.” Sociological Theory 18 
(1): 100–120.
Mills, C. Wright. 1959. The Sociological Imagination. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Mooney, Linda A., David Knox, and Caroline Schacht. 2011. Understanding 
Social Problems. Toronto: Nelson College Indigenous.
Najam, Adil. 2005. “Developing Countries and Global Environmental 
Governance: 
From 
Contestation 
to 
Participation 
to 
Engagement.” 
International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics 5 (3): 
303–321.
Onuf, Nicholas G. 1989. World of Our Making: Rules and Rule in Social Theory 
and International Relations. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Pierre, Jon. 2000. Debating Governance: Authority, Steering, and Democracy. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Posner, Eric, and Jack L. Goldsmith. 2002. “Moral and Legal Rhetoric in 
International Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective.” Journal of Legal 
Studies 31 (1): 115–139.
Ronit, Karsten, and Volker Schneider. 1999. “Global Governance Through 
Private Organizations.” Governance 12 (3): 243–266.

3  THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GLOBAL PROBLEMS   73
Rosenau, James N. 1995. “Governance in the Twenty-First Century.” Global 
Governance 1 (1): 13–43.
Rosenau, James N., and Hongying Wang. 2001. “Transparency International 
and Corruption as an Issue of Global Governance.” Global Governance 7 (1): 
25–49.
Ruggie, John Gerard. 1998. “What Makes the World Hang Together? Neo-
Utilitarianism and the Social Constructivist Challenge.” International 
Organization 52 (4): 855–885.
Scherer, Andreas Georg, Guido Palazzo, and Dorothée Baumann. 2006. 
“Global Rules and Private Actors: Toward a New Role of the Transnational 
Corporation in Global Governance.” Business Ethics Quarterly 16 (4): 
505–532.
Senturia, Joseph. 1931. “Corruption, Political.” In Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences, Vol. 4, 448–452. New York: Macmillan.
Spector, Malcolm, and John Kitsuse. 1973. “Toward a Sociology of Social 
Problems.” Social Problems 20: 407–419.
———. 1975. “Social Problems and Deviance: Some Parallels.” Social Problems. 
22: 584–594.
———. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers.
Underhill, Geoffrey R. D., and Xiaoke Zhang. 2008. “Setting the Rules: Private 
Power, Political Underpinnings, and Legitimacy in Global Monetary and 
Financial Governance.” International Affairs 84 (3): 535–554.
Van de Graaf, Thijs, and Jeff Colgan. 2016. “Global Energy Governance: A 
Review and Research Agenda.” Palgrave Communications 2. https://doi.
org/10.1057/palcomms.2015.47.
Väyrynen, Raimo. 1999. Globalization and Global Governance. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield.
Weiss, Thomas G., and Rorden Wilkinson, eds. 2014. International 
Organization and Global Governance. London and New York: Routledge.
Wendt, Alexander. 1992. “Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social 
Construction of Power Politics.” International Organization 46 (2): 391–425.
———. 1995. “Constructing International Politics.” International Security 20 
(1): 71–81.
Williams, Michael C. 2004. “Why Ideas Matter in International Relations: 
Hans Morgenthau, Classical Realism, and the Moral Construction of Power 
Politics.” International Organization 58 (4): 633–665.
Woolgar, Steve, and Dorothy Pawluch. 1985. “Ontological Gerrymandering: 
The Anatomy of Social Problems Explanations.” Social Problems 32 (3): 
214–227.
Young, Oran R., ed. 1997. Global Governance: Drawing Insights from the 
Environmental Experience. Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press.

75
The chapter examines the first anti-corruption discussions at global ven-
ues and the first instances of global institutional legitimation. Since the 
1970s, claims on corruption within international organizations devel-
oped in two major directions. The chapter argues that these clashing 
interpretations of the same condition can be called the Chilean and 
the American (US) legacies. The major difference between these two 
approaches was that the Chilean legacy developed at the UN and defined 
corruption as corporate influence on politics, while the American legacy 
developed predominantly at the OECD and defined corruption as brib-
ery. The chapter examines the content of global claims at the OECD and 
the UN in the 1970s and argues that the successful campaign to estab-
lish corruption as a global governance problem in the 1990s can only 
be understood as the legacy of the 1970s. By showing that nation states 
were pioneers in the process of global social construction, the chapter 
lays the groundwork for the argument that state power is essential in the 
creation of global problems and that powerful states can be proactive 
participants in this process.
The search for the first occurrence of claims-making about corruption 
being a problem in need of globally organized corrective action shows 
that the initial legitimation of claims took place in the early to mid-
1970s in the UN, the OECD, the World Bank, the IMF and the ICC, 
but also in the US Congress. It was revelations in the American press, 
starting with a publication by syndicated journalist, Jack Anderson, that 
CHAPTER 4
Building a New World:  
Global Claims in the 1970s
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_4

76   E. KATZAROVA
triggered talks at global venues of practices and social conditions that 
were characterized as ‘corrupt.’ On March 21, 1972, Anderson pub-
lished an article in the Washington Post that documented the inappro-
priate involvement of the ITT in the political life of Chile. Based on 
leaked internal memos, the ITT Corporation had been allegedly trying 
to prevent Allende’s election in 1970 due to fears that his policies would 
impact negatively ITT’s investments in the country. In relation to the 
revelations, at the third UN Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD III) in April 1972, Allende defined the problem of corrup-
tion as a question about the role of business in politics and the rising 
influence of corporate power over the democratic process, referring 
to corporations’ ‘powerful corruptive influence on public institutions 
in rich and poor countries alike’ (UNCTAD 1973, 353). These initial 
claims were ultimately not successful at framing a global corruption 
problem.
If we are to follow the successful claims, the first formalized appeal 
that there was a global problem with corruption went under the rubric 
of ‘illicit’ or ‘corrupt’ payments. These claims were made by the US 
delegations to the UN and the OECD in 1975. The United States sub-
mitted a proposal to the OECD for the inclusion of ‘illicit payments’ in 
the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (IME(75)18).1 The for-
mal claim was made on September 17, 1975, just before the opening 
of the regular session of the UN General Assembly in the third week 
of September where a similar claim was reiterated. In September 1975, 
informal talks including a number of Finance Ministers from devel-
oped nations were carried out by William Simon, US Secretary of the 
Treasury, in the IMF and the World Bank (US Senate 1975). As the fifth 
chapter will show, both the Chilean and the US claims were triggered by 
the ITT affair and the same putative condition–corporate involvement in 
political affairs. The United States carried out its own internal investiga-
tions on the ITT affair, which revealed hundreds of other cases of corpo-
rate malpractice, including cases of foreign bribery. The next chapter is 
dedicated to the US internal investigations and provides more informa-
tion on the ITT affair and the putative condition that triggered global 
corruption claims.
1 Due to the large amount of documents cited from the OECD Archives, in-text citations 
use the reference code, because this constitutes the most effective method to locate the 
documents in both the bibliography and the OECD Archives.

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   77
The Rising of the Global South
It is only after tracing back the unsuccessful claims of developing nations 
that the US initiative of 1975 can be seen as reactive to the developing 
nations’ claims rather than proactive. The US argument that corruption 
should be understood predominantly as bribery was made in opposi-
tion to a more expansive definition promoted by a number of develop-
ing countries in the G77, especially Chile. Chilean President, Salvador 
Allende, promoted a version of corruption as corporate influence over 
politics. Unregulated global markets offered opportunities for corpo-
rations to influence politics in a way that was detrimental to the pub-
lic interest. Allende called attention to ‘the increasingly obvious conflict 
between the public interests of the wealthy nations (those which are of 
real benefit to their peoples) and the private interests of their great inter-
national corporations’ (UNCTAD 1973, 353).
UNCTAD III has been characterized as a time of ‘radicalization’ of the 
Global South (Garavini 2013, 132). Developing nations became increas-
ingly assertive in international affairs and demanded a substantial reform of 
the international economic system. Chile appeared at the forefront of this 
radicalization, and the Chilean demands in 1972 to examine the increas-
ing influence of multinationals on politics could be understood within that 
context.2 These claims historically led to the UN agenda to create a global 
framework for corporate conduct and the pursuit of the public interest.
As noted previously, the first UN talks on corruption occurred in rela-
tion to a series of corporate misconduct cases, of which the involvement 
of the ITT Corporation in the political life of Chile became the first and 
most prominent example (US Congress 1975). The Chilean claim that 
there was a fundamental clash between the globally unregulated pursuit 
of corporate profit and democracy emerged out of this context. This 
claim was first launched at the UNCTAD III (April 13–May 21, 1972), 
hosted by Chile in Santiago less than a month after Anderson’s publica-
tions shook the world. Allende later reiterated his claims about the cor-
rupting influence of multinationals during his speech at the UN General 
Assembly in December of the same year (Allende 1972). The basic argu-
ment of Allende’s claim about the clash between multinationals and 
states could have been taken straight out of the highly acclaimed 1971 
2 While the term ‘transnational’ was preferred to ‘multinational’ corporations by the UN 
and the Global South in the 1970s, this book uses the terms interchangeably.

78   E. KATZAROVA
book by Harvard economist Raymond Vernon, ‘Sovereignty at Bay.’ 
The attempt to multilaterally regulate multinationals under the auspices 
of the UN became the chosen path of action for ameliorating potential 
clashes between multinationals and states.
The impact of Allende’s claims occurred through a number of direct and 
indirect channels. Allende’s framing of the ITT affair as a problem of corrup-
tive influence of multinationals on politics and democracy resonated strongly 
with the UNCTAD III audience. In their highly detailed first-person account 
of the history of the UN CTC, Hamdani and Ruffing (2015) describe that, 
influenced by Allende‘s speech, the Under-Secretary-General for Economic 
and Social Affairs, Philippe de Seynes, who had already developed a strong 
interest in the role of multinationals in global affairs, included an appeal to 
create an international machinery to deal with multinationals in the World 
Economic Survey he presented to ECOSOC in July 1972. At the same time, 
Chilean Ambassador Santa Cruz presented a formal complaint about ITT’s 
attempt to influence the political life of Chile to ECOSOC in Geneva. Based 
on the ITT incident, Santa Cruz submitted a draft resolution, which due to 
a good working relationship with US Ambassador Zagorin was amended and 
adopted on July 28, 1972 (Yoder 1993). It was this ECOSOC Resolution 
1721 (LIII) that urged the Secretary-General to consult with governments 
on the creation of the UN Group of Eminent Persons, which recommended 
international regulation of multinationals in 1974. The UNCTC came to act 
as a Secretariat for the Commission on Transnational Corporations and the 
proposed Code of Conduct for governments and transnational corporations, 
but the binding code came to be vehemently opposed by the Global North 
and, in particular, the United States.
The first meeting of the Group of Eminent persons took place in 
September 1973 and coincided with Allende’s overthrow. US disagree-
ment with the work of the UN Group was evident from the start. Seven 
members submitted responses to the Report of the Panel of Eminent 
Persons. The two US representatives, Jacob Javits and Irwin Miller, as 
well as Swiss representative Hans Schaffner found a lot of faults with 
the Report, which they addressed thoroughly.3 Javits claimed that ITT’s 
involvement in Chile was an isolated case and should not become the 
basis of the entire endeavor. The American delegate also disagreed with 
the main premise that there is conflict of interest between the economic 
power of multinationals and the political power of governments, a 
3 While the other delegates submitted responses of half a page, the Swiss and US 
responses were of 21 and 35 pages, respectively.

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   79
position that was generally accepted by other representatives. Schaffner 
disagreed on another major point of accord: that developing countries 
should strengthen their bargaining position vis a vis corporations. The 
Chilean representative, Juan Somavia, to some extent agreed that the 
entire endeavor should not be based on the Chilean case but should 
address the general problem of: ‘the role multinational corporations 
play in reacting to and shaping policies and events in home and host 
countries’ (Report of the Group of Eminent Persons 1974, 146). Even 
after the events of September 1973, the Chilean delegate to the Group 
of Eminent Persons continued to voice the problem raised by Allende 
with undue corporate influence on politics in developed and developing 
countries.
Ironically, the Swiss Delegate became the source of much controversy 
in the UN regarding corporate influence. A Swiss NGO called ‘The Bern 
Declaration’ showed that based on minutes of secret meetings and cor-
respondence, Schaffner was working on a mandate by six multinational 
corporations, including Nestle and Sandoz. Schaffner, who was a for-
mer President of Switzerland, was at the time working for the pharma-
ceutical company Sandoz. The document from ‘The Bern Declaration’ 
commented that: ‘while officially classed as a government representative 
Schaffner was in effect representing the private interests of the six multi-
nationals’ (The Bern Declaration 1978, 1). The mandate he was given, 
according to the report, was to halt the Code of Conduct and employ 
other stalling techniques. If that failed, Schaffner was to steer negotia-
tions toward an organization that is more favorable to multinationals. 
The case became highly controversial in Switzerland and the UN, espe-
cially because it was presented as an attempt to infiltrate the UN with 
corporate interests at a time when the UN was facilitating their interna-
tional regulation.
The direct contribution of the Allende delegation to the UN effort 
came to an end with the establishment of the military dictatorship in 
Chile. The US involvement in the overthrow (and ultimate death) of 
Allende on September 11, 1973, and the establishment of the dictator-
ship of General Augusto Pinochet is touched upon in the next chapter 
in relation to US Congress debates on the topic, but it falls outside the 
scope of this study. Yet, the Pinochet regime as an answer to the eco-
nomic independence of the Via Chilena—Allende’s democratic, nonvi-
olent road to socialism—cannot be seen as unrelated. Garavini (2013) 
finds that the ‘deliberate symbolism’ with which Pinochet moved his 

80   E. KATZAROVA
headquarters in the same building that Allende’s Popular Unity govern-
ment had built for the UNCTAD just the year before was meant to send 
a clear message to other Latin American countries (162). Pinochet’s cor-
porate-friendly military dictatorship lasted until 1990 and is considered 
to be one of the first examples of the neoliberal counterrevolution that 
was about to sweep the globe. The military junta undid swiftly Allende’s 
reforms by returning nationalized corporate assets and providing com-
pensation to US multinationals, including the ITT. Allende had nation-
alized the Chilean telephone company, which was operated by ITT, and 
subsequently refused to pay compensation to ITT in 1973 due to the 
company’s attempt to block his election in 1970 (NYT Archives 1973).
As Qureshi (2009) notes, Nixon’s nightmare was expropriation of 
corporate assets, not communist infiltration. It might be easy nowa-
days to dismiss the threat Allende posed for American leadership in the 
early 1970s, but that threat went beyond the symbolic gains and losses 
of Cold War calculations. Allende’s nationalization of selected indus-
tries, pertaining to natural resources and public utilities could have set a 
dangerous precedent for Latin American and other developing countries 
to follow. As Dinges (2012) argued, all those who study the history of 
Latin America during this period need to appreciate the fact that ‘radical 
social revolution was a real possibility for millions of people, colouring 
everyday life with hope or dread depending on the circumstances and 
political views of each individual’ (41). Chile’s experiment with demo-
cratic socialism could not have been as easily delegitimized as oppressive 
Soviet-style dictatorships.
The assertive new role that Chile tried to play in international affairs 
constituted the diplomatic counterpart to Allende’s reforms at home. 
As Harmer (2011) notes, through the use of international organiza-
tions Allende ‘sought to safeguard his own revolution by changing the 
world as opposed to sacrificing his cause’ (262). Allende’s appeals for 
the Global South to mobilize were well received by other developing 
countries and championed by his Ambassador to Geneva, Santa Cruz, 
who was also very active at the G77 (Yoder 1993). As Garavini (2013) 
points out, the Chilean Ambassador managed to secure Santiago as 
host for the UNCTAD III, which was central to Allende’s international 
strategy. As noted previously, it was at the UNCTAD III that Allende 
talked for the first time about corporate abuse of power as corruption. 
During his meeting on December 4, 1972, with the Secretary-General 
of the UN, Kurt Waldheim, Allende raised the problem of multinational 

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   81
corporations as his top priority. The issue of regulating the operation of 
multinationals internationally was also in line with the economic theories 
of Argentinian economist Raul Prebisch, who was Secretary-General of 
UNCTAD until 1969. Allende also posed the question about what role 
was Prebisch about to serve at the UN after the end of his term. As is 
well known, the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis has served as one of the basic 
tenets of dependency theory, which was the dominating perspective on 
global economic relations in Latin America well into the 1970s. Margulis 
(2017) credits Prebisch for informing a lot of the thinking behind the 
New International Economic Order (NIEO) and the regulation of mul-
tinationals. Following the meeting, Waldheim invited Prebisch to consult 
the UN Panel of Eminent Persons on multinational corporations.
Prebisch had also contributed to providing developing countries with 
leverage in international negotiations through his work in UNCTAD. 
If UNCTAD and the G77 constituted attempts to ‘unionize’ the Third 
World (Garavini 2013, 30), the UNCTAD conference hosted by Chile 
in 1972 constituted a ‘radicalization of the Third World’ (132). Debates 
on anti-corruption within the UNCTAD, UNCTC and G77 do not have 
to be understood as counterproductive, but as an attempt by countries 
in the Global South to assert their political and economic independ-
ence, as well as promote their own theories of how the global economy 
works. In the early 1970s, the Global South demanded the re-organiza-
tion of the global economic order and put forward their proposal about 
how was the increasing economic and political power of multinational 
corporations be curbed as part of a broadly construed anti-corruption 
agenda. For a brief time in the 1970s (1972–1981), such an agenda did 
not seem impossible due to the increased ability of developing nations to 
influence the global economy. The 1973 oil crisis testified to the newly 
found power of Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC) members. While 1973 also saw the end of Allende’s attempts 
to instigate change through international organizations, the Chilean leg-
acy still had an impact on UN organizations, dominated by developing 
nations up until the early 1990s. Allende’s initial framing of the ITT 
affair as corruptive influence of multinationals on politics and elections 
had a long-lasting impact on the UNCTC and debates on the regulation 
of multinationals and the US-sponsored issue of illicit/corrupt payments.
For developing nations, the US-sponsored issue of illicit/corrupt 
payments that is discussed in the following sections remained closely 
associated with the Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporations, 

82   E. KATZAROVA
as Resolution 3514 from 1975 also shows. The Resolution was drafted 
by a group of 27 developing nations and G77 members (among whom 
Argentina, Columbia, Pakistan, Somalia, Venezuela and Yemen). The 
UN Codes of Conduct can also be understood as part of the program 
for NIEO, launched with an initiative from the G77 in 1974 (Reynolds 
1982; Fikentscher 1993). Hence, the US-sponsored issue of illicit pay-
ments became caught up in a far larger effort to renegotiate the terms 
and workings of the global economy. This does not entail, however, that 
the problem of corrupt payments was hijacked by other priorities—rather 
in the attempt to define the putative condition, different and contro-
versial opinions appeared. The more limited understanding of corrupt 
payments as bribery was juxtaposed to a more complex definition that 
contained a broader variety of practices, which contributed to the trans-
formation of corporations from economic into political actors.
The United States Claims Ownership of Global 
Corruption
Gusfield (1989) delineated problem ownership as having the authority 
to define a certain condition as a problem and formulating methods for 
its amelioration. Two essential aspects of owning social problems are 
responsibility and exclusion. Responsibility, in this case, does not mean 
accepting that the problem is one’s fault, but that one has the responsi-
bility and authority to define and ameliorate the socially harmful condi-
tion. Exclusion means that by successfully owning a social problem, the 
claimant excludes certain interpretations of what is wrong with a given 
social condition.
When the US government claimed in 1975 that there was a prob-
lem with illicit or corrupt practices, it stressed the global impact of a 
particular type of (what only later came to be called) corruption, that 
is, payments by corporations to public officials in foreign countries. 
The transnational character of this activity made it particularly sus-
ceptible to global consideration. While it was illegal for an American 
corporation to pay bribes within the United States, the corpora-
tion was not liable, in the United States, for payments made in for-
eign jurisdictions. Congressional hearings and investigations after 
the ITT affair and post-Watergate revealed that a significant number  

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   83
of US corporations have been involved in illicit payments to foreign gov-
ernments. The Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations uncovered 
what seemed to be an illegitimate involvement of US corporations in the 
domestic affairs of a number of foreign countries. Separate hearings on 
‘The Activities of American Multinational Corporations Abroad’ were 
held with ITT, Gulf Oil, Lockheed and other implicated companies that 
had also made questionable payments. Gulf Oil had made such payments 
in Korea; Exxon, Mobile Oil and Lockheed in Italy, the Netherlands 
and Japan (US House 1975). As Chapter 5 shows, such examples of 
corporate misconduct were largely discussed as an ‘American’ problem 
in the foreign press and this caused much frustration for US legislators, 
who very well knew that such questionable practices were shared by 
their competitors. The reason why corporate misconduct was perceived 
as an American problem was that at the time, according to Cohen and 
Baumeister (1977), approximately 90% of multinationals had headquar-
ters in the United States and this is why the United States was ‘viewed as 
having a heavy responsibility to control multinationals’ global activities’ 
(207).
In the wake of the post-Watergate investigations, the United States 
government found itself in a threefold legitimacy crisis.4 First, the inves-
tigations deepened an already severe crisis of political legitimacy that the 
United States had to tackle domestically, and which involved the attempt 
to dissipate public mistrust toward government and big business. Second, 
there was the question of the legal legitimacy of American-based multi-
national corporations. The post-Watergate climate was one of the ‘most 
high-profile periods for attacks on multinational corporations’ and ‘every 
Congressman and Senator wanted his or her own investigation committee’ 
(Broehl 1996, 159). Internationally as well, the increasing economic power 
of the multinational corporation and its ability to evade the grip of national 
jurisdictions led to discussions about the legal status of these juridical  
entities—the UN and the OECD Codes of Conduct being two examples 
4 This threefold distinction between political, legal and economic aspects of legitimacy 
is based on Bakker. Bakker (2000) describes legitimacy in the classic definition of Lipset 
as ‘the capacity of the system to engender and maintain the belief that the existing politi-
cal institutions are the most appropriate ones for the society’ (quoted in Bakker, 22). The 
three qualifications of legitimacy rather than comprising three different definitions stress 
three dimensions of the same concept. The central political concept can also be based on 
legality and adherence to the law as the most important basis for legitimacy and/or eco-
nomic performance or at least an economic order that is considered just and adequate.

84   E. KATZAROVA
of such international debates. Third, there was an economic legitimacy crisis  
with developing countries, due to the unsatisfactory progress in growth 
rates and wealth distribution. A growing disappointment after over two 
decades of development policies that was quite concisely captured in an 
OECD report from 1972 as ‘development weariness’ (DD-300, 5). In 
addition to the geopolitical impact that this development fatigue could 
have had in the context of the Cold War, it was threatening the very basis 
of the relationship between Western investors and Third-World countries.
This domestic legitimacy crisis with foreign policy repercussions, which is 
given much more detailed attention in the next chapter, constituted the back-
drop against which the US legislative and executive branches felt constrained 
to adopt a tough stance against cases of foreign bribery. The United States 
brought their own interpretation of global corruption in relation to the 
same string of corporate abuse scandals to the UN and the OECD in 1975 
(IME(75)18). Within the particular climate of post-Watergate investigations 
and the congressional hearings on multinational corporations (1973–1976), 
corruption increasingly became the focus of public discontent (Broehl 1996). 
At the same time, a qualitative shift of meaning as to what constitutes corrup-
tion occurred in the United States with corrupt behavior increasingly being 
understood as quid pro quo (or bribery) (Teachout 2014). The understand-
ing of corruption promoted by the United States was ultimately an argument 
that corruption should be addressed as a ‘limited scope’ and ‘individual actor 
paradigm’ offense (Puckett 2010, 815), and this US position was in direct 
opposition to the understanding of developing nations that corruption 
should be regulated at the systemic level.
As stated previously, if we are to follow the successful claims, the first 
formal US appeal went under the rubric of ‘illicit’ or ‘corrupt’ payments. 
The formal bid for global attention was allegedly made by Secretary of 
State Henry Kissinger on September 1, 1975, during the Seventh Special 
Session of the United Nations General Assembly (US Senate 1975). The 
speech ‘Global Consensus and Economic Development,’ delivered by 
D. Moynihan, in the absence of Kissinger, however, did not include any 
direct reference to the question of illicit/corrupt practices. Kissinger’s 
speech contained rather a response to the ‘radicalization’ of develop-
ing nations evident in: ‘their claim for a greater role, for more control 
over their economic destiny, and for a just share in global prosperity’ 
(Kissinger 1975, 425). In the speech, Kissinger confirmed that the US 

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   85
government is ready to address the concerns of developing nations on the 
problem of corporations as political actors and that the time was ripe for 
global standards on corporate and government conduct to be articulated.
The specific claims on illicit/corrupt payments were made by the 
US delegations to the UN and the OECD in 1975. On September 17, 
1975, the United States submitted a proposal to the OECD for the inclu-
sion of ‘illicit payments’ in the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises 
(IME(75)18). A similar proposal was reiterated at the opening of the reg-
ular session of the UN General Assembly in the third week of September. 
The same month, the William Simon, US Secretary of the Treasury, 
carried out informal talks with a number of Finance Ministers from the 
Global North in the IMF and the World Bank (US Senate 1975).
The US claims-making activities in the OECD were related to the 
ongoing negotiations of the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, 
which were successfully completed the following year. The US contri-
bution was placed under the heading, ‘Political Involvement.’ The Draft 
Guidelines on Political Involvement of Multinational Enterprises rec-
ommended that companies and multinational enterprises evade inter-
fering in the politics of a host country and eschew political contestation 
(IME(75)19, 4). The UN influence can be readily discerned in this for-
mulation because the problem of corporate political influence remained 
the major issue. A UK proposal explicitly referred to political influence 
through monetary payments and recommended that multinational 
enterprises eschew rendering illegal payments to host governments, 
as well as political parties and governmental agencies (IME(75)16, 1). 
The US-modified position simply clarified that: ‘Enterprises should nei-
ther make nor be solicited to make payments to government officials or 
(illicit) contributions to political parties and candidates’ (IME(75)18, 
1). ‘Illicit payments’ was a formulation reminiscent of the ‘irregular pay-
ments’ by American corporations investigated by SEC at the time, and 
it remained the dominant formulation of such practices at the OECD. 
At the UN, reference was made to both illicit and corrupt payments. 
Simultaneously to the proposal in the OECD, the United States made 
an official appeal to the UN during the 30th session of the UN General 
Assembly within the framework of the Commission on Transnational 
Corporations. In addition to the United States, two other countries 
submitted draft resolutions to the General Assembly concerning the 

86   E. KATZAROVA
treatment of international corrupt practices—the Libyan Arab Republic 
and Iran.
Even early on in the discussions, the work of the OECD Committee on 
International Investment and Multinational Enterprises (CIME) was explic-
itly connected to the UN Commission on Transnational Corporations. 
The OECD Committee discussed an exchange of views with the UN 
Commission on a permanent basis, but was met with opposition by some 
delegates, who while principally agreeing to the collaboration stressed 
that: ‘…a clear distinction should be made between exchanges of views 
and attempts to coordinate views’ (IME/M(75)2, 8). As the document 
explains, the debates at ECOSOC and other UN bodies, which concen-
trate on the formulation of a Code of Conduct, would differ from the same 
discussions at the OECD because developing nations had specific concerns 
on multinational companies that were not shared by OECD member states 
(IME/M(75)2, 8). As we will see shortly, the attempt to keep the two 
processes separate failed and the development of a legally binding OECD 
Convention on illicit practices was made conditional on the developments 
at the UN Commission on the same subject. The connection to the UN 
talks in itself was problematic, because of the highly contested nature of dis-
cussions on corporate conduct at ECOSOC and other UN forums.
Talks at the UN After 1975
At the UN, the US claims on illicit/corrupt payments were incorpo-
rated in discussions about the repercussions of the activities of trans-
national corporations within the framework of the UN Commission 
on Transnational Corporations, which held its first session on March 
17–28, 1975. Three countries submitted draft resolutions concern-
ing the treatment of international corrupt practices to the General 
Assembly—the United States, Iran and the Libyan Arab Republic. The 
United States proposal did not differ substantially from that of pre- 
revolution Iran, except for the emphasis on the role of governments from 
the developed world in occurrences of corruption. The Iranian proposal:
called upon Governments to take all necessary measures to prevent corrup-
tive practices; called upon home countries to adopt strict measures against 
acts of bribery committed by their nationals or corporations abroad; asked 
the Secretary-General to prepare a study of ways and means to prevent 
corruptive practices, including the adoption of a code of conduct; asked 

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   87
that the Commission on Transnational Corporations include the issue 
in its programme of work; and called upon relevant governmental and 
non-governmental organizations to assist in the formulation and imple-
mentation of anti-corruptive measures against transnational and other  
corporations. (487)
The Libyan version of a draft resolution made use of a more forceful 
language, providing for tougher measures and requesting that states: 
‘refrain from employing transnational corporations as an instrument for 
intervening in the internal affairs of host countries for political purposes’ 
(Chapter XIII: UN Yearbook 1975, 487). With this addition, the Libyan 
claim raised the highly controversial question of government-sponsored 
illicit payments to foreign governments done through front corpora-
tions. While the final version of the UN Resolution is fully available, the 
draft versions are presented in a summarized version in ‘Chapter XIII. 
Questions Concerning Transnational Corporations’ from the UN 1975 
Yearbook, with the positions of the three countries which submitted 
draft resolutions to the 30th Session of the General Assembly presented 
verbatim. The Libyan version of the draft resolution was withdrawn as 
the other two, but it most directly addressed the problem of corruption 
as political influence and the entanglement of interests of foreign public 
and private actors. These controversial claims, despite not being directly 
adopted in the position of the G77, presented an extreme case of the 
position of the developing countries on the question of corrupt practices:
By the Libyan proposal, the Assembly would have, inter alia: condemned 
illegal and immoral acts practised by transnational corporations against the 
safety and security of peoples and States; condemned States which sup-
ported, collaborated with or covered up such acts; recognized the right 
of States to nullify contracts entered into as a result of illegal or immoral 
practices, and to take action they deemed appropriate in accordance 
with national laws; called upon all Member States to investigate the ille-
gal and immoral acts of transnational corporations, to exchange informa-
tion regarding them, and to impose strong sanctions, including boycotts, 
against the corporations involved. (487)
‘Illegal and immoral acts,’ the exact content and form of which were to 
be studied in an ad hoc group, constituted an expansive definition of 
what was problematic with the interaction of foreign private and domes-
tic public actors. It also revealed a deep-seated distrust in the objectives 

88   E. KATZAROVA
of foreign investment and skepticism about the status of corporations as 
independent economic actors, pursuing purely economic i nterests, with-
out being influenced by the country of origin. The most notable twist in 
the problem’s definition is the claim that bribery and other illicit prac-
tices and forms of influence are state sponsored and foreign states are 
part of the corrupt equation. The US proposal also included a reference 
to state-sponsored corporate bribery by referring to possible ‘encourage-
ment’ by governments for corrupt practices committed by private agents. 
The US proposal: ‘condemned the offering or solicitation of bribes and 
other corrupt practices by enterprises, or their encouragement by gov-
ernment officials or individuals’ (487).
The US attempt to claim ownership of the problem at the UN 
was to a large extent unsuccessful because all three draft resolu-
tions were withdrawn in favor of a G77 sponsored Resolution, which 
included the Libyan Arab Republic, Iran and seven OPEC members.5 
Resolution 3514 (XXX) was adopted on December 15, 1975, with the 
title, ‘Measures against Corrupt Practices of Transnational and Other 
Corporations, their Intermediaries and others Involved.’ The Resolution, 
which was drafted by a group of 27 developing nations, although devoid 
of the forceful language of the Libyan draft resolution, left the question 
open as to the involvement of foreign governments in corporate illicit 
payments and other illicit practices. The question of (Western) govern-
ment influence through the employment of private corporate actors 
as instruments of foreign policy was claimed as relevant to the prob-
lem of corruption, as developing nations understood it. Furthermore, 
Resolution 3514 reinforced the connection between corrupt practices 
of transnational corporations and the discussions about the Code of 
Conduct, which aimed at regulating the activities of transnational cor-
porations globally. Resolution 3514 recalled the Declaration NIEO and 
the Action Plan that provided for the discussion of the Code of Conduct. 
As noted previously, the NIEO was an initiative of developing nations, 
who sought to establish what they understood to be more equitable con-
ditions for development, but in doing so were jeopardizing the interests 
5 The draft resolution was forwarded by Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Bolivia, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, Guyana, Iran, Iraq, the 
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Romania, Somalia, the Syrian 
Arab Republic, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela and 
Yugoslavia.

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   89
of Western investors with demands for stronger control over foreign 
investment and the reaffirmation of national sovereignty through more 
effective control over natural resources and demands for more equitable 
prices for raw materials (Resolution 3201 S-VI).
The Ad Hoc Intergovernmental Working Group on Corrupt 
Practices, established on August 5, 1976, by ECOSOC, was also domi-
nated by developing nations. Members included Algeria, Colombia, Iran, 
Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, Uganda, the United States, 
Venezuela and Zaire. The chairman of the group, Rafael Rivas, was from 
Colombia. The group was meant to ‘conduct an examination of the 
problem of corrupt practices in international commercial transactions by 
transnational and other corporations, their intermediaries and other par-
ties involved’ (Appendix III: UN Yearbook 1976, 1084). This broader 
mandate did not identify corrupt practices as a payment and allowed for 
the consideration of other parties, such as foreign governments, as part 
of the illicit interaction.
Some of the developed countries were opposed to the UN Code 
of Conduct because they saw it as an offspring of NIEO and because 
the Code was attempting to regulate Western-based multination-
als. Despite their similar mandate, the draft Codes of Conduct at the 
OECD and the UN were in competition, if not in conflict, with each 
other, because the former was representing the approach of the indus-
trialized nations of the North, while the latter was to a large extent 
dominated by the Global South (Sagafi-nejad and Dunning 2008). The 
US-sponsored problem of corrupt practices in the UN was intertwined 
with discussions about the influence of Western governments and mul-
tinational corporations over the social and economic progress of devel-
oping nations. The ultimate paralysis of the negotiations came in 1980, 
when the G77 finalized its decision that the progress of the drafted 
International Agreement on Illicit Payments (IAIP) was conditional on 
the adoption of the Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporations. 
Although this constituted a decisive blow to the negotiation process, 
the talks had already stalled in 1976 with the G77 insistence that cor-
porations should terminate their support—legal or illegal—of the 
apartheid regime in South Africa by stopping illicit payments toward 
the regime (IME/M(77)1). Although the decision of the G77 looks 
like a strategic move to hamper the agreement on illicit payments, 
work on the Code of Conduct started in relation to Chile bringing 
the case of the ITT Corporation to ECOSOC in 1972 (Horn 1980).  

90   E. KATZAROVA
Therefore, making progress on illicit payments conditional on the Code 
was symptomatic of a different interpretation of what is wrong with the 
same putative condition; the G77 claimed it was corporate conduct and 
demanded more restrictions on multinational corporations, while the 
United States interpreted bribery as the culprit.
The claims made by developing nations included the political impact 
of FDI, with payments made to the apartheid regime in South Africa as 
the most controversial example, which ultimately led to the stagnation of 
the pre-negotiation talks. Developing nations claimed that foreign pri-
vate enterprises tried to influence the political processes of newly sover-
eign nations for the benefit of their home governments or for their own 
purposes. In the case of South Africa, although new FDI flows stagnated 
in the 1970s due to public pressure against apartheid, it was only in the 
mid-1980s that foreign corporations started exiting the South African 
market en masse (Gelb and Black 2004).6 The involvement of transna-
tional corporations in South Africa was claimed to support the apart-
heid regime. By pursuing investment interests, in particular in military, 
police and security affairs, foreign corporations were directly solidifying 
the regime and were detrimental to international efforts to terminate 
apartheid. The operations of transnational corporations were also sup-
porting the regime indirectly by confirming to the rules of apartheid, 
because 80% of the South African workforce was black (Sagafi-nejad and 
Dunning 2008). The case of the apartheid regime pertained to politi-
cal corporate power—the power of foreign economic actors to influence 
even indirectly the political processes of a country in a way that is detri-
mental to the public interest. This interpretation of what constitutes a 
corrupt practice was in line with the initial Allende claims of undue cor-
porate influence on foreign political processes.
The claims of the developing nations could not be understood only as 
a bargaining strategy in which unrelated issues are made conditional on 
one another. The diverging positions of the developed and developing 
countries can be more fully understood as ontological claims and coun-
terclaims about the construction of a global problem and as a struggle 
of definitions over putative conditions and their causal relation to other 
6 Further work at the UNCTC contributed to the withdrawal of transnational corpora-
tions from South Africa in the 1980s (Sagafi-nejad and Dunning 2008).

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   91
agenda items. Whether it is the support for apartheid, the inability of yet 
unstable institutional systems to exert effective control over the deal-
ings of transnational corporations on their territory or the use of bribery 
to secure military contracts, one of the major claims of the developing 
nations was about corporate influence on politics bought legally or ille-
gally through monetary and non-monetary means.
As Pieth (2007) observed, because of the corporate misconduct 
revelations in the 1970s, the very legitimacy of the free market system 
appeared to be under threat. For the developed nations, the operation 
of the free market, unencumbered by global regulation, as well as the 
free access of corporations to foreign markets, could have been just and 
desirable (take away the occurrences of illicit payments). For developing 
nations, however, the primary source of concern seemed to be the ques-
tion as to what kind of impact the powerful governmental and corpo-
rate moneyed interests had over their, yet inadequate, national political 
systems.
Talks at the OECD After 1975
Parallel to discussions at the UN, some OECD member states also raised 
concerns about the increasing flow of FDI from non-OECD mem-
bers, and in particular, oil-producing countries. The flux of capital from 
these countries was bound to ‘add new aspects to foreign control in key 
industries’ (IME(75)2, 3). This ‘reversal’ of foreign investment from its 
usual route from developed to developing countries became a matter of 
controversy:
The word “investment” in this particular context could not be interpreted 
in the sense in which it had normally been interpreted in the past. Normal 
investments by foreign countries were usually welcome because they per-
mitted the creation of new production capacities and access to foreign 
technology and mahagerial [sic] skills. But the investments now under dis-
cussion were of a different nature, and involved the purchase of the assets 
of a firm, not for economic reasons but for political reasons, in order to 
control it and its management. Because of his country’s shortage of skilled 
labour, the Federal Government had always encouraged German business-
men to go abroad and to take with them their knowledge and skills and 
money. But the motives of the oil-producing countries were not the same, 
their object was to gain influence on the production structures of other 
countries. (IME(75)4, 55)

92   E. KATZAROVA
Even though the problem of political influence in a foreign country 
through FDI reflected the claims of the G77 at the UN, in the OECD 
the issue, under the general rubric of political influence, was not con-
nected explicitly to illicit payments. The exertion of influence by oil-pro-
ducing countries in OECD member states was juxtaposed to the benefit 
of managing current account surpluses globally. Yet, concerns over the 
political influence of oil-producing nations came center stage and were 
revealing of a rather uncharted territory in the global economy—the 
inflow of investment from developing to developed nations. In the 
1970s, outward FDI from developing nations was the exception rather 
than the rule, starting from 1% of total global investment in the 1970s 
and reaching 6% in the 1990s (Velde and Nair 2006). The unprece-
dented investment flows from oil producers in the mid-1970s anticipated 
later debates about sovereign wealth funds and raised concerns in the 
OECD. As noted previously, this concern mirrored the claims of some 
G77 members about the influence of foreign investment over the politi-
cal processes of developing countries, but was not explicitly connected to 
corruption as it was in the UN. The problem of ‘illicit payments’ in the 
OECD remained of a more limited scope, although still under the rubric 
of political influence.
The question of political influence of multinational enterprises was 
introduced by the UK delegation to the Drafting Group on September 
12, 1975, and aimed to set basic guidelines for private enterprises’ polit-
ical non-involvement in the countries where international investment is 
carried, ‘save to the extent necessary’ (IME(75)2, 1). The draft aimed 
as much to establish standards of political non-involvement, as to safe-
guard some involvement of multinational enterprises as legitimate. The 
necessity to stay clear of political controversy is also pointed in the UK 
Draft, but most importantly the avoidance of ‘any payments (other than 
for manifest public purposes) to a host government, or to its agencies, 
or to political parties.’ The distinct feature of such payments is based 
on the criterion of lawfulness or legality, as well as on a requirement for 
full disclosure: ‘unless such payments are lawful and deteils [sic] of the 
amounts and the beneficiaries are published in accordance with a general 
requirement of the host government’ (IME(75)16, 1). The note on the 
Draft Guideline on Political Involvement, submitted by the United States 
on September 17, 1975, expanded the criterion of legality by  

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   93
defining the contributions or payments as ‘illicit’ rather than unlaw-
ful or illegal. This shift of definition allowed for arguments that make 
the issue of political involvement of multinational enterprises and 
illicit payments, in particular, the prerogative of the ‘home gov-
ernment’ and therefore promoted a different set of solutions that 
would be in accordance with the solutions discussed in the US 
Congress in relation to corrupt payments performed by American 
corporations. The discussions during the Fourth Meeting of the 
CIME dismantled such claims as the majority of delegates agreed 
that while referencing the question of political involvement in the 
Guidelines might be of some use, the recommendation for behav-
ior could not go beyond ‘recommending multinational enter-
prises to act in conformity with the legislation and practice of the  
host country’ (IME/M(75)4, 3).
The responsibility of the multinational enterprises to act in accordance 
with the host country’s established practices was further strengthened 
through the revisions of the Draft Guidelines. Multinational corporations 
were urged to operate:
within the framework of the laws and regulations of the host country, 
observe the best standards set by relevant local customs and practices with 
regard to:
(i)  rendering gifts or other benefits to public servants;
(ii)  contributions to political parties and other political organisations;
(iii)  involvement in local political activities. (IME(75)19 (1st Revision) 
Annex I, 5)
After US insistence, the reference to ‘gifts’ was changed for ‘bribes’ 
and a much stronger overall formulation of the recommendation was 
achieved. Enterprises were urged to:
(6) not render – and they should not be solicited or expected to render – 
any bribe or other improper benefit, direct or indirect, to any public serv-
ant or holder of public office; (7) not make contributions to candidates for 
public office or to political parties or other political organisations except 
as permitted by law; (8) abstain from any improper involvement in local 
political activities. (IME(75)2 Annex I, 2)

94   E. KATZAROVA
The shift from ‘gift’ to ‘bribe’ is, of course, significant. While ‘gifts’ ren-
dered in the cultural context of another country, according to the best 
practices of the host society, seem rather inauspicious as a problem, the 
rendering of direct or indirect benefits and ‘bribes’ demands more atten-
tion. The former claim provides a supposed excuse for such practices 
within the sociocultural context of the country in which investment is 
carried out, while the latter condones such practices as universally unac-
ceptable. Ultimately, the first claim negates that there is a problem with 
such practices while the second promotes the need to counteract them. 
While the former claim does not provide a basis for the ‘globality’ of the 
problem, because it makes the course of action conditional on the cus-
toms and practices of a territorially bound state, the latter universalizes 
the illegitimate nature of monetary payments or indirect types of influ-
ence, independently of the national socio-historical context. The lat-
ter text prevailed during the next meeting of CIME on December 18, 
1975 (IME/M(76)1), and was included in the final text of the adopted 
Guidelines.
The controversy of defining the putative condition as ‘gift’ or ‘bribe’ 
between OECD member states was overshadowed by the far bigger 
controversy about corrupt practices and political influence at the UN. 
Thus, despite the inclusion of the recommendation in the Guidelines for 
Multinational Enterprises adopted on June 21, 1976, further work on 
illicit payments was hampered. The successful adoption of the Guidelines 
on multinational corporations, and the references to transnational bribery 
that it made, was of limited success since the code was voluntary. The US 
goal was to further develop the work on illicit payments in the direction 
of a treaty. By the end of 1976, such talks were already underway, and the 
United States argued that certain issues referenced in the code were in 
need of further work, such as the ‘proposed convention to deal with the 
problem of illicit payments’ (IME(76)26/01, 2). For lack of a dedicated 
ad hoc committee to deal with the subject of illicit payments, CIME was 
entrusted with the task, but its work became entangled with the nego-
tiations of a binding legal instrument in the Ad Hoc Intergovernmental 
Working Group on Corrupt Practices at the UN. Despite the initial 
determination to keep the work of the OECD and the UN separate, 
because of the differing interests of the developing and the developed 
nations on the subject of transnational corporations, such separation 
became unfeasible during the pre-negotiation talks (IME/M(75)2).

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   95
Claims and Counterclaims  
and the Redefinition of Scope
Voluminous exchanges of documentation between the two organiza-
tions occurred during 1976 and the discussion of bribery and political 
involvement at the OECD stagnated in 1977 because of the discussions 
at the UN (IME/M(77)1). The pre-negotiation talks at the UN were 
qualified by Jack Blum, a US attorney, who endeavored to draft the anti- 
corruption Convention at the time, as the ‘disaster of 1976.’ The reason, 
according to Blum, was that: ‘Ideological differences, commercial rival-
ries, and national interests overrode what little momentum the anti-cor-
ruption initiative had’ (Blum 2009, 2). Mark Pieth, a Swiss Professor 
of Criminal Law, who was Chairman of the OECD Working Group on 
Bribery in International Business Transactions from 1990 to 2013, had a 
different insight into the debacle of the 1970s:
The drafts modeled after the FCPA were, however, caught in the cross-
fire between North and South, with developing countries maintaining that 
the concept of “illicit payments” should be understood in a broad sense, 
including payments also made to the Apartheid regime in South Africa. 
(Pieth 1997, 122)
Claims-making about the redefinition of the scope of the problem was 
at the center of the heated debates, as discussed previously. The position 
of the developing nations was that the problem of corrupt payments was 
broader than the limited understanding of bribery, promoted in accord-
ance with the FCPA drafts that were simultaneously being discussed at 
the US Congress. This redefinition of scope incorporated instances of 
political influence through means other than commercial bribery and 
referred to illicit interactions between private and public actors, but also 
to political influence through FDI. This redefinition of the scope of the 
problem included, but was not limited to bribery:
With decolonization, former colonial states, but also newcomers amongst 
exporting nations, tried to maintain or establish their power-basis with the 
emerging elites in the southern hemisphere by buying allegiances. Whereas 
the motivation to bribe will have been primary economic, to a large extent 
corruption was also used as a political means in the struggle of the Cold 
War to secure influence across the world. (Pieth 2007, 5)

96   E. KATZAROVA
This shadow of influence has to be understood in the context of suspi-
cion toward multinational enterprises and their likelihood to ‘abuse (of) 
concentrations of economic power and to conflict with national pol-
icy objectives’ (IME(76)1 Annex, 5). The socioeconomic context of 
the 1970s is relevant here, not only because of the Cold War, but also 
because consensus had not yet been reached about the universal desir-
ability of FDI. In light of their colonial heritage, G77 members were 
apprehensive of the dealings of foreign corporations on their territory. 
Furthermore, during the Cold War, the G77 had more leverage to 
claim a different global economic order, a request that was present in 
the Declaration NIEO. The OECD Guidelines were seen to represent a 
‘western approach’ and at least to some extent to ‘render irrelevant’ the 
UN approach (Sagafi-nejad and Dunning 2008, 111). The South–North 
controversy during the pre-negotiation talks was, however, also a clash of 
definitions and a clash of different perspectives on the same putative con-
dition and, therefore, on what constitutes the global problem of corrupt 
practices.
During the 1970s, a redefinition of scope was the primary issue 
at stake at the OECD and the UN, with corporate political influence 
and bribes reflecting different degrees of expansion of the definition. 
Understanding corrupt practices as payments or as influence entails dif-
ferent approaches for addressing the putative condition that led to the 
claims in the first place. As noted previously, the empirical condition, 
which led to both the expansive and the limited scope claims, was a series 
of corporate misconduct scandals, which started with the involvement of 
the ITT Corporation in Chile. If the putative condition is broadly and 
neutrally presented, as the interaction of foreign private (corporate) and 
domestic public (government) actors, then what is problematic about 
this interaction is a matter of competing definitions. In addition, while 
the developing nations questioned to some extent the legitimacy of 
Western investment, as well as the payment of illicit contributions, the 
developed nations were interested in establishing the legitimate nature 
of one form of transaction (investment) and the exclusion of the other 
(bribery). International corruption, understood either as corporate 
political influence or as an illicit payment (bribery), demands two dif-
ferent approaches for addressing the issue. While both claims are legit-
imate definitions of the same putative condition, it is noteworthy that 
the narrower definition of the problematic situation could be much 

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   97
easier to handle through an internationally negotiated machinery that 
would tackle the problem of corrupt payments understood as bribery. 
As noted previously, Spector and Kitsuse (2009) point out that success-
ful claims may limit the scope of problems and make them more man-
ageable. While to address the problem of corporate influence on politics 
would have been more difficult, it would not have been impossible, and 
the attempt of the UNCTC and the eponymous commission to create a 
binding code of corporate conduct can be seen as a step in that direction.
From the vantage point of developing countries in the 1970s, there 
was a conflict between the pursuit of corporate profit and the pursuit 
of the public interest. That conflict was not insurmountable, however, 
and could be addressed if governments regulate corporate conduct in 
the public interest. When corporations exert disproportionate influence 
on the direction of politics and public policy, this could hurt the public 
interest and have a detrimental effect on democracy. This rather simple 
insight might still be relevant today. Especially, in a time of increasing 
public–private partnerships, the question of what kind of influence is 
legitimate, and what kind is problematic, becomes difficult to discern. 
The Lockheed Corporation bribery scandal, which surfaced as a conse-
quence of the Church investigations, provides a relevant example. While 
Lockheed Martin reformed to tackle the question of bribery, the com-
pany’s interaction with the Pentagon is still under scrutiny. The last 
known case of bribery was discovered in 1994 in relation to a 1989 
sale of C-130 Hercules transport planes to Egypt, but the influence 
Lockheed exerts abroad and on American policy-making is still a source 
for concern. The Lockheed Corporation has remained tightly involved 
not only in the technological, but also in the policy aspects of national 
security. As Danielle Brian from the nonprofit Washington-based ‘Project 
on Government Oversight’ points out in the New York Times arti-
cle ‘Lockheed and the future of warfare’: ‘It is impossible to tell where 
the government ends and Lockheed begins.’ Corporate bribery is per-
haps superfluous in a world in which big business and government are so 
comfortably entangled together. As the article argues, Lockheed profits 
are fueled with government subsidies and revolving door politics ensure 
a constant flow of officials between the corporation and government 
agencies. A world, in which ‘Lockheed’s influence runs so deep,’ does 
not need bribery (Weiner 2004, 1)

98   E. KATZAROVA
An understanding of corruption as corporate political influence, rather 
than as bribery, would have put under scrutiny the current interaction 
between Lockheed and the US government. Whether at the UN or at 
the OECD, the issue of illicit/corrupt payments was always understood 
within the framework of illicit involvement of corporations in political 
affairs. The problem of global corruption in the 1970s can therefore be 
seen to touch on a fundamental topic in the study of international political 
economy, such as state–business relations in the context of globalization. 
More specifically, corruption appeared to be intrinsically connected to the 
question of multinational corporations as political actors. This major ele-
ment of the debate in the 1970s was completely reversed by the 1990s 
through the prism of neoliberalism. It was not the corruptive influence of 
corporations on politics that was the problem; it was the state itself that 
was the problem and the state as an economic actor. As it will be shown 
in the following chapters, the idea of the venality and inefficiency of gov-
ernment was intrinsically connected to this argument and to the natural 
extension of this argument that outsourcing and privatizing more of the 
former prerogatives of government will lead to less corruption.
This chapter examined the pre-negotiation talks of the 1970s in a 
number of international forums that formed the backdrop against which 
the re-launch of global claims was made in 1989. The redefinition of the 
problem’s scope was the primary hindrance at reaching consensus during 
discussions at the OECD and the UN in the mid- to late 1970s. Claims 
and counterclaims between developing and developed nations (primar-
ily the United States) made the definition of corruption waver between 
political influence and bribery. Delegations to the UN from the Global 
South saw the interaction between public and private actors not only as 
the influence of foreign business interests over the public interest of their 
country, but also as the exertion of political influence of foreign countries 
through business relations. This expansion of the understanding of what 
was the putative condition implicitly endangered the legitimacy of FDI 
in former colonial nations and became largely controversial. With talks at 
the OECD dependent on progress in the UN, both pre-negotiation talks 
stalled. Faced with the uncertainty of the adoption of a global treaty, the 
United States enacted the FCPA unilaterally and this decision shaped the 
content of the talks after the re-launch of global claims in 1989.
In the particular climate of ‘post-Watergate morality,’ the foreign/illicit 
payments problem became a serious predicament for the United States.  

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   99
The approach adopted by the US Congress was criminalization, which 
entailed a limited scope, individual actor offense. While the global pub-
licity of the revealed corrupt payments compromised trust in American 
companies and the legitimacy of the global free market system, the FCPA 
was to a large extent adopted as a domestic anti-corruption measure, as 
the next chapter will show. The subsequent internationalization of the 
FCPA can be seen as the global equivalent of turning private (national) 
troubles into public (global) problems. The problem was ‘American,’ not 
because only American corporations were carrying out such questionable 
payments domestically and abroad, but because due to a constellation of 
circumstances the United States was the most interested actor in launch-
ing a global claims-making campaign on transnational corrupt payments. 
Other countries involved in the disclosure measures, despite the unfa-
vorable national publicity, did not pursue the issue of corporate payments 
further, and when they did, it was treated as an essentially domestic (or 
national) problem. The disclosure of corrupt payments had repercus-
sions in Japan, the Netherlands and a number of countries in the Middle 
East, but no country investigated the alleged illicit payments by their own 
corporations or at least did not make the investigations public (Church 
1975). The internationalization of the FCPA came forth as an American 
priority in 1988 with the decision to press the issue at the OECD. The 
FCPA, therefore, conditioned the second re-launch of global claims in 
the late 1980s and early 1990s, but it also gave a powerful ally to the 
US government–American-based multinational companies, who became 
champions of global anti-corruption efforts.
References
Allende, Salvador. 1972. “Speech Delivered by Dr. Salvador Allende, President of 
the Republic of Chile, Before the General Assembly of the United Nations.” 
December 4. Washington, DC: Embassy of Chile.
Anderson, Jack. 1972. “Memos Bare ITT Try for Chile Coup.” The Washington 
Post, March 21.
Bakker, Heleen, ed. 2000. Corruption & Legitimacy. Amsterdam: Siswo 
Publication.
Blum, Jack. 2009. “Testimony on the Problem of Curbing Grand Scale Global 
Corruption Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of 
Representatives.” 111th Cong., 1st sess., May 19.

100   E. KATZAROVA
Broehl, W. G. 1996. “The Persisting Case Against the Multinational 
Corporation.” Business and Economic History 25: 159–165.
Church, Frank (Senator from the State of Idaho). 1975. “Testimony on S. 
Res. 265., A Resolution to Protect the Ability of the United States to 
Trade Abroad before the Senate Finance Committee, Subcommittee on 
International Trade.” 94th Cong., 1st sess., October 6.
Cohen, Sander, and Richard Baumeister. 1977. “Foreign Bribery by American 
Multinational Corporations: A Status Report.” Delaware Journal of Corporate 
Law 2 (2): 207–232.
DD-300. The Crisis in Development Strategies. Development Assistance 
Directorate (September 13, 1972). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Dinges, John. 2012. The Condor Years: How Pinochet and His Allies Brought 
Terrorism to Three Continents. New York and London: The New Press.
Fikentscher, 
Wolfgang. 
1993. 
Recht 
und 
wirtschaftliche 
Freiheit: 
Bd. 
Transnationales Marktrecht. Tuebingen: Mohr Siebeck.
Garavini, G. 2013. After Empires. European Integration, Decolonisation and the 
Challenge from the Global South 1957–1986. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gelb, Stephen, and Anthony Black. 2004. “Foreign Direct Investment in South 
Africa.” In Investment Strategies in Emerging Markets, edited by Saul Estrin 
and Klaus Meyer, 174–208. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Gusfield, Joseph R. 1989. “Constructing the Ownership of Social Problems: Fun 
and Profit in the Welfare State.” Social Problems 36 (5): 431–441.
Hamdani, K., and L. Ruffing. 2015. United Nations Centre on Transnational 
Corporations: Corporate Conduct and the Public Interest. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Harmer, Tanya. 2011. Allende’s Chile and the Inter-American Cold War. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Horn, Norbert. 1980. “International Rules for Multinational Enterprises: The 
ICC, OECD, and the ILO Initiatives.” American University Law Review 30: 
936–939.
IME(75)2. Attitudes of the Governments of OECD Member Countries Towards 
Increased Investment by Non-residents. Note by the Secretariat (February 25, 
1975). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME(75)4. Multinational Enterprises—Uniform Standards of Behaviour. Note by 
the Secretariat (April 15, 1975). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME(75)16. Draft Guidelines on Political Involvement of Multinational 
Enterprises. Note by the United Kingdom Representative to the Drafting 
Group (September 12, 1975). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME(75)18. Draft Guidelines on Political Involvement of Multinational 
Enterprises. Note by the United States Delegation (September 17, 1975). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   101
IME(75)19. Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Intergovernmental 
Consultation Procedures on Issues and Policies Pertaining to the Activities of 
Multinational Enterprises. Note by the Secretariat (October 9, 1975). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME/M(75)2. Summary Record of the Second Meeting, Held on 28–29 April, 
1975 (May 27, 1975). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME/M(76)1. Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Intergovernmental 
Consultation Procedures on the Implementation of the Guidelines (December 
18, 1975). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME(76)1 
Annex. 
Guidelines 
for 
Multinational 
Enterprises 
and 
Intergovernmental Consultation Procedures on Issues and Policies Pertaining 
to the Activities of Multinational Enterprises. Note by the Secretariat (January 
14, 1976). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME(76)26/01. Comments Relating to the Formulation of a United Nations 
Code of Conduct for Transnational Corporations (December 30, 1976). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
IME/M(77)1. Summary Record of the Twelfth Meeting Held on 14–15 February, 
1977 (March 9, 1977). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Kissinger, Henry. 1975. “Global Consensus and Economic Development.” 
Address by Secretary Kissinger Prepared for Delivery at the Seventh Special 
Session of the UN General Assembly 425. September 22.
Margulis, Matias. 2017. The Global Political Economy of Raúl Prebisch. London 
and New York: Taylor & Francis.
Meeting of the Secretary-General with President Allende of Chile. December 4, 
1972. Series 292, Box 18, File 13, UN Archives, New York Headquarters.
NYT Archives. 1973. Allende Scoffs at Funds for I.T.T. Special to the New York 
Times, April 11.
Pieth, Mark. 1997. “International Cooperation to Combat Corruption.” In 
Corruption and the Global Economy, edited by Kimberly Ann Elliott, 119–
133. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute.
———. 2007. “Introduction.” In The OECD Convention on Bribery: A 
Commentary, edited by Mark Pieth, Lucinda A. Low, and Peter J. Cullen, 
3–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Puckett, Blake. 2010. “Clans and the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act: 
Individualized Corruption Prosecution in Situations of Systemic Corruption.” 
Georgetown Journal of International Law 41 (4): 815.
Qureshi, Lubna Z. 2009. Nixon, Kissinger, and Allende: U.S. Involvement in the 
1973 Coup in Chile. Lanham and Plymouth: Lexington Books.

102   E. KATZAROVA
Report of the Group of Eminent Persons to Study the Role of Multinational 
Corporations on Development and International Relations. June 12, 1974. 
E/5500/Add1, Series 1003, Box 6, File 22, UN Archives, New York 
Headquarters.
Reynolds, T. H. 1982. “Clouds of Codes: The New International Economic 
Order Through Codes of Conduct: A Survey.” Law Library Journal 75: 
315–354.
Sagafi-nejad, Tagi, and John H. Dunning. 2008. The UN and Transnational 
Corporations: From Code of Conduct to Global Compact. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Spector, Malcolm, and John Kitsuse. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. 
Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Teachout, Z. 2014. Corruption in America: from Benjamin Franklin’s Snuff Box 
to Citizens United. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
The Bern Declaration. “The Infiltration of the UN System by Multinational 
Corporations.” Excerpts of Internal Files. June 6, 1978. Series 0897, Box 7, 
File 7, UN Archives, New York Headquarters.
UN 1975. “Chapter XIII: Questions Concerning Transnational Corporations.” 
In Yearbook of the United Nations, 484–490. Vol. 29. New York: UN.
———. 1976. “Appendix III: Ad Hoc Bodies.” In Yearbook of the United 
Nations, 1058–1153. Vol. 30. New York: UN.
UNCTAD. 1973. “Address Delivered by Mr. Salvador Allende Gossens, 
President of Chile at the Inaugural Ceremony on April 13, 1972.” 
Proceedings of UNCTAD Third Session. Vol. 1 Annex VIII.
UN General Assembly. 2229th Plenary Meeting. “Resolution 3201 (S-VI) 
[Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order]” 
May 1, 1974 (A/RES/S-6/3201). New York: UN.
———. 30th Session. “Resolution 3514: [Measures Against Corrupt Practices 
of Transnational and Other Corporations, Their Intermediaries and Others 
Involved]” December 15, 1975, pp. 69–70 in Resolutions Adopted on the 
Reports of the Second Committee (A/RES/3514). New York: UN.
US Congress. House. Committee on International Economic Policy. 1975. 
The Activities of American Multinational Corporations Abroad: Hearing 
Before the Subcommittee on International Economic Policy of the Committee on 
International Relations. 94th Cong., 1st sess., June 5.
US Senate. Committee on Finance. 1975. S. Res. 265., A Resolution to Protect the 
Ability of the United States to Trade Abroad: Hearing Before the Subcommittee 
on International Trade of the Committee on Finance. 94th Cong., 1st sess., 
October 6.

4  BUILDING A NEW WORLD: GLOBAL CLAIMS IN THE 1970S   103
Velde, Willem, and Swapna Nair. 2006. “Foreign Direct Investment, Services 
Trade Negotiations and Development: The Case of Tourism in the 
Caribbean.” Development Policy Review 24 (4): 437–54.
Weiner, Tim. 2004. “Lockheed and the Future of Warfare.” New York Times, 
November 28.
Yoder, Amos. 1993. The Evolution of the United Nations System. Washington: 
Taylor & Francis.

105
US claims on illicit corporate payments came to dominate global 
anti-corruption debates in the 1990s. This chapter traces the steps that 
led to the re-launch of global claims-making in 1989 and shows how 
the US concern with illicit/corrupt payments emerged in the first place. 
The main reason for the United States to re-launch global claims in 
1989 was the FCPA, which can be seen as a product of Watergate, as 
much as a product of the ITT aftermath. While the ITT affair triggered 
debates in the United States on the foreign policy repercussions of cor-
porate misconduct, Watergate made these debates more domestically ori-
ented. It was the combined work of the Subcommittee on Multinational 
Corporations, the Watergate Special Prosecution Force and the SEC 
that shed light on the illicit payments problem and informed much of 
the thinking behind the FCPA (Koehler 2012). Furthermore, the US 
Congressional hearings after the ITT affair were the main source of 
information for other governments to start their own investigations into 
corporate and government misconduct. As such, these testimonies pro-
vide information on the putative condition out of which global claims 
on corruption emerged. This is why this chapter discusses the content 
of the US Congress hearings on multinational corporations in relation 
to corrupt practices. The chapter further establishes the re-emergence of 
claims after the 1988 Amendment to the FCPA, when the United States 
chose the OECD as the most appropriate international forum in which 
to achieve consensus on corrupt practices.
CHAPTER 5
The Corporate Watergate
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_5

106   E. KATZAROVA
The previous chapter demonstrated how consensus on what consti-
tuted a ‘corrupt practice’ proved unattainable, with developing coun-
tries insisting on a definition of corruption broader than bribery. These 
debates over the definition of the scope of the practices that should be 
deemed ‘corrupt’ did not remain encapsulated in the UN, but spread, 
or had an influence, over other organizations such as the OAS and the 
OECD. In the 1970s, global measures included: OAS Resolution 154 
(167/75) from July 10, 1975; UN Resolution 3514 from December 
15, 1975; OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises from June 
21, 1976; ICC Rules of Conduct to Combat Extortion and Bribery 
from December 2, 1977. Some of these initiatives were promoted as a 
wider strategy of the US government to address questionable payments 
and bribery through international and unilateral solutions (Schmults 
Memorandum 1976). The ICC Rules of Conduct were published as a 
self-regulation measure at the same time that the FCPA was signed 
into law in December 1977. The FCPA, together with the 1978 Ethics 
in Government Act and the amended Federal Election Campaign Act, 
became part of a comprehensive regulatory campaign against corruption 
in American politics (Neild 2002). The FCPA aimed at restoring confi-
dence in American business through a radical measure—a criminalization 
approach led by Congress that was in direct opposition to the disclosure 
approach heralded by the US executive in a number of international and 
global forums. As the US Trade Representative later argued, the US 
Congress ‘reacted quickly and emotionally to daily newspaper headlines 
and public outcry’ in adopting this draconian measure (Brock 1981). 
The FCPA formed the basis of the second strategic re-launch of global 
claims-making and to a significant extent shaped the content of the prob-
lem of corruption, as it became institutionalized in international organi-
zations starting from the mid-1990s.
Investigations and hearings at the Subcommittee on Multinational 
Corporations, as well as the US Senate Select Committee to Study 
Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, 
revealed inappropriate behavior by US corporations abroad. Senator 
Church was the central figure in the hearings, first as Chairman of the 
Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations and then as Chairman of 
the so-called Church Committee (or the US Senate Select Committee 
to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence 
Activities). The Chilean case and the ITT affair were the corner-
stone in the investigations of both committees. The Subcommittee on 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   107
Multinational Corporations held its first hearings (March 20–April 2, 
1973) on the role of ITT in Chile. The widely controversial ‘Church 
Committee’ also aimed to set the record straight on US involvement 
in Chile in the decade prior to the overthrow of Allende, but it tackled 
the role of multinationals only marginally in relation to covert action 
by the CIA. In publications in The New York Times on September 
20 and December 22, 1974, the investigative journalist Seymour 
Hersh revealed alleged CIA involvement in the Chilean coup and sur-
veillance of US civilians, which prompted the creation of the Church 
Committee. As William Bader (1975), professional member of the 
Church Committee, stated: ‘our interest in Chile, and in this report, is 
not only what happened there but what the Chilean experience tells us 
about covert action as a foreign policy operation of a democratic soci-
ety’ (8).
In a similar way, the ITT case became the basis on which the 
Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations launched an investiga-
tion into the way in which inappropriate corporate behavior clashes with 
political and foreign policy objectives. While the decision to investigate 
the ITT case was made in May 1972 (shortly after the Anderson reve-
lations) by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the hearings were 
postponed until after the US presidential election. When the hearings 
on the ITT case in Chile started in March 1973, the Subcommittee on 
Multinational Corporations ventured once again to look at what the ITT 
case meant for the influence of multinational corporations on US politics 
in general. The first question that the hearings attempted to answer was 
about corporations and the public interest: ‘Do the activities of the mul-
tinational corporations advance the interests of the people of the United 
States taken as a whole?’ (US Senate 1973, 1). In the preamble to the 
hearings, it was further stated that it might be ‘critical to the survival 
and viability of these corporations, that there be agreed upon standards 
of conduct’ (US Senate 1973, 2). The mandate of the Subcommittee on 
Multinational Corporations to a large extent coincided with UNCTC 
debates on multinational corporations and the public interest, as well as 
the negotiation of codes for standards of behavior for multinationals. As 
the investigations at the Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations 
progressed, the revelations of inappropriate payments also started to sur-
face. One of the most blatant examples of such questionable payments 
was the infamous seven-figure offer that the ITT made to the CIA to 
prevent the election of Allende in 1970. The CIA refused the offer, but 

108   E. KATZAROVA
the hearings raised the possibility of a legislative response which would 
criminalize similar corporate contributions (US Senate 1973, 119). The 
underlying question behind these payments to a significant extent con-
tinued to be about ‘the appropriate limits for a company in seeking to 
influence the politics and policies of nations’ (US Senate 1973, 111). It 
was the foreign corporate payments problem, however, which emerged 
with the SEC disclosure program in 1975 that shifted debates decidedly 
toward corporate bribery and formed the basis of the FCPA, as well as 
the US proposal on illicit payments in the UN and the OECD.
Establishing the Global Dimension  
and Deciding on a Venue
The FCPA was the first, albeit national, law that addressed the question 
of transnational bribery. The adoption of the law in 1977, however, can 
be better understood within a domestic anti-corruption program, since 
the FCPA was a direct consequence of the Watergate investigations 
(Posadas 2000; Cragg and Woof 2002; Biegalman and Biegelman 2010; 
Koehler 2014). The connection was immediate because the Watergate 
Special Prosecution Force, investigating the 1972 campaign of then 
President Richard Nixon, discovered that the slush funds used at home 
for illegal party contributions were also used to bribe foreign officials 
abroad (Sporkin 2003). Judge Stanley Sporkin, who was employed by 
the SEC at the time (1961–1981) and became Director of the Division 
of Enforcement (1974–1981) explained in an interview for SEC that 
the same slush funds, used for illegal contributions in the United States 
were used abroad for other questionable payments: ‘we had developed a 
horrendous situation where we found out of those slush funds that were 
being used to give money to political parties, we went into them and we 
found that those monies were also being used for other various activities, 
such as bribing officials in foreign countries to get business’ (Sporkin 
2003, 16). Given the particular post-Watergate environment, the public-
ity surrounding these investigations created strong support for a unilat-
eral measure that would forbid US companies to perpetuate these illicit 
practices abroad, leading eventually to the FCPA which is discussed in 
this chapter.
The first claims that illicit/corrupt practices were a global prob-
lem operated in an environment of uncertainty as to the magnitude 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   109
of the problem and had fluid definitional boundaries. In light of the 
expected unilateral legislative measure that the US Congress was push-
ing for, the search for an international solution became a priority for 
the US executive and for American corporations. One of the primary 
sources of information on the immediate US position before starting a 
global claims-making process in 1975 was the Congressional Hearings 
and Discussions on Senate Resolution 265 ‘The Resolution to Protect 
the United States Ability to Trade Abroad’ (US Senate 1975). Senator 
Ribicoff, as a member of the Finance Committee, in the opening of the 
Congressional hearings pointed to the unfavorable domestic and world-
wide publicity for US illicit practices that were not, however, the sole 
prerogative of American companies:
The publicity that has accompanied these disclosures has made it seem 
to many that this kind of corporate misconduct is primary an American 
practice. It has been argued that if we stop our companies from engaging 
in these sordid activities we will be ending the problem. But the fact is 
foreign corporations have been involved too, probably even to a greater 
extent than our own companies. (Ribicoff 1975, 2)
Despite the unjust focus on American corporations, illicit corporate 
payments were considered of global relevance because other corpora-
tions were also implicated in such practices. Thus, the twin solutions of 
national legislation and international negotiations on a collective solu-
tion become the center of claims as to the proper course of future action. 
Senator Church (in his capacity as Chairman of the Subcommittee of 
Multinational Corporations) also made a statement that the investiga-
tions led him to conclude that a solution to the problem of political con-
tributions and bribery had to be sought nationally and internationally. 
Church stated that globally such practices appeared to be a ‘way of life’ 
and therefore, not necessarily perceived by the participants as a problem 
in need of an urgent solution:
It has been a very sorry, sordid tale that the subcommittee heard - a tale of 
kickbacks and shakedowns, of bribery and corruption in the very highest 
military and governmental circles abroad and the condoning of secret slush 
funds, false bookkeeping, Swiss bank accounts and “fake” subsidiaries by 
the top of the executives of America’s leading firms. Corporate represent-
atives tell us that corruption is an integral part of doing business abroad; 

110   E. KATZAROVA
that paying bribes is a common and accepted practice or a way of life, as 
many of them put it.’ (Church 1975, 7)
Church’s knowledge and expertise on the subject were central to form-
ing a better understanding of the scope of the problem and its reper-
cussions and subsequently influencing a decision as to why the problem 
should be tackled and at what level. Senator Church considered the 
problem of corrupt payments a political and economic, rather than a 
moral one, and he put emphasis mostly on the repercussion of such pay-
ments on American foreign policy. Despite the fact that the hearings in 
the Subcommittee provided numerous examples of the way in which US 
foreign policy was hampered by the revelations, Senator Church singled 
the influence of corporate bribery on a new arms race in the Middle East 
as the most important foreign policy aspect of corrupt payments:
Documents and public testimony before the Multinational Subcommittee 
show that military procurement decisions which were supposed to be 
made on the basis of fundamental national security considerations, instead, 
all too often are based on the size of payoffs made to key people in the 
military and civilian defense establishments (…) The incentive is, therefore, 
great to buy the most expensive weapons and in greater quantities than are 
really needed. One country’s unnecessarily bloated defense budget then 
immediately becomes the rationale for its neighbors or potential adversar-
ies to acquire more weapons just to keep up. And so it goes in a vicious 
and never-ending cycle. (Church 1975, 8)
According to the statement, the payments constitute a problem because 
legitimate defense requirements should be the basis for making arms 
purchases rather than private financial interests. In addition, leaving 
defense budgets to be influenced by private profit incentives may lead 
to an escalating arms race with grave repercussions for armed conflicts. 
Bribery could be singled out as the major cause of such distortions, but 
the issue was more intricate. Senator Church suggested that US author-
ities could be tolerating the inappropriate use of agent’s fees by corpo-
rations because higher arms sales contributed to the country’s balance 
of payments, which had been hurt by the OPEC oil crisis. The political 
commitment to prevent conflict in the Middle East was hampered, how-
ever, by aggressive arms sales which provide ‘all sides in that conflict with 
the instruments of another war’ (Church 1975, 8). Thus, US commer-
cial interests clashed with other foreign policy objectives.

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   111
The effect of corporate bribery on political regimes in other coun-
tries, as well as on US foreign policy objectives, was not limited, how-
ever, to a spiraling arms race, but involved the use of corrupt payments 
by American corporations in ideological warfare. The tendency of elec-
torates in other countries to start perceiving their governments as ‘hand-
maidens of foreign and domestic financial interests’ was jeopardizing the 
American foreign policy objective of stabilizing democratic and foreign 
capital friendly political regimes:
There is also little doubt that widespread corruption serves to undermine 
those moderate democratic and pro-free-enterprise governments which 
the United States has traditionally sought to foster and support. Several 
oil companies testified before the subcommittee that they had made huge 
political contributions in Italy and Korea, for example. They claimed to 
be supporting the democratic forces who are friendly to foreign capital in 
those countries, but in fact, they were subverting the basic democratic pro-
cesses of those two countries by making illegal contributions and were, at 
the same time, providing the radical left with its strongest election issue. 
(Church 1975, 9)
Foreign policy repercussions of corrupt practices were the main issue for 
the Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations, but Senator Church 
argued that these practices committed abroad were also problematic 
domestically: ‘The slush funds and secret bank accounts from which 
money was drawn to pay foreign politicians also provided the means of 
disguising corporate contributions to American politicians’ (Church 
1975, 9). The illicit interaction between private and foreign actors, as 
well as national public actors, constituted a national as well as an interna-
tional problem. Illicit payments also constituted a short-sighted under-
standing of American business interests and, as Senator Church asserted, 
the business community was already aware of the fact that corruption 
was not a viable long-term strategy. An analogical international solution 
had to be sought in addition to a national one since the problem was 
not only American and the competitiveness of American business should 
not be compromised with a unilateral solution (Church 1975). Senate 
Resolution 265 urged the American executive to start talks for a treaty 
on corrupt practices in the framework of GATT or another trade agree-
ment. A multilateral approach was deemed appropriate in order to pre-
serve the competitive positions of American companies in international 
trade.

112   E. KATZAROVA
It was more than logical to conclude that the problem with illicit 
political contributions was not a patented American one, and hearings 
at the Subcommittee of Multinational Corporations bore testimony by 
American enterprises that such practices were widely shared in the global 
business community, but the evidence was scarce. Senator Church admit-
ted that American companies during the hearings: ‘spoke in generalities. 
They said that they believed that these practices which they themselves 
admitted were commonplace, they believed that foreign firms did engage 
in them. But they were not able to furnish us specific information’ 
(Church 1975, 10). The Senator himself was positive that this was not 
solely an American practice, but he referred to the difficulty of discover-
ing definitive proof. The evidence he provided was of anecdotal nature—
he referred to two stories he read in the press about Belgian and French 
bribery cases. In this case, a conventional understanding of problems as 
objective conditions that are statistically studied and demand an almost 
automatic response from society and the responsible public authorities, 
inadequately explains the emergence of social and global problems. Even 
in cases when the magnitude of the problem appears as the driving force 
behind building a collective response to a putative condition, it may be 
the perceived magnitude of a problem (or the publicity it generates) that 
leads to action and prescriptive, rather than empirical, argumentation 
for said action. The difficulty of building a statistical database on global 
corrupt practices is notorious and the fact that at such an early stage of 
claims-making, the ‘data’ are anecdotal is more than understandable. The 
Congressional hearings persuasively show the lack of precise data, but 
also the struggle to understand the magnitude of the problem quantita-
tively. This dynamic is evident in the testimony of the Assistant Secretary 
of Commerce for Domestic and International Business:
… I’ve spent the last 15 years of my life in the field of international trade, 
and in the last 18 months prior to coming to government, I have partic-
ipated in the financing of over $300 million of equipment going abroad, 
and I have never been involved in a transaction of that nature. I do not 
think that 98 percent of the companies in this country have. I think we are 
talking about a small percentage. (Reed 1975, 34)
Senator BYRD. You mentioned that 98 percent of the corporations do not 
engage in such practices as are enumerated in the resolution. That is an 
encouraging statement, I think. Does that apply to 98 percent of the mul-
tinationals as well as 98 percent of the corporations?

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   113
Mr. REED. The Fig. 98 percent is my own estimate. It is not some-
thing that is statistically proven.
Senator BYRD. Yes; but when you applied the 98 percent, do you apply 
it to all corporations doing business overseas, or do you apply it to the 
multinationals only? (US Senate 1975, 37)
The geographical scope became another question in relation to the 
‘globality’ of the problem investigated during the hearings. Senator 
Church concluded that from the information he had gathered dur-
ing the hearings the rendering of bribes was also from the recipient’s 
side a ‘worldwide problem.’ American companies admitted to making 
such payments not only in developing, but also in developed countries  
(US Senate 1975, 11). On the other hand, the supply part of such cor-
rupt payments that was deemed to be the developed countries was more 
significant because it required the search for a global solution. Senator 
Church was not aware of ongoing investigations in other countries 
with the exception of Germany, but he confirmed that Iran and Saudi 
Arabia had reacted to the findings of the Subcommittee on Multinational 
Corporations by passing edicts on the practice of rendering commissions 
in military equipment purchases (Church 1975, 9). The expected sce-
nario was that after other countries undertake their own investigations, 
even if only a small number were willing to make the findings public, this 
small core of states could reach agreement for an international solution. 
Senator Church supported a mixed solution for these potential partner 
countries with the enactment of national laws and corollary international 
agreement. The proposal of the Church Committee for national legisla-
tion on corrupt payments was to a large extent driving the need for an 
international approach:
Now we have these universal practices all over the world. And American 
business is being blamed. Talking for myself, personally, I do not intend 
to sit by and see American business put in a disadvantageous position. And 
they certainly are in a disadvantaged position because this Congress will, I 
am sure, follow up the Church committee’s proposals and have every type 
of restriction against American corporations. (Ribicoff 1975, 19)
Senator Ribicoff explained that in including the issue under the Trade Act 
that both Democrats and Republicans ‘expected once and for all that the 
American negotiators look out for the interests of American business and 
not be so hypersensitive to what other people do’ (Ribicoff 1975, 19). 

114   E. KATZAROVA
The framing of corrupt practices as a trade issue, and therefore, an issue 
suitable for discussion at GATT, was meant to best serve the interests of 
American business from the viewpoint of the legislature. The function of 
an international solution was, to some extent, to preempt national leg-
islation banning illicit payments abroad or at least minimize the damage 
that the ban on such payments would have incurred on the competitive-
ness of American corporations. This is the main reason why representa-
tives of American trade organizations also endorsed the Senate Resolution 
with the modifications put forward by representatives of the executive. 
US companies and representatives of the executive were more eager to 
export the policy debate on corrupt practices abroad, while in the US 
Congress there was a strong determination to first ban such practices by 
US companies with a national law that would go in the line of full disclo-
sure or criminalization. For organized business interests, the search for a 
global solution was much more preferable to a unilateral domestic meas-
ure which would put American business at a competitive disadvantage. 
Representatives of American trade organizations, therefore, urged that the 
problem of corrupt payments be addressed at the international level and 
the plans for unilateral policy measures be abandoned:
use every resource of the U.S. Government to deal with this prob-
lem, and that might include bilateral discussions or any other intergov-
ernmental technique to accomplish the objectives of the resolution.  
I suggest that the regulatory proposals of the Department of State, which 
I have entered into the record, are unilateral in character; they are totally 
unnecessary at the present time; and they would be contrary to the objec-
tive of the resolution. (US Senate 1975, 41)
The two main considerations were, firstly, not to rush into a unilateral 
form of legislation before a global approach has been tested and, sec-
ondly, to place a demarcation line between similar practices which 
would render some legitimate and others not. The second concern was 
expressed about both domestic and global business transactions and 
especially in connection to military contracts. Business representatives 
urged that: ‘many relationships carried on by US companies even with 
the Middle East countries or with Indonesia or with some of the other 
countries that have received so much attention in the press, are legiti-
mate relationships and are not subject to criticism’ (41). Where the 
line of demarcation between illicit and legitimate types of influence in 
business transactions lies was subject to claims-making. Representatives 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   115
of business and trade interests tried to delimit a narrower definition of 
what are considered ‘corrupt payments’ and clarify legitimate agent fees, 
monetary and non-monetary forms of influence and other services that 
remain outside the ‘problem.’ The two primary objectives of organized 
business interests in the mid-1970s were: (1) exporting the discussion 
of the problem to international forums while preventing the enactment 
of a unilateral national legislative act; (2) demarcating a narrower defini-
tion of what constitutes a corrupt practice. These two objectives shaped 
much of the strategy of the US executive in addressing corrupt practices 
internationally. As will become evident with the adoption of the FCPA, 
different actors had different interests and tried to construct an etiology 
of the problem that served those interests. The choice of international 
organization in which to launch the claims was another example of the 
plurality of positions in which the intent of Congress to direct talks to 
GATT was challenged by representatives of the US executive and organ-
ized business interests.
Senate Resolution 265 directed the American executive (President’s 
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, representatives of the 
Department of State, Commerce, Treasury and Justice) to initiate nego-
tiations for a treaty on corrupt payments in the framework of GATT or 
other trade agreement in accordance with the 1974 Trade Act. The main 
exchange of claims and counterclaims on the content of the problem 
and the appropriate international forum in which to address it occurred 
during the hearings of the President’s Special Representative for Trade 
Negotiations. It was in the contrasting positions between the represent-
atives of the legislative and executive branches of government that the 
claims-making process became ready for international export.
The Senate Resolution 265 specified GATT as the proper institu-
tional forum for the internationalization of the problem of corrupt 
payments and insisted on its definition as a trade issue. The Special 
Representative for Trade Negotiations concurred with the general objec-
tive of the Resolution, but not with the definition of the problem as a 
trade issue and with the chosen institutional setting for launching the 
claims globally. The President’s Special Representative, Dent, insisted 
that the trade negotiations in Geneva were not the appropriate forum 
and that a multifaceted issue such as unethical payments should be exam-
ined in the OECD and/or the UN. The Special Representative rejected 
GATT as the proper institution at which to address the claims and reas-
sured Congress that other institutional fora were already approached.  

116   E. KATZAROVA
The question of public disclosure of corrupt payments was examined at 
the IMF and the World Bank with Ministers of Finance from Canada, 
Japan, Britain, France and Germany. Furthermore, the Secretary-General 
of the OECD had responded favorably to looking for international cor-
rective action within the organization. Special countermeasures were 
undertaken in the sphere of defense by the Secretary of Defense who in 
cooperation with the State Department and the Pentagon was working 
on a solution for the disclosed cases of fees paid to middlemen in arms 
sales. Regional approaches were also underway in the framework of the 
OAS in cooperation with MIT, Stanford Regional Institute and Harvard 
University. Despite claiming that the problem was predominantly politi-
cal and governmental in nature, Special Representative Dent stressed that 
corporate actors were actively working for a solution in the direction of 
self-regulation. The ICC, as well as the US Chamber, was already start-
ing to develop codes of acceptable conduct for multinational corpora-
tions. The Charter on International Investments of the Pacific Economic 
Council and the Caterpillar Tractor’s Code of Worldwide Business 
Conduct provided other examples of business-sponsored initiatives on 
solving the problem of illicit payments (Dent 1975).
Special Representative Dent claimed that corruption or unethical 
payments were not simply a trade issue as ‘the problem affects all fac-
ets of business and business-government relationships’ (Dent 1975, 17). 
What was problematic with the disclosed payments, Dent claimed, was 
of moral and political nature. Legislating global morality was hardly the 
business of the United States, according to his argument. The GATT 
trade negotiations were already complicated by economic recession, and 
if these ethical issues were added to an already ambitious round of nego-
tiations, it was doubtful that successful conclusion of both the negoti-
ations and the particular problem laid ahead. The President’s Special 
Representative insisted that corruption was predominantly a moral and 
political issue, but this did not doom it to failure in other international 
negotiations since ‘no government is likely to concede nonconformity 
with commonly held principles of morality and decency.’ While agreeing 
in principle that corrupt practices can constitute a trade obstacle, Dent 
expressed his practical doubts that one could negotiate ‘the ethics of 
trade practices in the MTN’ (17).
Within the framework of the social construction of global problems, 
this preliminary reframing of putative condition justifies the choice of 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   117
venue for the launch of global claims. Corrupt payments as a trade issue 
was meant to introduce the issue at GATT where some congressmen 
believed the United States had clout. Corrupt payments as an ethical prob-
lem was meant to steer talks away from GATT. This is why the executive 
representative referred to ‘unethical payments’ and insisted that the issue 
should be brought to a wider web of global and international venues, 
but most appropriately to the OECD. The insistence of the President’s 
Special Representative that GATT was not the most appropriate forum 
for working toward a global solution was met with very strong opposition 
in Congress. The Special Representative suggested amendments to the 
Resolution that would accommodate the change in preferred venue, and 
these changes were supported by the business community, but met force-
ful opposition in Congress. Senator Ribicoff insisted that: ‘we felt the time 
has come to move fast in the international forum where we have clout, 
and that is GATT, to put the American companies on the same basis as 
companies from all over the globe’ (Ribicoff 1975, 22). The Senator vehe-
mently opposed the change in international organization proposed by the 
executive arguing that: ‘Every nation that is in OECD is in the GATT, but 
GATT is where the crunch is. GATT is where the power is. Everything 
else is a debating society’ (Ribicoff 1975, 30). The inclusion of transna-
tional corrupt payments under the 1974 Trade Act made the issue suitable 
for discussion at international trade negotiations. Therefore, it is possible 
that this particular interpretation of the putative condition was enacted in 
order to promote the problem at an international forum where the United 
States ‘had clout,’ as the Congressional hearings repeatedly put it. The 
position of the representatives of the executive promoted a different inter-
pretation and another strategy for the internationalization of the issue—
these unethical payments would be better managed at the OECD and 
after a consensus is reached within the group of developed nations, this 
agreement could be ‘transferable’ to other international and global insti-
tutions (Dent 1975, 23). The strategic value of starting the discussions at 
the OECD was explained as the following:
What we are attempting to do is obtain some unanimity of thought within 
a smaller group, particularly the payers, the people who are making the 
payments. The OECD, we think, provides a proper vehicle at the moment 
to attempt to get some unanimity of thought in regard to how this univer-
sal code of conduct would be accepted and could then be introduced into 
GATT or any other appropriate body. (Reed 1975, 35)

118   E. KATZAROVA
While the US Senate Resolution directed the negotiation talks toward 
GATT, representatives of the executive and business interests managed 
to establish that a broader approach, involving in particular the OECD 
and the UN, would be more effective. This strategy of the US execu-
tive informed the US anti-corruption initiatives not only in the 1970s 
but also in the 1990s. To a significant extent, the immediate function of 
claims-making at this stage was to tackle unfavorable publicity domesti-
cally, as well as globally, and to ameliorate the consequences public dis-
content might have for compromising American leadership. While the 
US Congress expressed intent to act unilaterally, such projects were sus-
pended, waiting for the results of a multilateral approach.
The FCPA as a Product of ‘Post-Watergate Morality’
The failure of talks in the UN and the OECD in the 1970s to generate a 
viable global solution to the problem of corrupt/illicit payments was due 
to some extent to varying claims of scope, and in particular, the develop-
ing nations’ argument that broader range of activities and outcomes were 
to be included in the category of ‘corrupt practices.’ The claims of the 
G77 that foreign corporations become political agents in their countries 
that strengthen or destabilize the position of ruling governments, as well 
as channel the national interest of their country of origin, became highly 
controversial. Viewed from this perspective, the question of corruption 
was one of corrupt ‘influence’ rather than ‘payment.’ The US govern-
ment had its own reason to pursue a ban on illicit or corrupt payments 
and this reason can be understood after a careful look at the domestic 
investigations that the two Church Committees, the Watergate Special 
Prosecution Office and the SEC, undertook.
Parallel to the UN and OECD pre-negotiation talks, debates were 
ongoing in the US Congress. The Ford administration insisted on a 
multilateral solution and favored a disclosure approach (Cragg and 
Woof 2001). It took a change of administration and Jimmy Carter, 
who favored a criminalization approach, signed the FCPA into law on 
December 20, 1977 (Koehler 2012). The new president still envisioned 
the successful conclusion of the UN negotiations as the international 
counterpart of the American ban on foreign bribery, but the unilateral 
adoption of the FCPA further complicated the pre-negotiation talks and 
isolated the United States in the UN and the OECD (IME/M(77)1). 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   119
The chapter discusses the adoption of the FCPA, because its amendment 
in 1988 leads to the resurgence of discussions at the international level 
and a strategic re-launch of global claims.
The FCPA was the first national law to address the question of trans-
national bribery. As it was noted previously, the adoption of the law in 
1977 can be placed better within a domestic anti-corruption program 
and can be understood as an unintended consequence of the post-Water-
gate investigations (Sporkin 2003). The FCPA is significant in the con-
struction of a global corruption problem for two main reasons. Firstly, 
the unilateral adoption of a law with extraterritorial implications fur-
ther complicated the pre-negotiation talks at the OECD and the UN 
after 1977, and contributed to the failure of a viable multilateral solu-
tion. Secondly, the FCPA became the basis for renewed attempts to 
reopen negotiation talks at the OECD after the Act was amended for 
the first time in 1988 in Title V of the Omnibus Trade Act. While the 
attempts to promote the problem of corrupt payments on the interna-
tional agenda presented transnational corporate bribery as fundamentally 
a global problem, the adoption of the FCPA pitched corporate corrupt 
payments as essentially a national problem. The criminalization of cor-
porate questionable payments to foreign government officials was not 
a ‘national’ problem because it could not have been better addressed 
through a global approach, but because the FCPA was predominantly 
a consequence of the dynamic between the executive and legislative 
branches of power in the peculiar post-Watergate climate, and the func-
tion of the Act was to a large extent to remedy sentiments of suspicion 
toward the dealings of US business and government.
The general concern of the American legislator had to do with the 
connections between government and business, whether domestically 
or internationally, and did not differ so greatly from the UN talks about 
the role of corporations in politics. Senator Church in a public speech at 
Harvard University on October 26, 1976, argued that corporations have 
been transformed into political actors: ‘an American multinational cor-
poration can become a political actor abroad whose immediate interests 
may be antithetical to the foreign policy objectives of the United States.’ 
The problem of political involvement of US corporations abroad and the 
growing power of corporations to outmaneuver national sovereignty was 
further complicated by alleged government involvement in the question-
able corporate payments:

120   E. KATZAROVA
I do not ignore that some of these corporations, as in the case of ITT in 
Chile, acted with the encouragement of government agencies, like the CIA. 
But more often, as in the cases of Japan, Korea and Italy, the subcommittee 
has been told by the responsible U.S. government officials that they had 
no knowledge of the political payments, bribes or questionable commission 
fees disclosed by the subcommittee. It could be that these are disingenuous 
denials designed to conceal the background role of our own government 
in such gross misconduct. But I think it is more likely that the disclaimers 
reflect the traditional attitude of our diplomats that commercial activities 
abroad of American-owned corporations are simply none of their business. 
Such an attitude betrays a failure to understand that multinational corpo-
rations often are crucial actors in the international political sphere, whose 
activities may determine and define U.S. national interests to a degree com-
parable to the actions of our own government. (Church 1976, 1)
The problem of corrupt payments can therefore be placed at the center 
of what Senator Church in the same speech referred to as a ‘web of 
entanglement’ that cannot be exhausted with the influence of corporate 
actors over political processes, but rather points to an intricacy between 
political and business considerations:
What I have tried to describe to you is the way in which the Lockheed case 
illustrates a web of entanglement: a major U.S. defense contractor seeks its 
financial salvation in sales abroad; it penetrates and corrupts the internal 
politics of major allies of the United States; our own government admits 
that this fraudulent and corrosive behavior has taken place outside its 
knowledge and control; and, when a congressional committee proposes to 
expose the sordid facts and legislate to prevent their repetition, we are told 
that to do so would endanger the security of the United States. (Church 
1976, 2)
Despite attempts from Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to suppress 
the Lockheed case on the basis of security interests, Senator Church con-
tinued the investigations (Biegalman and Biegelman 2010). The main 
reason why the legislature concentrated on ‘payments’ (that were called 
‘irregular,’ ‘questionable,’ ‘illegal’ or ‘corrupt’) came from the fact that, 
as noted previously, while following the money trail of the Watergate 
investigations, the existence of slush funds was discovered. In 1973, 
the Watergate Special Prosecution Office was investigating the money 
trail of domestic political campaign contributions. In a follow-up, SEC 
discovered:

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   121
falsifications of corporate financial records, designed to disguise or con-
ceal the source and application of corporate funds misused for illegal pur-
poses, as well as the existence of secret “slush funds” disbursed outside the 
normal financial accountability system. These secret funds were used for a 
number of purposes, including in some instances, questionable or illegal 
foreign payments. (SEC Report 1976, 2)
The disclosure program, instituted by the SEC as a consequence, had 
hundreds of companies participated on a voluntary basis and in 1975 
revealed a worldwide bribery web, a global conundrum that Kissinger 
referred to as ‘the Watergate of private industry’ (quoted in Biegelman 
and Biegelman 2010, 17). The Lockheed bribery case was simply the 
most publicized of the investigations, because it led to resignations of 
political leaders abroad, and therefore became the emblematic precursor 
to the FCPA. Legislative response was deemed necessary, firstly because 
of SEC’s obligation to ensure correct disclosure to stockholders and sec-
ondly because of the ramifications such payments had for American for-
eign policy (Cragg and Woof 2002).
The American executive was hesitant to pursue criminalization and 
the Ford administration focused on disclosure measures, which would 
have provided a much more lax approach to handling corporate foreign 
payments. The US Congress was determined to enact tougher measures, 
however, and an earlier form of the FCPA (Bill S.3133) was introduced 
by Senator Proxmire (Koehler 2012). The bill was in direct opposition to 
the proposal backed by the Ford administration, the ‘Foreign Payments 
Disclosure Act,’ which did not foresee the explicit prohibition of foreign 
bribery. The leverage of the US Congress post-Watergate was particularly 
strong because of the compromised reputation of the executive, severely 
damaged during the Nixon administration (Fisher 2014). The criminali-
zation approach, promoted by Proxmire, was the most substantial option 
of legislative action against the questionable corporate payments, and in 
the particular post-Watergate climate, it overrode strong domestic con-
cerns from the business sector.
The ITT affair and the resulting corporate misconduct revelations 
by the Subcommittee on Multinational Corporations had a damaging 
effect on US credibility both domestically and abroad. It was, however, 
the SEC disclosure program, which came as a follow-up of the Watergate 
investigations that redirected the debates decisively toward corporate 
bribery in 1975. The problem with the disclosed corrupt payments had 

122   E. KATZAROVA
an ideological and a foreign policy dimension, but the reason why the 
criminalization approach became the preferred mode of addressing the 
questionable payments had more to do with the climate of ‘post-Water-
gate morality’ that had a powerful impact on US politics in the 1970s 
(Koehler 2012).
Unilateral Criminalization or Disclosure
The FCPA was a complex interplay between a number of actors, 
most notably the Church Subcommittees, the Ford (and Carter) 
Administration, the SEC, and the chairman of the Senate Committee on 
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs (Koehler 2012). The latter, in the 
face of Senator William Proxmire, was responsible for drafting what was 
later to become the FCPA of 1977. In the attempt to criminalize bribery 
and not simply demand disclosure of information, Proxmire was guided 
by clear objectives. He wanted the anti-bribery campaign to take the 
form of a criminal law because that ‘would help US multinational com-
panies resist corrupt demands,’ but he also argued that corrupt practices 
carried out abroad would corrode the US political landscape and become 
the rule domestically as well (quoted in Cragg and Woof 2001, 185). 
Proxmire’s follow-up Senate hearings at the Committee on Banking, 
Housing and Urban Affairs came as a consequence of the SEC reports 
and supplemented the Church revelations on Lockheed. The reason why 
Proxmire could have taken the Lockheed bribery scandal to heart was 
that he was opposed to the 1971 bailout of the corporation, and the rev-
elations that Lockheed might have used some of the government money 
to bribe foreign officials must have not fared favorably with him.
The Proxmire-sponsored criminalization of transnational bribery 
appeared at first as an unlikely course of action, because the proposals 
of Church, SEC and the Ford administration excluded criminalization in 
favor of disclosure and measures aiming at self-regulation (SEC Report 
2017). The proposal of the Ford administration was based on the inves-
tigations of the Task Force on Questionable Payments Abroad, estab-
lished by the president on March 31, 1976. President Ford considered 
the ‘erosion of confidence’ and in particular the public distrust in the 
free enterprise system as major motives for legislative action (Ford 1976). 
The proposed Foreign Payments Disclosure Act, however, avoided a 
criminalization approach because of the inherent element of extraterrito-
riality, which would have entailed the application of US criminal statues 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   123
on foreign territories (Ford 1979). The disclosed information about cor-
rupt payments would have been provided to foreign governments on 
certain occasions, and the relevant foreign authorities were to decide if 
the information should be made public and/or national jurisdiction 
on the subject was applicable. The prosecution of transnational brib-
ery was, according to this draft Act, to remain a predominantly national 
prerogative with limited forms of unilateral or multilateral international 
cooperation for the exchange of information. The provisions of the Act 
were minimal in comparison with the approach promoted by Proxmire. 
Facilitation payments were to be excluded from disclosure, and the 
Secretary of State or the Attorney General could ban the publication of 
disclosed payments on the basis of foreign policy considerations (Ford 
1979).
The proposal of the Ford administration left a large margin for polit-
ical discretion. The continuation of ‘business as usual’ was what the 
Proxmire proposal for criminalization was trying to counteract. The 
criminalization approach also entailed a larger responsibility for the 
bribing corporation. The approach would have, therefore, showed deci-
sive intention to root out American corporate bribery domestically and 
abroad, and would have also inflicted significant costs on bribing trans-
gressors. During a hearing before the Senate Committee On Banking, 
Housing and Urban Affairs, Proxmire referred to the impunity and lack 
of criminal and monetary accountability that corporations involved in 
the corrupt payments have enjoyed following the disclosures. Promoting 
a criminalization approach was to some extent a method of instituting 
more stringent measures against bribing US companies. The approach 
championed by Proxmire claimed to aim at restoring faith in the US 
business community and in the ethical standards corporations abide to in 
their interaction with foreign, as well as US governmental officials:
The recent revelations of foreign bribes paid by many of our largest corpo-
rations threaten to undermine public confidence in our free enterprise sys-
tem. We cannot condone bribery abroad and expect the public to believe 
that the same kind of illegal payoffs do not occur at home. Corporate cor-
ruption knows no boundaries. If we permit bribery to become a regular 
policy of U.S. corporations abroad, it will only be a matter of time before 
these same corrupt practices inflict our domestic economic system.
There are those who condemn foreign bribery but who argue that it 
should be dealt with only through an international treaty such as the one 

124   E. KATZAROVA
the State Department has announced it is considering. This approach is 
really a prescription for doing nothing…An international treaty to outlaw 
bribery is equivalent to a treaty to outlaw war. While high sounding in pur-
pose, it is devoid of any practical effect. (Proxmire 1976, 1)
Proxmire reversed the arguments used earlier to promote corrupt prac-
tices as an intrinsically global problem that has to be addressed through 
a viable multilateral solution. The Senator claimed that, even if desirable, 
the negotiation of an international treaty would be too lengthy process 
and would ultimately not provide a practical solution to the problem. 
Proxmire’s arguments had a political underbelly because his criminali-
zation approach was in direct opposition to the proposal by the Ford 
administration. The proposal also reflected the expressed concern of 
Congress that the State and Defense Departments, in particular, were 
not only insufficiently involved in solving the problem of foreign cor-
rupt payments, but were actually actively perpetuating it (Kohler 2012). 
Congressional hearings suggested that the US government might have 
been aware of the questionable payments even prior to the disclosure 
procedures, and this led to suspicions of state-promoted corporate brib-
ery. Senator Helms announced that the US government has not ‘leve-
led with the American people about the government’s own involvement 
with respect to these activities’ (quoted in Koehler, 968). As Koehler 
(2012) observes, Senator Church also characterized the government’s 
inactivity and overall attitude toward the foreign corrupt payments as 
one of ‘indifference or perhaps benign neglect’ (969). This suspected 
indolence of the US government, which was working toward an interna-
tional solution, but was allegedly circumventing real reform, became the 
fuel behind the unilateral criminalization approach.
The US Congress and in particular the Senate’s suspicion toward the 
government’s approach and possible involvement in the questionable 
payments were the driving forces behind the FCPA. The initial draft of 
the bill proposed by Proxmire was the only one providing for the crim-
inalization of transnational corrupt payments performed by US-based 
companies and their subsidiaries, and the Senator later reworked the bill 
to accommodate the proposal by the SEC. The SEC initially showed 
reluctance to support the criminalization approach. In an address by 
the SEC Chairman Roderick Hills on March 15, 1976, the implications 
of the disclosures for the US society were presented in the following 
way:

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   125
Confidence in our business community and its capacity to compete fairly 
has been badly shaken, perhaps destroyed at least temporarily. We must – 
for this reason alone – as a government and a society, condemn bribery 
anywhere. If bribery will get a contract for a manager in a foreign country, 
and if he is permitted to try it: Who will be convinced that the company 
that bribes abroad will compete fairly at home.
Disclosure alone cannot restore confidence in our institutions. Indeed, 
disclosure carried to an irrelevant degree would only obscure its true value, 
but the discipline of disclosure will be a power catharsis for much of our 
present cynicism. We are face to face today with the disagreeable fact that 
too many of our people in government and out do not believe in our 
free-enterprise, capitalistic system; because they do not believe it’s compet-
itive, they do not believe it’s free, and the word “capitalist” sounds like 
another one of those fellows who won’t tell the truth. (Hills 1976, 12–13)
The SEC Chairman was expressing a similar sentiment to the one held 
by Proxmire that the unencumbered proliferation of corrupt payments 
abroad would compromise the credibility of domestic business-gov-
ernment relations. At the same time, the ‘discipline of disclosure’ was 
judged sufficient to purge the American public from the growing distrust 
toward the dealings of business and government actors. The SEC, how-
ever, later came around on the criminalization approach supported by 
the Senate as the most effective measure against corrupt practices that 
would restore the confidence of the American electorate in the political 
system governing the country (SEC 2017).
In his resignation speech, former Vice President Agnew used the term 
‘post-Watergate morality’ to refer to his understanding that ‘the things he 
had done had been … normal and generally tolerated … until Watergate 
came along’ (quoted in Koehler 2012, 943). The decreased tolerance of 
the American public toward questionable dealings was a central item of 
this post-Watergate moral sentiment and the members of Congress of this 
new political era took on the role of guardians of the integrity of the free 
market system that the United States was championing around the globe. 
The illicit payments discovered during the post-Watergate investigations 
became, therefore, part of the ideological battle of supremacy during the 
Cold War and were seen to compromise the very legitimacy of the free 
enterprise system (Pieth 2007; Koehler 2014).
Following the enquiries from a number of Senate committees, the 
SEC and the Task Force on Questionable Payments Abroad, established 
by President Ford, the US Congress passed the FCPA in December 

126   E. KATZAROVA
1977. The US Congress was driven not only by concerns for US foreign 
policy, being damaged by the bribery scandals of the previous years, but 
also by much broader ethical considerations, the primary one of which 
was the integrity of the free market system (US House 1977). This 
combination of domestic challenges to democratic governance and the 
foreign policy exigencies in the Cold War era coupled to promote the 
enactment of the FCPA in 1977 in the particular post-Watergate climate. 
After being passed by Senate, but not by the House of Representatives 
in 1976, the bill was re-introduced by Proxmire in January 1977. Prior 
to his election as President, the Democratic candidate Jimmy Carter 
had supported the criminalization approach, but as SEC records show, 
after coming into office showed only hesitant support for Proxmire’s 
bill. SEC believed it had remedied the problem by strengthening cor-
porate governance and addressing the falsification of corporate records. 
Proxmire’s bill, however, retained ‘a great deal of superficial appeal’ as 
Commerce Secretary Richardson put it (SEC 2017). The Proxmire-
sponsored bill passed the 95th Congress and the report presented in 
front of the House of Representatives stated that the necessity for the act 
was primarily driven by the unethical nature of the bribe practices dis-
closed and the rift with the political values of American public life. The 
report concluded that such corrupt practices erode ‘public confidence 
in the integrity of the free market system’ (quoted in Cragg and Woof 
2002, 115).
Adopting unilaterally the FCPA placed American business at a relative 
disadvantage with respect to foreign competitors. The ‘international’ or 
multilateral alternative preferred by the Ford administration remained 
another option that was pursued at the time by the US executive in the 
framework of a number of international organizations. From a business 
point of view, the proposal of the Ford administration to first secure a 
multilateral framework appeared far more acceptable than the one cham-
pioned by Senator Proxmire. The multilateral arrangement was more 
favorable to business interests because it would have resolved the ten-
sion between conformity with the national legislation and the competi-
tive pressure of global markets by leveling the playing field. Furthermore, 
the US proposal at the UN was based on the disclosure approach cham-
pioned by the Ford administration and the adoption of the FCPA had 
a negative impact on the international negotiations. The ECOSOC Ad 
Hoc Intergovernmental Working Group on Corrupt Practices was firmly 
against home country criminalization of corrupt practices because of the 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   127
predicaments of enforcement and extraterritorial application that this 
approach entailed (IME/M(77)1).
Once the FCPA was adopted, the interest of the United States to 
protect its companies from the adverse effect of the unique domes-
tic anti-bribery act on their global competitiveness appeared as a logi-
cal development. In the decade, following the adoption of the FCPA, 
the US Congress was consistently lobbied by American companies who 
insisted that they operated at a relative disadvantage in a global market-
place, where bribes remained tax deductible for most of their European 
competitors. In fact, as Gutterman (2013) observes, corporate lobbying 
against the FCPA from 1977 to 1988 was so persistent that the ques-
tion becomes why was it not successful in repealing the act? Despite the 
Reagan administration’s stated intention after 1981 to decriminalize  
foreign bribery, the FCPA remained intact. According to Gutterman 
(2013), the reason for the act’s perseverance in the face of powerful cor-
porate lobbying and the executive’s determination to protect the inter-
est of American business was that repealing the act would have been 
‘easier done than said’ (109). In the enduring tradition of Watergate, 
public justification for the repeal would have been politically unfeasi-
ble, because: ‘you simply couldn’t get representatives or senators to 
vote to repeal it … no congressman will want to run for reelection and 
have his opponent say that he had voted in favor of committing brib-
ery’ (Heimann quoted in Gutterman, 112). The debate about revisions 
spread over three congresses and the first amendment to the FCPA was 
enacted as part of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act in 1988. 
Thus, in 1988 in accordance with the provisions of the amendment, the 
US Congress pushed the executive branch to initiate negotiations specif-
ically in the framework of the OECD, which culminated in an interna-
tional convention ten years later.
American corporations lobbied against the adoption of the FCPA 
prior to its adoption and to repeal it after 1977. Business found itself 
on the defensive after the revelations of hundreds of illicit high-profile 
business cases, and the 1970s became a decade of intensive business 
mobilization (Hacker and Pierson 2010). Despite the strategies of step-
ping up lobbying and developing personal contacts with politicians, the 
prevalence of an anti-corruption sentiment post-Watergate made repeal 
difficult. In the immediate adoption of the FCPA, enforcement efforts 
were credible, but with the advent of the Reagan administration and 
the frustrated effort to repeal or amend the act, enforcement patterns 

128   E. KATZAROVA
changed (Cragg and Woof 2002). The ban on foreign corrupt practices 
raised specific problems for a range of actors in the United States, start-
ing from the fact that the FCPA placed unique constraints on US busi-
ness. The re-launch of global claims was intrinsically connected to the 
criminalization approach established by the FCPA. Previous negotiations 
were not restricted to criminalization or even to establishing a definitive 
ban on transnational corrupt practices, but heralded primarily a disclo-
sure approach, which would entail the ‘right to know.’ The re-launch of 
global claims at the OECD in 1989, therefore, served a different func-
tion than the failed exploratory talks of the 1970s, because it aimed at 
the specific task of internationalizing the FCPA. The function of the US 
global claims was, nonetheless, stated as essentially identical to the ones 
of the previous decades:
The impetus to move on this issue came from the Congress which called 
on the executive branch in the Omnibus Trade bill of 1988 to work 
through the OECD to arrive at a common anti-bribery position. Now, 
some have asserted that the treaty does not go as far as it was hoped, but 
nevertheless it sets us on a course to pursue similar actions and efforts and 
other international arena and to broaden anti-corruption efforts in cooper-
ation with our competitors. (Senator Sarbanes 1998)
The strategy to reach consensus at the OECD and build on it in other 
international forums was first proposed by representatives of the US exec-
utive in 1975 and was adopted again in 1989. The attempt to forge con-
sensus with other economically powerful partners and then export this 
consensus on corrupt practices as a global problem to other international 
organizations and global institutions was successful in the 1990s. It deter-
mined, to a large extent, the definition of the problem and the mapping 
of the legitimate range of concerns and responses. In the process, the 
limited scope and ‘individual actor paradigm’ (Puckett 2010, 815), pro-
moted by the FCPA, came to tacitly define global attitudes toward corrup-
tion as bribery. The tackling of the problem, predominantly understood 
as one of ‘foreign corporate payments,’ had to contribute to the global 
legitimization of the free market system and of multinational enterprises. 
Furthermore, how to reconcile fighting corruption with the objectives 
of liberalization, privatization and deregulation became issues of primary 
concern. The discussions about corrupt practices in the OECD in the 
1990s were contextually different from the UN pre-negotiation talks in 

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   129
the 1970s, but were not less problematic. The United States had to per-
suade their competitors and partners from the Global North that corrupt 
payments, particularly in the form of bribery, constituted a problem, which 
had to be addressed multilaterally. The pre-negotiation talks at the OECD, 
which started in 1989, were central to forging a consensus on what consti-
tutes and how to address the global problem of illicit or corrupt payments.
References
Bader, William (Professional Staff Member of the Senate Select Committee). 
1975. “Testimony on S.Res.21. Hearings Before the Select Committee to 
Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities.” 94th 
Cong., December 4–5.
Biegelman, Martin T., and Daniel R. Biegelman. 2010. Foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act Compliance Guidebook: Protecting Your Organization from Bribery and 
Corruption. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Brock, Bill. 1981. “An Official View: Bill Brock on U.S. Trade.” Washington 
Post, May 20. Copy in the OECD Archives.
Church, Frank (Senator from the State of Idaho). 1975. “Testimony on 
S.Res.265. A Resolution to Protect the Ability of the United States to 
Trade Abroad Before the Senate Finance Committee, Subcommittee on 
International Trade.” 94th Cong., 1st sess., October 6.
———. 
1976. 
“Lockheed: 
Corporation 
or 
Political 
Actor?” 
Outline 
of Speech, Harvard University, Boston, MA, October 26. Accessed 
September 5, 2014. http://www.thecrimson.com/article/1976/10/26/
lockheed-corporation-or-political-actor-pon/.
Cragg, Wesley, and William Woof. 2001. “Legislating Against Corruption in 
International Markets: The Story of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.” 
In The Political Economy of Corruption, edited by Arvind K. Jain, 180–214. 
London: Routledge.
———. 2002. “The U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act: A Study of Its 
Effectiveness.” Business and Society Review 107 (1): 98–144.
Dent, Frederick (Special Representative for Trade Negotiations). 1975. 
“Testimony on S.Res.265. A Resolution to Protect the Ability of the United 
States to Trade Abroad Before the Senate Finance Committee, Subcommittee 
on International Trade.” 94th Cong., 1st sess., October 6.
Fisher, Louis. 2014. The Law of the Executive Branch: Presidential Power. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Ford, Gerald. 1976. “Statement on the Task Force on Questionable Corporate 
Payments Abroad.” The American Presidency Project, March 31. Accessed 22 
September, 2014. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=5773.

130   E. KATZAROVA
———. 1979. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Gerald R. Ford, 
Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President 1976–
1977. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Gutterman, Ellen. 2013. “Easier Done Than Said: Transnational Bribery, Norm 
Resonance, and the Origins of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.” 
Foreign Policy Analysis 11 (8): 109–128.
Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. 2010. “Winner-Take-All Politics: Public 
Policy, Political Organization, and the Precipitous Rise of Top Incomes 
in the United States.” Politics & Society 38 (2): 152–204. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0032329210365042.
Hersh, Seymour. 1974a. “C.I.A. Is Linked to Strikes in Chile That Beset 
Allende.” The New York Times, September 20.
———. 1974b. “Huge C.I.A. Operation Reported in U.S. Against Antiwar 
Forces, Other Dissidents in Nixon Years.” The New York Times, December 22.
Hills, Roderick. 1976. “Address by SEC Chairman Roderick M. Hills 
to the Association of the Bar.” Association of the Bar, New York, 
March 15. Accessed March 12, 2014. https://www.sec.gov/news/
speech/1976/031576hills.pdf.
IME/M(77)1, Summary Record of the Twelfth Meeting Held on 14–15 February, 
1977 (March 9, 1977) OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
International Chamber of Commerce. Extortion and Bribery in Business 
Transactions: Report Adopted by the 131st Session of the Council of the ICC, 29 
November 1977. Paris: International Chamber of Commerce.
Koehler, Mike. 2012. “The Story of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.” Ohio 
State Journal 73: 930–1013.
———. 2014. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in a New Era. Northampton, 
MA: Edward Elgar.
Neild, R. R. 2002. Public Corruption: The Dark Side of Social Evolution. London: 
Anthem Press.
OAS Resolution 154 (167/75), Permanent Council Resolution on the 
Behaviour of Transnational Enterprises Operating in the Region and the Need 
for a Code of Conduct to Be Observed by Such Enterprises, OEA/SerG, 
CP/RES 154 (10 July, 1975). Reprinted in American Society of International 
Law 14 (5) (September 1975): 1326–1328.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1976. The OECD 
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. Paris: Organization for Economic 
Co-Operation and Development.
Pieth, Mark. 2007. “Introduction.” In The OECD Convention on Bribery: A 
Commentary, edited by Mark Pieth, Lucinda A. Low, and Peter J. Cullen, 
3–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Posadas, Alejandro. 2000. “Combating Corruption Under International Law.” 
Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law 10 (2): 345–414.

5  THE CORPORATE WATERGATE   131
Proxmire, William. 1976. “Release from Senator William Proxmire on 
Legislation Outlawing Bribes to Foreign Government Officials.” Wisconsin, 
March 12. Accessed September 12, 2014. http://www.sechistorical.org/
museum/galleries/wwr/wwr04b-three-criminalization.php.
Puckett, Blake. 2010. “Clans and the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act: 
Individualized Corruption Prosecution in Situations of Systemic Corruption.” 
Georgetown Journal of International Law 41 (4): 815.
Reed, Travis (Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Domestic and International 
Business Administration). 1975. “Testimony on S.Res.265. A Resolution to 
Protect the Ability of the United States to Trade Abroad before the Senate 
Finance Committee, Subcommittee on International Trade.” 94th Cong., 1st 
sess., October 6.
Ribicoff, Abraham (Chairman of the Subcommittee on International Trade). 
1975. “Hearing on S.Res.265. A Resolution to Protect the Ability of the 
United States to Trade Abroad Before the Senate Finance Committee, 
Subcommittee on International Trade.” 94th Cong., 1st sess., October 6.
Sarbanes, Paul S. 1998. “Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials in International Business Transactions.” Committee on Foreign 
Relations, 105th Congress 2nd Session, to Accompany Treaty Doc, 105–143, 
July 16 (Text from: Federation of American Scientists, Intelligent Resource 
Program).
Schmults, Edward to Gerald Ford, Memorandum for the President. 1976. 
“Questionable Foreign Payments by U.S. Companies,” February 24.
SEC Report. 1976. Report of the Securities and Exchange Commission on 
Questionable and Illegal Corporate Payments and Practices, Submitted to the 
Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, May 12. Accessed 
April 14, 2018. http://3197d6d14b5f19f2f440-5e13d29c4c016cf96cbbf-
d197c579b45.r81.cf1.rackcdn.com/collection/papers/1970/1976_0512_
SECQuestionable.pdf.
SEC Report. 2017. “Three Approaches, One Law: Foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act of 1977 and Related Museum Resources.” Accessed October 22. http://
www.sechistorical.org/museum/galleries/wwr/wwr04b-three-criminaliza-
tion.php.
Sporkin, Stanley. 2003. “Securities and Exchange Commission Oral Histories 
with Stanley Sporkin.” Interview by Irving Pollack, September 23, edited 
transcript. Accessed May 22, 2014. http://www.sechistorical.org/museum/
galleries/wwr/wwr04a-three-illicit.php.
UN General Assembly, 30th Session. 1975. “Resolution 3514: (Measures 
Against Corrupt Practices of Transnational and Other Corporations, Their 
Intermediaries and Others Involved)” December 15, 69–70 in Resolutions 
Adopted on the Reports of the Second Committee (A/RES/3514). New York.

132   E. KATZAROVA
US Congress House. Committee on International Economic Policy. 1975. The 
Activities of American Multinational Corporations Abroad: Hearing Before 
the Subcommittee on International Economic Policy of the Committee on 
International Relations. 94th Cong., 1st sess., June 5.
US Congress House. 1977. Unlawful Corporate Payments Act of 1977: Report to 
Accompany H.R. 3815 to September 28, 1977. 95th Cong., 1st sess. H. Doc. 
604.
US Senate. 1973. “Hearings before the Subcommittee on Multinational 
Corporations. The International Telephone and Telegraph Company and 
Chile 1970–1971.” Part I, March 20–April 2. Accessed September 1, 2018. 
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015003294462;view=1up;
seq=1.
US Senate. Committee on Finance. 1975. S.Res.265. A Resolution to Protect the 
Ability of the United States to Trade Abroad: Hearing Before the Subcommittee 
on International Trade of the Committee on Finance. 94th Cong., 1st sess., 
October 6.

133
In the 1980s, a counterrevolution that re-configured the relationship 
between state and market took place. The history of neoliberalism as 
a technical fix would stress the role of stagflation in the 1970s and the 
emergence of monetarism as a functional correction to the presumed 
failure of Keynesianism. As Stedman Jones (2014) argues, this might 
have been the case with monetarist policies, but adopting the doctrine 
of unfettered markets was a little more perplexing. The idea that the free 
market provides the best mechanism for allocating resources, of course, 
delegitimized the role of the state as defender of the public interest 
against the excesses of global corporate profit maximization. In fact, the 
neoliberal turn of the 1980s stressed the role of the state in construct-
ing the right framework for business to operate, as the main objective of 
governance.
The anti-corruption debates in international organizations are perhaps 
not unrelated to these processes. The 1990s witnessed the transforma-
tion of anti-corruption debates from ‘bad business’ to ‘bad government’ 
(Jakobi 2013, 243). The objectives of regulating multinationals interna-
tionally and preventing the corruption of the public interest appeared to 
be relics of the past. If in the 1970s anti-corruption debates were domi-
nated by the problem of corporations as political agents, in the 1990s the 
role of the state as economic agent came center stage. The Global South 
lost its strategic importance with the end of the Cold War, but also 
much changed with the Third-World foreign debt crisis, which became 
CHAPTER 6
The Road to the New Orthodoxy
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_6

134   E. KATZAROVA
apparent by the early 1980s. The set of structural adjustment programs 
imposed on debtor countries was starting to work its magic in convert-
ing the Global South to neoliberalism. Yet, the UN venues dominated by 
developing countries, such as the UNCTAD, the G77 and the UNCTC, 
continued to argue for regulatory activism in the developing world.
The US-sponsored issue of bribery was now re-introduced as a prob-
lem of corruption in the developing world. The formal appeal by the 
US delegation to the OECD to revisit the issue of illicit payments took 
place in the first months of 1989, before the formal end of the Cold War. 
Yet, the US drive to convince other major competitors from the Global 
North to ban transnational bribery could not have but intensified with 
the prospect of new markets opening up in the East.
Talks at the OECD After 1989: The Positions  
of Member States
The re-launch of formal claims to address corruption or bribery as a 
global problem was made by the US delegation at the OECD during a 
Special Session of the Executive Committee, held on February 28 and 
March 1, 1989. The US proposed a feasibility study, or an ‘inventory of 
relevant legislation’ on illicit payments to be completed through a ques-
tionnaire, distributed to member states (C(89)49, 1). The US delega-
tion insisted that further work be carried out by an ad hoc committee, 
with a small group of legal experts from member states (to be agreed by 
the OECD Council). The US proposal emphasized the need for an ad 
hoc group because the issue did not allegedly fit neatly into the stand-
ing committees (such as the International Investment and Multinational 
Enterprises) and also would have interfered with the work and finan-
cial resources of other committees since it needed special (mostly legal) 
expertise.1 As Spector and Kitsuse (2009) observe, the tactic of estab-
lishing an ad hoc group allows for the institutional independence of dis-
cussions of the problem and is therefore more conducive to reaching a 
successful outcome.
1 The proposal stated that illicit payments constitute a ‘broad but discrete subject’ and this 
is why it demanded special attention. The US delegation also suggested that legal expertise 
is of primary importance in this case: ‘We would anticipate that the necessary experts – pri-
mary legal experts – would come largely from capitals and would have different sorts of 
expertise from the officials who attend meetings of the standing committees’ (C(89)49, 2).

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   135
The US proposal provided a succinct background report on the FCPA 
and the consequences of the 1988 Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness 
Act. It also briefly touched on concerns about jurisdictional reach and 
the contested definition of the problem. The proposal urged swift action 
and the adoption of a binding treaty that would administer civil and 
criminal penalties on transgressors from the OECD member states.2 The 
document clarified, however, that such practices were not the sole pre-
rogative of OECD nations:
Bribery is a problem for many countries, not just those of the OECD. 
But as the U.S. Congress recognized, the OECD has a long history of 
setting an example for others. In our view, this organization is well suited 
to examine this problem. OECD members have a common interest in 
showing they are committed to ethical business practices abroad by their 
nationals. Moreover, the OECD has the experience and the facilities to 
serve as a forum for the negotiation of an agreement on illicit payments. 
(C(89)49, 2)
The US appeal for action was not limited to developed nations and 
sought to universalize the significance of a future OECD agreement on 
illicit payments. In fact, US claims concentrated on developing nations 
as the beneficiaries of such reforms. Economic development in the Third 
World and economic efficiency for industrialized nations smoothly coa-
lesced in US claims. The universalization of the claims served three pri-
mary purposes. First, it was a continuation of the strategy of building 
consensus among developed nations and exporting it to other organiza-
tions with a wider membership base. Second, it helped make the claims 
less controversial because it presented bribery as a problem of efficiency 
for both developed and developing nations; for the developed nations, it 
was imposing undue costs, and for the developing nations, it was causing 
political instability and was hindering development. Third, the United 
2 The US proposal envisioned a binding international treaty that would harmonize inter-
national legal provisions in accordance with the US law: ‘The goal of an international 
agreement would be to ensure that individuals and enterprises in OECD member states 
are subject to comparable national legal standards governing bribery in conducting interna-
tional commercial transactions. The central element of such agreement would be a binding 
obligation by members to enact appropriate civil, administrative and criminal penalties to 
punish their nationals and corporations who commit bribery in connection with such trans-
actions’ (C(89)49, 2).

136   E. KATZAROVA
needed to universalize the claims and to reach a degree of consensus and 
a global legitimization of the issue because of the transnational nature of 
corrupt transactions. Without the cooperation of developing nations for 
information exchange, even a convention targeting only OECD mem-
bers would not have been implementable.
As we saw in the previous chapter, the United States wanted to take 
a firm stance against corrupt practices internationally in the 1970s, but 
failed to convince developing nations in the UN that they had a stake 
in fighting corrupt payments understood as bribery. Bringing develop-
ing nations on board with a broad mandate to address corrupt practices 
internationally was still needed in the 1990s. Furthermore, presenting the 
question as a development prerogative was deflecting controversial claims. 
Playing the development card in an organization with membership from 
only developed states became a basic strategy in the pre-negotiation talks:
The issue of illicit payments also is relevant to the OECD’s overall con-
cern for the developing world. This organization has long recognized the 
importance of maintaining a corruption-free environment for international 
commerce. The use of bribery in international commerce not only poses 
ethical problems, it also hinders the development of international com-
merce by adding undue transaction costs and restricting the operation of 
free and open markets. The United States believes that an international 
agreement would serve the purpose of eliminating so far as possible brib-
ery and other payments that are both illegal and costly to enterprises and 
that are disruptive to political stability and sound economic development 
in developing countries. (C(89)152, 17)
The Council approved the US proposal (already backed by the 
Secretary-General). A group of experts was formed, which consulted 
for the first time on a draft questionnaire to be distributed to member 
states on June 15, 1989, and returned to the Secretariat by October 
31, 1989. The preliminary definition of illicit payments was: ‘payments 
or other benefits offered or paid with a view to facilitate commer-
cial transactions.’ The question of the political impact of such transac-
tions was dropped altogether, and it was assumed that corporations 
make such payments with strictly commercial purpose. The question-
naire probed national and transnational bribery legislation as well as 
issues pertaining to extraterritorial jurisdiction and the tax deductibil-
ity of bribes (C(89)49, 22). After the completion of the study in June 
1990, the Secretary-General produced a Note about illicit (corrupt)  

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   137
payments in international commercial transactions. This report set the 
framework for discussion in the following years and also put the prob-
lem into comparative and historical perspectives. The study of what were 
the main factors that caused the failure of the previous talks in the UN 
and the OECD guaranteed institutional continuity and also pinpointed 
the most controversial issues that could interfere with the progress in 
the current talks. The main obstacles were judged to be of a legal and 
political nature. Referring to previous international attempts at abolish-
ing such practices and in particular the attempt to draft a convention 
to criminalize corrupt payments, the report stated that in terms of legal 
obstacles:
No other general international convention had made criminals of corpo-
rations, and this novelty created some of the problems that arose in the 
course of the negotiations[…] Difficulties of a legal nature were mostly 
in connection with the issue of territorial jurisdiction. As illicit payments 
involve activities in several states, effective control would involve concur-
rent action in these states. As is shown above this was not in accordance 
with most countries criminal statues against bribery, which generally seek 
to protect mainly the integrity of their own national officials. Jurisdiction 
over acts committed abroad is asserted only exceptionally. (C(90)87, 5)
Corporate criminal liability and extraterritorial application of national 
laws were designated as the two issues of primary concern in the past 
and would prove to be problematic in future OECD talks on the sub-
ject as well. The Secretary’s Note examined the principal unresolved legal 
aspects of addressing corrupt payments at the UN, which were: the issue 
of extraterritoriality and the publication of payments. However, pending 
issues of political nature were judged to be: references to ‘illegal minority 
regimes in Southern Africa’ and the entanglement of the issue of cor-
rupt payments with the negotiation of a binding Code of Conduct for 
Multinational Enterprises.
Political problems also appeared. An article concerning the prohibi-
tion of making royalty or tax payments to the ‘illegal minority regimes in 
Southern Africa,’ firmly supported by the G77, was opposed by OECD 
countries. Also, throughout the negotiations, the G77, insisted that 
corrupt practices involving transnational corporations should only be 
regulated within the context of the ‘Code of Conduct of transnational cor-
porations.’ This led to a deadlock. (C(90)87, 33)

138   E. KATZAROVA
As it was already discussed in Chapter 4, both issues were indicative of 
the different understanding that developing nations had of corrupt prac-
tices. Expanding the definition of corrupt practices to include other pay-
ments with political impact is reflected in the issue of tax payments to the 
apartheid regime: ‘The article concerning the prohibition from making 
royalty or tax (p)ayments to the ‘illegal minority regimes’ in Southern 
Africa was firmly supported by the G77 and especially by Uganda, 
Venezuela and Argentina. OECD countries constantly opposed this arti-
cle’ (C(90)87 Annex 2, 41). Even more importantly, developing nations 
insisted on the issue of bribery, which was introduced by the United 
States to be regulated within the Code of Conduct because a broader 
regulatory effort was deemed necessary to counteract what can some-
times be a corruptive influence of multinationals on politics and national 
development objectives.
Examining the reasons for the deadlock, the report pointed out one 
striking element of the opposition between developing and developed 
nations: ‘In fact, few developing countries demonstrated interest in the 
issue, which they perceived as of special concern to some industrialized 
counties’ (C(90)87 Annex 2, 41). The puzzle as to why the develop-
ing nations did not show particular concern for the problem narrowly 
defined as bribery can be approached in a number of ways. Elites of 
developing nations could have shown lack of interest in addressing the 
problem of transnational bribery, in which they were in fact implicated, 
and their disinterest constituted a disingenuous attempt to continue said 
corrupt practices uninhibited. As the discussions at the UN had previ-
ously revealed, however, developing nations did not show particular 
concern for bribery per se, but lodged claims that there was a more fun-
damental problem with the influence that Western investment interests 
and state-sponsored corporate bribery had over their political processes. 
They demanded that the question of corrupt payments be examined 
within the broader context of setting different terms of global trade, a 
strategy that was opposed by developed nations and in particular the 
United States.
The OECD members were meant to put a common front at the UN, 
but the significance of the question of transnational bribery did not have 
unequivocal support within the group. Nevertheless, in 1979 a decision 
was reached to sign an OECD agreement in case the UN talks faltered:

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   139
Upon the request of the United States, consultations were held among 
OECD countries in Paris from 31st May to 2nd June 1978 with a view to 
harmonising these countries positions in the UN Committee. In spite of 
the efforts made mainly by the US delegation, no consensus was reached 
on a common declaration setting forth the basic elements of a treaty on 
illicit payments and proposing to convene a conference of plenipoten-
tiaries in 1979 to conclude that treaty. In the 1980 Venise [sic] Summit 
Communiqué, however, the attending governments committed themselves 
to the ongoing UN effort and pledged, in the event that initiatives fal-
tered, to conclude an agreement among themselves with the same objec-
tive. (C(90)87 Annex 2, 37)
The G7 Summit took place from June 22 to 23, 1980, in Venice, Italy, 
and considered the question of illicit payments as part of its trade agenda 
and the final communiqué made the political commitment that the G7 
members would pursue the question further:
As a further step in strengthening the international trading system, we 
commit our governments to work in the United Nations toward an agree-
ment to prohibit illicit payments to foreign government officials in interna-
tional business transactions. If that effort falters, we will seek to conclude 
an agreement among our countries, but open to all, with the same objec-
tive. (Venice G7 Summit Communiqué VI: 3)
This political commitment, however, did not prove to be stable. The 
United States appeared as the only state actor with a strong interest 
in addressing the question of illicit payments. The choice to tackle 
the problem unilaterally with the adoption of the FCPA, and with-
out consultation with other negotiating partners, further compli-
cated the matter and alienated the hesitant partners in the developed 
world. The adoption of the FCPA was viewed unfavorably by other 
OECD members, despite the fact that it put their multinational cor-
porations at a competitive advantage, because it showed that the 
US government was unilaterally making decisions about addressing 
the corrupt payments problem, decisions that it was later intending 
to impose on other countries. As Pieth (1999) explained, the other 
partners were suspicious of a hegemonic trade agenda, so despite the 
impasse at the UN, OECD members did not pursue the issue any 
further:

140   E. KATZAROVA
The draft agreement was not finalized because of divergences between 
participants. In addition to the draft agreement, the Economic and Social 
Council formulated two draft resolutions on the subject and decided to 
transmit them to the General Assembly. The General Assembly agreed in 
1979 to take no decision on them at that time. No further action has been 
taken since. (C(90)87 Annex 2, 37)
The talks in the 1990s reopened in the shadow of the impasse from the 
1970s, but also as an outstanding issue to be resolved by OECD mem-
bers. By stressing that the issue of corrupt practices was awaiting settle-
ment for over a decade, in 1990 the Reports of the Secretary-General 
reopened the debate as an unresolved issue in need of settlement. The 
Recommendations to the Council suggested a wide mandate and two 
possible courses of action. The first was in accordance with the US pro-
posal to pursue an international solution through the negotiation of a 
treaty, and the second was a softer approach of fortifying the already 
existing national legislation and supplementing it with a set of voluntary 
guidelines, such as a revised version of the Guidelines on Multinational 
Enterprises. Furthermore, the US proposal for the creation of an ad hoc 
group to tackle the issue was countered by the option of CIME taking 
on the mandate, as it did in 1975. The Secretary-General Note con-
cluded that:
The problem of prohibited practices, otherwise called corrupt practices, 
including payments, bribery, extortion and other similar practices, is a uni-
versal phenomenon with deep roots and a long history. It poses serious 
political, economic, social, legal, and moral challenges. With the develop-
ment of international exchanges, instances of corruption have resurfaced 
in a dramatic manner, causing serious embarrassment and attracting wide-
spread concern. (C(90)87 Annex 2, 36)
At this preliminary stage of discussion, three primary concerns devel-
oped as justification for a course of action at the international level. The 
first was a concern for developing nations, which had failed to under-
stand their stake in agreeing to accept the so-defined problem of corrupt 
payments. The second was a preoccupation with economic efficiency and 
the financial losses that bribery, in particular, was incurring on the global 
economy. The third was about publicity and the ‘embarrassment’ factor 
pertaining not to the actual harm corrupt payments were causing, but to 
how revelations of their existence were causing international outrage.

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   141
During the early stages of discussions, however, OECD member 
states remained unconvinced of the seriousness the US delegation was 
attaching to the issue of bribery. As Mark Pieth, who was to become the 
Chairman of the OECD Working Group on Bribery in International 
Business Transactions, stated: ‘the reactions of other OECD members 
were at best reserved’ (1997, 119). After the Council in March 1989, 
the US representative forcefully re-established the US interest in the sub-
ject during the Council Session on May 21, 1990, referring to his gov-
ernment’s plan to ‘approach capitals to reiterate its interest in the matter’ 
(C/M(90)13(Prov.)). The US representative claimed that ‘increased 
awareness’ or ‘consciousness’ of the problem of corrupt payments in the 
developing world is a signal that OECD members should do whatever is 
in their power to curb bribery in international business transactions:
The United States believed that OECD governments had a common inter-
est in seeing that business entities based in OECD countries avoided illicit 
payments, for reasons that were well known: trade problems and persis-
tent problems in foreign relations emerged when such payments came 
to light. Mr. Lamb thought that there was increasing consciousness of 
the problem of corruption in economic development in the third world, 
and that whatever could be done to eliminate illicit payments could help 
countries address at least part of the problem of corruption of which all 
were perhaps more aware today and more willing to address openly. 
(C/M(90)13(Prov.), 6)
The US representative, Denis Lamb, was tactfully presenting the 
problem of corrupt payments as damaging for developing countries, 
evading in this way potentially controversial discussions about the 
involvement of OECD members in such practices. At the same time, 
the absence of developing nations at an international forum such as the 
OECD appeared to be a fortunate condition for addressing the issue 
properly as it could have obliterated many of the hindrances encoun-
tered at the UN:
The United States recognized that dealing with illicit payments on an 
international basis was not easy, as had been amply demonstrated by the 
lack of progress in the United Nations. Nevertheless western governments 
had made progress in recent years in attacking controversial problems such 
as money laundering, and they would urge the OECD to set a comparable 
example in addressing illicit payments. (7)

142   E. KATZAROVA
The United States considered the OECD to be the most appropriate 
forum for tackling this ‘generally acknowledged problem’ and recogniz-
ing the resistance of some delegations, agreed to a broad mandate but 
insisted on the establishment of an ad hoc group. The Canadian delega-
tion provided vague agreement, without commitment to the outcome, 
and was specifically against the issue as an extraterritorial offense. Canada 
also preferred future work to be carried out within CIME rather than 
an ad hoc group. The representative of Switzerland was skeptical of the 
feasibility of a legally binding agreement and the UK delegation saw no 
merit in further work on the subject altogether. The UK argumenta-
tion was that national laws were adequate and domestic legislation could 
remedy the insufficiencies. Insurmountable issues with extraterritorial 
application of laws and double jeopardy were coupled with the demand 
for additional resources that could be put toward more urgent mat-
ters. According to the UK delegation even if action on the international 
scale was agreed on, the rules could not be effectively applied domesti-
cally. The UK position was backed by Germany with some unspecified 
reservations.
Spain, the Netherlands and Turkey were in favor of a UN treaty. 
The Netherlands in particular showed a strong preference for a uni-
versal treaty and raised the issue at the UN at the end of 1989.3 Spain, 
Australia, Greece, Denmark, New Zealand, Belgium, Italy, Sweden, the 
Netherlands and Japan also favored CIME as the future forum for work 
on illicit payments. Only the Austrian and Finnish delegations showed 
explicit support for an ad hoc group, but Austria had a problem with 
the extraterritorial application of national laws. Iceland, while generally 
supportive, demanded further clarification on the definition of ‘illicit 
payments’ ‘or what exactly – among a multitude of business practices 
constituted an illicit payment’ (C/M(90)13(Prov.), 12). The delegations 
of Greece, Belgium, Sweden and Norway were more supportive of the 
US proposal, while Australia, Luxembourg and Ireland demonstrated 
skepticism over the proposed endeavor. The Greek delegation in particu-
lar claimed that illicit payments and illicit receipts were part of the game 
in international economic relations, but such practices undermined inter-
national competition. The Irish position was skeptical but: ‘That was not 
to say that the Irish authorities did not recognize that there was a very 
serious problem’ (11). The problem, however, remained national and the 
3 Attention to this process is given in the following UN section.

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   143
extraterritoriality inherent to the US international solution was consid-
ered inappropriate:
The problem of extraterritoriality was one which was not confined to 
this particular issue: the difficulties which had occurred in a number 
of other aspects of international law were well known, when countries 
tried to solve a problem which essentially was one which should first be 
dealt with at home by reaching out into the legal systems of other coun-
tries. The question of illicit payments, Mr. O’Sullivan thought, was a 
field that would prove to be immensely complex and difficult to tackle. 
(C/M(90)13(Prov.), 11)
While the governments of the French and Italian delegations had not yet 
finalized their positions, the Italian delegation was principally opposed to 
extraterritoriality and requested information about the reaction of the US 
Congress to the OECD discussions so far, as well as more information on 
the overall US strategy. The US delegation’s response was that members of 
Congress were very invested in the issue and reasonably satisfied by OECD 
developments. However, a conclusive decision had not been made about 
the feasibility of an international agreement or what kind of action the 
organization and its members intended to take. In light of the expressed 
opinions, the Chairman of the OECD Council was hesitant about the pros-
pects of success and ‘whether something could be done and if so, whether 
it would be better to envisage a binding or a non-binding instrument’ (13).
The United States faced a difficult task of persuading partners at the 
OECD that illicit payments, defined as bribery in international business 
transactions, was a matter of global concern. The US government had 
maneuvered itself into competitive disadvantage and despite the lax imple-
mentation of the FCPA, American businesses were facing more uncertainty 
with the expansion toward new markets after the fall of the iron curtain in 
1989, a problem of competitiveness that the Omnibus Act was trying to 
remedy. The US President had made a commitment to submit a progress 
report on the work done on illicit payments by August 1991, but the reser-
vations that other OECD members had, as to how important was this issue, 
made progress incremental (DAFFE/IME/M/(91)1). The political clout 
of the United remained the most important factor for progress, but also 
the ability to ‘lock’ the issue in a working group guaranteed institutional 
continuity that ensured the problem would not be written off the agenda. 
Managing controversy became an essential task for the Working Group and 
aided the US delegation to ultimately forge consensus on corrupt payments.

144   E. KATZAROVA
The OECD Ad Hoc Working  
Group and Controversy Management
The role of the Working Group, under the auspices of CIME, was essen-
tial in foreseeing and managing controversies arising in the OECD 
Council. The Ad Hoc Group constituted not of independent experts, 
but of delegates from national capitals and was therefore similar to the 
constitution of the Council. The delegates were from Ministries of 
Justice and Finance, Ministries of the Economy, central banks, foreign 
investment departments, etc. The United States had the most dele-
gates (4)—from the SEC, the Department of Justice, the Department 
of State and the Permanent delegation to the OECD (DAFFE/IME/
PI(91)3). At least initially, the delegates did not strictly represent relative 
size of the states or financial contribution, but to some extent reflected 
the level of investment in the issue of illicit payments. The German and 
the UK delegations, which were both outspokenly opposed to addressing 
the issue, had just one delegate each from the Ministry of the Economy 
(Germany) and the Department of Trade and Industry (United 
Kingdom).
The selection of national, predominantly legal experts, with a broad 
competence, rather than independent anti-corruption consultants influ-
enced the content and direction of discussions. As Spector and Kitsuse 
(2009) note, the selection of the members of a working group is not 
a self-evident choice, but a political one. The selection of sociologists, 
economists or legal experts already tints the problem in the shade of the 
expertise that the delegates are expected to provide. The discussions in 
the Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, therefore, had a decisively legal 
character and concentrated on the problem of legal feasibility, leaving 
the decisions, as to the substance of the problem, to member states. This 
strategy helped the management of controversies arising from the dis-
cussion of the ethical, economic and political consequences of corrupt 
practices. At the same time, the question of legal feasibility became an 
intrinsic part of the process of definition and the measures taken against 
the issue. Further work in the framework of the OECD was judged 
dependent on the attainability of consensus and the practicability of 
the proposed solutions. This trend had an influence on the scope and 
definition of the offense with the boundaries of what constituted ‘illicit 
payment’ remaining fluid and fuzzy during the discussions. These devel-
opments are in line with the argument that practicability and feasibility 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   145
constitute an intrinsic part of the decision whether there is a ‘problem’ 
that demands a collective response (Spector and Kitsuse 2009). At the 
international level, matters of feasibility are further complicated by com-
peting claims that policy measures are better left to the discretion of 
individual nation states, and should not become the center of concerted 
global action. The national principle in the selection of experts for the 
ad hoc group increases the propensity to consider the problem to be a 
national prerogative rather than a subject for international measures.
Contact was initiated with consultants for a feasibility study to exam-
ine options for international cooperation on illicit payments (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)2, 4). The ad hoc group convened in June 1991 to discuss 
a Feasibility Study on Available International Means for Dealing with 
Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)1). It had to issue a report by the end of the year, which, 
after revision, would be sent to the Council as a CIME report (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)4, 5). The ad hoc group divided the options into five cat-
egories: (1) multilateral treaty, (2) bilateral agreements, (3) decision of 
the council, (4) national laws and (5) non-obligatory codes of conduct 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2).
First, the choice of a multinational convention, especially with an 
emphasis on criminalization, was pitched as the most effective measure for 
the prevention of illicit payments. The problem of reaching the ‘highest 
level of consensus’ associated with this measure, however, made this option 
difficult to achieve. The lack of a wide-reaching consensus at the UN in 
the 1970s was provided as a case in point. Second, the bilateral arrange-
ments had to ‘include agreements between OECD Member States and 
countries where public corruption appeared prevalent; agreements among 
OECD Member States on taxation issues and mutual judicial assistance; 
and agreements to implement, enforce, or fill gaps in other international 
instruments’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2). The third option in the form of an 
OECD Council Decision could have been adopted in combination with 
other measures and/or with the establishment of an international moni-
toring body or formal consultation process. The fourth option of revising 
national laws could have been done with a model law that would encour-
age reform of national laws or with a recommendation to ‘take appropriate 
measures’ and was a highly feasible option because it demanded a ‘lower 
level of consensus’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2, 3). Since the OECD and ICC 
had already issued guidelines on corrupt payments, reinforcing and endors-
ing those voluntary guidelines remained the last option.

146   E. KATZAROVA
Despite the fact that the definitional boundaries of the offense 
remained ambiguous and unspecified throughout the talks, the Ad Hoc 
Group claimed that consensus existed on the principle that bribery should 
not be taking place between enterprises and members of foreign govern-
ments. Singling the United States as the only state that had enacted leg-
islation against such transactions, the Group reaffirmed that the choice 
of the term ‘illicit payments’ also came from US legislative debates. 
However, consensus as to whether illicit payments were to be addressed 
internationally remained a challenge. Discussing the failure at the UN and 
the insufficient impact of the ICC Guidelines, the Report affirmed that:
The lack of success in finding an effective international solution to the 
illicit payments problem appears to reflect a lack of consensus on a fun-
damental point: is it appropriate and feasible to proscribe corrupt 
arrangements between private enterprises and the public officials of other 
sovereign states? The United States has long urged that the answer to this 
question should be affirmative, so long as a recognized basis exists for 
exercising prescriptive jurisdiction. Other nations, however, have repeat-
edly urged that efforts to police another state’s governmental processes 
would constitute an impermissible assertion of “extraterritorial” jurisdic-
tion or, at least, officious and self-righteous intermeddling. (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)2, 4)
This lack of consensus reflected a fundamental disagreement on whether 
the issue could and should be tackled through the transnational meas-
ures proposed by the United States. The question of feasibility became 
intertwined with the question of ‘globality’ because other OECD 
member states disagreed with the claim that illicit payments, defined as 
bribes, should be tackled outside the borders of nation states and saw the 
problem as a national one. How the anti-corruption initiative would be 
received beyond the OECD area was another area of contestation. While 
previous efforts to tackle bribery were met with the opposition of non-
OECD members, the ad hoc group claimed that the tide had turned for 
developing nations, which had come to appreciate the deleterious effect 
that corruption had on their social and economical systems and were less 
likely to oppose an OECD initiative, like they did in the 1970s: ‘they 
(developing nations) may, as a group feel less aggrieved by a joint effort 
of the OECD Member States to prevent illicit payments in international 
commercial transactions’ (5). This position was already taking into con-
sideration the recent UN Economic and Social Council Official Records 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   147
Decision 111/104 which recommended ‘that all nations take appro-
priate means in combating corruption of public officials,’ as well as the 
proceedings of the International Seminar on Corruption in Government, 
which took place in The Hague (11–15 December 1989, 3–19).
The Ad Hoc Group’s Report is indicative of the importance of fea-
sibility in the construction of social problems. This feasibility works on 
two levels. The first level is administrative, and it pertains to the effec-
tiveness that the proposed measure would have in terms of compliance 
and presumed efficacy in ameliorating the condition.4 The second is 
political feasibility, and it pertains to the likelihood of reaching a final 
agreement. The interplay between what is feasible in terms of political 
consensus and what is effective in terms of addressing a putative con-
dition becomes part of the makeup of the problem and the proposed 
solutions:
In considering the options presented in this Discussion Paper, it is impor-
tant to evaluate not only their intrinsic merits but also the extent of con-
sensus likely to support them. In the past, there has been no consensus 
favoring strong international action to prevent illicit payments. An over-
riding issue is the extent to which such a consensus has now – or can be – 
developed. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 5–6)
The feasibility of reaching an agreement on the need for international 
action became an intrinsic part of the development of the putative con-
dition into a global problem. Consensus on the severity of the condi-
tion, what it was, and what was the proper mode to handle it, was at 
the center of such debates. Different states or group of states had a 
diverging understanding of ‘what is wrong’ and what the best mode of 
handling the alleged problem was. The understanding of problems as 
natural conditions has created a success bias, which naturalizes the final 
definition of a putative condition, forsaking the divergent interpreta-
tions of the problem prior to institutionalization. The lack of consensus 
on illicit payments in the UN reflected a divergence in understand-
ing what was problematic with the putative condition (which could  
4 As noted, the content and definition of the actual problem remained unspecified with 
the US definition of bribery being continuously challenged from other member states at 
the UN, the OECD and OAS. The preliminary documents made reference to broadly 
defined ‘illicit payments’.

148   E. KATZAROVA
most broadly be defined as illicit interaction between public and private 
actors). This lack of consensus worked at different levels:
Three draft UN Conventions failed to reach fruition because of a lack of 
consensus (1) between the developed and developing countries and (2) 
among the developed countries themselves. The lack of consensus between 
developed and developing countries is unlikely to reoccur (at least in 
the same form) in negotiating a multilateral convention among OECD 
Member States. The lack of consensus that emerged among the devel-
oped countries, however, is potentially more significant. Indeed, based on 
a review of the ECOSOC deliberations, one commentator has concluded 
that ‘the bulk of the important struggle over the proposed convention has 
been between the United States on the one hand and the other OECD 
nations on the other. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 9)5
Because of the institutional continuity, the impact of the failed talks 
was weighing heavily on the new ones. The OECD work program also 
showed that in addition to taking into consideration previous efforts, 
international organizations may go to great lengths not to duplicate 
efforts by other international organizations on the same topic. The 
OECD talks in the 1970s were put on hold because the main forum for 
discussion had become the UN, and any further work at the OECD was 
made conditional on forging consensus at the UN. This development 
suggests that, as the US strategy stated, consensus is indeed ‘transfer-
able,’ but also that the main institutional setting for the talks matters. 
The rationale behind the choice of venue in transnational litigation, also 
known as forum shopping (Bell 2003), was very much part of the choice 
of the OECD by the United States. The OECD provided favorable 
conditions because an agreement between its members to put a stop to 
transnational corrupt payments perpetuated by their corporations would 
have been easier than establishing consensus at the UN. As the Report 
of the Ad Hoc Group argued, the lack of consensus between the Global 
South and North would not be repeated in the same form. This was 
apparent for negotiations at the OECD where developing nations were 
not present; it also implied that the UN would not become the primary 
5 The reference was to a study published by Seymour in 1980 (Seymour, Bruce Illicit 
Payments in International Business: National Legislation). It is noteworthy that the studies 
made by Seymour (consisting mostly of the history of the pre-negotiation process in the 
UN) were the only broadly cited academic scholarship in the Group’s Report.

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   149
forum for discussion. However, even if the OECD was to remain the 
central forum for work on illicit payments, the lack of consensus between 
the developed nations could be a serious hindrance.
In the 1990s, the United States was still isolated in its concern for 
bribery or illicit payments. This isolation raises the question as to why 
other developed nations appeared so blasé about said practices. Was the 
United States the beacon of moral fiber in international business? A more 
functional explanation would be that while in 1975, the United States 
had a problem with illicit payments, after 1977 it had a problem with the 
FCPA. The issue of bribery of foreign officials became a problem for the 
United States in its national legislative order, and in this sense, the prob-
lem of corrupt practices was a ‘private trouble,’ which the US executive 
was trying to turn into a global concern. This was applicable to an even 
greater extent after the re-launch of global claims in 1989, when the 
explicit mandate of the US executive was to internationalize the FCPA, 
particularly among developed nations. For other OECD states said prac-
tices did not become problematic, and therefore, it was the task of the 
United States to break this relative isolation and convince the other 
OECD member states to take the issue seriously.
The failed UN model of US action post-1977 provided one alterna-
tive for future work at the OECD:
The draft UN illicit payments agreement provides one model for a multilat-
eral convention among OECD Member States addressing the illicit payments 
problem. The U.N. approach was to draft a comprehensive criminalization 
convention designed to incorporate all mechanisms available to deter illicit 
payments in international transactions and to punish anyone engaging in 
corrupt practices. Effectively, it would have incorporated the U.S. Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act, together with a number of additional enforcement 
mechanisms into international law. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2, 11)
As noted earlier, after the adoption of the FCPA in 1977, it was even 
more difficult for the United States, to convince its partners not only of 
the definition of illicit payments as bribery, but also of the adoption of 
a criminalization approach, which due to the extraterritorial character of 
the measure would allow the United States to police its application. On 
the one hand, this was because other OECD nations had an incentive to 
be free riders and not adopt the legislation that was imposing restrictions 
on US business. On the other hand, however, the adoption of the FCPA 

150   E. KATZAROVA
in the midst of talks at the UN and the OECD in the late 1970s showed 
that the US government was going ahead unilaterally with a widely con-
tested issue and trying to impose the same definitions and solutions on 
other states. In fact, the problem that the United States had in the 1990s 
had more to do with the FCPA itself, rather than the corrupt practices 
per se. Nothing short of a multilateral convention criminalizing trans-
national bribery would have been a satisfactory outcome for the United 
States. Adopting a criminalization approach for other OECD members 
was the major objective. From the US perspective, the work of the Ad 
Hoc Group was important in steering the discussion toward the direc-
tion of a multilateral option or in case this was unfeasible, to direct atten-
tion to preliminary steps that would secure a basic level of consensus that 
would later be used as a basis for a multilateral legally binding agreement.
The discussion of the ‘sub-options’ of a criminalization convention 
involved a choice of remedies, and the advantages and disadvantages of 
the multilateral option were evaluated in terms of benefits and costs, a 
common model for US documents on the subject of illicit payments. 
The benefits of a multilateral convention would have been to prevent 
illicit payments more effectively, to level the playing field and cut unnec-
essary costs for business. In addition, the pros of a multilateral conven-
tion were deemed to be the binding nature of the agreement, uniform 
application and efficient enforcement mechanisms. The cons of the 
multilateral approach were that it was not flexible, it demanded a high 
level of consensus and it was difficult to change once adopted (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)2/REV1). The major costs of a multilateral convention 
would have been its inherent inflexibility and the prospect of future 
amendments:
If the definition of “illicit payment” or a particular enforcement mecha-
nism created unforeseen problems for one or more parties, they would 
have to persuade the other parties to agree to a change. As the recent 
amendment of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act demonstrates, the 
definition and control of illicit payments can well require change in light of 
experience. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 14)
Even more relevant were the ‘extrinsic problems’ and the trade-off 
between effectiveness and feasibility. An agreement achieved at the 
expense of reservations would have been one likely outcome of a binding 
treaty that in any case would have been a multiannual project. The high 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   151
degree of consensus that the adoption of a multilateral treaty required 
could have led to failure to pursue the issue further in any form as it had 
happened in the UN:
As the experience of the draft UN convention shows, there may well be no 
consensus even among the OECD Member States on important elements 
of a criminalization convention. At worst, lack of consensus could result in 
failure to agree on any text to recommend for signature. Alternatively, lack 
of consensus might lead to agreement among only a subset of Member 
States which, for competitive reasons, might ultimately refuse to proceed 
on their own. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2, 5)
Characteristically, the feasibility of reaching consensus on addressing the 
problem became part of the discussion whether it was desirable to tackle 
the issue multilaterally: ‘the most important consideration in determin-
ing whether to pursue a multilateral convention on illicit payments is 
the likelihood of success. For agreement to be reached, a broad political 
consensus must exist among Member States’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/
REV1, 15). The consensus was to go ‘beyond agreement that illicit pay-
ments are reprehensible’ and extend to the questions of extraterritorial 
jurisdiction and the proper measure to address illicit payments (15). 
Later, the development of a matrix presenting the controversies that 
may arise in pursuing an international agenda became the centerpiece of 
preliminary discussions. The reports reveal the extent to which the pro-
posed solutions became part of the discussions about whether to address 
the condition. Feasibility, rather than an inquiry into the severity of the 
condition or its negative global impact, became the center of discussions 
in the Working Group. The following matrix was developed and revised 
multiple times in order to foresee any sources of controversy within the 
OECD member group (Table 6.1).
Controversies pertaining to the definition of corrupt practices beyond 
bribery were one source of difficulty. The US delegation insisted on a 
definition of corrupt payments as bribery, while the majority of OECD 
Members challenged this limitation. The question of corporate criminal 
liability was also deemed central. Other potentially controversial topics 
were questions about private agents as recipients, and the use of interme-
diaries, as well as government involvement in cases when official approval 
was needed for commercial transactions. The question of monitoring 
corporations was also deemed highly controversial, as it raised fears of 

152   E. KATZAROVA
Table 6.1  Issue controversy
Issue
Controversy
Comments
Definition of offense as 
bribery
No
Has to be illegal under national jurisdiction
Definition including 
other illicit payments
Yes
Problems in adopting a definition beyond 
traditional bribery
Type of transaction—
sale to governments
No
Type of transaction—
sales in need of govern-
ment approval
Yes
Purpose of payment
Yes
‘Market conditioning’ and other payments 
would become controversial
Public agents as 
recipients
No
Private agents as 
recipients
Yes/No
Payments to private agents would be contro-
versial, but will probably not be discussed as 
an option
Corporate payers
Yes
Criminal liability for corporations would be 
very controversial
Intermediaries
Yes
Payments through intermediaries would lead 
to controversy
Secondary offenses
Yes
It would be in conflict with the legislation 
of a number of MS to include conspiracy 
and other secondary offenses (in the case of 
criminalization)
Actions at the national level
Criminalization of illicit 
payments
Yes
Tax deductibility
Yes/No
The degree to which the issue of tax deduct-
ibility would be controversial depends on the 
definition of the offense
Disclosure and keeping 
records
Yes
A disclosure approach could become as 
controversial as criminalization depending 
on offense definition
Conditioning public 
actions
Yes
Similar considerations to disclosure
Civil measures
Yes
Caused problems at the UN
Territorial Jurisdiction
Yes
Very controversial in UN draft. A solution 
might be to define the offense so that it 
demands adequate territorial nexus
International measures
Information exchange
No/Yes
(continued)

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   153
too much government involvement in the economy. A dispute resolution 
tribunal and securing compliance with the multilateral convention would 
have posed significant challenges. An opening through which to address 
the illicit payments indirectly came from the subject of tax deductibility 
of bribes, on which consensus appeared possible.
The draft matrix prepared by the Ad Hoc Group is revealing of the 
element of feasibility that is intrinsic to the construction of social prob-
lems, according to Spector and Kitsuse (2009). The matrix was reg-
ularly updated and became central to evaluating the trade-off between 
the administrative and political aspects of feasibility. Based on the matrix, 
the choice of convention appeared unfeasible according to the working 
group. The assumed unfeasibility of reaching a degree of consensus nec-
essary for the adoption of a binding multilateral instrument was judged 
more important than the fact that a multilateral treaty would have been 
arguably the most effective measure against corrupt practices. Other 
measures that demanded a lesser degree of international consensus were 
therefore deemed necessary. Bilateral agreements came as a ‘second best’ 
alternative to a multinational treaty:
Unlike multilateral conventions, which seek to create a multinational 
web of identical legal rules, bilateral agreements generally focus on mat-
ters of reciprocal interest between the two contracting states.6 To assist its 
investigation of allegations that Lockheed Aircraft Corporation had made 
6 Prolific examples existed in the field of investment and double taxation, but it was unu-
sual for such instruments to be used for criminalization of some forms of transnational 
behavior.
Table 6.1  (continued)
Issue
Controversy
Comments
Mutual (administrative, 
civil, criminal) assistance
No
Extradition
Yes/No
Extradition instruments already exist and the 
principle is not controversial
Monitoring MS
No
Monitoring corporations Yes
Entails delegation of sovereignty
Dispute resolution
Yes
Controversial at UN and ICC
Adapted 
from: 
DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/ANN, 
DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 
DAFFE/IME/
PI(91)7/ANN1

154   E. KATZAROVA
illicit payments, the United States negotiated a series of ad hoc bilateral 
assistance arrangements in the 1970s. A series of much broader bilateral 
treaties followed, providing the assistance in locating witnesses, obtain-
ing witness testimony, production and authentication of business records, 
and service of judicial and administrative documents in criminal matters. 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(91)7/ANN1, 4)
Four secondary options to bilateral agreements with host countries 
(defined as countries where corruption was ‘prevalent’) were developed. 
These bilateral agreements would have resolved the question of extra-
territoriality, but were deemed politically unfeasible because the host 
country would have to implicitly admit the existence of endemic corrup-
tion on its territory. Therefore, it was judged that excluding developing 
nations and enacting a ‘network of such bilateral undertakings among 
OECD Members (or a multilateral convention to that effect) might pro-
vide useful political cover for non-OECD countries to enter into such 
agreements’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)7/ANN1, 17). This formulation 
implied that such agreements between OECD members would otherwise 
be completely superfluous, despite the fact that after the Lockheed affair 
the bilateral agreements enacted were precisely between OECD member 
states. This redirection of focus from the developed to the developing 
world once again was strategically keeping controversy under control by 
presenting the problem as one peculiar to developing countries.
At the same time, the question of tax deductibility of bribes was one 
of central importance to US interests because it was creating an even 
more acute disadvantage for American business. Option 2 was dedicated 
to this aspect of bribery and concerned Bilateral Tax Agreements dedi-
cated to the treatment of the deductibility of illicit payments that could 
use the model OECD treaty on double taxation. Option 3 was Mutual 
Assistance Agreements (MOU) for the facilitation of current laws, but 
would have been helpful as a deterrent only in the United States. Finally, 
Option 4 constituted a combination of bilateral agreements with other 
measures such as a multilateral treaty or a voluntary code. The benefit 
of bilateral arrangements was that they were legally binding, yet could 
be easily adapted to specific needs (a MOU was even easier to negoti-
ate and adopt, but was non-binding). The cons of bilateral agreements 
in ‘non-host countries,’ however, were significant because: ‘Absent a 
parallel series of agreements making the same or similar rules applicable 
to all principal international competitors, non-host countries would be  

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   155
unlikely to agree bilaterally to prohibit their own nationals from compet-
ing for international business’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)7/ANN1, 18). The 
disadvantages of expanding the web of bilaterals, created with the initia-
tive of the United States after the Lockheed case, were deemed significant 
enough for this option to be deemed feasible but impractical. The third 
substantive option concerned an OECD Council Decision. This would 
have fallen under Art. 5(a) and 6 of the OECD Convention which enti-
tles the Council to issue decisions by consensus that are binding, but do 
not demand ratification and allow for reservations. An OECD Decision 
could come in the form of a recommendation, but it had not been used 
to criminalize private actions. The advantages of a Council Decision and 
relevant sub-options would have been that they are phrased generally and 
are coupled easily with other options, which can lead to incremental pro-
gress in the given area (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)7/ANN1, 2).
The prospect of incremental action was advantageous because it 
would have allowed for a low degree of consensus in order to adopt a 
Recommendation with general language, leaving significant discretionary 
power for member states. The disadvantage was that Decisions had not 
been used previously for such substantial changes, such as the criminali-
zation of private conduct. This option was, therefore, considered in com-
bination with strengthening national laws (fourth substantial option). 
The advantage of taking this combination was that a Council Decision 
would make it easier to reach international consensus. This route allowed 
for flexibility and possibly increased effectiveness, because a multilateral 
treaty might lead to the lowest common denominator. The disadvan-
tage was that legislation would remain ‘spotty’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)7/
ANN1, 23).
The last and fifth substantial option concerned Codes of Conduct and 
voluntary Guidelines. This option was already explored with the 1976 
OECD Guidelines, which included a reference to illicit payments. The 
ICC Guidelines, issued following the Shawcross Commission Report, 
‘Rules of Conduct to Combat Extortion and Bribery,’ also established a 
panel to monitor the application of said rules; but any study of infringe-
ment had to secure the agreement of the accused enterprise, and the pro-
cedures were to remain undisclosed. The UN Guidelines also constituted 
a precedent. The OECD Guidelines and the Shawcross Report both 
took less than 2 years to be concluded, but the UN Code of Conduct 
on Transnational Corporations took more than 15 years of talks and 
remained inconclusive. This raised questions about the trade-off between 

156   E. KATZAROVA
the velocity of adoption and the effectiveness of the measures. The 
advantages of the non-binding measures were that they were faster to 
negotiate and could provide good ground for further work. Experience 
showed low efficacy of such measures, however, except for the practice 
of courts to make use of the guidelines and treat them as international 
norms. Precedents existed with non-binding instruments on mon-
ey-laundering. To the extent that such guidelines were already enacted 
and seemed to be of little consequence, this option was also considered 
feasible, but unlikely to be effective.
The talks on corrupt payments at the OECD in the period 1989–
1994 were to a large extent dominated by the impasse of the 1970s. 
Managing controversy and deciding on the trade-off between effec-
tiveness and feasibility became the dominant goals of the pre-negotia-
tion talks in the early 1990s and the options for future work were each 
examined against these criteria. Unlike the 1970s, however, the OECD 
remained the primary venue for discussions on policy solutions to cor-
rupt practices with the UN retaining a subsidiary position.
Talks at the UN After 1980:  
Economic Crime and Good Management
After the US delegation raised the question of illicit payments at the 
OECD during the Special Session of the Executive Committee on 
February 28, 1989, another OECD member state found a less formal 
channel to re-launch the debates at the UN. The government of the 
Netherlands, which during the OECD Council meetings expressed a 
strong preference for a universal treaty, hosted an Interregional Seminar 
on Corruption in Government as a preparatory meeting for the 8th UN 
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. 
The Interregional Seminar took place on December 11–15, 1989, in 
The Hague, and was attended by officials from 18 developing countries 
and 8 developed countries as observers, as well as representatives from 
academia, NGOs and other independent anti-corruption organizations. 
The Seminar participants drafted an anti-corruption manual that was pre-
sented at the 8th Congress on crime prevention.
The UN Congresses on Prevention of Crime, which took place every 
five years, had continuously discussed the topic of corruption since the 
1970s. The perspective on corruption was different, however, with what 
was seen as sophisticated new forms of economic crime being at the 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   157
center of graft and corruption as problems of international concern. In 
the period from 1980 to 1989 when talks about what the United States 
had introduced as illicit/corrupt payments had virtually stopped at other 
UN bodies, the Congress on Prevention of Crime continued talks on 
corruption, but its take on the issue was in the tradition of ECOSOC 
and differed significantly from the OECD discussions. During the 6th 
Congress in Caracas (August 25–September 5, 1980) questions of cor-
porate crime and the abuse of power of high-level officials were at the 
forefront of discussions about corrupt practices. The abuse of economic 
power by transnational corporations and the impunity with which they 
and high government officials perpetuated corrupt practices was point-
ing to the problematic relationship between global business and political 
elites worldwide, and was not concerned with bribery in particular. The 
inability of developing states to handle effectively transnational corpora-
tions and the ‘various aspects of offenses relating to the abuse of power 
and the perpetuators of such offenses at the global and regional levels’ 
with a stress on economic crime revealed a much broader understanding 
of corruption (Travaux Preparatoires UNCAC 2010, xv).
During the 7th Congress (Milan, August 26–September 6, 1985), the 
controversial subjects of NIEO and corporate criminal liability also resur-
faced. Corruption was discussed as leading to distrust in government and 
cynicism because of a socially presumed ‘inevitability of a corrupt soci-
ety and the inability to achieve a state of communal well-being and eco-
nomic stability and prosperity’ (xv). At the same time, the solutions to 
corruption as a form of ‘economic crime’ were seen to be in building 
the institutional capacity of developing nations, so they could prosecute 
complex economic crime. The question of corruption appeared as part 
of the area of economic crime in which corporate and organized crime 
appeared intricate:
“crime as business” referred to heterogeneous groups of crimes character-
ized by specific features, such as the underlying objective of economic gain 
and the involvement of some form of commerce, industry or trade; the use 
or misuse of legitimate techniques of business and industry; and the high 
social status and/or political power of the persons involved in the commis-
sion of the crimes concerned. Crimes of corporations, on the one hand, 
and so-called “organized” or syndicated crime, on the other, were found 
to have many similarities and interrelations and, typically, both might 
involve the corruption of law enforcement and political authority. (Travaux 
Preparatoires UNCAC, xiii)

158   E. KATZAROVA
Economic crimes exhibited ever-evolving sophistication and were often 
committed with impunity. The goal was to develop equivalent treat-
ment of economic and conventional crimes, and this required a dynamic 
penalization approach for corporate offenders. It was in the line of this 
‘developing nations perspective’ that the interregional seminar discussed 
forms of corrupt practices and the possibility for an international con-
vention to address transnational corruption. During the 8th Congress, 
corruption was discussed under agenda item 3 and a paper prepared by 
the Secretariat claimed that ‘corruption had become more transnational, 
plaguing all societies, and that its consequences were much more delete-
rious in developing countries’ (xiii). Political commitment was needed in 
the form of strengthening of national laws and international cooperation 
for their effective application. The stress was, however, on the respon-
sibility of the host country to prosecute such crimes, which involved a 
higher degree of government authority over transnational corporations. 
The position that corruption and bribery were just tools in the toolbox 
of a number of more sophisticated economic crimes constituted a major 
difference with discussions at the OECD where bribery was pitched as 
the central problem. Attempts by developing countries to strengthen 
their grip over foreign investors operating on their territory and a high 
level of discretion in the prosecution and definition of economic crimes 
and corruption could have been undesirable for the developed countries.
During the 8th Congress, a resolution demanded that the Crime 
Prevention Branch forward a draft code of conduct for public officials 
to the next Congress and a report on the position of NGOs and gov-
ernments on the distributed anti-corruption manual. The Committee on 
Crime Prevention and Control had to: ‘keep the issue of corruption under 
constant review’ and to submit an update to the 9th Congress (xviii). 
Resolution 45/107 reiterated the mandate of the Crime Prevention and 
Criminal Justice Branch on corruption and requested the production of 
materials on special training of national prosecutors and judges. In paral-
lel, corruption was included in the agenda of the Commission on Human 
Rights with a stress on high-level government officials:
Following the Eighth Congress, the Commission on Human Rights 
adopted resolution 1992/50, entitled “Fraudulent enrichment of top 
State officials prejudicial to the public interest, the factors responsible for 
it, and the agents involved in all countries in such fraudulent enrichment”, 
in which it stressed the necessity for determined action to combat the 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   159
fraudulent or illicit enrichment of top State officials and the transfer abroad 
of the assets thus diverted, as well as to prevent those practices which 
undermined the democratic system in countries throughout the world and 
constituted an obstacle to their development. (xviii)
Before the 9th Congress in 1995, which took place in Egypt, the UN 
International Drug Control Program launched a preparatory Ministerial 
Forum Against Corruption in November 1994. The previous Congress 
in Havana discussed measures against corruption and stressed the impor-
tance of international cooperation in addressing the issue globally, as well 
as the role the UN should play in the process. The Congress, however, was 
taking place every 5 years and did not provide a consistent framework for 
discussion of the issue of corruption per se. It provided, however, for the 
re-introduction of the issue of foreign illicit payments on the agenda of the 
UN, and in particular, in the UNCTC. The Commission on Transnational 
Corporations requested the Secretary-General to issue a report on cor-
rupt practices in international business transactions in 1991. The Report 
recalled previous efforts on the subject and noted that national approaches 
to tackling corruption could benefit from international cooperation on 
the subject. The following year, the Code of Conduct, which was con-
nected to the question of illicit payments in the 1970s, failed and there-
fore opened the door to a new take on the subject. It was only after the 
Recommendation of the OECD in 1994, however, that the UN intensi-
fied talks on the subject of illicit payments (Posadas 2000). With the excep-
tion of the above initiatives, the US-sponsored question of illicit/corrupt 
payments remained of limited importance in the UN until some degree 
of consensus was reached at the OECD. In this sense, the discussions of 
the 1990s mirrored those of the 1970s, but the issue of corrupt payments 
remained contained as the prerogative of the OECD. This had significant 
influence over the process of reaching consensus and the definition of the 
offense. The exchange of venues between the OECD and the UN, as the 
central forum for discussion in the 1970s and 1990s, raises the relevant 
question of how to contain the discussions of a potential global policy issue 
within a certain organization. The Netherlands did not manage to re-in-
troduce corruption in the UN in the same forceful and persuasive way that 
the United States did with the illicit payments issue in the OECD. In the 
1970s, it was the inability to manage controversy at the UN, which raised 
the stakes of the issue of corrupt payments, and made further OECD talks 
conditional on finding a successful resolution to the controversy at the UN.

160   E. KATZAROVA
The enduring differences between the OECD and the UN takes 
on the question of corruption are reflected in an exchange of views 
that took place on April 25, 1991 (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN). The 
United States was still isolated in its interest to address transnational 
bribery at that point, and the bulk of the discussion took place between 
the US Permanent Representative to the OECD, Alan Larson, and the 
Secretary-General of UNCTAD, Kenneth Dadzie. During his presenta-
tion of the 8th Session of the UNCTAD, Dadzie made a reference to 
‘good management,’ which the US representative took as a window of 
opportunity to raise the issue of corrupt activities:
With regard to Mr. Dadzie’s interesting comments on the question of 
good governance and in particular on the specific point he had made con-
cerning the efforts of developing countries were making to structure their 
economies in a way as to minimize the opportunities and incentives for 
corrupt activities, Mr. Larson asked whether it would be seen as desirable 
to have greater discipline on the activities of representatives of industrial 
countries through some sort of international agreement or national activi-
ties which would discipline illicit payments by their citizens. (C/M(91)9/
PROV/ANN, 22)
The US Permanent representative continued to refer to ‘good govern-
ance,’ a concept that had recently gained an, albeit limited, currency 
after the 1989 World Bank Report on Sub-Saharan Africa called the sit-
uation in the region a ‘governance’ crisis (World Bank 1989, 60). The  
UN representative consistently referred to ‘good management,’ and this 
difference was symptomatic of diverging explanations for the culprit of 
unsatisfactory development, as well as what was the role of corruption in 
the process. The UN representative affirmed that the concept of ‘good 
management’ was already included in the agenda of UNCTAD VIII, but 
remained highly contested. ‘Good management’ was at the interface of 
market forces and public policy at which government intervention was 
supposed to compensate for market inefficiencies. To this extent, good 
management was not seen as the withdrawal of the government from the 
economy, but as a vantage point for more intervention—a position that 
would have been inconsistent with the neoliberal turn. The rules of global 
trade and investment were equally culpable for insufficient development. 
The position of the UNCTAD representative was that corruption con-
stituted part of a web of problems—a development problematique, rather 
than a problem of its own right (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 4).

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   161
At the current stage of discussion at the UN, the issue of good man-
agement was primarily understood as market transparency for foreign 
investors. The four primary objectives of a good management agenda 
were: to establish a predictable framework for foreign and domes-
tic investors, to manage conflict, to manage market deficiencies and to 
manage government intervention in the economy. The ‘good manage-
ment’ agenda justified government intervention in the economy. The 
free market was deemed insufficient to solve the problems of develop-
ment: ‘market solutions to problems of poverty and inequitable distribu-
tion income often result in conditions incompatible with societal values’ 
(C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 14). Altogether, market mechanisms were 
deemed to not provide for public goods and not deal effectively with 
externalities. Government intervention (and a lot of it) was still deemed 
necessary to set the conditions for a free market system. Sustainable 
development was also provided as another example of the insufficiencies 
of unregulated markets (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN).
Without making an explicit reference to New Institutional Economics 
(NIE), the UN representative concurred in this exchange of views with 
the basic NIE insight that domestic institutions, defined as the ‘rules of 
the game,’ matter in managing economic uncertainty (North 1990). 
At the same time, Dadzie pointed to the rules of the global economy 
as the main detriment to successful economic development. The per-
formance of some East Asian economies, as well as India and China, 
appeared to support the argument that it was domestic rather than 
global policies which mattered in development strategy, but the UN rep-
resentative challenged this perspective and claimed that the global eco-
nomic environment was hostile to development and some of the aspects 
of the problem were: ‘the collapse in financial flows, the burden of 
the debt overhang, historically high interest rates, depressed real com-
modity prices, and formidable barriers in developed countries markets’ 
(C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 7).
In the early 1990s, under the influence of NIE, the theoretical 
groundwork was laid for the culprit for unsatisfactory economic growth 
to be found in domestic politics. The call to reform the global rules 
of the game did not negate the importance of domestic policies, but 
revealed a more varied and complex picture. The developing governance 
literature stressed the role of institutions (defined after North as ‘the 
rules of the game’) and the role of political authority within the nation 
state (Kaufmann 2010). The underlying argument was that the culprit 

162   E. KATZAROVA
of slow development was to be found in domestic politics and that was 
challenged by developing nations in the preliminary discussions of the 
parameters of what they called ‘good management.’ The question of 
corrupt payments was thrown in the vortex of discussions about good 
governance but, understood initially from the perspective of develop-
ing nations, the concept of good governance/management was meant 
as a policy tool, which could create a predictable framework for foreign 
investment, and was therefore a matter of primary interest for Western 
investors. The difference in positions on what constituted ‘good gov-
ernance’ became a matter of debate during the OECD session. The  
representative of the Netherlands remarked that he was astounded by the 
degree of convergence between UNCTAD and the OECD on economic 
policies, but that there was one notable exception:
There has been however one exception: Mr. Dadzie had mentioned that 
the question of good management and good governance had aroused con-
siderable controversy whereas Mr. Labohm was under the impression that 
a consensus was emerging worldwide on the desirability of good manage-
ment and good governance. (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 21)
The United States joined on that note stating that the delegation: ‘had 
been struck by the emerging consensus on development policy, par-
ticularly with respect to the role of private enterprises, human resources 
and democratic institutions’ (21). The views on good management/ 
governance, however, were not synchronized, and as noted earlier, the  
US representative introduced the future OECD program to tackle the 
supply side of bribery in the discussion of good governance. The UK 
representative also welcomed the ‘emphasis on good governance’ and 
commented that the ‘UNCTAD was not, after all, missing out on the 
change of atmosphere—with emphasis on partnership and flexibility 
rather than confrontation and regulation—which had taken place over 
the last few years’ (22).
The softening of the position of the developing countries was also 
due to the changing global environment in which they had collectively 
lost bargaining power. The strategic importance of the Third World 
had diminished with the end of the Cold War. The UN Representative 
stated that while: ‘welcoming the ending of the Cold War many devel-
oping countries have also been concerned that their vital interests would 
lose their salience on the international agenda’ (6). The alliances of 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   163
developing nations were changing, but UNCTAD remained the most 
essential forum ‘to deal …with trade and development from the particu-
lar point of view of developing countries’ (7). Together with the G77 
(which now has 131 members), UNCTAD was still seen to have a dis-
tinctive developing nations’ perspective on global issues.
The position of the developing nations was that the global rules of 
the game and, in particular, the rules governing Western enterprises 
remained the most pressing element in the development agenda, but the 
developed nations did not seem disposed to revisit the question of inter-
national regulation of multinationals. The rules of the global economic 
game appeared to be made in organizations to which the developing 
nations either did not have access or had limited influence:
These phenomena have accentuated the vulnerability of those economies, 
particularly in the developing world, that are open enough to come under 
considerable influence from abroad but are not sufficiently large for their 
own policies to make a significant impact on others. Thus, the volume and 
terms of trade of developing countries has come to depend significantly on 
the overall stance of macro-economic policies in major OECD countries…
(C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 8)
The Secretary-General of UNCTAD responded to the question regard-
ing good management, which had been raised by the representative of 
the Netherlands, explaining why the question of good governance had 
recently become controversial at the UNCTAD:
The controversy to which Mr. Dadzie had referred was a controversy 
within the UNCTAD rather than any controversy external to UNCTAD. 
Within UNCTAD, the way an issue was presented was seen as being just 
as important as the issue itself. As it had happened, the issue had been 
advanced in the first place as a problem of corruption in developing coun-
tries, and this approach had generated negative vibrations and cast a cloud 
over subsequent discussions: every time a suggestion was made, it was seen 
by one side or the other as an accusation. Finally, following some months 
of acrimonious discussion, agreement had been reached on the concept of 
good management. There were still some suspicions that the Secretariat 
might treat good management as simply an issue of corruption (by and 
involving only developing countries) but Mr. Dadzie thought he had 
demonstrated in his presentation that the view was somewhat more bal-
anced than that. (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 33)

164   E. KATZAROVA
The question of ‘good management’ emphasized the economic side of 
‘good governance’ that the US and UK representatives referred to in 
accordance with the recently developed World Bank terminology. The 
World Bank also came to define governance with broader, more neu-
tral language, namely as ‘the manner in which power is exercised in the 
management of a country’s economic and social resources for develop-
ment’ (World Bank Group 1992, 1). Stressing the economic and polit-
ical aspects of public authority, the definition of good governance as 
‘sound development management’ was developed for the purpose of 
feasibility (Santiso 2001, 5). The UNCTAD’s stress on good manage-
ment, as the economic aspect of public authority, showed that there is 
still space for government that does not simply serve economic objec-
tives. The concept of governance, to a large extent, blended the political 
and economic capacities of governments for the sole purpose of eco-
nomic development. At the same time, corruption did not become the 
centerpiece of the Bank’s good governance agenda. A case in point is 
that the WGI, published since 2002 and covering the period after 1996, 
use Control of Corruption as one of six governance indicators (World 
Bank 2014). As the Secretary-General stated, during these preliminary 
talks at the UNCTAD, at the time corruption in developing countries 
was put forward as the centerpiece of a good management/governance 
agenda, which led to rancorous disputes. It is this understanding of gov-
ernance as national-level management in order to establish a predictable 
framework for investment that the UN representative was referring to in 
response to Alan Larson’s question about corruption:
relevant rules and regulations should be effectively removed from an ad 
hoc or arbitrary intervention by the politically powerful and must not be 
subject to excessive discretionary power which offered temptations to eco-
nomic agents and their interlocutors in administrative structures to engage 
in corrupt practices. Whether there was need for an international agree-
ment was another matter. There was no doubt that all countries must 
achieve a more uniform understanding of practices which are allowable and 
which are not. (C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN, 3)
Without appearing fundamentally opposed to an international agree-
ment on corrupt payments, the UN representative outlined broadly the 
general aspect of the problem and the spectrum of possible measures: 
‘Different instruments might be required in the field of crime – possibly 

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   165
some sort of international agreement. In other areas, codes of behavior, 
either binding or non-binding, might be appropriate’ (24). The decou-
pling of the political and economic authority of national governments 
constituted a compromise that could have led to some level of consen-
sus on the desirability of ‘good management.’ It was a compromise that 
stripped anti-corruption policies from their ubiquitous political facet but 
also reconciled an anti-corruption agenda with the objective to remove 
market regulation. The degree of disagreement on questions of state 
intervention in the economy and the global terms of trade was, however, 
unlikely to lead to an agreement on the definition of corruption or the 
methods to tackle it at the UNCTAD at that time. The essential step at 
reaching global consensus on the content of corrupt activities, and the 
design of the program that would address them, proved to be reaching 
agreement at the OECD as pre-negotiation talks advanced.
In the 1990s, as in the 1970s, one international organization became 
the locus of discussion of the problem of corrupt payments. The reper-
cussions of the choice of venue, the UN or the OECD, were significant 
because of the difference in the membership base of the two organiza-
tions. The potential global governance problem was discussed in a dif-
ferent light at the two venues, which had an impact on international 
consensus. It is not possible to neatly group the position of developed 
and developing nations as there was significant variety of opinions within 
each group, yet there appeared to be some level of convergence between 
a ‘developing’ and a ‘developed’ nations’ perspective on questions of 
good governance and corruption.
In the aftermath of the failed UN process, feasibility became the most 
essential element for future work at the OECD. The study of feasibil-
ity meant that in addition to what the problem consisted of, the ques-
tion whether the problem could be tackled internationally became just 
as important (Spector and Kitsuse 2009). The protracted work on cor-
rupt payments at the OECD and the UN reveals international organiza-
tions as incubators in which global issues can remain encapsulated for a 
number of years or even decades while state actors remain central to any 
progress. On the one hand, the study of the social construction of the 
problem of corruption shows how through the rather mundane internal 
dealings of working groups and Council meetings, meaning and defi-
nitions are shuffled and transformed. On the other hand, the essential 
impetus for the successful completion of the work of expert committees 
is political and comes from influential state actors.

166   E. KATZAROVA
The pre-negotiation talks at the OECD were no less difficult for the 
United States than the UN talks, and the US delegation found itself 
isolated in its concern for corrupt payments at the OECD. The United 
States had a problem specifically with bribery because of the FCPA and 
leveling the playing field with its major competitors from the developed 
world became the main task. This did not entail that the United States 
was the only country that was implicated in corrupt dealings, but that 
under particular domestic and international contingencies in the 1970s, 
this implication became a problem for the United States in a way that it 
did not for any other state. The corrupt payments problem was jeopard-
izing domestic stability post-Watergate and complicating the US position 
in ideological warfare during the Cold War. Tackling the problem with 
illicit payments set in course a mechanism of internationalization that was 
successfully completed in the 1990s. The success of the United States 
to forge consensus on corrupt payments is examined in the next chapter 
and shows how the ability to turn your national (private) troubles into 
global (public) concerns is an essential aspect of state power.
References
Bell, Andrew S. 2003. Forum Shopping and Venue in Transnational Litigation. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
C(89)49. United States Proposal on the Issue of Illicit Payments, Note to the 
Secretary General (March 22, 1989). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. Annex. United States Proposal for an International Agreement on Illicit 
Payments (March 14, 1989) OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(89)152. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions Request to 
Delegations for Information, Note to the Secretary General (August 2, 1989). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(90)12. Medium-Term Priorities, Note to the Secretary General (January 30, 
1990). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(90)87. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, Note to the 
Secretary General (June 12, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. Annex 1. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, 
Description of the OECD Countries Legislation and Practices Concerning Illicit 
Payments (June 12, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. Annex 2. Description of the Work Done on the Issue of Illicit payments in 
International Transactions at an International Level (June 12, 1990). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(90)90. Council Communiqué (June 12, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   167
C/M(90)10(Prov.). Minutes of the 733rd Session, Council (July 18, 1990). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(90)13(Prov.). Minutes of the 736th Session, Council (July 6, 1990). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(90)16(Prov.). Minutes of the 739th Session, Council (September 27, 1990). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/MIN(90)11. Council Meeting (October 24, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
C/MIN(90)11. The 1990 Review of the 1976 Declaration on International 
Investment and Multinational Enterprises, Council at Ministerial Level (May 
27, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)2/PROV/PART2. Minutes of the 749th Session, Council (February 13, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)4/PROV. Minutes of the 751st Session, Council (March 7, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)9/PROV/ANN. Minutes of the 756th Session (June 11, 1991). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)11/PROV. Minutes of the 758th Session, Council (October 22, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)12/PROV. Minutes of the 759th Session, Council (October 16, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)20/PROV/ANN. Minutes of the 767th Session (July 22, 1991). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)22/PROV. Minutes of the 769th Session, Council (December 6, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C/M(91)25/PROV. Minutes of the 772nd Session, Council (February 17, 1992). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME(90)4. Symposium on the OECD Guidelines for Multinational 
Enterprises, Note by the Secretariat (June 15, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME(91)2. Committee on International Investment and Multinational 
Enterprises, Summary Record, Held on the 10th–12th April 1991 (April 26, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)10. The 1991 Review of the OECD Declaration and Decisions 
on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises, Note by the 
Secretariat (April 16, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)10/ADD1. The 1991 Review of the OECD Declaration and Decisions 
on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises, Note by the 
Secretariat (May 22, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)15. Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (April 9, 1991). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.

168   E. KATZAROVA
———. (91)26. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, 
Note by the Secretariat (November 26, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
———. (92)14. Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (April 21, 1992). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/A(91)4. Agenda, CIME (November 19, 1991). OECD Archives, 
Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/BR/A(96)6/REV1. Agenda, Working Group on Bribery in 
International Business Transactions (November 6, 1996). OECD Archives, 
Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/M/(90)4. Summary Record of the Committee on International 
Investment and Multinational Enterprises Held on 27th–29th November 1990 
(December 21, 1990). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)1. Summary Record of the Meeting of the Committee on International 
Investment and Multinational Enterprises Held on the 6th–8th February 1991 
(March 26, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)1. Summary Record of the Meeting of the Committee on International 
Investment and Multinational Enterprises Held on 4th–6th December 1991 
(February 4, 1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)2. Summary Record of the Meeting of the Committee on International 
Investment and Multinational Enterprises Held on 5th–6th May 1992 (June 23, 
1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/PI(91)1. Agenda, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (June 13, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)2. Feasibility Study on Available International Means for Dealing 
with Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, Ad Hoc 
Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (June 13, 1991). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)2/REV1. Feasibility Study on Available International Means for 
Dealing with Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, 
Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (September 30, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)3. Summary Record of the Meeting Held 13–14 June 1991, Ad Hoc 
Group on Illicit Payments (September 23, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
———. (91)4. Agenda, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (September 23, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)5. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions: 
Question of Future Work in OECD, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note 
by the Secretariat (October 2, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)5/ANN2. Annex 2, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (October 2, 
1991) OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.

6  THE ROAD TO THE NEW ORTHODOXY   169
———. (91)7. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, 
Report by the Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (November 21, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)7/ANN1. Annex 1: Feasibility Study on Available International 
Means for Dealing with Illicit Payments in International Commercial 
Transactions (November 21, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (91)7/ANN2. Annex 2: Observations by the Italian Delegation 
(November 21, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)2. Agenda, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (June 16, 1992). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)3. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions, Ad 
Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (18 June, 1992). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)3/ANN. Annex: Substantive Elements to Be Considered Together with 
Procedural Options (June 18, 1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV1. Illicit Payments in International Commercial 
Transactions, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (October 9, 1992). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)3/REV2. Feasibility Study on Illicit Payments in International 
Commercial Transactions, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (December 4, 
1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———. (92)3/REV3. Feasibility Study on Illicit Payments in International 
Commercial Transactions, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (December 17, 
1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (Amendments), Pub. L. No. 100–418, 102 Stat. 
1415 (1988).
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, Pub. L. No. 95–23–, 91 Stat. 1494 
(codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. 78m, 78dd-1 to 78dd-2, 78ff (1994) 
[Hereinafter FCPA] as Amended by International Anti-bribery and Fair 
Competition Act of 1998, 15 U.S.C.A. 78dd-1 to 78dd-3, 78ff (1999) 
[IAFCA].
International Chamber of Commerce. 1977. Extortion and Bribery in Business 
Transactions: Report Adopted by the 131st Session of the Council of the ICC, 29 
November 1977. Paris: International Chamber of Commerce.
Jakobi, Anja P. 2013. “The Changing Global Norm of Anti-Corruption: 
From Bad Business to Bad Government.” Zeitschrift Für Vergleichende 
Politikwissenschaft 7 (1): 243–264.
Kaufmann, Daniel. 2010. “Daniel Kaufmann on State Capture.” World Policy 
Journal 27 (1): 3–4.
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 100–418, 3001–
3604, 103 Stat. 1372 (1988) (Codified as amended in scattered sections of 
U.S.C. (1988)).

170   E. KATZAROVA
Pieth, Mark. 1997. “International Cooperation to Combat Corruption.” In 
Corruption and the Global Economy, edited by Kimberly Ann Elliott, 119–
133. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute.
———. 1999. “International Efforts to Combat Corruption.” Paper Presented 
at the 9th International Anti-Corruption Conference (IACC), Durban, South 
Africa, October 10–15.
Posadas, Alejandro. 2000. “Combating Corruption Under International Law.” 
Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law 10 (2): 345–414.
Santiso, C. 2001. “Good Governance and Aid Effectiveness: The World Bank 
and Conditionality.” Accessed October 23, 2017. http://agris.fao.org/agris-
search/search.do?recordID=GB2013203594.
Spector, Malcolm and John Kitsuse. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. 
Rutgers, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.
Stedman Jones, Daniel. 2014. Masters of the Universe: Hayek, Friedman, and the 
Birth of Neoliberal Politics—Updated Edition. Reprint edition. Princeton and 
Oxford: Princeton University.
Travaux Préparatoires of the Negotiations for the Elaboration of the United Nations 
Convention against Corruption. New York, NY: United Nations, 2010.
UN. 1990. Corruption in Government: Report of an Interregional Seminar 
11–15 December, The Hague. New York: UN.
Venice G7 Summit. “Communiqué.” (June 22–23, 1980). Accessed October 
22, 2017. http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/summit/1980venice/communique/
trade.html.
World Bank. 1989. Sub-Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth. 
Washington, DC: IBRD/ World Bank.
———. 1992. Legal Framework for the Treatment of Foreign Investment. 
Washington, DC, U.S.A. (1818 H St. N.W., Washington 20433).
World Bank Group. 1992. “Report to the Development Committee and Guidelines 
on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment.” In Legal Framework for the 
Treatment of Foreign Investment, vol. II. Washington, DC, U.S.A.
———. 2014. “WBI Governance and Anti-Corruption.” Accessed October 23,  
2017. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/WBI/EXTWBIG 
OVANTCOR/0,,contentMDK:20678012~pagePK:64168445~ 
piPK:64168309~theSitePK:1740530~isCURL:Y,00.html.

171
In the period 1994–1997, the foundation of the global anti-corruption 
governance was laid out. As this chapter shows, the success of the anti- 
corruption endeavor was to a large extent determined by a systematic 
approach of state-sponsored coalition building. The advancement of talks at 
the OECD and the adoption of the  RBIBT led OECD member states to 
introduce the topic of corrupt practices in the OAS, the CoE, the EU, the 
UN and the G7/8. Non-state actors contributed to the process of coalition 
building, but much of what they achieved was shaped by previous efforts of 
state actors, in particular the United States, and the ongoing intergovernmen-
tal dynamics. The instrumental use of publicity and the change of venues con-
tributed to the success of the OECD initiative to outlaw transnational corrupt 
payments and led to the spread of talks in a number of regional organizations. 
The formal agreements reached at organizations such as the OAS, the CoE, 
the EU, the OECD and the World Bank then provided the legal and discur-
sive underpinnings for the re-introduction of the subject at the UN. Building 
on Chapter 6, the first part of this chapter zooms closer in on the way in 
which the decision for the RBIBT was reached and discursively shaped. The 
second part then goes on to zoom out and show the bigger picture of how, 
in relation to progress at the OECD, the subject of corruption was intro-
duced in regional organizations. In this way, this chapter works toward strik-
ing a balance between showing how the social construction of problems is 
negotiated within organizations and how the interconnection and overlaps 
CHAPTER 7
The OECD Convention and Beyond:  
State-Powered Coalition Building  
in a Broken World
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_7

172   E. KATZAROVA
between organizations also shape the processes of collective definition and the 
formulation of an official plan of action.
Pre-negotiation talks constitute the most essential step in the social 
construction of global problems, but researchers have largely ignored 
them. In a constructivist research agenda, the decision to open negoti-
ations reveals a high degree of consensus on the recognition of a condi-
tion as a global problem. While bargaining during the negotiation stage 
is the biggest showcase for power imbalances, power also matters before 
opening negotiations because not every actor can raise an issue at an 
international organization and actually see it through.
The work of ad hoc groups and other committees provides essen-
tial continuity for pre-negotiation debates, but is not in itself sufficient 
for reaching a successful outcome. As Spector and Kitsuse (2009) note, 
the vast majority of social concerns drown in the swirl of ad hoc groups 
and committees. Through the rather mundane and detailed internal 
dealings of working groups and Council meetings, meaning and defi-
nitions are shuffled and transformed, and feasibility becomes the cen-
tral element of the process. Rather than defining the problem and the 
measures to address it in some ideal vacuum of technical expertise, the 
definition of the offense, its relation to the most effective instruments 
and to the putative condition itself remain contested and dynamic. 
The study of feasibility, therefore, has an impact on what is defined as 
the problem, and in judging if anything can be done about the fuzz-
ily defined condition and with what tools. The expertise of national 
delegates convening at the OECD Ad Hoc Group was instrumental in 
delimitating the most feasible option for future action but at no time 
did their technical competences supplant the agency of member states. 
The supremacy of nation states over this process of internationalization 
of the problem of corruption was institutionally enshrined in the role of 
the OECD Council in the organization’s decision-making processes, but 
also became part of the very discussions of feasibility within the Ad Hoc 
Group and CIME. Previous chapters traced the undercurrent of inter-
governmental talks on corrupt practices since the 1970s, and this chap-
ter shows how starting in the 1990s other actors became incorporated 
into these ongoing talks.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   173
Talks at the OECD Advance:  
Toward a Fragile Consensus 1991–1994
This section shows how the study of political and administrative feasi-
bility led to the narrowing down of options and establishing a plan 
for future work, which proved to be fundamental for incremental pro-
gress, and led to the adoption of the RBIBT in 1994. After establish-
ing the list of four primary options, the Ad Hoc Group had to receive 
CIME’s approval for choosing a combination of an OECD Decision 
and Recommendation (options 3 and 4). The choice of these options 
did not per se exclude option 1 (International Convention) when con-
sensus was forged on the issue, but pursuing the Convention route was 
deemed unfeasible at the moment (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2).1 The Ad 
Hoc Group had to ‘provide the Council with the elements necessary 
to allow it to assess the feasibility of the different options without prej-
udicing the outcome of its deliberations on this issue’ and at the same 
time help the Council decide as to whether pursuing future work on the 
question of illicit payments was necessary and/or desirable (DAFFE/
IME/PI(91)4, 2–3).2 Member states, therefore, retained a firm grip 
on the decision-making process and even the preliminary recommenda-
tions of the Ad Hoc Group were not issued independently, but in col-
laboration with the delegations. A list of ‘elements and issues’ (provided 
by the Secretariat in a Room Document) formed the basis for revisions 
that incorporated the opinion of the delegations. The refined inven-
tory of elements on which agreement was reached was later to provide 
the contents of the RBIBT, the Recommendation on tax deductibility 
and to some extent the Convention itself. Corrupt practices were pre-
sented as a problem of competitiveness, which made them contrary to 
OECD objectives in global economic exchange (DAFFE/IME(91)26). 
The criterion of ‘controversy’ was the centerpiece of the study of feasibil-
ity: ‘Are there any elements, which are considered so controversial that 
1 During a meeting on the June 13–14, 1991, the Ad Hoc Group members re-elected 
Mark Pieth as Chairman. Pieth had been instrumental for the successful outcome of the 
discussions on money-laundering (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)3).
2 The list of the members of the Ad Hoc Group revealed an increased interest in the 
issue of corrupt practices with a more extensive national representation from Ministries of 
Finance and the Economy, Departments of States, National Banks from almost all OECD 
member states (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)3).

174   E. KATZAROVA
their inclusion in any type of instrument would meet little, or no inter-
national consensus? If so, which ones and why? … What is the nature 
of the controversy?’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)5, 1). Based on the matrix of 
potential controversies, the Ad Hoc Group had to suggest the exclusion 
of controversial elements out of the program.3 Once again the trade-off 
between effectiveness and feasibility was taken as the primary considera-
tion: ‘which uncontroversial elements must be included in order to have 
an effective instrument and why?’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 10). 
Using the matrix revealed that the potential and most controversial ele-
ments are the definition of the offense and the identification of the actors 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1). The continuous management of the 
controversial elements showcases that expert recommendations were not 
made in a political lacuna in which technical solutions were matched to 
clearly defined natural problems, but that these expert recommendations 
were imbued in the context of what appeared to be politically feasible.
The interplay between optimal solutions and what was to be realisti-
cally expected led to estimates as to what kind of definitions of offenses 
were to be paired with what type of instruments in order to achieve the 
ultimate match between effectiveness and feasibility: ‘If these were the 
only elements on which agreement could be reached, does the Group 
feel that they are sufficient for developing an effective instrument? If not, 
what element would be lacking? Does their inclusion depend on being 
able to reduce potential controversy?’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)5, 3).4 In 
this study of feasibility vs. effectiveness, the Group had to concentrate 
on, ‘(a) the degree of consensus that is likely to be achieved on the dif-
ferent options as presented in the consultant’s feasibility study; and (b) 
the legal/political effectiveness of those options for dealing with illicit 
payments’ (3). Based on this trade-off, the Group had to exclude certain 
4 This search for optimal solutions in the context of what is deemed to be in the realm 
of the politically feasible was concerned with questions such as: ‘Is there an inverse [rela-
tionship] proportionality between the controversial elements and the type of instrument? 
For example, does the controversy diminish as one gets further away from the more legally 
constraining type of instrument?’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)5, 3).
3 Basing the recommendations on the provided matrix, the Report stated that a number 
of such highly controversial elements had been individuated: ‘such elements may include 
a definition of illicit payments which would cover payments other than traditional bribes, 
including sales requiring government approval, the reaching of payments through inter-
mediaries, and the issue of jurisdiction absent a sufficient territorial nexus’ (DAFFE/IME/
PI(91)5).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   175
future routes and promote others, all the while not prejudicing the deci-
sion of the Council. This interplay between technical expertise and polit-
ical authority was at the core of discussions on the subject and showcased 
the manner in which political feasibility is intrinsically connected to tech-
nical fixes from the very beginning of the evolution of the global issue. 
Furthermore, the methodology of the matrix became contested and the 
meaning of ‘feasibility’ became a question in itself: ‘What should be the 
criteria for determining feasibility? Would it be the amount of interna-
tional consensus a particular option is likely to enjoy, or would it be the 
extent to which Member states would be legally bound to their commit-
ments, or how much political credibility the instrument can achieve? Are 
there other criteria?’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)2/REV1, 4).
The ingredients of a technical evaluation, therefore, already included 
a significant amount of reflection on issues of practical feasibility, such as 
estimations of political will and chances of successful consensus building. 
Since the most important aspect of the Group’s consultation was deemed 
to be legal expertise (in accordance with the US claim), it was legal feasi-
bility, rather than ethical and economic considerations, that took central 
stage in deciding on a plan for action.5 In managing controversy, from 
a legal standpoint, the consideration of what was politically feasible was 
more readily included in the ‘technical analysis.’ The diagnostics of the 
problem did not take place in a vacuum of technical (legal) expertise in 
which optimal solutions were later matched to the realities of political 
constrictions, and the distinction between technical and political pro-
cesses was not clear-cut. Nonetheless, the report retained a claim of sepa-
ration between technical expertise and political decision-making:
Having examined the feasibility study on the available international means 
for preventing illicit payments, the Group should be in a position to make 
a technical evaluation of which of the available instruments seems the most 
worthwhile pursuing. This technical evaluation, which will be taken into 
consideration by the CIME in developing its report to the Council, will 
help the Council to make the political decision whether or not to pursue 
work concerning illicit payments. (DAFFE/IME/PI(91)5, 5)
5 Economists or sociologists, for example, would have provided different type of exper-
tise, but might have also given rise to more controversy, because more claims might have 
centered around the relationship of the putative condition to the definition of the problem, 
as they did in the UN.

176   E. KATZAROVA
Following these preliminary interactions between the Ad Hoc Group 
and the Council, as well as the expressed remarks of the delegations, fur-
ther work on the feasibility study remained slow and incapsulated within 
the Ad Hoc Group for almost a year. On June 9, 1992, the Secretariat 
submitted a note for consideration to the Group in which the option of 
multilateral negotiations was deemed unfeasible and a combination of a 
Recommendation and Decision was judged to best reflect the attitude of 
the Council (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3). These options could be considered 
as ‘vehicles for political agreement’ which would incrementally lead to the 
more substantive treaty option (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV1, 3).
Political disagreement and controversies are usually seen as obstacles 
to solving otherwise practical problems, but this more nuanced picture 
of pre-negotiation talks reveals that political considerations become an 
integral part of the way in which problems are studied and constructed. 
The Ad Hoc Group’s technical expertise included an attempt to fore-
see controversial areas and take them off the negotiation table, so that 
emerging discord would not lead to a deadlock. Through this process, 
the members of the Ad Hoc Group, who were also representatives of 
member states from state departments and ministries, remained attentive 
to the preferences of the Council and reflected the expected attitudes of 
member states. Member states remained unconvinced of the US FCPA 
approach. The majority in the Council was pushing corrupt payments 
as the prerogative of national legislation and challenging the extent to 
which the issue should be seen as global (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/
REV3, 3). The central elements of this national approach to tackling 
corruption had to be broad enough to allow countries the discretionary 
power to use them according to their specific needs: ‘The language of 
these elements would be general and non-technical, to provide guidance 
easily adaptable to different legislative approaches’ (4). The only possi-
ble intrusion could have been a model law, based on the FCPA, but that 
would have still left a lot of space for political and legislative maneuver-
ing for individual OECD members. The prospects for international or 
transnational cooperation remained rather limited, and challenging the 
extent to which the issue should be treated beyond the borders of the 
nation state became a primary concern, but questions of definitional 
scope remained just as relevant.
The Recommendation would have had provisions for intergov-
ernmental cooperation, such as exchange of information, but a net-
work of agreements expanding the network of bilaterals between the 

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   177
United States and other OECD members, which had been in place since 
the 1970s, was all that delegations were disposed to concede to. This 
mutual assistance perspective was firmly routing the responsibility for 
treating corrupt practices as a predominantly national prerogative. This 
was claimed to be the case, because difficulties with ‘global coverage and 
jurisdiction’ made civil and administrative rather than criminal meas-
ures more suitable for addressing the differences between member states 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV3, 5).
Three other points of fundamental disagreement were the definition 
of the offense, the actors and the reach of the jurisdiction (DAFFE/
IME/PI(92)3/REV3, 11). First, throughout the discussions the precise 
definition of the problem remained contested and ambiguous:
The term “illicit payment” has been used as a generic term for all payments 
that are made with the intention to influence a decision improperly –  
payments for the purchase of public decisions – broad interpretation that 
covers financial and non-financial payments, may include the payment of 
a direct monetary bribe, or payment in the form of political contributions, 
payments in violation of exchange control regulations, gifts and favours, 
etc. (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV1, 5)
Even the understanding of the problem as a ‘payment’ was not defini-
tive. In later revisions, it was specifically added that the term ‘payments’ 
is somehow misleading because the definition is: ‘interpreted broadly 
enough to cover financial and non-financial payments, may include 
the payment of a direct monetary bribe, or others’ (DAFFE/IME/
PI(92)3/REV2, 4). The advantage of this definition was to cover ben-
efits which did not possess any intrinsic value in themselves: ‘social or 
other advantage of no necessary significant value to someone other than 
the recipient’ or ‘anything of value granted to the recipient, to which the 
latter would not be otherwise entitled (an ‘undue’ advantage)’ (DAFFE/
IME/PI(92)3/REV1, 6). While this interpretation of the offense would 
have been much closer to an understanding of corruption as influence 
rather than monetary exchange, the definition was later to be stirred in 
the direction of bribery. Defining the offense as ‘bribery’ had little to 
do with the ‘problem itself’ and its relation to the putative condition, 
and more to do with feasibility: ‘While there is a certain consensus on 
the definition of “bribery” (…) the concept of other “illicit payments” 
is not easily definable and that there may not be a consensus to reach 
beyond classical “bribery”, at least for criminal law purposes’ (DAFFE/

178   E. KATZAROVA
IME/PI(92)3/REV2, 12). The US delegation was firmly behind the 
definition of illicit payments as ‘bribery’ and this position was intrinsically 
connected to the FCPA statute and the quest for criminalization of the 
offense.
Second, after the definition of corrupt payments, the identity of 
the proponent of the bribe became a source of significant controversy 
because it entailed corporate criminal liability (CCL).6 Most countries 
did not have any provisions for CCL at the time or had only administra-
tive and civil measures and some limited CCL (acting through natural 
persons, such as board members and employees). Since the questions of 
private recipients and intermediaries also became controversial, establish-
ing feasibility and managing controversy on the topic of actors involved 
in the corrupt transaction constituted a central part of the talks.
Third, the question of jurisdictional reach or ‘extraterritoriality’ 
became another example of how controversy was managed. The feasibil-
ity study had a legal and political component. In terms of legality, legal 
action was to be taken for a payment made in a foreign territory. The 
ramification of addressing the supply side of corrupt payments was the 
exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction, which was highly contested and 
this is why it demanded a high degree of consensus. The future CIME 
report had to address the concerns of delegations, and in later revisions, 
‘extraterritoriality’ was substituted by ‘concurrent jurisdiction.’ In con-
current jurisdiction, states share the responsibility of prosecution, but 
some delegations saw this, yet again, as an ‘inappropriate interference in 
the sovereignty or interests of another state’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/
REV3, 12). The question of extraterritoriality was nominally absent 
from the last draft, despite the fact that the substance of extraterritorial 
jurisdiction was still inherent to the proposed solutions. This rephrasing 
6 The definition of the offender covered natural and legal persons and the recipient could 
be a public/governmental official or a private party. The definition of public official was 
broad enough to include all persons with public decision-making or implementing roles. 
Relevant was also the inclusion of a private person with the ability to influence public pol-
icy whether this person works in a firm or NGO. The definition of who makes an offer 
included ‘any corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, business, trust, 
unincorporated organization or sole proprietorship which has its principal place of busi-
ness (or center of activity related to the commercial transaction in question) in the member 
country’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV3, 5). It is noteworthy that there did not occur at 
any point a discussion of the offeror being a public or governmental agent in their official 
capacity, while a private recipient remained an albeit contested option.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   179
made no significant difference to the position of the member states, who 
were opposing the extraterritorial element of the transnational anti-cor-
ruption measures. Reaching international consensus was judged to be 
more likely than it was at the UN more than 10 years ago, but political 
feasibility still faced considerable hindrances because:
Some Delegations believe that it is inappropriate for Member countries to 
assume responsibility for sanctioning conduct which should be primarily 
the concern and responsibility of the government of the official. Moreover, 
despite the official anti-corruption policies of all countries, an OECD 
initiative could be resented by non-OECD countries. (DAFFE/IME/
PI(92)3/REV2, 12)
This is why non-member attitudes toward countermeasures to corrupt 
payments became relevant to the OECD initiative. The participation and 
inclusion of non-members were judged important and entailed ‘a com-
mitment to promote anti-corruption policies within and beyond the 
OECD area, including through a policy dialogue with non-OECD coun-
tries’ (11). This expansion beyond the OECD served the dual purpose 
of providing legitimacy and broader support for an OECD instrument, 
thus turning the OECD initiative into a catalyst for global anti-corrup-
tion action. Furthermore, as early as 1992–1993 policy dialogue with the 
World Bank was considered and the Guidelines on the Legal Framework 
for the Treatment of Foreign Investment were referenced, in which a 
bid to states to control ‘corrupt business practices’ was made (DAFFE/
IME/PI(92)3/REV1). The World Bank Group Guidelines were in 
the line of work of the UNCTC and the eponymous UN Commission, 
but the World Bank had, of course, a different take on business—state 
relations. Instead of looking at the behavior of corporations and call-
ing for international regulation of corporate behavior, the World Bank 
addressed governments and their ability to promote FDI (World Bank 
Group 1992). While curbing the economic and political influence of 
transnational corporations, to the extent to which they may go against 
the public interest, constituted issues of concern for the UNCTC and 
the agenda on corrupt practices, such apprehensions were dissipated in 
the post-Cold War era. The World Bank avoided addressing the behavior 
of corporations, presumably in order not to duplicate the work of the 
UNCTC and the Commission on Transnational Corporations, but the 
UNCTC was abolished in 1992. The program was moved to UNCTAD 
and the focus shifted toward FDI promotion (UNCTAD 2002).

180   E. KATZAROVA
After the OECD Council gave CIME a mandate on February 25, 
1993, to draft the text of a Recommendation, the initiative to promote 
anti-corruption policies more broadly was claimed as an intrinsic part of 
the process (DAFFE/IME(93)21). This was the beginning of the expan-
sion of the OECD work on illicit payments into a broader network of 
other intergovernmental organizations, non-state actors and IFIs, which 
is discussed in the second part of this chapter.
The Impact of the United States on the OECD  
Anti-Bribery Recommendation
The work program for 1994 included the preparation of an OECD 
Recommendation on ‘illicit payments in international trade and invest-
ment,’ which would provide for modes of getting non-members on 
board. A report had to be filed with the Council by February 1994 
and the OECD Council agreed on the Recommendation option in the 
same month (DAFFE/IME(93)17). The catalyst for progress within the 
OECD was the change of leadership in Washington in 1993. President 
Clinton gave new impetus to the American initiative by making the 
anti-bribery agenda a foreign policy priority (Larson 1997; Glynn et al. 
1997). Furthermore, Warren Christopher, who became Secretary of 
State under Clinton, had been personally involved in drafting and dis-
cussing the FCPA in 1977 under Carter (Pieth 2013). Together with the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs, Daniel 
Tarullo, who was also a lawyer with good knowledge of the FCPA, 
Warren Christopher turned the OECD anti-bribery agenda into a major 
US priority (Abbott and Snidal 2002; Glynn et al. 1997).
With increased political dedication and resources, the United States 
was very influential in the drafting of the Recommendation. Other mem-
ber states, such as the Netherlands, Italy and Germany also submitted 
drafts and commentaries, which, however, were not reflected in the final 
Recommendation. The Netherlands made suggestions for the draft rec-
ommendation in line with prior UN efforts, but was more supportive of 
the OECD initiative than in 1989. The Dutch delegation still showed 
a strong preference for a universal approach to bribery that it claimed 
was not limited to developing countries: ‘Far from being restricted 
to developing countries, bribery is a worldwide phenomenon occur-
ring also in business transactions between OECD member countries.  

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   181
An OECD initiative, which could act as a catalyst for global action, is 
therefore appropriate’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)1, 2). While the Dutch del-
egation conceded on the definition of the offense as bribery, the Italian 
delegation made a proposal that concentrated precisely on the definition 
of corrupt payments, and in particular, the distinction between bribery 
and other illicit transactions (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)2). The US delega-
tion continued to use the formulation of ‘illicit payments’ while sub-
stituting it with bribery in later drafts (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)3). The 
German delegation submitted a proposal on assimilation as an alternative 
to extraterritoriality. According to the Germans, assimilation—a criminal 
act with foreign elements is assimilated and treated as a domestic act—
was suitable, because it would have allowed for a comprehensive interna-
tional agreement without changes to national legislation on the subject 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(93)2).
While some of the comments and draft proposals by the delegations 
concerned the modes of addressing the problem, uncertainty over what 
was the exact content of the offensive behavior persisted. Delegations 
were discussing methods to tackle the question of illicit payments with-
out having managed to settle the parameters of what was included in 
the definition of such activities. Referring to the controversies over the 
definition of illicit payments, the Report to the Council agreed on the 
elements of the behavior, the advantage, the transaction and the iden-
tity of who offered the bribe, recipient and intermediary, but not on the 
actual content of these aspects of the definition. In later drafts, the con-
cept of ‘illicit payments,’ however, was altogether replaced by ‘payment 
of bribes’ and ‘bribery,’ discursively displacing in this way the contesta-
tion that illicit payments contained a broader spectrum of activities than 
traditional bribery (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)9). The position of the United 
States that illicit payments were more or less exhausted by bribery, which 
was challenged by OECD members, and previously at the UN, prevailed.
The reasons why the United States insisted on the definition of the 
offense as bribery were both practical and historical: practical, because 
a more limited definition of any problem, especially a criminal act, would 
be more feasible for negotiation and implementation. The United States 
wanted to criminalize transnational bribery because this was the approach 
chosen in the FCPA. An expansion of the scope of what constitutes an 
illicit payment might have also proven more difficult to negotiate. In fact, 
the United States referred to bribery as ‘illicit payments’ in order to man-
age controversy in the international organizations where talks were held. 

182   E. KATZAROVA
Hiding the concept of bribery under the more ubiquitous heading of ‘illicit 
payments’ constituted a strategy to avoid controversy up to the moment 
when some level of consensus on the necessity to act had been reached. The 
underlying reason for this definition was that historically, it was bribery of 
foreign public officials that crystallized as a problem for the United States 
after the Congressional hearings, the SEC disclosure program and the sub-
sequent adoption of the FCPA. Therefore, the term ‘illicit payments’ as a 
cover for bribery was not meant to raise the questions of scope and defini-
tion that it did at the OECD and the UN. While these controversies about 
what constituted an ‘illicit payment’ could be seen as a bargaining game in 
which other state actors try to dilute the US demands and make the prob-
lem unfeasible, in the social construction of problems these controversies 
also reveal competing definitions of the same condition, in this case broadly 
defined as an illicit interaction between public and private actors.
Empirical studies of the illicit payments in question were understanda-
bly difficult because of the political sensitivity of the issue. The work on tax 
treatment of illicit payments was the only data source that provided some 
limited glimpse into the empirical dimension of the problem and some, 
albeit insufficient, quantitative understanding of the extent of transnational 
bribery in particular. The tax treatment of illicit payments was to be fea-
tured as an element of the Recommendation (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)6). 
The results of the questionnaire to which 16 members responded showed 
a varied treatment of bribery across the OECD area.7 Most respondents 
had at least some provision for the deductibility of payments that could 
be considered illicit.8 In addition to the United States, six other members 
had some provisions of non-tax deductibility of certain general payments.9 
Except for the United States, however, these provisions were not aimed at 
illicit payments abroad, although Austria and Canada had some extended 
jurisdiction in tax matters and non-deductibility of illicit payments. 
Under specific conditions, deductibility was possible for all respondents, 
7 The questionnaire was filled by Austria, Belgium, Canada, Finland, France. Germany, 
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, the 
United Kingdom, the United States and included information about Denmark, Greece and 
Luxemburg from a previous study (C(90)87).
8 The ‘non-deductibility’ of illicit payments meant that they were not considered as legiti-
mate business expense, and their deductibility meant that governments were implicitly sub-
sidizing illicit payments by making them tax free as business expenditure.
9 Namely, in Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Luxemburg, New Zealand, Norway and 
the United Kingdom such prohibition was underway (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)6).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   183
including the United States, where facilitation payments for a ‘routine gov-
ernment action’ enjoyed tax deductibility at the time (6). In some cases 
(United States and France), prior government approval was necessary for the 
deductibility of such payments. In France under a confidential procedure, 
the Minister of Finance deemed payments with an undisclosed recipient 
abroad deductible, but this procedure had just been abolished. After 1993, 
such approval was no longer granted, but companies could still enjoy tax 
deductibility of certain payments as long as they met the legal requirements.
Only four members provided specific information about the number 
of illicit payments detected or reported in their tax system. In Belgium, 
109 such payments were revealed between 1988 and 1992. In France, 
200 annual requests were made. While New Zealand had only one 
reported case, Norway reported 5 such cases and a number of other 
domestic payments currently under investigation. In conclusion, since 
most countries imposed certain restrictions on the tax deductibility 
of illicit payments, harmonization was deemed feasible, albeit difficult 
(DAFFE/IME/PI (93)6). The work on the prohibition of tax deducti-
bility of illicit payments provided an opening through which to push the 
anti-bribery agenda further as it led to a second Recommendation that 
was adopted by the Council on April 17, 1996 (C(96)27/FINAL). This 
incremental approach of building agreement on different facets of the 
issue was indicative of the excellent role of the OECD as a facilitator.
The facilitating role of the OECD was also instrumental in provid-
ing a forum for a broader range of actors. The anti-corruption work 
of the organization was presented not as an end in itself but as a first 
step in a broader anti-corruption agenda. OECD members had to con-
sider undertaking: ‘a commitment to promote anti-corruption policies 
within and beyond the OECD area, including a policy dialogue with 
non-OECD countries, which would permit the identification of the most 
suitable modalities for enhancing international efforts’ (DAFFE/IME/
PI(93)5, 4). The policy dialogue with non-members aimed to:
[i]ncrease the awareness in non-Member countries of the importance 
of concerted actions to combat corrupt practices and illicit payments. 
Member countries could associate themselves with recent efforts by inde-
pendent organizations such as Transparency International, as well as work 
already underway in the Development Assistance Committee, in order 
to jointly encourage and influence policy discussions of these issues in 
non-Member countries. (4–5)

184   E. KATZAROVA
TI was officially founded in May 1993, only three months prior to 
the report, and was already seen as a valuable partner in the talks 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(93)5. In 1993, President Clinton sent US offi-
cials to ask for TI’s support and managed to secure it (Pope 2011). 
As Jeremy Pope, co-founder of TI, stated: ‘We agreed – not on 
the basis of providing corporate America with a level playing field 
for export competition, but in the interest of the victims of cor-
rupt practices, most notably the poor in the developing world’ (158). 
With the initiative of the US executive, TI became a valuable ally in  
the pre-negotiation talks at a number of organizations, of which more 
will be said in this chapter.
At the same time that the subsequent drafts of the OECD 
Recommendation limited the problem of illicit payments to bribery, they 
universalized the relevance of the OECD initiative and to some extent 
discursively framed future debates on the subject: ‘an OECD initiative 
to combat bribery could act as a catalyst for global action and could 
help companies to refuse to engage in such practices in host countries by 
setting standards of behavior to which they can refer’ (DAFFE/IME/
PI(93)9, 2). Furthermore, the Recommendation required the acceptance 
by non-members of the legitimacy of an anti-corruption agenda, because 
the cooperation of so-called host countries was necessary for successful 
implementation. Therefore, the Recommendation was seen as an ele-
ment that would boost future cooperation with non-members as well:
An important question in considering the effective application of the 
OECD Recommendation was how to associate non-OECD Member 
countries in the efforts to combat bribery. The Recommendation appeals 
to non-Member countries to join with OECD Members in their endeav-
ours to combat the payment of bribes. It further asks Member countries 
to actively promote anti-corruption policies within and beyond the OECD 
area and to encourage non-Member countries to join in the OECD effort. 
(DAFFE/IME/PI(93)9, 5)
The policy dialogue promoted by the Recommendation had its first for-
mal event in the form of an international symposium with non-OECD 
members in 1994 (later moved to 1995) (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)11). 
The symposium was tailored to ‘increase awareness’ of corruption 
with a broader audience of state and non-state actors and formulate a 
proposal for future course of action (3). The Ad Hoc Group on Illicit 

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   185
Payments was further encouraged to make ‘the results of their efforts 
to combat bribery more easily accessible to wider audiences’ through 
the publication of their annual reviews and information exchange with 
non-members (6). The symposium and the efforts of the OECD to 
engage a wider audience in the anti-corruption effort, as early as 1993, 
are indicative of the coalition of governmental and non-governmental 
actors that was built with US leadership, and are discussed in the second 
part of this chapter.
The draft recommendation located the impetus for action in that: 
‘bribery is a widespread phenomenon in international business transac-
tions, including trade and investment, raising serious moral and political 
concerns and distorting international competitive conditions’ (DAFFE/
IME/PI(93)11, 7).10 The impact of the US delegation was not lim-
ited to the establishment of bribery as the offense, but was also influ-
ential on the hierarchy of proposed measures. The earlier drafts of the 
Recommendation did not promote criminal action as the top priority 
in addressing bribery and left considerable space for national maneu-
vering within the boundaries of the recommended behavior. In fact, 
criminalization of bribery did not initially make it as one of the recom-
mended measures, with possible civil and administrative measures left 
to the discretion of member states. International cooperation was lim-
ited to actions in the line of bilateral agreements to provide informa-
tion upon request. This hierarchy of priorities was not consistent with 
the US intention to use the Recommendation as a stepping-stone for 
the criminalization of corrupt transactions, possibly in an anti-bribery 
Convention. On December 6, 1993, the United States submitted an 
alternative draft recommendation which was adopted almost verbatim 
as the final text of the recommendation (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)10). The 
US draft added a definition of the offense and completely reshuffled the 
proposed measures for domestic action by placing criminalization as the 
top priority (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)10, 3). The US draft also appealed to 
the global relevance of the OECD initiative, highlighting the importance 
of relations with non-members and strengthening the links between the 
10 In the Draft Report to CIME,  ‘illicit payments’ were already substituted with ‘brib-
ery’ and a more forceful language was employed. The Report highlighted, however, that 
consensus has not been reached in a number of areas despite the fact that the feasibility of 
cooperation among OECD members has been developed since July 1990 (DAFFE/IME/
PI (93)11).

186   E. KATZAROVA
OECD initiative and the other organizations. The United States urged 
the Secretariat to: ‘consult with other international organizations and 
IFIs on effective means to combat bribery as an aid to promote the pol-
icy of good governance’. Member states were also invited to: ‘promote 
anti-corruption policies within and beyond the OECD area and, in their 
dealings with non-Member countries’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)10, 4).
The new draft recommendation reflected very closely the American 
text and did not incorporate the substance of the commentaries of 
other delegations, such as the Netherlands, Italy and Germany. The 
influence of the US delegation on the formulation of the actual text of 
the Recommendation was very significant, yet the notion of ‘bribery’ 
employed in this draft was far broader than a payment, reflecting the 
position of members who insisted on a definition of corrupt payments 
beyond traditional bribery.11 Similar controversies emerged over the 
hierarchical list of measures promoted by the US delegation with crim-
inal laws being the top choice of civil, administrative and other measures 
that were reflected in the new draft.12
In compromising about including criminal measures in the inventory, 
some delegations insisted that the list of recommended actions was not 
meant to be exhausted and that individual member states had discretion-
ary space to decide which measures were applicable:
While all Member countries agree to review all the areas listed under 
“domestic action”, there are different opinions as to whether action will 
be necessary in every case. – It is agreed that domestic tax laws and reg-
ulations are to be reviewed by all Members, but there are different views 
on whether tax deductibility of bribes should be mentioned explicitly 
in the Recommendation, and on whether action to change tax laws and 
11 The definition of bribery was set in the draft as: ‘[such bribery can involve an inten-
tional offer, promise, or giving of any undue pecuniary or other advantages to or for the 
benefit of a foreign public official (including members of a law-making body, candidates for 
a law-making body or public office and officials of political parties) whether or not solicited 
by the official, in violation of the official’s legal duties, whether directly or indirectly through 
an intermediary, in order to obtain or retain business]’ (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)10, 4). The 
bracketed text indicated that consensus had not yet been reached on the particular definition.
12 The controversies over the definition were settled temporary with a ‘working definition 
of bribery for practical purposes,’ but the controversy over the list of measures was not so 
easily dissuaded (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)11, 7).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   187
regulations should be expected in every case. While Member countries 
agree that action in the area of criminal laws would be the most effective 
ways [sic] to deal with the problem of bribery in international business 
transactions, they also agree that it raises complex issues for implementa-
tion. Aside from outright criminalization, other possible means of action 
include criminalization if the act is criminal offence also in the target coun-
try, assimilation of the offence in the domestic legislation on request of the 
target country and extradition. (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)11/REV1, 3–4)
These battles between the US delegation and other OECD members are 
significant because they show differing claims on the question not only 
of bribery, but also of the proper actions to handle it. While the first 
text specified the prohibition of transnational bribery in the style of the 
FCPA, the second version concentrated on domestic prohibition of brib-
ery and could have been interpreted far more liberally by individual mem-
ber states. OECD members tried to oblige US demands but at the same 
time retain the ability to maneuver independently and retain discretion in 
their application of the new rules. The US delegation was not only deter-
mined to limit the offense to traditional bribery, but was also insisting 
on promoting criminalization along the lines of the FCPA and the lat-
ter formed the basis for future discord. Following the amendments of the 
FCPA in 1998, after the criminalization approach to transnational brib-
ery was enshrined in a binding OECD Convention, the US law became 
applicable to foreign corporations. Companies such as Telia (Sweden), 
Siemens (Germany) and BAE (United Kingdom) were imposed record 
fines (FCPA Enforcement 2018). Enforcement records as of 2018 reveal 
that 8 out of the top 10 companies fined under the FCPA were foreign. 
Acceptance of the criminalization approach from the OECD partners 
allowed foreign companies to be prosecuted under the FCPA, and it also 
showed consensus on the highest possible level of condemnation of brib-
ery. The United States also specifically connected the question of bribery 
to the good governance agenda, which was gaining momentum at the 
World Bank, and intended to get other organizations and financial insti-
tutions on board with the anti-bribery agenda (DAFFE/IME/PI(93)10).
The OECD Recommendation (RBIBT) adopted by the Council on 
May 27, 1994, demonstrated the political will of member states to tackle 
corrupt practices in international business transactions. It was an impor-
tant signal for other international organizations and non-state actors 
that some level of intergovernmental consensus had been reached on 

188   E. KATZAROVA
the existence of a serious issue in need of a global remedy. While such 
general political commitments were also evident with the Resolutions 
of the 1970s, the choice of instrument this time entailed that OECD 
member states would have to take concrete measures in their respec-
tive national jurisdictions. The effectiveness of the instrument is the 
first way in which to understand the RBIBT as a breakthrough. Not 
all ‘soft law’ is made equal, and the peer review and monitoring system 
of the OECD Recommendations is a case in point. The FATF (FATF) 
Recommendations successfully developed and implemented global stand-
ards on money-laundering through ‘soft law’ (Pieth 1999). The second 
political aspect of the importance of the RBIBT is that it became a step-
ping-stone for further work at the OECD, but also the centerpiece of a 
systematic approach of state-sponsored coalition building in and between 
organizations.
The Making of the Global Anti-Corruption Eruption
In the 1994–1997 period, the foundations of the global anti-corruption 
architecture were laid out. The RBIBT constituted a landmark in this 
process because its adoption led to the introduction or re-introduction 
of the problem of corrupt practices (now predominantly understood as 
bribery) in the CoE, the EU, OAS, G7 and the UN. This section traces 
how this was carried out by OECD member states and how the agree-
ments in different venues developed and started influencing each other. 
While non-state actors played a role in this process, their efforts were 
shaped and reinforced by previous endeavors of state actors, in particu-
lar the United States, and the ongoing intergovernmental dynamics. The 
change of venues coupled with the instrumental use of publicity contrib-
uted to the success of the OECD initiative to outlaw corrupt payments 
and led to the adoption of anti-corruption instruments in other regional 
and global forums. The formal agreements reached in other venues then 
provided the legal and discursive underpinnings for the re-introduction 
of the subject at the UN.
An understanding of global problems as natural would treat the 
anti-corruption eruption of the 1990s as an automatic response to a 
worsened condition. International organizations started adopting formal 
anti-corruption rules because levels of corruption increased and differ-
ent organizations more or less automatically started trying to mitigate 
this increase. This approach brackets the role of member states as agenda 

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   189
setters in international organizations, as well as the overlapping member-
ship base of many organizations. The former means that except for the 
notable case of the European Commission, much of the agenda of inter-
national organizations is dominated by the interests of their members. 
The latter means that because of their overlapping membership, espe-
cially with EU member states, an agreement reached at one organiza-
tion might require talks to be held at another. The latter also means that 
states can hop from one international venue to another in search of a 
suitable environment for their grievances. Venue shopping (Baumgartner 
and Jones 2009) would be one prism through which to see the dynamics 
of the 1990s, but there is another element to this diffusion of venues. In 
the 1990s, the OECD became the major forum for the anti-corruption 
talks, and as this section shows, agreements in other venues were to some 
degree used instrumentally for reaching an agreement at the OECD.
The optimal solution of internationalizing the FCPA through a 
binding treaty was deemed not to be feasible at the OECD in the early 
1990s. One of the major stated obstacles was getting developing nations 
on board. Having made some progress with European partners at the 
OECD with the RBIBT, the US government approached the mem-
ber states of OAS. The US Office of Government Ethics and the US 
Information Agency launched the First International Conference on 
Ethics in Government in Washington DC in November 1994 (Feinberg 
1997). The following month, the Summit of the Americas in Miami 
made addressing corruption a priority for the organization. Feinberg 
(1997), who was personally involved in the negotiations, traces how 
the US government engaged other state actors prior to the topic being 
raised for the first time in OAS. An Interagency Working Group (IWG) 
was created in 1993 to deal with corruption in the framework of Inter-
American relations and was later renamed as the Democracy IWG. 
Michael Skol, who became Head of the IWG, had excellent knowledge 
of Venezuelan domestic politics through his work as US Ambassador 
to Caracas and expected that the US bid would be received well by the 
new Venezuelan government because the corruption-related scandals 
the country recently experienced had led to the impeachment of the 
president. Feinberg singles out winning Venezuela as an ally and receiv-
ing its support for the internationalization of the FCPA (in exchange 
for the inclusion of measures on extradition) as one of the major fac-
tors for the successful anti-corruption campaign in OAS. As part of the 
US consensus building strategy, a series of meetings were organized in 

190   E. KATZAROVA
Washington through the embassies of a small core of member states 
(Venezuela, Chile, Honduras and Ecuador) that carried out a consider-
able amount of work prior to the official announcement of corrupt prac-
tices as an agenda item in the Miami Summit (Feinberg 1997). The OAS 
Working Group on Probity and Ethics worked in close cooperation with 
the Washington Working Group. The drafts produced by the two groups 
‘paralleled’ each other and the US government managed to imprint its 
influence on the final draft of the Convention (119).
Even though the anti-bribery agenda constituted a top priority for the 
United States at the Summit, President Clinton was evasive of naming the 
practices ‘corrupt’ (Elliott 1997). As much as the word ‘corruption’ had a 
negative connotation, the trouble was that calling the practices ‘corrupt’ 
was also a direct reference to the ‘corrupt’ practices act that the US exec-
utive was trying to internationalize. It was the Vice President of Ecuador 
Alberto Dahik who was chairman of the Advisory body of TI who pro-
moted the explicit use of ‘corruption’ as an agenda item.13 The anti-cor-
ruption project was introduced into the general theme of probity and civic 
ethics raised by Chile in the post-Pinochet era (Manfroni and Werksman 
2003). As mentioned previously, the US government was interested in 
introducing the subject of transnational bribery and Venezuela was inter-
ested in establishing extradition and mutual assistance procedures in order 
to mitigate the consequences of the 1994 banking crisis (Feinberg 1997). 
The Chilean Ambassador to OAS, Edmundo Carreño presided over the 
Working Group on Probity and Ethics (Manfroni and Werksman 2003). 
The Working Group, comprised of national experts mandated by almost 
all member governments, met at the Washington headquarters of OAS 
a number of times in order to amend and prepare the draft text of the 
Convention (Carreño 2000). During the Summit of the Americas in 
Miami, the United States persuaded its partners to establish cooperation 
with the OECD Working Group on Bribery, which superseded the Ad 
Hoc Group on Illicit Payments in 1994 (Elliott 1997). As a consequence 
of this liaison, the OAS Group adopted a definition of the offense that 
almost verbatim reproduced the OECD preliminary definition (DAFFE/
IME/PI(93)1). The Convention was successfully adopted on March 29, 
1996, and Article VIII in practice internationalized the FCPA for the first 
time (Elliott 1997; Feinberg 1997).
13 Dahik himself had to leave Ecuador in 1995 on corruption charges, an incident that 
according to Galtung and Pope (1999) made TI realize that politicians should not be 
included in TI’s higher management.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   191
The leadership of the US executive through a technique of issue-spe-
cific coalition building was instrumental for the successful adoption of the 
Convention (Feinberg 1997). Feinberg credits the careful US preparatory 
work for diffusing the North–South tension on the global anti-bribery 
initiative. Furthermore, the liaison between OAS and the OECD Working 
Group proposed by the United States showed that the inter-Ameri-
can consensus would have positive repercussions for furthering the work 
of the OECD. The OAS Convention was indicative of an agreement 
between developing and developed nations on a common anti-bribery 
approach. The primarily US interest remained in the OECD, as interna-
tionalizing the FCPA among the members of OAS would not have been 
as consequential as convincing the major European investors to impose 
restrictions on their companies. The OAS progress, therefore, provided a 
bargaining chip for the United States at the OECD. Developing countries 
were finally on board with the US-sponsored anti-bribery campaign.
The OAS agreement also testified that the US issue-specific coalition 
building was effective. An essential aspect of the coalition building was 
that intergovernmental cooperation was enriched by meetings between 
the Democracy IWG and a number of INGOs such as the US section 
of the ICC and TI. Feinberg who was a special assistant to President 
Clinton and senior director of Inter-American Affairs at the National 
Security Council sought out TI’s support in early 1994 (Vogl 2012). 
Vogl, co-founder of TI, agreed to utilize TI’s connections in Latin 
America in order to convince another government to officially raise the 
question of corruption on the OAS agenda because: ‘the United States 
could not diplomatically raise the issue itself as this would be resented’ 
(185).14 The US success in building this broader coalition with non-gov-
ernmental actors even before the topic was raised in OAS was funda-
mental for the quick negotiation and successful adoption of the OAS 
Convention.
Involving INGOs and business actors has become a successful US 
strategy for issue-specific coalition building (Feinberg 1997). Proposals 
to include TI in the work of the OECD on corrupt payments were made 
immediately after the INGO was founded in 1993 (DAFFE/IME/
PI(93)5). As noted previously, President Clinton managed to secure 
TI’s support for the OECD initiative (Elliott 1997; Pope 2011). TI was 
14 This is how the support of the President of Costa Rica, Oscar Arias, and the Vice 
President of Ecuador, Alberto Dahik, was secured (Vogl 2012).

192   E. KATZAROVA
also very invested in facilitating a global solution to corrupt practices in 
international business transactions in particular. The US Chapter of the 
INGO carried out most of the correspondence with the OECD and it 
is emblematic that its slogan at the time was, ‘The coalition to curb cor-
ruption in international business transactions’ (TI-USA 1998). The main 
interlocutor with the OECD who submitted and presented reports at 
the Meeting of the OECD Working Group on Bribery in International 
Business Transactions was the Chairman of TI-USA Fritz Heimann. 
He was advocating a synergetic anti-corruption approach between gov-
ernments and companies and was urging governments to adopt the 
Recommendation on the tax deductibility of bribes, which was the next 
stepping-stone in the signing of a binding treaty in 1997 (Heimann 
1996a). The TI-USA Chairman also contributed in his dual capacity as 
a representative of the ICC and as a Counselor to the General Counsel 
of the General Electric Company (Heimann 1996b). The triple capacity 
of the main interlocutor with the OECD is revealing of the way in which 
the experience with the FCPA shaped the interests of American corpo-
rations and organized business in becoming anti-corruption activists. In 
the mid-1990s, a series of high-profile prosecutions by the Department 
of Justice, such as General Electric in 1994 and Lockheed in 1995, 
reminded US business to get on board with the government agenda of 
internationalizing the FCPA (Pieth 2013). The Chairman of the OECD 
WG on Bribery pointed to the ‘effective lobbying of the US business sec-
tor’ as a major contributing factor for the success of the OECD anti-cor-
ruption agenda (17).
While American companies were firmly behind their government’s 
agenda to promote an international anti-bribery pact, their major com-
petitors from other OECD member states were opposed to the endeavor 
and TI got involved in turning the opinion of members of the business 
community in the United Kingdom, France and Germany with some 
success (Vogl 2012). A series of meetings was carried out by TI with the 
German business representatives at the Aspen Institute in Berlin during 
the decisive years prior to the adoption of the OECD Convention (Eigen 
2013). TI managed to influence the position of the German business 
community on countering transnational bribery and this had an impact 
on the German government signing the OECD Convention.
TI is celebrated for its coalition building, but TI was also part of 
an intergovernmental coalition-building strategy with US leader-
ship. Furthermore, a broad network of interlocutors of civil society 

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   193
and business actors, as well as intergovernmental organizations and 
global financial institutions, was established from within the OECD. 
In March 1995, as a follow-up of the Symposium on Corruption and 
Good Governance, an anti-corruption network was created between the 
OECD as organizer and the OAS, CoE, the IMF, the World Bank, the 
UN, as well as other organizations (Symposium 1996). The Symposium 
gained considerable media attention in the Financial Times (FT), the 
International Herald Tribune and the BBC among many (Coburn 1995; 
Glynn et al. 1997). The reference of the former Costa Rican President, 
Oscar Sanchez, to the ‘cancer of corruption’ was particularly well 
received in global media outlets and the FT in particular (Adonis and 
Jack 1995). Reminiscent of the words of Senator Church in 1975 that: 
‘A cancer is eating away at the vitals of Western society and that can-
cer is corruption’ (quoted in Vogl 2012, 164), the ‘cancer is corruption’ 
slogan would later come to symbolize the policy change in the World 
Bank. By the time President Wolfensohn made his emblematic ‘cancer of 
corruption’ speech in October 1996, the anti-corruption agenda already 
had the intergovernmental seal of approval with the OAS Convention 
and the work underway in the OECD, CoE and the EU.
The role of the OECD as a facilitator was particularly important in 
creating broad coalitions among a range of actors. Special meetings with 
the private sector and INGOs (including TI and ICC) in the OECD 
were organized and they included representatives of the World Bank. 
Such formal meetings were carried out in 1996, for example, to inform 
the private sector about the Recommendation on tax deductibility of 
bribes and to receive feedback from business representatives on the pro-
posed route to criminalization (DAFFEE/IME/BR/A(96)6/REV1). In 
1996, the ICC revised its Rules of Conduct adopting much of the lan-
guage of the RBIBT and specifically urging governments to implement 
the measures proposed in the OECD Recommendation. In addition to a 
reference to the RBIBT, the revised text urged the World Bank and the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) to con-
tribute to the anti-corruption agenda (ICC Rules of Conduct 1996).
While the United States was keeping busy at the OAS, to which the 
Europeans had no access, European governments were shuffling the 
anti-bribery agenda item through organizations that the United States 
was excluded from. The RBIBT which led to the resurgence of the nego-
tiations at the OECD was immediately followed by the 19th Conference 
of European Ministers of Justice in Valletta in June 1994, which issued 

194   E. KATZAROVA
recommendations that prepared the ground for the Programme of Action 
against Corruption adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the CoE 
in November 1996 (Civil Law Convention on Corruption 1999b). The 
19th Conference was carried out under the theme of ‘Administrative, 
civil and penal aspects, including the role of the judiciary, of the fight 
against corruption’ and it examined the consequences of the RBIBT 
and the future work on predominantly civil and administrative (but also 
possibly criminal) measures against transnational corruption and bribery 
(CM(94)117). The Secretary-General of the CoE stressed the ‘European 
dimension of the problem facing old and new democracies alike’ and 
argued that the ‘response to the problem must be European as well’ and 
it entailed collective measures of European states (3). The Ministers of 
Justice discussed the issues raised at the OECD and the choice of reme-
dies set out in the RBIBT. Resolution 1 was indicative of the overlap with 
the agenda of the OECD Working Group and also established a Group on 
Corruption within the CoE which would map future action for European 
states (including the drafting of a Convention) that would be enacted in 
coordination with the OECD and the UN (19–21). The preference for 
administrative and civil measures was clearly discernible in these early CoE 
talks, and it was indicative of the vigor with which European countries 
opposed the US criminalization approach at the OECD.
The considerable overlap between the membership base of the OECD 
and the CoE made the latter a useful forum for the coordination of 
anti-corruption policies of European states. In 1994, nineteen members 
of the OECD were also members of the CoE, and after the accession 
of the Czech Republic (1995), Hungary (1996) and Poland (1996) 
to the OECD, the overlap increased to 22 common member states. 
Furthermore, the fact that most CoE members were also EU member 
states caused not only the spread of discussions from one organization to 
another, but also later the explicit coordination of the negotiations lead-
ing to the Common Position of October 6, 1997, and the Second Joint 
Position of November 13, 1997, concerning the coordination of work 
on corrupt practices underway in the three organizations, so as to avoid 
conflict or duplication (Szarek-Manson 2010).15 The need to coordinate 
positions and policies in order to achieve a common legal basis on issues 
15 When work advanced at the UN, coordination was necessary in 4 organizations and 
this was reflected in the Coordinated Position for the UN, adopted by the Council of the 
EU on February 28, 2001 (Szarek-Mason 2010).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   195
between EU members led to the inclusion of anti-corruption measures 
in the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities’ 
Financial Interests, adopted on July 26, 1995. Later, the EU Convention 
against Corruption Involving Public Officials was adopted on May 26, 
1997, and its main goal was to ensure that members adopted criminal 
provisions which would cover cases of bribery not only of their national 
public officials, but also of holders of public office in other EU member 
states. In this way, the EU created an albeit limited system of criminali-
zation of corruption of foreign public officials within its own member-
ship base before the adoption of the OECD Convention on Combating 
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions 
in December of the same year. The key here was that the EU agreement 
was not valid for third parties, but only between the members of the 
organization. This seemingly innocuous detail was a powerful bargaining 
tool for the OECD talks. If the approach adopted here was to be applied 
in the OECD Convention that would have meant that bribery of foreign 
officials would have been criminalized only among the members of the 
OECD and not in developing countries, for example.
The EU and CoE initiatives are best understood in conjunction with 
the progression of the OECD talks after the adoption of the RBIBT. As 
it was evident in the negotiation of he RBIBT itself, at first the European 
states were interested in discarding the criminalization approach that the 
United States was promoting in relation to internationalizing the FCPA. 
Later on, in preparation for increasingly likely negotiations of a binding 
treaty in 1997, if criminalization was to be chosen, it was preferable that 
the EU model of an inter partes treaty be applied to the OECD instru-
ment as well. These ingenious tactics of the European countries and the 
United States led to the diffusion of the talks into a number of venues 
and are given further attention in this chapter.
The Instrumental Use of Venues and Publicity: The 
OECD Convention and Beyond
If we are to look at the anti-corruption eruption of the mid-1990s with 
the fresh eyes of somebody, who was unaware of the confidential inter-
governmental talks that had been going on for decades, a clear picture 
would emerge. An explosion of corruption scandals in the mid-1990s 
was clearly driving the anti-corruption campaign. That was particularly 

196   E. KATZAROVA
valid for the European member states in the OECD. An imposing num-
ber of European partners were facing domestic crises concerning what 
Harris (2003) calls the small ‘c’—that is, corruption scandals that are 
symptomatic of the broader phenomenon of corruption, but do not 
exhaust it. Italy, France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom all 
experienced a series of corruption-related political scandals and instabil-
ity (Della Porta and Mény 1997). It looked like a number of state actors 
within and outside of Europe faced similar crises of political legitimacy 
as the United States did in the 1970s. All of these cases of alleged cor-
ruption within nation states led the FT to categorize 1995 as the ‘Year 
of Corruption’ while a joint survey of FT, The Economist and New York 
Times showed that there had been a fourfold increase in reporting on 
corruption between 1984 and 1995 (Tanzi 1998). At the same time, as 
Vogl (2012) also observes, the corruption-related political scandals of 
the 1970s were no less turbulent. They were severe in the United States, 
but also implicated other Western democracies. Yet, the corruption scan-
dals of the 1970s did not generate enough support for the US interna-
tional ban on bribery. What was different in the 1990s? While the next 
chapter tries to articulate a more systematic response to this question, 
this chapter argues that the instrumental use of venues and publicity was 
the determining factor for the success of the US bid on transnational 
bribery in the 1990s. It was the US strategy to connect these national, 
highly reported, occurrences of the small ‘c’ to the issue of transnational 
bribery through the ‘calculated use of public diplomacy’ that made the 
difference in the 1990s (Glynn et al. 1997, 20).
The corruption accusations in OECD member states, such as France 
(Fay 1995), the United Kingdom and Spain, influenced the climate of 
the OECD negotiation process in the mid-1990s (Della Porta and Mény 
1997), but were in no way sufficient in and of themselves to steer an 
international approach to corruption, and in particular to transnational 
bribery. The ‘sensitization’ of the European public to the subject of cor-
ruption was successfully employed by US officials, who ‘observed the 
high level of European public interest in all aspects of corruption, includ-
ing the OECD discussions’ (Abbott and Snidal 2002, 164). As Abbott 
and Snidal observe, political scandals culminating in the mid-1990s made 
the European public highly attentive to issues of corruption and State 
Department officials managed to link the preoccupation with domestic 
corruption to the question of transnational bribery. It is a valid assump-
tion to make that these cases of national corruption scandals must have 

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   197
made some of the US partners more susceptible to support an OECD-
sponsored anti-corruption instrument. This is why the success of the 
‘vague’ RBIBT has been attributed to the US attempt to bring ‘domestic 
political pressure, motivated by value considerations’ to the negotiation 
table (Abbott and Snidal 2002, 164). At the same time, there was no 
indication that these national troubles with corruption would become 
a global issue with a formidable global governance architecture. The 
scandals in European countries from the mid-1990s might have caused 
national reforms and even international declarations of concern, but in 
no way were they in and of themselves related to the US bid to crimi-
nalize transnational bribery, and as we already saw, it was that bid, which 
was driving the talks at the OECD, the OAS, and to a significant extent 
the EU and the CoE.
In addition to US leadership, other factors inherent to the inter-
nal workings of the OECD, such as controversy management and the 
progressive study of feasibility, as well as the expert Chairmanship of 
Mark Pieth, contributed to the success of the OECD talks. The Council 
Recommendation of 1994 differed from the general political statements 
against corrupt practices of the 1970s because of the specific provisions 
for review and follow-up procedures that were included under title VIII 
(C(94)75/FINAL). The monitoring provisions prompted a peer review 
process, which turned ‘into one of the most dynamic instruments of 
international law’ (Pieth 2013, 17). Title IX specifically provided for a 
review within 3 years, which led to the revision of the Recommendation 
on May 23, 1997, this time specifically in the line of criminalization 
(C(97)123/FINAL). Furthermore, on April 11, 1996, another issue 
which had come out of the feasibility study of the Ad Hoc Group, 
the tax deductibility of bribes, was adopted in the Recommendation 
on tax deductibility (C(96)27/FINAL). In fact, the two Council 
Recommendations remained the major testimonies of the political com-
mitment of states to tackle bribery even after the adoption of the binding 
treaty (Pieth 2013). The RBIBT, in particular, set in motion a process of 
peer review and monitoring that secured steady progress.
After the RBIBT, the battle was not to agree on the existence of a prob-
lem, which the United States managed to narrow down to bribery, but to 
push for criminal measures. European partners, in particular Germany and 
France (at first joined by the United Kingdom), were resisting the US attempt 
to promote criminalization by internationalizing the FCPA (DAFFE/IME/

198   E. KATZAROVA
BR/RD(95)1).16 The US State Department wanted a binding treaty, but 
as this appeared infeasible was content with the recommendation on tax 
deductibility and the revision of the RBIBT in the direction of criminaliza-
tion (Abbott and Snidal 2002). Germany and France, however, proposed a 
binding treaty, with the former choosing the UN as the venue for negotiation 
and the latter preferring the WTO (Pieth 2013). This seemingly counterin-
tuitive joint move by the German and French delegations was done in order 
to deflect talks for a binding instrument to organizations that were chosen 
because of the likelihood of stalemate. The pre-negotiation talks at the UN 
were still referred to as the ‘disaster of 1976’ (Blum 2009, 2) and the US 
executive had historically avoided raising the issue of illicit payments at GATT 
and the WTO.17,18
Pieth (2018) credits the Deputy-Director of Directorate for Financial, 
Fiscal and Enterprise Affairs (DAFFE) at the time, Rainer Geiger, for 
calling the European bluff and proposing a Convention at the OECD. 
While prior to the RBIBT in 1994, the US delegation was pushing for a 
Treaty, Pieth managed to convince them to explore the Recommendation 
option, based on the positive experience with FATF. The return to the 
Convention route at the OECD, therefore, came as an unexpected turn 
of events at this stage. The threat by the reluctant European partners to 
move the talks to the UN or the WTO provides another example of the 
instrumental use of venues during the pre-negotiation talks.
The OECD partners were also bringing agreements reached in other 
organizations to the negotiation table. Work underway in regional 
organizations, such as OAS, the EU and the CoE, became part of the 
persuasion strategies of both camps. The United States was using the 
OAS Convention to invalidate the argument that criminalizing the 
supply side of bribes constituted interference in the domestic affairs of 
another state (or the sovereignty of the so-called host countries). In 
16 The ‘re-discovery’ of the 1906 Prevention of Corruption Act and the repercussions 
of the ‘cash for questions’ controversy had a definitive impact on the UK position and the 
new government (formed in May 1997) wanted to take a strong stance against corruption 
(Alldridge 2012; Bean 2012).
17 As discussed in Chapter 4, Senate Resolution 265 of 1975 specified GATT as the insti-
tutional forum for negotiations, but representatives of the US executive did not concur 
with this strategy, as they judged it would have been highly unlikely to reach consensus at 
GATT.
18 The United States did raise the issue of transparency in procurement at the WTO, but 
after the adoption of the OECD Convention (International Trade Commission 1997).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   199
fact, after the adoption of the OAS Convention, Tarullo argued that the 
member states of OAS ‘suggest that governments of developed coun-
tries… by failing to act against foreign bribery by their own multination-
als, [are] complicit in the bribery’ (quoted in Ashe 2005, 2912). While 
the US delegation used the agreement at OAS as a bargaining tool, the 
European partners used the agreements reached at the CoE and the EU 
to set the tone of the OECD agreement. France and Germany presented 
a draft Convention based on the texts negotiated at the EU and the 
CoE (Pieth 2013). The EU Convention against Corruption Involving 
Public Officials (May 26, 1997) was adopted prior to the negotiations 
for a binding Treaty at the OECD, which commenced in October, and 
it criminalized bribery of holders of public office in other EU mem-
ber states, but not in third counties (European Union 1998). If this 
approach was to be applied to the OECD Convention, as Germany and 
France wanted, it would have entailed criminalization only among mem-
bers of the OECD (or the countries that sign the Convention); in other 
words, Germany, for example, would have made it illegal for a German 
company to bribe an official in Canada, but not in Bangladesh or 
Venezuela. This, albeit significant, concession would not have been satis-
factory for the United States, because it would not have provided global 
coverage and would have internationalized the FCPA only incompletely. 
The United States rebuffed the European inter partes approach by argu-
ing that only a global coverage would be legitimate (Abbott and Snidal 
2002). The goal of the US delegation was to reach an agreement for the 
criminalization of bribery in countries outside the OECD area.
Targeting the OECD as the primary forum to address the corrupt 
payments issue in 1989 was a strategic move to internationalize the 
FCPA among the main US investment competitors at the time. The US 
preference can also be explained with the historic and financial influence 
that it has at the OECD—historic because the organization was created 
in 1948 to implement the Marshall Plan for postwar Europe, and finan-
cial because the United States was still the biggest contributor, provid-
ing 22% of the organization’s budget. As Carolyn Ervin, counselor at 
Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs (DAF) at the OECD, put 
it in a fax to Pieth referring to a visit of the organization’s Secretary-
General to the United States: ‘He [Donald Johnston] intends that brib-
ery be one of his major points for persuading Washington of how useful 
is the OECD.’ The US delegation to the OECD had the political clout 

200   E. KATZAROVA
to retain the issue of corrupt payments on the agenda of the organiza-
tion for the period 1989–1994 when little concern for the transnational 
aspect of such practices existed among other member states.
While what was happening in the OECD was important, external 
strategies were just as important, and they did not concern solely the 
OAS, the EU and the CoE. The most important external element that 
contributed to the success of the OECD talks was the instrumental use 
of publicity or the use of public diplomacy (Glynn et al. 1997; Abbott 
and Snidal 2002). As discussed previously, just because all the major 
European OECD members (Germany, France, United Kingdom, Italy 
and Spain) underwent a series of corruption-related political scandals did 
not mean that an international approach would be automatically sought 
after. In fact, connecting these broader domestic corruption issues to 
transnational bribery through the instrumental use of publicity was a 
way of turning national troubles into global problems, to paraphrase the 
famous formulation by Mills (1959). US officials managed to interlock 
public concerns over democratic accountability and national corruption 
with transnational bribery through the European press, which was atten-
tive to suggestions that national politicians appeared supportive of brib-
ery in an international context (Abbott and Snidal 2002). As Glynn et al. 
(1997) also confirm: ‘American officials took their case to the interna-
tional media, which proved remarkably receptive’ (21).
The OECD press reviews from the period 1994–1997 show an 
overwhelming interest in the OECD talks with thousands of publica-
tions referring to the organization’s anti-corruption effort and relat-
ing it to national corruption scandals. At the same time, media interest 
peaked around the adoption of the revised recommendation in May 
1997 and the months covering the negotiation of the treaty (October–
December 1997). The Journal of Commerce, the Washington Post, the 
International Herald Tribune, The New York Times, The France Press 
Agency, Le Monde, The Yomiuri Shimbun all published series of arti-
cles reflecting on the position of France and Germany as obstructive and 
quoting US officials who criticized the strategies of the two European 
countries to block the US proposal to outlaw bribery (Blustein 1997). 
While the tax deductibility of bribes was discussed at CIME with the 
Fiscal Affair Committee, the US Trade Representative, Michael Kantor, 
threatened that the United States would impose trade sanctions on the 
reluctant European partners and that (most likely unsubstantiated) threat 
received broad media coverage (Glynn et al. 1997).

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   201
This mounting pressure through the media in which the positions of 
countries were publicly exposed was the culmination of the strategy of 
public diplomacy that ultimately provided part of the external impetus 
to adopt the Revised Recommendation in May 1997 and the OECD 
Convention in December of the same year. From within the OECD and 
CIME, in particular, work on controversy management continued and 
a list of ‘Agreed Common Elements’ was provided on which consensus 
for the Revised Recommendation and/or the proposed binding instru-
ment would later be built (Pieth 2013). While these elements provided 
the backbone for agreement, the key to the successful resolution of the 
OECD talks was lying in another change of institutional setting: the G7. 
As a TI Press Release (1998) put it later: ‘G7 Summit holds the key to 
Global Anti-Bribery Treaty.’ While OECD member states were the target 
audience for US efforts to internationalize the FCPA, the US strategy 
from the start was to concentrate on the G7 (Pieth 2018). A series of 
meetings were organized prior to the 23rd G7 Summit in Denver. The 
meeting of the G7 Ministers and Central Bank Governors on April 27, 
1997, in Washington produced a statement of support for the anti-cor-
ruption work of the  (IFIs) and the OECD (Washington G7 Meeting). 
Following the Communiqué of G7 Finance Ministers was a series of pre-
paratory meetings between Washington, DC and Airlie Center, VA on 
May 22–24, 1997, that proved to be decisive for reaching a compromise 
between OECD member states (The White House 2014).
The US executive was prepared to move forward without France 
and Germany and requested the support of the United Kingdom, but 
Tarullo, who was Clinton’s personal representative to the Summit, 
attempted to secure the Franco-German agreement, as the following tel-
egram from the OECD Archives reveals:
He [US Representative to OECD, Alan Larson] thought that the Germans 
might be prepared to move towards accepting the US conditions. Since 
the ECSS, the US had lobbied them at high level (letters from Attorney 
General Reno and Commerce Secretary Daley to their counterparts). In 
circulating the revised draft G7 statement, they had made clear US read-
iness to take this to the Summit. Tarullo would be pressing hard at Airlie 
House. Kohl would not wish to be embarrassed at Denver. (Washington 
Embassy Telegram 1997)

202   E. KATZAROVA
As Pieth (2018) notes, ‘between spring and autumn 1997 intensive lob-
bying took place’ through US embassies in key capitals (83). Reaching, 
what Pieth (2013) calls the ‘compromise of May 1997,’ ensured that in 
case the negotiations of a binding instrument failed by April 1, 1998, 
members would nonetheless enact criminalization measures in accord-
ance with the Revised Recommendation (19). The fate of the OECD 
Convention was also decided when the G7 members agreed to proceed 
with ratification (Pieth 2013). The exact way in which the compromise 
of May 1997, which essentially secured the criminalization of bribery, was 
reached remains unspecified, but the change of venues, the instrumen-
tal use of publicity and the ‘embarrassment factor’ remained an effective 
part of the persuasion arsenal of the US President’s personal representa-
tive. Abbott and Snidal (2002) note that: ‘Tarullo carried with him (or 
told people he did) a list of the 10 largest bribe-paying companies in the 
world’ and he would threaten to make the list public with a tap on his 
pocket (164). Through public diplomacy and the threat of publicity, the 
US executive would essentially recreate the consequences of the public 
revulsion that took over Europe and the United States in the 1970s, but 
as Abbott and Snidal point out, the public distaste for corrupt practices in 
Europe was not mobilized in the 1970s, the way it was in the 1990s.
The key to signing the Convention on December 17, 1997, can be 
seen to lie in the compromise enshrined in Section 3 of the Revised 
Recommendation, which ensured that criminalization measures would 
be enacted by April 1998, even if the negotiation of a binding instru-
ment failed. This development is revealing of how the neglected period 
of pre-negotiations is much more important than usually assumed. In the 
social construction of problems, the decision to open treaty negotiations 
would suggest a high level of intersubjective agreement on the parame-
ters of the problem. This is not to say that the negotiation of the binding 
treaty was not a difficult process. Metcalfe (2000) provides an elaborate 
account of the negotiation process itself and shows that the negotiation 
was an abrasive process, of which the participants were not ‘enamored’ 
(150). The main reason for that, however, was the last minute introduc-
tion by the United States of the divisive issue of criminalization of pay-
ments to foreign political parties (Metcalfe 2000). The particular issue 
did not make it into the final text, but criminalization as the ‘strongest 
form of condemnation’ (Abbott and Snidal 2002, 167) testified to the 
formal seriousness that OECD member states now attributed to the 
problem of corrupt payments.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   203
The specific facet of corruption, defined as transnational bribery, 
enshrined in the OECD Convention and the Council Recommendations 
appeared as a threshold through which corruption arrived publicly on 
the intergovernmental and global agendas. This is also formally acknowl-
edged in the explicit statement of influence or the discursive impact of 
the RBIBT and the OECD Convention on agreements reached in inter-
national organizations, such as the CoE, the EU, OAS and the UN (in 
particular Article 16 of UNCAC).19 With the OECD, the OAS, the EU 
and CoE being on board with the anti-corruption agenda, the UN fol-
lowed suit with the Global Program Against Corruption in March 1999. 
Elaboration on a potential global instrument commenced the following 
year with the UN General Assembly Resolution 55/61. The final ver-
sion of the UN Convention Against Corruption was ready by the end of 
2003 and entered into force on December 14, 2005.
A few elements contributed to the re-introduction of the topic of cor-
rupt payments to the UN in a different tone. The most important one 
was that the UNCTC was abolished in 1992 under a US-inspired finan-
cial restructuring of the organization and the work on the Code of 
Conduct was suspended. Following the adoption of the two OECD 
Recommendations in December 1996, the US Department of State spon-
sored the UN Declaration Against Corruption and Bribery in International 
Commercial Transactions (Department of State 1997). The Declaration 
51/191 closely followed the language of the RBIBT urging states to crimi-
nalize corruption and bribery of foreign public officials and to proscribe the 
tax deductibility of bribes. A year earlier on December 20, 1995, Resolution 
50/106 was adopted, which in Article 6 urged ECOSOC to decide on 
a time frame for the UN Draft Agreement on Illicit Payments developed 
19 As it was noted earlier, the RBIBT of 1994 which led to the resurgence of the nego-
tiations at the OECD was paralleled by the recommendations of the 19th Conference 
of European Ministers of Justice in Valletta in 1994 that prepared the ground for the 
‘Programme of Action against Corruption’ adopted by the Committee of Ministers of 
the CoE in November 1996. Resolution 1, adopted by the European Ministers of Justice 
at their 21st Conference in Prague in 1997, followed the adoption of the revised OECD 
Recommendation and urged for the implementation of the Program. In the EU, the 
Common Position 97/661/JHA from October 6, 1997, defined by the Council on nego-
tiations in the CoE and the OECD relating to corruption, also established a formal link 
between the adoption of the RBIBT, the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention and the subse-
quent Criminal and Civil Law Conventions on Corruption adopted in 1999.

204   E. KATZAROVA
under the auspices of the eponymous commission (A/RES/51/191).20 
The Draft Agreement on Illicit Payments from 1978 (UNTERM 2014) 
was based on the FCPA. Boswell (1997) argued that the UN Declaration 
against Corruption and Bribery from 1996 was indicative of the expand-
ing political will to approach globally the question of corruption and brib-
ery in particular. In 1999, however, when the UN Secretary-General was 
launching the Global Compact at the World Economic Forum, he was still 
reluctant to talk about anti-corruption provisions (Vogl 2012). Despite the 
Declaration from December 1996, anti-corruption legislation was slower to 
emerge at the UN. Vogl (2012) credits the fact that other regional organi-
zations came to develop anti-corruption instruments, as well as the mount-
ing pressure from the Clinton Administration to investigate bribery and 
kickbacks in the Oil-for-Food Program, as incentives for anti-corruption 
work at the UN in the late 1990s.
Following the Global Program Against Corruption in March 1999 
and after the inclusion of provisions on corruption in the United 
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) 
in December 2000, the decision to work toward an international legal 
instrument against corruption was taken by the General Assembly (A/
RES/55/61). The Ad Hoc Committee for the Negotiation of the 
Convention against Corruption met over seven sessions in the period 
from January 2002 to October 2003. As the declassification period of 
the UN documents is 20 years, records and minutes from the pre-ne-
gotiation talks and the negotiation of the UNCAC Treaty are not yet 
made available. The former chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee for the 
negotiation of a Convention against Corruption, Dr. M. Touq, has elab-
orated that while criminalization was seen as the sensible way forward by 
all states, UN members were ‘bitterly divided over the definition of cor-
ruption’ (Touq 2013). Another source of initial controversy was that the 
G77 and China wanted to include illegal transfer of funds, which led to 
the provision on asset recovery (Vlassis 2004).
The final text of the Convention had significantly broadened the type 
of covered practices, such as trading in influence and private sector cor-
ruption (UNODC 2014). The point of view had shifted, however, and 
as the next chapter shows, this cannot be entirely explained with the end 
of the Cold War and the natural waning of ideological controversies. 
20 This line of work was carried out in accordance with the UN Crime Prevention 
Congresses and was discussed in Chapter 6.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   205
Furthermore, by the time the UNCAC was negotiated, it was seen as the 
cumulative work on top of a number of intersecting legal regimes that had 
already been put into place in regional organizations (Touq 2013). From 
a constructivist vantage point, the agreements reached in regional organ-
izations and the OECD discursively shaped the parameters of debate for 
the UN as well. Although ‘UNCAC expands past definitions of corrup-
tion’ (Eicher 2012, 120), the question of corrupt payments in the UN in 
the 1990s had lost its radical potential in comparison with the talks in the 
1970s. The UN debates on corruption were no longer challenging the 
rules of the international economic system and the power of multinational 
corporations to shape politics. The global anti-corruption campaign had 
shifted its focus from corporate to government abuse of power, and this 
dramatic change is given further attention in the final chapter.
References
Abbott, Kenneth W., and Duncan Snidal. 2002. “Values and Interests: 
International Legalization in the Fight Against Corruption.” Journal of Legal 
Studies 31 (1): 141–178.
Adonis, Andrew, and Andrew Jack. 1995. “OECD to Press for Anti-Corruption 
Laws.” Financial Times, March 21. Copy in the OECD Archives.
Alldridge, P. W. 2012. “The U.K. Bribery Act: ‘The Caffeinated Younger Sibling 
of the FCPA’.” Ohio State Law Journal 73 (5): 1181–1216.
Ashe, Daniel Patrick. 2005. “The Lengthening Anti-Bribery Lasso of the United 
States: The Recent Extraterritorial Application of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act.” The Fordham Law Review 73 (6): 2897.
Baumgartner, Frank, and Bryan Jones. 2009. Agendas and Instability in 
American Politics. 2nd ed. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press.
Bean, Bruce W. 2012. “Further to Professor Alldridge’s ‘Caffeinated’ Article: 
What ‘Stuff’ Did the Professor Have in Mind?” Working Paper, Social Science 
Research Network.
Blum, Jack. 2009. “Testimony on the Problem of Curbing Grand Scale Global 
Corruption Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of 
Representatives.” 111th Congress, 1st Session, May 19.
Blustein, Paul. 1997. “Fight Looms over Foreign Bribery: France, Germany 
Blocking Efforts to Outlaw Practice, U.S. Officials Say.” Washington Post, 
May 9. Copy in OECD Archives.
Boswell, Nancy Zucker. 1997. “Emerging Consensus on Controlling 
Corruption.” Journal of International Law 18 (4): 44–69.
Business Anti-Corruption Portal. 2014. “Compliance Resources.” Accessed 
October 22, 2014. http://www.business-anti-corruption.com/.

206   E. KATZAROVA
C(94)75/FINAL. 1994. Recommendation of the Council on Bribery in 
International Business Transactions, Adopted by the Council on 27 1994 at Its 
829th Session (July 11). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(96)27/FINAL. 1996. Recommendation of the Council on the Tax Deductibility 
of Bribes to Foreign Public Officials, Adopted by the Council on 11 April 1996 at 
Its 873rd Session (April 17). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
C(97)123/FINAL. 1997. Revised Recommendation of the Council on Bribery in 
International Business Transactions, Adopted by the Council at Its 901st Session 
on 23 May 1997 (May 30). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Carreño, Edmundo Vargas. 2000. “The Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption.” Paper Presented at the Conference for Transparency and 
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, Lima, Peru, February 8–10.
Coburn, Sara. 1995. “OECD Symposium Against Bribery.” BBC TV1, March 
13. Copy of transcript in the OECD Archives.
Common Position 97/661/JHA. 1997. “Common Position Drawn Up on the 
Basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union on Negotiations in the 
Council of Europe and the OECD Relating to Corruption.” Official Journal 
L 279 (October 6): 1–2.
Conference of European Ministers of Justice. 1995. Administrative, Civil, 
and Penal Aspects, Including the Role of the Judiciary, of the Fight against 
Corruption. Proceedings, 19th Conference of European Ministers of Justice 
CM(94)117, June 14–15, 1994, Valletta, Malta. Strasbourg: Council of 
Europe Publishing.
Council of Europe. 1999a. Criminal Law Convention on Corruption = Convention 
Pénale Sur La Corruption. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publication.
———. 1999b. Civil Law Convention on Corruption: And Explanatory Report. 
Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.
DAFFE/IME/PI(91)1. Agenda. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (June 13, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(91)2. Feasibility Study on Available International Means for Dealing with 
Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions. Ad Hoc Group on 
Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (June 13, 1991). OECD Archives, 
Paris Headquarters.
———(91)2/REV1. Feasibility Study on Available International Means for 
Dealing with Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions. 
Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (September 30, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(91)3. Summary Record of the Meeting Held 13–14 June 1991. Ad Hoc 
Group on Illicit Payments (September 23, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
———(91)4. Agenda. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (September 23, 1991). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   207
———(91)5. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions: 
Question of Future Work in OECD. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note 
by the Secretariat (October 2, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(91)5/ANN2. Annex 2. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (October 2, 
1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(91)7. Illicit Payments In International Commercial Transactions. Report 
by the Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (November 21, 1991). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(91)7/ANN1. Annex 1: Feasibility Study on Available International 
Means for Dealing with Illicit Payments in International Commercial 
Transactions 
(November 
21, 
1991). 
OECD 
Archives, 
Paris  
Headquarters.
———(91)7/ANN2. Annex 2: Observations by the Italian Delegation 
(November 21, 1991). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(92)2. Agenda. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (June 16, 1992). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(92)3. Illicit Payments in International Commercial Transactions. Ad Hoc 
Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (June 18, 1992). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(92)3/ANN. Annex: Substantive Elements to be Considered Together with 
Procedural Options (June 18, 1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/PI(92)3/REV1. Illicit Payments in International Commercial 
Transactions. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (October 9, 1992). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(92)3/REV2. Feasibility Study on Illicit Payments in International 
Commercial Transactions. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (December 4, 
1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(92)3/REV3. Feasibility Study on Illicit Payments in International 
Commercial Transactions. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments (December 17, 
1992). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME(93)11. Private Business Practices. Note by the Secretariat (April 
14, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)17. Programme of Work 1994. Note by the Secretariat (April 7, 
1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)21. Illicit Payments, Note by the Secretariat (April 15, 1993) OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/PI(93)1. Elements of Recommendation—General Considerations. 
Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Notes by the Netherlands Delegation 
(August 23, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)2. Elements of Recommendation—Definition and Domestic Action. Ad 
Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Notes by the Italian Delegation (August 23, 
1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.

208   E. KATZAROVA
———(93)3. Elements of Recommendation—International Cooperation. Ad Hoc 
Group on Illicit Payments, Notes by the United States Delegation (August 
23, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)5. Assimilation. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the 
German Delegation (August 23, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)6. Tax Treatment of Illicit Payments. Note by the Secreatriat (August 
27, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)9. Report on the OECD Recommendation on the Bribery of Foreign 
Public Officials. Report to the CIME (October 26, 1993). OECD Archives, 
Paris Headquarters.
———(93)10. Draft Recommendation of the Council on the Bribery of Foreign 
Public Officials. Ad Hoc Group on Illicit Payments, Note by the Unites States 
Delegation (December 7, 1993). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
———(93)11. Report on the OECD Recommendation on Bribery in International 
Business Transactions. Draft Report to the CIME, Ad Hoc Group on Illicit 
Payments, Note by the United States Delegation (December 27, 1993). 
OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/BR/RD(95)1. Criminalisation of Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials. Working Group on Bribery in International Business Transactions 
(October 11, 1995). OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/BR(96)2. Implementation of the Recommendation on Bribery 
in International Business Transactions. Draft Report of the CIME to the 
1996 Meeting of the Council at Ministerial Level (March 27, 1996). OECD 
Archives, Paris Headquarters.
DAFFE/IME/BR/A(96)6/REV1. Agenda. Working Group on Bribery in 
International Business Transactions (November 6, 1996). OECD Archives, 
Paris Headquarters.
Della Porta, Donatella, and Yves Mény, eds. 1997. Democracy and Corruption in 
Europe. London: Pinter.
Department of State. 1997. “Promoting the Model Business Principles.” 
Department of State Publication 104846. Accessed August 20, 2016. 
http://library.law.columbia.edu/urlmirror/4/PromotingtheModel­
BusinessPrinciples.htm.
Eicher, Sharon. 2012. Corruption in International Business: The Challenge of 
Cultural and Legal Diversity. Farnham: Gower Publishing.
Eigen, Peter. 2013. “International Corruption: Organized Civil Society for 
Better Global Governance.” Social Research: An International Quarterly 80 
(4): 1287–1308.
Elliott, Kimberly Ann. 1997. “Corruption as an International Policy Problem: 
Overview and Recommendations.” In Corruption and the Global Economy, 
edited by Kimberley A. Elliott, 175–233. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute 
for International Economics.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   209
Ervin, Carolyn, fax to M. Pieth. September 23, 1996. OECD Archives, Paris 
Headquarters.
European Union. 1998. “Convention Drawn Up on the Basis of Article K.3 
(2) (C) of the Treaty on European Union on the Fight Against Corruption 
Involving Officials of the European Communities or Officials of Member 
States of the European Union: (May 26, 1997).” International Legal 
Materials: Current Documents 37: 12–21.
FCPA Enforcement. 2018. The FCPA Top Ten List. Accessed June 10, 2018. 
http://www.fcpablog.com/blog/2018/6/7/socgen-replaces-total-sa-on-
the-top-ten-list.html.
Feinberg, Richard E. 1997. Summitry in the Americas: A Progress Report. 
Washington, DC: Peterson Institute.
Galtung, Fredrik, and Jeremy Pope. 1999. “The Global Coalition Against 
Corruption: Evaluating Transparency International.” In The Self-Restraining 
State: Power and Accountability in New Democracies, edited by Andreas 
Schedler, Marc Plattner, and Larry Jay Diamond, 257–285. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Glynn, Patrick, Stephen Kobrin, and Moises Naim. 1997. “The Globalization of 
Corruption.” In Corruption and the Global Economy, edited by Kimberly Ann 
Elliott, 7–31. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute.
Harris, Robert. 2003. Political Corruption: In and Beyond the Nation State. 
London: Routledge.
Heimann, Fritz. 1996a. “Will There Be a Tipping Point in the Fight Against 
International Bribery: The Synergy Between Government and Business 
Measures to Curb Corruption.” Presented at Meeting of OECD Working 
Group on Bribery in International Business Transactions, Paris, France, 
November 6.
———. 1996b. “The Role of the ICC in Combating Extortion and Bribery.” 
Presented at Meeting of OECD Working Group on Bribery in International 
Business Transactions, Paris, France, November 6.
International Trade Commission. 1997. Operation of the Trade Agreements 
Program, the Year in Trade, 49th Report. Collingdale, PA: Diane Publishing.
Larson, Alan. 1997. “US Policy on Corruption.” In Corruption and the Global 
Economy, edited by Kimberly Ann Elliott, 237–241. Washington, DC: 
Peterson Institute.
Manfroni, Carlos A., and Richard S. Werksman. 2003. The Inter-American 
Convention Against Corruption: Annotated with Commentary. Lanham, MD: 
Lexington Books.
Metcalfe, D. 2000. “The OECD Agreement to Criminalize Bribery: A 
Negotiation Analytic Perspective.” International Negotiation 5 (1): 129–155.
Mills, C. Wright. 1959. The Sociological Imagination. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

210   E. KATZAROVA
Pieth, Mark. 1999. “International Efforts to Combat Corruption.” Paper 
Presented at the 9th International Anti-Corruption Conference (IACC), 
Durban, South Africa, October 10–15.
———. 2013. “Introduction.” In The OECD Convention on Bribery: A 
Commentary, edited by Mark Pieth Lucinda A. Low, and Nicola Bonucci, 
3–56. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2018. “Bribing Foreign Officials: The OECD Anticorruption 
Instruments.” In Confronting Corruption: Past Concerns, Present Challenges, 
and Future Strategies, edited by Fritz Heimann and Mark Pieth, 75–101. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pope, Jeremy. 2011. “Getting Integrity Reforms Adopted Internationally.” In 
Delivering Policy Reform: Anchoring Significant Reforms in Turbulent Times, 
edited by Evert A. Lindquist, Sam Vincent, and John Wanna, 145–167. 
Canberra: ANU Press.
Spector, Malcolm, and John Kitsuse. 2009. Constructing Social Problems. 4th ed. 
Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Symposium on Corruption and Good Governance. 1996. OECD Working 
Papers (34) 4, OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Szarek-Mason, Patrycja. 2010. The European Union’s Fight Against Corruption: 
The Evolving Policy Towards Member States and Candidate Countries. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tanzi, Vito. 1998. “Corruption Around the World: Causes, Consequences, 
Scope, and Cures.” IMF Staff Papers 45 (1): 559–594.
TI Press Release. 1998. “G 7 Summit holds Key to Global Anti-
Bribery Treaty: Canada, France, Italy and UK Must take First Step.” 
Accessed 
September 
20, 
2014. 
http://www.transparency.org/news/
pressrelease/g_7_summit_holds_key_to_global_anti_bribery_treaty.
The White House. 2014. “Summit of the Eight: The Sherpas.” Accessed 
October 22. http://clinton5.nara.gov/WH/New/Eight/sherpa.html.
Touq, Muhyieddeen. 2013. “UNCAC is the Fastest Convention in History.” 
TI Deutschland. Accessed August 6, 2015. http://www.transparency.de/
UNCAC-is-the-fastest-conventio.2414.0.html.
UNCTAD. 2002. “UNCTC Evolution: United Nations Center on Transnational 
Corporations.” Accessed August 2, 2014. http://unctc.unctad.org/aspx/
UNCTCEvolution.aspx.
UNTERM. 2014. “Draft International Agreement on Illicit Payments.” Accessed 
October 10. http://unterm.un.org/dgaacs/unterm.nsf/8fa942046ff7601c-
85256983007ca4d8/52f9e4bc389a5e61852569fa00003a47? 
OpenDocument.
UN Economic and Social Council. 1996. 86th Session. “Resolution 51/191 
[Declaration Against Corruption and Bribery in International Commercial 
Transactions].” December 16 (A/RES/51/191), New York.

7  THE OECD CONVENTION AND BEYOND …   211
U.N. General Assembly. 2000. 55th Session (81st Plenary Meeting). “An 
Effective International Legal Instrument Against Corruption.” December 4 
(A/RES/55/61), New York.
Vlassis, Dimitri. 2004. “The United Nations Convention Against Corruption: 
Origins and Negotiation Process.” Resource Material Series (66).
Vogl, Frank. 2012. Waging War on Corruption: Inside the Movement Fighting the 
Abuse of Power. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Washington Embassy, Telegram to Foreign and Commonwealth Office (UK). 
May 21, 1997. RefN 1160. OECD Archives, Paris Headquarters.
Washington G7 Meeting of Ministers and Central Bank Governors. 
“Communiqué” (April 27, 1997). Accessed October 22, 2013. http://www.
g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm970427.htm.
World Bank Group. 1992. “Report to the Development Committee and 
Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment.” In Legal 
Framework for the Treatment of Foreign Investment. Vol. II. Washington, DC: 
World Bank Group.

213
This chapter compares global anti-corruption debates in the 1970s and 
1990s in order to provide the big picture in the development of a global 
corruption problem. The chapter suggests that anti-corruption rhetoric was 
indeed neoliberalized in the 1990s, but the link between anti-corruption, as 
part of a broader agenda to regulate multinationals, and neoliberalism, as an 
agenda for deregulation, could be more complex than previously assumed. 
Anti-corruption debates in the early 1970s concentrated on the impact 
of big business, and in particular, multinational corporations on politics, 
democracy and equitable development. Allende called this role ‘corruptive’ 
in 1972, while the neoliberal counterrevolution, which engulfed his coun-
try in 1973, aimed to prove that this role was universally beneficial. The 
genealogical root of global corruption can be traced back to the divisive 
topic of the pursuit of corporate profit and the public interest in the global 
political economy. If the historical root of these debates is to be revisited, 
the concern at the time was that multinational corporations are growing in 
power and attempting to subvert politics to their own benefit. This concern 
was provoked by the revelations of the role of the ITT Corporation in the 
political life of Chile. The elegant neoliberal solution to these concerns was 
to reinstate a harmony of interest between the pursuit of private (corporate) 
profit and the public interest. There was no need for further government 
intervention, and especially international regulation of multinational cor-
porations, because the best way to achieve economic growth and serve the 
CHAPTER 8
Global Anti-Corruption Talks in the 1970s 
and 1990s: The Story of Two Utopias
© The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global Corruption,  
Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5_8

214   E. KATZAROVA
public interest simultaneously was to remove obstacles from the free mar-
ket, rather than creating new ones.
Scholars have long criticized the subversion of anti-corruption policies 
to a global neoliberal agenda (Brown and Cloke 2004; Krastev 2004). 
This chapter suggests that, to some extent, neoliberal restructuring can 
be seen as a radical answer to the fundamental question about the role 
of multinational corporations in global social progress. The presumed 
attempt of multinational corporations to subvert the political process to 
their own benefit was what initially came to be labeled as ‘corrupt’ influ-
ence in global forums, such as the UN. The answer to this problem was 
not to negate altogether the positive effect that corporations play in the 
global economy, but to establish common rules to mitigate the poten-
tial conflicts between private (corporate) and public interests. This study 
of the role of transnational corporations and the public interest was the 
major task of the UNCTC (Hamdani and Ruffing 2015). Already in the 
1980s, it was becoming increasingly difficult to stick to the task of work-
ing on common rules for multinationals in the global economy because 
the advent of neoliberalism was challenging the very legitimacy of this 
goal. While examining the complex reasons for the neoliberal turn of the 
1970s and 1980s is beyond the scope of this study, this chapter briefly 
tackles some of the factors discussed in the literature in order to suggest 
that an anti-corruption agenda and an anti-neoliberal agenda could be 
connected in more than one way.
Fake Empires: Corporate Abuse of Political Power
The story of global anti-corruption efforts is wrought with meaningful 
ironies. For one, a debate that started in the G77 found its resolution 
in the G7 more than twenty years later. Nowadays, even to students of 
IR, the G77 sounds like a knockoff of the G7 despite there being good 
reason to believe the exact opposite. When the first official meeting at 
Rambouillet took place in November of 1975, the most pressing issue on 
the agenda of the then six most developed countries in the world was to 
temper the rambunctiousness of oil-exporting states. As G77 and OPEC 
members were unionizing in the early 1970s, so were countries in the 
Global North. The UN General Assembly might have appeared like a 
good place to start democratizing global political and economic struc-
tures in the post-colonial era, but it was simply more efficient to work 
in a small group of states. The US anti-bribery initiative bore testimony 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   215
to that. Not that the United States could impose its agenda with ease, 
even when it was holding the moral high ground in trying to clean up 
global exchanges from what appeared to be widespread corporate brib-
ery. If anything, the protracted story of the global anti-bribery agree-
ment shows that the United States was not imposing its will on anybody 
without having to put a very long fight. OECD members proved to be 
just as formidable a challenge as developing nations were in the UN. The 
switch between the major venue for anti-corruption talks from the UN 
in the 1970s to the OECD in the 1990s constituted another way for the 
leader of the free world to claim ownership of global anti-corruption 
efforts. Despite the strong European opposition to US demands, OECD 
members shared similar interests in trying to defend the legitimacy of the 
multinational corporation.
In addition to the venue switches, the biggest transformation was in 
terms of content. Corruption was transformed from corporate abuse of 
power in the 1970s to government abuse of power in the 1990s. The 
trope of the corrupt corporation came to be supplanted by the tropes 
of the corrupt politician, corrupt public official and corrupt country. In 
the process, the blame for corruption was shifted from developed coun-
tries (and their corporations) to the developing countries (and their gov-
ernments). Today, we automatically assume that the locus of corruption 
is government. This appears to be caused by an extraneous event, such 
as the rise of the neoliberal tide from the 1970s onward. The transfor-
mation of anti-corruption from a call for more regulation into a call for 
less regulation, however, puts the separation of the two processes into 
question. With the transformation of corruption from a corporate into a 
government problem, the content of anti-corruption shifted from more 
state in the economy to less state in the economy. With the locus of cor-
ruption in government, it made sense that government abuse of power 
should be checked with limiting the opportunities for corrupt behavior 
by politicians and public officials. Government was not the solution, gov-
ernment was the problem, as Reagan eloquently put it in his inaugural 
address in January 1981.
Given that the United States tried to initiate an intergovernmental 
ban on foreign bribery both in 1975 and in 1989, what made the latter 
attempt successful? There are some differences in the US approach that 
were independent of the big changes in the global political landscape, and 
which concerned the strategy of the US executive and the level of cer-
tainty within which this strategy operated. The former means that while 

216   E. KATZAROVA
in the 1970s the United States developed a problem with foreign corpo-
rate payments, by the 1990s the United States had a problem with the 
FCPA. Capitalizing on past mistakes, the US executive could develop a 
systematic strategy to internationalize the FCPA through lobbying, public 
diplomacy and the art of summitry. Essential in the process of interna-
tionalizing the FCPA were the couple of Latin American countries that 
the United States engaged with prior to and during the Miami Summit 
in 1994 and the couple of EU countries the United States engaged with 
prior to and during the G7 Summit in 1997. Working on global prob-
lems through summitry was light years away from debating issues in the 
General Assembly of the UN. The strategic shift in venues and the instru-
mental use of publicity were already given due attention in Chapter 7. 
What made this coordinated US campaign in the 1990s possible was that 
the FCPA was providing a very clear mandate for the US executive, and 
also that achieving agreement at regional organizations and the OECD 
was not conditional this time on an agreement at the UN.
The latter factor listed above concerns the certainty within which 
the US strategy operated. In 1975, the US executive operated within 
an environment of uncertainty as to what the fate of the anti-bribery 
response is going to be at home. As Chapter 5 showed, the American 
legislator was worried that the executive is trying to circumvent real 
reform by getting involved in complex intergovernmental talks that 
would ultimately be ineffective at proscribing foreign payments by 
American corporations. The push to form a national legislative response 
to foreign bribery in the two-year period between 1975 and 1977 also 
operated within a climate of uncertainty as to whether a disclosure or 
criminal approach would be chosen. The US executive was clearly in 
favor of a disclosure approach and so were SEC and Senator Church, 
so when the criminalization approach sponsored by Senator Proxmire 
prevailed and was signed into law by the next president, the conditions 
for the multilateral negotiations changed drastically as well. The United 
States went from arguing that something be done in the line of disclo-
sure to the very specific mandate of trying to internationalize the FCPA 
in a little over two years.
Another notable difference between the 1970s and the 1990s lies in 
the demands of the Global South. The draft agreement on illicit pay-
ments produced in the UN in 1979 was mostly based on the FCPA. 
This means that even in the 1970s, the United States was successful 
at influencing a draft agreement at the UN that served the purpose of 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   217
internationalizing the FCPA. There was one notable addition to the 
draft agreement however, and this was the inclusion of an article on 
the payments made to the apartheid regime in South Africa. As noted 
previously, the inclusion of such payments under the umbrella of illicit 
payments was consistent with developing nations claims that it was the 
political consequences of corporate action that made such behavior illicit 
or corrupt. A couple of months prior to President Carter signing the 
FCPA into law, the UN report on the final session of the Working Group 
on the Problem of Corrupt Practices1 presented the US position on pay-
ments to South Africa as counterproductive:
The underlying basic political problem is that the U.S. which (partly for 
reasons of domestic–i.e. presidential/congressional–policy) is pushing hard 
for a treaty on bribery and illicit payments, is not, at present at least willing 
to pay the price asked for it by the African countries, i.e., a corresponding 
criminalization of the payments of royalties and taxes to the illegal minor-
ity regimes in southern Africa. Moreover, many developed countries other 
than the U.S. are indifferent to the idea of setting up elaborate standards 
for reporting and disclosure of illicit payments. (UNCTC Inter-office 
memorandum 1977, 1)
The claims on payments to the apartheid regime were also supported 
by the G77. The position of the Global South was that the Code of 
Conduct on Transnational Corporations was more important in trying 
to solve the problem of corporate influence than was the US limited pre-
occupation with corporate bribery. This is why conditioning the adop-
tion of the agreement on illicit payments on the adoption of the Code of 
Conduct was consistent with the developing nations demands to bound 
corporate behavior in a legal framework of collectively agreed-upon 
rules. Both of these demands were gone by the 1990s. The apartheid 
issue was no longer part of the parcel and the UNCTC was abolished 
after a US-inspired restructuring of the UN. The relative ease with 
which the United States managed to orchestrate the OAS Convention 
could appear to support the argument that after the end of the Cold War 
attempts to internationally regulate multinationals and the task of man-
aging the complex interplay between political and economic goals in the 
1 The Working Group on the Problem of Corrupt Practices was superseded by the 
Committee on an International Agreement on Illicit Payments.

218   E. KATZAROVA
public interest simply dissipated with the end of ideological warfare. The 
US success in the 1990s can be attributed also to the change in attitude 
of developing nations toward FDI and their readily incorporation into 
the line of thinking that informed the ‘Washington Consensus.’
There are two major, albeit simplified, ways to explain the devel-
oping nations’ change of heart. The first is the ‘battle of ideas’ thesis. 
Under Soviet influence, developing nations entertained some misguided 
ideas about the role of the state in development and the need to reg-
ulate multinationals. These ideas collapsed by themselves and were 
replaced by what in 1989 came to be called ‘The Washington Consensus’ 
(Williamson 2008). This was a strictly intellectual battlefield, and the 
ideas of the Washington Consensus prevailed because they were simply 
better at describing how economies actually work, and how they should 
work. With the collapse of the already bankrupt Soviet enterprise, the 
theoretical and practical prowess of the set of ideas of the Washington 
Consensus became self-evident. There simply was no alternative, as 
Thatcher had said a decade earlier.
The second explanation is more sinister. US-backed dictatorships in 
Latin America—from Brazil to Chile—swept the elites of these countries, 
who were entertaining the wrong ideas. The recycling of petrodollars 
from the 1970s oil crises fueled oil-importing developing nations’ debts 
through US and European banks’ lending. When the Volker shock hap-
pened in 1979, and interest rates soared, Latin America could no longer 
service its debt. The conditionality attached to IMF and World Bank 
dealings with debtor developing nations finished what the military coups 
of the previous decades had started. The world was ready for a particular 
brand of capitalism, now called neoliberalism.
Similarly, when analyzing external factors to the success of the US del-
egation to internationalize the FCPA in the 1990s, and the failure, espe-
cially in the late 1970s, we can go in two major directions. The first one is 
to stress the role of agency, and in particular the new agents, who were not 
present in the 1970s. The coalition-building role of TI and the leadership 
of Mark Pieth would come to the forefront of such agency-based expla-
nations. The second aspect of US success can, on the contrary, be pinned 
down to structural changes. With the end of the Cold War, controversies, 
like the ones in the 1970s, simply dissipated. It was easier for the United 
States to convince developing countries of the necessity to internationalize 
the FCPA in the 1990s because they were speaking the same language of 
free market entrepreneurism and FDI. If we are to entertain the ‘battle 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   219
of ideas’ thesis, this explanation makes a lot of sense. If we are to look 
into the second option above, once again things start to look more sin-
ister. It is that the ideas developing nations entertained about regulating 
multinationals and actively guiding their own development were purged 
out of the Third World in the 1970s and 1980s, sometimes with the help 
of violent dictatorships and debt politics. There was nothing natural about 
the confluence of thought that emerged after the Cold War; the neoliberal 
project took decades of forceful persuasion tactics.
To speculate about the possibility of a link between the Third-World 
resurgence in the 1970s, and in particular the calls to regulate multina-
tionals, and the US turn to neoliberalism would be that; just a specula-
tion. Still, when we turn to function and not the study of motivation, it 
is difficult to not see that the basic tenets of neoliberalism ticked a lot 
of boxes. To give some substance to this argument, it would suffice to 
look at the two major ideas of regulating multinationals in the public 
interest and the self-regulating market. The problem of corporations and 
the public interest emerged as a central aspect of the work of UNCTC. 
This was not part of some poorly disguised communist propaganda, as 
critics would have it. According to Hamdani and Ruffing (2015), the 
task of aligning the corporate with the public interest was an inherently 
American agenda, which was supposed to strengthen the free market 
enterprise. The conflicts of interest between multinationals and the pub-
lic were not insurmountable, of course, but were judged to require some 
government intervention and international regulation. This is where the 
idea of the self-regulating market comes into play. The self-regulating 
market made the attempt to regulate multinationals in the public inter-
est redundant. The basic idea was that there was no conflict between 
the interests of multinational corporations and the public interest. The 
self-regulating market was in the best interest of everybody. Yet, neolib-
eral thinking on the public interest remained fuzzy. Four albeit schematic 
basic arguments could be distinguished: (1) the ‘trickle down’ argument; 
(2) the ‘corporations are people too’ thesis; (3) ‘the road to dictator-
ship’ argument; and (4) the ‘there is no society’ thesis. The first one is 
an extension of the ‘trickle down’ thesis that is usually used to justify cuts 
in taxes. If corporations are left to flourish in a market free of govern-
ment constraints, they will eventually benefit the rest of society through 
job creation and investment. The second argument is that corporations 
are people too. There is no fundamental difference between individuals 
and conglomerations of individuals, such as multinational corporations. 

220   E. KATZAROVA
Accordingly, to limit corporate freedom would mean to limit personal 
freedom. The third argument is ‘the road to dictatorship’ thesis. State 
intervention is a slippery slope, which increases government oppression 
of businesses and individuals alike, and is a one-way ticket to a Soviet-
style dictatorship. If all else fails, the fourth argument is the ‘there is no 
society’ thesis. There is no public interest, there are only individual inter-
ests and it would be impossible and dangerous to run after some vague 
public interest, that incompetent government officials would only try to 
use to their benefit.
How did this business-friendly ideology become the new economic 
science has been the central subject of many books (Offer and Söderberg 
2016; Stedman Jones 2014; Harvey 2007; Klein 2007; Duggan 2003). 
This book suggested that one of the unexplored avenues for the neo-
liberal turn could be found in the rise of the Global South in the 1970s 
and the international attempts to regulate multinationals in order to 
curb corporate power. The threat that the Third-World resurgence in the 
1970s posed to the international order of things could easily be under-
estimated had it been an isolated case. Calls to regulate multinationals 
were not a project solely of the Third World, however. Trade unions had 
also attempted it in the ILO in the late 1960s (Petrini 2017). Globally, 
international trade unions and Third-World countries were challenging 
the power of corporations in world affairs. In the United States, the pub-
lic interest movement was also threatening to provoke a renewed reg-
ulatory vigor on corporate affairs and so were other social movements. 
Altogether, according to Harvey (2007), a turn to the left was looking 
more likely as the preferred choice for tackling the crisis of Keynesianism. 
The future of the global economic system appeared to be holding more 
regulation and some of it international, rather than less.
If we do not subscribe to the battle of ideas thesis without account-
ing for strategic human agency, what happened was that the 1970s wit-
nessed a period of intensive business mobilization. Posed with threats 
on multiple fronts, businesses for the first time realized that they had 
common interests, which they could more effectively defend collec-
tively. Paradoxically, it was in the period after the FCPA was signed 
into law that business managed to ‘turn the tide’ (Vogel 2003, 148). 
Vogel shows that the political influence of business in the United States 
started to increase in the period 1977–1980, at the expense of organ-
ized labor and the public interest movement. These fluctuations in the 
relative power of the labor and consumer movements against the power 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   221
of organized business should not have been a cause of concern, had 
this inequality in interest representation not become a permanent fea-
ture of the political landscape. Gilens and Page (2014) find that in the 
period from 1981 to 2002 organized business interests have come to 
dominate politics at the expense of democratic electorates. Globally as 
well, the power of business was in no way matched by an increase in 
the bargaining power of labor and global consumer movements. In the 
1970s, even proponents of the free market system expected that global 
consumer movements, intergovernmental accords and international 
labor unions will keep rising corporate power under check (Bock and 
Fuccillo 1975).
Legal lobbying can be more consequential than bribery when it comes 
to influencing public policy, as Campos and Giovannoni (2007) find. In 
studying, what they call ‘legal corruption’ Kaufmann and Vicente (2011) 
argue that a significant amount of channels and transactions to achieve 
influence have remained legal (especially in transnational context). This 
allows corporate actors to achieve gentle forms of state capture in devel-
oped and developing countries alike. Putting the stress on influence 
raises the question of how to distinguish between benevolent and malev-
olent forms of influence. After all, anti-corruption protestors who topple 
a government are also exerting influence. In addition, not all corporate 
influence is necessarily against the public good. The answer is perhaps 
in what Heidenheimer and Johnston (2011) call public-interest-centered 
definitions of corruption. In the public-interest-centered definition, the 
role of public officials is to guard the public interest and not give way 
to special interests, which might attempt to capture the political agenda. 
As difficult as it may be to define the public interest, the relevant ques-
tion is, if a given policy or the rules of the game benefit the majority of 
the population or a select few. When special interests manage to subvert 
the rules of the game, a mild or more acute form of state capture may 
occur (Hellman et al. 2003). The efforts of companies to shape the insti-
tutional, legal and political framework within which they operate may 
not be the result of illegal action, but once again, if the stress is placed 
on influence rather than the means through which influence is achieved, 
the decisive factor would be whether corporate influence on policy serves 
the public at large or only special interests. When the influence of special 
interests over the political agenda is high, policy makers may be seen as 
being more responsive toward the demands of corporate actors to the 
detriment of the public interest.

222   E. KATZAROVA
Arguably, at the same time that corporate bribery was being tack-
led, organized business interests were finding less conspicuous modes 
of political influence. This effort can be captured partly by the concept 
of ‘legal corruption’ (Kaufmann and Vicente 2011). Legal corruption 
may be present in a collusive relationship between business and gov-
ernment elites, which can manifest through legal lobbying, legal cam-
paign funding or revolving door practices. As Della Porta and Vannucci 
(1999) have shown, the commodities of the corruption market are two: 
(1) influence over political decision-making and (2) access to privileged 
or restricted information (39–45). Influence on regulatory oversight is 
another aspect of legal corruption. Kaufmann (2008) refers to a meeting 
that took place on April 28, 2004, between representatives of the SEC 
and representatives of the five largest investment banks. The meeting led 
to amendments to the net capital rules, which have been in place since 
1975. Despite being contested as the source of the global financial crisis, 
the relaxation of the net capital rules can be seen as a relevant example 
of corporate influence over regulatory institutions without any payments 
or other monetizable awards. If the SEC changes are to be credited, at 
least to some extent, as having contributed to the global financial cri-
sis of 2008, the role of the federal government agency as protector of 
the public interest had been compromised. At the same time, Kaufmann 
(2008) does not imply in any way that there were inappropriate or illegal 
exchanges between investment bank representatives and SEC represent-
atives. Rather, it is the economic power of the largest investment banks 
that is readily convertible into political influence.
Even prior to the bailouts of 2008, following the Emergency 
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, political connectedness appeared 
to be central to government financial assistance. Faccio et al. (2006) 
find in a study of companies across 35 countries in the period 1997–
2002 that politically connected companies are much more likely to be 
bailed out in periods of economic turmoil. Political connectedness, 
however, is also not illegal and it is difficult to segregate due from 
undue influence. Kaufmann’s (2005) definition of corruption as ‘the 
extent to which many powerful private firms engage in undue influence, 
to shape state policies, laws and regulations, for their own benefit’ (82) 
is more in line with the Chilean legacy of understanding corruption 
in the global economy. Kaufmann (2010), who also happens to be a 
Chilean national, calls for a re-formulation of the problem and rede-
fines corruption as a form of collusion between government officials 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   223
and business actors which has remained outside the grip of the law. This 
collusion may start with legal forms of influence peddling and lead to a 
subtle form of state capture.
Corruption as corporate capture of democracy is not far from 
Allende’s framing of the ITT affair. The neoliberal counterrevolution 
offers legitimacy to this corporate capture. Systemic corruption is not 
unrelated to payments, of course, but it could be understood better 
through the imprecise concepts of ‘money in politics,’ revolving door 
politics, but above all as coming from the underlying principle that 
there is a natural alignment of business and public interests. This under-
lying philosophy may present the relaxation of regulatory oversight 
as being in the public interest because more profit for business means 
more benefits for society. At the same time, this logic can be seen to 
institutionalize undue corporate influence on politics. It is not difficult 
to imagine that the corporate-backed military dictatorship of Pinochet, 
which swiftly turned to neoliberalism, would have constituted the epit-
ome of corruption for Allende. In fact, understood as corporate cap-
ture, corruption has only intensified around the globe since the early 
1970s. The mobilization of business interests witnessed in this decade 
has led to better tactics of corporate influence on politics. Business as 
a philosophy of governance has also exerted powerful influence over 
public institutions. The underlying philosophy of neoliberalism itself 
has transformed politics into managerialism, while the marketization of 
everything—from education through health care to environmental pro-
tection—has led to radical transformations of societies and natural hab-
itats. Economic calculus has started to dominate so many aspects of the 
public sphere that the complete corporatization of government is start-
ing to look within reach.
Corporations and the Public Interest
It is not difficult to see that corruption as undue corporate influence on 
politics is not compatible with a neoliberal agenda of deregulation and 
privatization. In fact, neoliberalism—understood as the disproportionate 
influence of corporations and business thinking on politics—can be seen 
as a form of political corruption. This argument is not purely concep-
tual, but is based on global anti-corruption debates in the 1970s, which 
concentrated on corporate abuse of power and the way market prerog-
atives can overrun political and democratic objectives. Contemporary 

224   E. KATZAROVA
concerns over the influence of corporate money on national elections 
and public policies illustrate the enduring relevance of corruption as 
undue business influence on politics. The successful framing of a global 
corruption problem in the mid-1990s channeled an ascendant neolib-
eral narrative emphasizing the merits of the free market and the short-
comings of politics. Corruption was redefined (and operationalized in 
academic research) as a problem not of broader corporate and business 
influence on politics but primarily of bribery. This chapter suggests there 
might be new avenues for research on the links between corruption and 
neoliberalism.
What would an anti-corruption agenda that is also a movement 
against neoliberalism look like? An anti-corruption agenda in the leg-
acy of Allende would study the private (corporate) abuse of the polit-
ical power. The fundamental anti-corruption goals from that vantage 
point would be to revisit the premise that there is no fundamental clash 
between corporate and public interests, and then regulate on behalf of 
the public in the cases when such clashes are seen as significant. Such an 
agenda would put into question revolving door practices that are based 
on the same assumption—that there is no fundamental conflict of inter-
est between governmental and corporate positions of power.
The task of studying and regulating the corporate abuse of power 
encounters a couple of fundamental questions about whether cor-
porations should at all pursue the public interest, whether govern-
ment regulation in that respect would do more harm than good, and 
whether corporations are indeed persons (see Citizens United vs FEC 
558 US 310 [2010]). The answers some neoliberal thinkers give to 
these questions are quite emphatic. Hayek (1944) famously argued 
that not only is government intervention in the economy inefficient, 
but it also leads to the concentration of power in government, which 
over the long run leads to a severe limitation of personal freedom in 
the form of totalitarianism. Regarding the question about the role of 
corporations in serving the public interest, Friedman (1970) remarked 
that the only responsibility of business is to increase its profit and that 
the notion of corporate social responsibility ‘involves the acceptance 
of the socialist view that political mechanisms, not market mecha-
nisms, are the appropriate way to determine the allocation of scarce 
resources to alternative uses.’ The attempt to disembed business from 
most social and political constraints can be seen as a major goal of the 
neoliberal agenda.

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   225
The disembedding of the market economy (Polanyi 2001) is particu-
larly stark when corporations start to share the proverbial international 
anarchy of nation states. The attempt to regulate the conduct of corpo-
rations internationally, which was evident in the UN effort to finalize a 
binding Code of Conduct, can be seen as an attempt to put multina-
tional corporations under some political and social constraints that are 
negotiated internationally. That the Code of Conduct would have faced 
significant implementation problems was a fact, but more important was 
perhaps the spirit of such attempts to bind the global market by political 
means that temper the extremes of profit maximization at a global scale. 
Neoliberalism successfully delegitimized this attempt with the asser-
tion that market economies, nationally or globally, should not be con-
taminated with politics. Neoliberalism constituted a counterrevolution 
against what at the time was perceived as a swing to the left. In asserting 
the moral bankruptcy of any opposition to the reinvented free market 
dogma, the neoliberals took Hayek (1944) a step further and managed 
to establish a confluence between state intervention in the economy and 
totalitarianism. In the process, Developmentalism and Keynesianism 
became Stalinism. The irony of the early neoliberal experiments in Latin 
America, of course, was that it took a dictatorship in Chile to set the 
market free.
Neoliberals admit indeed to a conflict of interest between political 
and economic objectives, but only because governments are trying to 
regulate against the interests of corporations in the pursuit of a vague 
(and actually nonexistent) public interest. The job of governing should 
actually be to create the right conditions for businesses to pursue their 
interest and the market would take care of the rest. The neoliberal coun-
terrevolution of the 1970s and 1980s amounted to nothing less than 
a war between politics and economics as the best way to organize and 
manage societies. The radicalization of free market proponents should 
also be seen as reactionary. Hayek was reactionary to Keynes, and the 
‘Chicago boys’ were reactionary to a more active state in the developing 
world. Early anti-corruption debates about the role of multinational cor-
porations in societies showed concern about business interests becoming 
too enmeshed in politics. Neoliberalism provided a blunt answer to such 
concerns: There was nothing to be feared.
Corruption, from a question about the impact of corporate power 
on democracy and politics, became a question of limiting the impact of 
government on the economy. That inversion was quite revolutionary in 

226   E. KATZAROVA
itself, but the neoliberal transformation of society went even further. It 
went to demand government to transform in the image of a business, 
to adopt the same governance mechanisms, the same goals, the same 
language. Anti-corruption rhetoric and practice also went to contribute 
toward the goal of making government look and act more like a busi-
ness. First, as noted before, the locus of corruption was government, and 
government officials were no different than any other market actor—
they were interested in the pursuit of their own interest. Public officials’ 
abuse of power was the question to be tackled, and not corporate abuse 
of power. To downsize government and privatize most of its former pre-
rogatives was a natural and efficient way to fight government abuse of 
power and hand more services to the impartial free market.
Critics of neoliberalism often lament the excessive marketization and 
managerialization of metaphoric and actual public spaces (Webb 2009). 
The words of Margaret Thatcher from her 1987 interview for ‘Woman’s 
Own’ that there is no society, just individuals and their families are 
often referenced as a signifier for this new annihilation of the very con-
cept of the social that was ushered by the neoliberal era. Perhaps, lesser 
known are her words from a 1981 interview for ‘Sunday Times’ that: 
‘Economics are the method; the object is to change the heart and soul’ 
(271). It is quite possibly in ‘changing the heart and soul’ of individu-
als that the major success of neoliberalism lays. It is in the assertion that 
individuals and conglomerations of individuals, such as corporations, 
should relentlessly pursue their private interest and somehow, by the 
mysterious grace of the market, the common good would still be within 
reach. While in the 1970s the inherent contradictions of the excessive 
pursuit of private (corporate) profit and the public interest were still in 
the center of debates, by the 1990s these conflicts of private and public 
interest seemed to have been all but forgotten.
The Career of Global Corruption  
and Problem Definition
The process through which corruption came to be understood and 
defined as a global problem holds some relevance for academic debates 
and purely conceptual musings on what constitutes corruption. The 
Senturia (1931) definition ‘misuse of public power for private profit’ 
(448) is truly versatile in its simplicity and can accommodate more than 
one meaning. To understand corruption as corporate abuse of political 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   227
or public power for private profit would be one way to accommodate 
the lost debates of the 1970s. As noted previously, if corruption is to be 
understood in that tradition, as disproportionate business influence on 
politics, this has implications for the locus of corruption.
Despite minor alterations in the wording, the contemporary under-
standing of corruption revolves closely around the institution of the 
public office. In both grand and petty corruption, it is public officials 
at different levels of government, who fail to observe the public interest 
and become focal point of concern. Heidenheimer and Johnston (2011) 
argue that in relation to the referential frame for the misuse, four defi-
nitional variants exist; a ‘public-office-centered,’ a ‘public-interest-cen-
tered,’ a ‘market-centered’ and a ‘public-opinion-centered’ (3–12). It is 
the way in which the Senturia definition is applied, that implies the locus 
of corruption is in government and public authorities. As is well known, 
political corruption and administrative corruption are also ‘grand’ and 
‘petty’; the former implicates political decision makers, while the latter is 
concerned with lower-level bureaucrats. Furthermore, systemic corrup-
tion vertically cuts through petty and grand corruption and ‘implicates 
an entire bureaucratic hierarchy, electoral system or overall governmental 
structure from top to bottom’ (Rose-Ackerman 2007, xvii). Once again, 
when it comes to notions of ‘systemic corruption,’ the locus of corrup-
tion is firmly rooted in government and politics. The systemic under-
standing of corruption from the vantage point of developing countries 
in the 1970s had a very different meaning. The lack of global rules on 
corporate conduct was contributing to the corruptive influence that mul-
tinationals could, in certain cases, exert on political institutions for their 
own benefit. The major concern in this sort of systemic corruption was 
the lack of accountability and the impunity with which multinational cor-
porations operate in the global economy.
The international counterpart to the corrupt politician and the cor-
rupt public official is, of course, the corrupt country. This development 
has been due mostly to the charms of corruption rankings, a neat way 
to rank countries based on their level of perceived corruption, which 
generates headlines and keeps governments accountable. One of the 
consequences of conceptualizing corruption as a ‘transaction,’ and in 
particular, as bribery, was that corruption becomes measurable. Selecting 
a piece of the puzzle such as illicit monetized payments between private 
and public agents makes corruption quantifiable and was done for the 
purposes of economic analysis (Rose-Ackerman 2007). Quantification of 

228   E. KATZAROVA
the perception of corruption in the CPI index is, nonetheless, not lim-
ited to bribery of public officials, but includes public procurement kick-
backs and embezzlement of public resources. All of these also seem to be 
understood in relation to government.
Should we then move the locus of corruption to the private sector? 
The notion of corruption as corrupt payment implies that corruption is 
a transaction. The idea of a business—government interaction is already 
present in the notion of transaction, but is not exhausted by it. It is not 
difficult to accommodate the idea that there is something wrong in 
the interaction between business and politics. As noted previously, this 
moves the locus of corruption not from politics to business, but to the 
space of interaction that defines the relationship between the two. In this 
way, we escape both the trope of the corrupt politician and the trope of 
corrupt businessman.
What is happening in the interaction between business and poli-
tics? It is not difficult to discern a neoliberal argument in the enduring 
tropes of the corrupt public official, the corrupt politician and the cor-
rupt country. The politics of placing the locus of corruption in gov-
ernment is quite straightforward. It implies that we should be wary of 
increasing the power of government, and in particular its regulatory 
capacities, leading directly to the argument of the ‘lean’ state as the 
best way to minimize corruption. As noted previously, the idea of cor-
porate actors as the source of corruption led to debates on the pursuit 
of private (corporate) profit and the protection of the public interest. 
The discursive construction of the corrupt politician can be seen as a 
direct response to the corrupt corporation. Every time we automati-
cally resort to the trope of the corrupt politician, who takes an enve-
lope under the table, we become part of the neoliberal narrative. This 
is in no way a justification for government abuse of power, but simply 
a recognition that the tropes of the corrupt politician, corrupt public 
official and the corrupt country are charged with ideological connota-
tions. Furthermore, from a constructivist point of view, the neoliberal 
transformation of society and politics creates, as much as it describes, 
the political villain that we are now so used to. It is characteristic that 
public choice easily turns from descriptive into prescriptive theory, 
when arguing that the self-serving politician is preferable to the public 
interest fanatics.
In an interview for the New York Times, entitled appropriately ‘The 
Bribe Busters,’ Stanley Sporkin, who was central to the SEC’s work on 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   229
bribery at the time said: ‘I really think we’re dealing with corruption of 
the process. There has been a lack of attention to the way corporations 
are managed in this country (…). Capitalism is the greatest thing going, 
but unchecked it’s its own undoing’ (Kohlmeier 1976). It was under the 
banner of ‘saving capitalism’ that the 1970s attempts to regulate multi-
national corporations should be understood and evaluated. The uneasy 
relationship between business and democracy was exacerbated by glo-
balization because a global market without regulatory oversight offers 
ample ground for a lot of reckless behavior. Although neoliberalism was 
marketed as ‘the alternative’ to communism in the post-Cold War era, in 
the 1970s the battle of ideas was between the two strands of economic 
liberalism: the radicalized free market version that came to be known 
as neoliberalism and the more moderate version, characteristic of the 
postwar compromise. As a utopian project neoliberalism is self-perpet-
uating, with every crisis, more market distortions have to be overcome 
by removing regulatory barriers and public institutions have to be disci-
plined with more austerity. The free market trope found a powerful ally 
in the trope of the corrupt politician. The weakness of politics in front 
of the capacity of business and technologies to shape the future seemed 
like a welcome deliverance from the presumed incompetence of govern-
ment. Without politics in the way, we had moved into a utopian future 
beyond conflict of interest between employees, consumers and employ-
ers. This harmony of interests was also extended to the Third World. 
The new ideology was offering deliverance to the wary governments of 
the Global South, who only had to surrender to the free market dogma 
to join the prosperous North.
The radicalization of the Global South discussed in this book was, of 
course, also a utopian project. Developing nations perhaps took their 
independence a bit too literally. Their assertiveness in the 1970s showed 
that they thought they could choose and mix approaches. Despite the 
Cold War rhetoric, this ‘mix and match’ approach was seen by the econ-
omist of the South, Raul Prebisch, as progressive capitalism (Margulis 
2017). The communist threat was perhaps not the major function of 
adopting a tough stance against unruly governments, such as the one 
of Allende. The uncertainty of expropriation was multiplied by the 
chance that the Allende model might become widespread. On Allende’s 
agenda, the question was if what was good for General Motors was also 
good for Chile. Nixon’s answer would have been an emphatic ‘yes.’ In 
fact, his successor, Gerald Ford, also believed that what happened in 

230   E. KATZAROVA
Chile was in the interest not just of the American, but also the Chilean 
people (Ford 1974).2 What was good for General Motors was good for 
everybody.
The Road not Traveled
In the second half of the 1990s, there was an explosion of anti-corrup-
tion treaties and initiatives. The world, it appeared, was finally ready to 
tackle the perennial problem of political corruption. This book offered 
a critical appraisal of the ‘corruption eruption’ that seemed to have cap-
tured the imagination of global policy makers and ordinary citizens. The 
book showed how the framing of global corruption at the time pro-
moted a narrative on the merits of the free market and the deficiencies of 
politics that was decisively neoliberal. Global anti-corruption initiatives 
first had to frame a global corruption problem and transform business—
state relations in the process. From being understood as a problem of 
corporate influence on politics, corruption became redefined—and oper-
ationalized in academic research—as the much more limited offense of 
bribery. The locus of corruption shifted from the private to the pub-
lic sector, and our understanding of corruption came to be dominated 
by the image of the greedy politician. Globally, the idea of a ‘corrupt 
country’ captured the public imagination through the spread of percep-
tion-based country rankings. Everybody is an anti-corruptionist now, but 
anti-corruption discourse and practice are not as neutral, technocratic 
and devoid of struggles for power as we would assume. The direction 
and content of global anti-corruption efforts have been shaped by one 
country, more than any other—the United States. This book offered the 
story of how this happened.
Academic literature so far has neglected the way in which definitions 
of corruption have been shaped within and between international organ-
izations, such as the OECD, the UN, the CoE, OAS and the EU since 
the 1970s. This book distinguished between American and Chilean leg-
acies in international organizations. The American legacy took root in 
2 It should be noted that in the context of the conference, President Ford was suggest-
ing that the US involvement in Chile was limited to supporting the opposition and the 
media outlets friendly to the opposition, because President Allende was presumably trying 
to silence them. It is probably in this context of supporting freedom of speech that Ford’s 
utterance should be understood.

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   231
the OECD and defined corruption as bribery. The Chilean legacy took 
root in the UN, in particular, in the UNCTAD, the UNCTC and the 
G77, and defined corruption as corporate influence. Without adumbrat-
ing the definitions of corruption, promoted by these two legacies, and 
the impact they had on countries in the Global South and the Global 
North, the institutional interplay that allowed the emergence of a global 
corruption problem in the 1990s looks incomplete. The American leg-
acy prevailed in the 1990s and corruption globally became to be widely 
accepted as transnational quid pro quo, as well as a limited single-actor 
offense. The Chilean legacy was promoting a rather radical critique of 
the global economic system by conceptualizing of corruption as corpo-
rate influence over politics. The cure for corruption, according to this 
perspective, was establishing commonly agreed rules to regulate corpo-
rate conduct internationally. This understanding of corruption and its 
policy implications became largely delegitimized, starting in the 1980s, 
with the onslaught of policies of deregulation and privatization. The 
American conceptualization of corruption, as the more limited offense of 
bribery, and as an individual failing, rather than a systemic problem, was 
more resonant with the policy mood of the 1980s and prevailed in the 
1990s. The Chilean and American legacies, however, are still relevant for 
current debates on anti-corruption policies and definitions of corruption 
as a global problem.
The title of this section makes reference to the widely known, and 
equally widely misunderstood, poem by Robert Frost ‘The Road Not 
Taken.’ In the poem, a traveler finds two paths in the woods and 
decides which one to take. The irony of the poem is that even though 
the traveler would later justify her choice as inevitable, the two roads 
were rather similar. In hindsight, we all want to believe we took the 
right decision, and we would go out of our way to justify the road 
taken as meaningful and even inevitable. To the more critical among 
us, the opposite might apply however. We would imagine the alterna-
tives to the chosen course of action and might sincerely believe that if 
only we had taken the other road, most or all of our current calami-
ties would not have happened. Both positions are equally alluring and 
deceptive. The ‘road not taken’ will always appeal to critical analysts, 
but as its practical implications have never been tested, that road might 
not have led us to a better outcome. Still, imagining alternative roads, 
utopian counterfactuals to our current predicaments, might not be 
entirely without merit.

232   E. KATZAROVA
This book touched upon the way in which, in the 1970s, states 
found themselves at a similar crossroad—faced with two diverging ways 
to organize the global economy. One entailed more state intervention 
in the global market and preserving the position of nation states (espe-
cially democratic nation states) as the guardians of the public interest. 
This road was corruption as corporate influence over politics. During 
the 1980s, the opposite view prevailed. Rather than regulating corpo-
rate conduct internationally, a movement for deregulation and privatiza-
tion swept the globe. The problem was not so much private to public 
influence, as the developing nations claimed, but public to private influ-
ence, because governments should not interfere in the workings of the 
market. With the locus of corruption in government, the corrupt cor-
poration was supplanted by the corrupt politician and the corrupt coun-
try. Propped by the ascendant neoliberal narrative, the anti-corruption 
debate had been reversed at 180 degrees and became safe for export in 
the new millennium.
References
Bock, P. G., and Vincent J. Fuccillo. 1975. “Transnational Corporations 
as International Political Actors.” Studies in Comparative International 
Development 10 (2): 51–77.
Brown, Ed, and Jonathan Cloke. 2004. “Neoliberal Reform, Governance 
and Corruption in the South: Assessing the International Anti-corruption 
Crusade.” Antipode 36 (2): 272–294.
Campos, Nauro, and Francesco Giovannoni. 2007. “Lobbying, Corruption and 
Political Influence.” Public Choice 131 (1): 1–21.
Della Porta, Donatella, and Alberto Vannucci. 1999. Corrupt Exchanges: Actors, 
Resources, and Mechanisms of Political Corruption. New York: Aldine de 
Gruyter.
Duggan, Lisa. 2003. The Twilight of Equality?: Neoliberalism, Cultural Politics, 
and the Attack on Democracy. Boston: Beacon Press.
Faccio, Mara, Ronald W. Masulis, and John McConnell. 2006. “Political 
Connections and Corporate Bailouts.” The Journal of Finance 61 (6): 
2597–2635.
Ford, Gerald. 1974. “The President’s New Conference.” September 16. 
Accessed October 22, 2017. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.
php?pid=4717.
Friedman, Milton. 1970. “The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its 
Profits.” The New York Times Magazine, September 13. Accessed October 22, 

8  GLOBAL ANTI-CORRUPTION TALKS IN THE 1970S AND 1990S …   233
2017. 
https://www.colorado.edu/studentgroups/libertarians/issues/fried-
man-soc-resp-business.html.
Gilens, Martin, and Benjamin Page. 2014. “Testing Theories of American 
Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens.” Perspectives on Politics 
12 (3): 564–581.
Hamdani, K., and L. Ruffing. 2015. United Nations Centre on Transnational 
Corporations: Corporate Conduct and the Public Interest. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Harvey, David. 2007. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hayek, Friedrich A. 1944. The Road to Serfdom. New York and London: George 
Routledge and Sons.
Heidenheimer, Arnold J., and Michael Johnston. 2011. Political Corruption: 
Concepts and Contexts. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction.
Hellman, Joel, Geraint Jones, and Daniel Kaufmann. 2003. “Seize the State, 
Seize the Day: State Capture and Influence in Transition Economies.” 
Journal of Comparative Economics 31 (4): 751–773.
Kaufmann, Daniel. 2005. “Myths and Realities of Governance and Corruption.” 
In The World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2005–2006, 
edited by Augusto Lopez-Carlos, Michael E. Porter, and Klaus Schwab, 
81–98. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
———. 2008. Daniel Kaufmann’s Farewell Lecture: Governance, Crisis, and the 
Longer View: Unorthodox Reflections on the New Reality. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
———. 2010. “Daniel Kaufmann on State Capture.” World Policy Journal 27 
(1): 3–4.
Kaufmann, Daniel, and Pedro C. Vicente. 2011. “Legal Corruption.” Economics 
& Politics 23 (2): 195–219.
Klein, Naomi. 2007. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. New 
York: Picador.
Kohlmeier, Louis. 1976. “The Bribe Busters.” New York Times, September 26.
Krastev, Ivan. 2004. Shifting Obsessions: Three Essays on the Politics of 
Anticorruption. Budapest: Central European University Press.
Margulis, Matias. 2017. The Global Political Economy of Raúl Prebisch. London 
and New York: Taylor & Francis.
Offer, Avner, and Gabriel Söderberg. 2016. The Nobel Factor: The Prize in 
Economics, Social Democracy, and the Market Turn. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Petrini, Francesco. 2017. “Capital Hits the Road: Regulating Multinational 
Corporations During the Long 1970s.” In Contesting Deregulation: Debates, 
Practices and Developments in the West Since the 1970s, edited by Knud 

234   E. KATZAROVA
Andresen and Stefan Müller, 185–199. New York and Oxford: Berghahn 
Books.
Polanyi, Karl. 2001. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic 
Origins of Our Time. Boston: Beacon Press.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 2007. International Handbook on the Economics of 
Corruption. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Senturia, Joseph. 1931. “Corruption Political.” In Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences, vol. 4, 448–452. New York: Macmillan.
Stedman Jones, Daniel. 2014. Masters of the Universe: Hayek, Friedman, and the 
Birth of Neoliberal Politics—Updated Edition. Reprint edition. Princeton and 
Oxford: Princeton University.
Thatcher, Margaret. 1981. “Interview for Sunday Times.” May 1. Thatcher 
Archive. Accessed October 22, 2017. https://www.margaretthatcher.org/
document/104475.
———. 1987. “Interview for Woman’s Own,” September 23, Thatcher 
Archive. Accessed October 22, 2017. https://www.margaretthatcher.org/
document/106689.
UNCTC Inter-office Memorandum. 1977. “Final Session of the Working Group 
on the Problem of Corrupt Practices.” July 7. Series 0897, Box 7, File 4, UN 
Archives, New York Headquarters.
Vogel, David. 2003. Fluctuating Fortunes: The Political Power of Business in 
America. Washington: Beard Books.
Webb, D. 2009. “Where’s the Vision? The Concept of Utopia in Contemporary 
Educational Theory.” Oxford Review of Education 35 (6): 743–760.
Williamson, John. 2008. “A Short History of the Washington Consensus.” In 
The Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance, 
edited by Narcís Serra and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 14–31. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

235
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2019 
E. Katzarova, The Social Construction of Global 
Corruption, Political Corruption and Governance, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98569-5
Index
A
Allende, Salvador, 76–81, 90, 107, 
213, 223, 224, 229
Anderson, Jack, 75–77
Apartheid, 89–91, 95, 138, 217
B
Brazil, 218
British Aerospace (BAE), 12, 187
Business and Industry Advisory 
Committee (BIAC), 14
C
Carter, James, 118, 126, 180
Chile, 76–81, 89, 96, 107, 120, 190, 
213, 218, 225, 229, 230
Church, Frank, 27, 97, 106, 109–113, 
118–120, 122, 124, 193, 216
Clinton, William, 180, 184, 190, 191, 
201, 204
Committee on International 
Investment and Multinational 
Enterprises (CIME), 86, 93, 94, 
134, 140, 142, 144, 145, 172, 
173, 175, 178, 180, 185, 200, 
201
Corporate criminal liability, 137, 151, 
157, 178
Corporations as political actors, 85, 98
Corrupt interaction (business and 
government), 15, 16, 97, 119, 
125, 222
Corruption as corporate abuse of 
power, 2, 80, 215, 223, 224, 226
Corruption as government abuse of 
power, 2, 205, 215, 226, 228
Corruption Perception Index (CPI), 
16, 22–25, 228

236   Index
Council of Europe (CoE), 3, 6, 7, 11, 
30, 171, 188, 193–195, 197–
200, 203, 230
D
Dadzie, Kenneth, 160, 161, 163
De Seynes, Philippe, 78
E
Ecuador, 88, 190, 191
European Union (EU), 3, 6, 7, 11, 
30, 171, 188, 189, 193–195, 
197–200, 203, 216, 230
F
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), 
63, 188, 198
Financial Times (FT), 193
Ford, Gerald, 229
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA), 5, 6, 11, 12, 26–28, 95, 
98, 99, 105, 106, 108, 115, 118, 
119, 121, 122, 124–128, 135, 
139, 143, 149, 150, 166, 176, 
178, 180–182, 187, 189–192, 
195, 197, 199, 201, 204, 
216–218, 220
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), 22, 
23, 90–92, 95, 96, 98, 179, 218
France, 116, 182, 183, 192, 196–201
Friedman, Milton, 224
G
General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT), 15, 111, 114–
118, 198
Germany, 113, 116, 142, 180, 182, 
186, 187, 192, 196–201
Global financial crisis (GFC), 14, 15, 
222
Governments as economic actors, 3, 
88, 90, 98
Greece, 142, 182
Group of 7 (G7), 214
Group of 77 (G77), 6, 77, 80–82, 
87–90, 92, 96, 118, 134, 137, 
138, 163, 204, 214, 217, 231
Group of 20 (G20), 14, 15, 32
I
International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC), 13, 75, 106, 116, 145, 
146, 155, 191–193
International Financial Institutions 
(IFIs), 20, 26, 180, 186, 201
International Labor Organization 
(ILO), 60, 220
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
15, 26, 60, 75, 76, 85, 116, 193, 
218
International Telephone & Telegraph 
(ITT), 5, 27, 76–78, 80–83, 89, 
96, 105–107, 121, 213, 223
Italy, 83, 119, 139, 142, 180, 182, 
186, 196, 200
K
Kaufmann, Daniel, 22, 32, 33, 161, 
221, 222
Keynesianism, 133, 220, 225
Kissinger, Henry, 84, 120, 121
L
Latin America, 17, 21, 25, 26, 80, 81, 
191, 216, 218, 225
Lockheed Martin, 27, 83, 97, 98, 
120–122, 153–155, 192

Index   237
N
The Netherlands, 83, 99, 142, 156, 
159, 162, 163, 180, 186
New York Times, 97, 107, 196, 200, 
228
Nixon, Richard, 80, 108, 121, 229
O
Oil crises, 81, 110, 218
Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), 2, 3, 5–7, 11–15, 
17, 21, 26, 30, 33, 63, 65, 66, 
75, 76, 83, 85, 86, 89, 91, 92, 
94–99, 105, 108, 115, 117–119, 
127, 128, 134–151, 154–160, 
162, 163, 165, 166, 171–173, 
176, 179–185, 187–189, 191–
203, 205, 215, 216, 230
Organization of American States 
(OAS), 3, 6, 7, 30, 106, 116, 
147, 171, 188–191, 193, 
197–200, 203, 217, 230
Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries (OPEC), 81, 
88, 110, 214
P
Pinochet, Augusto (General), 79, 190, 
223
Polanyi, Karl, 225
Prebisch, Raul, 81, 229
Proxmire, William (Senator), 121–
124, 126, 216
Public-private partnership, 97
R
Reagan, Ronald, 127, 215
Recommendation on Bribery 
in International Business 
Transactions (RBIBT), 6, 7, 171, 
173, 188, 189, 193–195, 197, 
198, 203
Ribicoff, Abraham (Senator), 109, 
113, 117
S
Securities & Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 5, 85, 105, 108, 118, 
120–122, 124–126, 144, 182, 
216, 222, 228
South Africa, 89, 90, 95, 217
T
Thatcher, Margaret, 218, 226
Transparency International (TI), 1, 4, 
9, 10, 16–19, 21–23, 25, 28, 29, 
65, 184, 190–192, 201, 218
U
United Kingdom, 11, 12, 85, 92, 182, 
196
United Nations (UN), 2, 3, 5–7, 
15, 65, 66, 75–89, 91, 92, 
94–98, 106, 108, 115, 118, 119, 
126, 128, 134, 136–139, 142, 
145–151, 155, 156, 159–162, 
164–166, 171, 175, 179–182, 
188, 193, 194, 198, 203–205, 
214–217, 225, 231
United Nations Center on 
Transnational Corporations 
(UNCTC), 6, 7, 78, 81, 86, 97, 
107, 134, 159, 179, 203, 214, 
217, 219, 231
United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD), 

238   Index
7, 76–78, 80, 81, 134, 160, 
162–165, 179, 231
United Nations Convention Against 
Corruption (UNCAC), 11, 
13–15, 30, 204, 205
United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime 
(UNTOC), 204
United Nations Economic and Social 
Council, 146
United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC), 14, 15, 204
United States, 4, 10, 17, 26, 27, 89, 
98, 106–109, 116–120, 128, 
135, 138, 139, 144, 146, 148, 
149, 181, 182, 191, 199
V
Volker Shock, 218
W
Waldheim, Kurt, 80, 81
Warren, Christopher, 180
Washington consensus, 21, 25, 26, 
218
Washington Post, 76, 200
World Bank, 1, 4, 7, 10, 14, 15, 17, 
19–26, 28, 32, 65, 75, 76, 116, 
160, 164, 171, 179, 187, 193, 
218
World Trade Organization (WTO), 
15, 198
Worldwide Governance Indicators 
(WGI), 22, 25, 164

