The ANIMATOR’S SKETCHBOOK
by TONY WHITE
How to See, Interpret & Draw Like a Master Animator

The ANIMATOR’S SKETCHBOOK
How to See, Interpret & Draw Like a Master Animator


CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
The ANIMATOR’S SKETCHBOOK
by TONY WHITE
How to See, Interpret & Draw Like a Master Animator

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20160621
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-7401-7 (Paperback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsi-
bility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright 
holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate 
system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: White, Tony, 1947- author.
Title: The animator’s sketchbook : how to see, interpret & draw like a master 
animator / Tony White.
Description: Boca Raton : CRC Press, 2016. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016016652 | ISBN 9781498774017
Subjects: LCSH: Drawing--Technique. | Animation (Cinematography)
Classification: LCC NC1765 .W475 2016 | DDC 741.5/8--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016016652
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

This sketchbook belongs to:
Name _________________________________________________________________________________________________
Contact ________________________________________________________________________________________________
(Please return to the above owner in case of loss.)


I dedicate this book to all those master animators of the future 
who are starting their journey on the long road to animation 
mastery. Whether you ultimately turn your knowledge to 
two-dimensional (2D), three-dimensional (3D), stop-motion, 
or any other form of animation, you will find that the work 
you put in here will prove the finest foundation you will ever 
have to grow and learn! Software and generic techniques can 
be learned by anyone. But the work you create through the 
Animator’s Sketchbook will be unique to you and you alone. 
It is, in fact, that special uniqueness that most employers are 
looking for in this day and age, so don’t sell yourself short 
with the work you do here. A strong understanding of the 
core principles of movement, based on personal observation 
and drawing what is seen, really is the key to all animation 
mastery. I sincerely believe that this book will provide you 
with that perfect solid ground upon which you can build an 
outstanding career for yourself. Ultimately, though, this book 
will only become valuable to you in direct proportion to what 
you put into it—not me! So I earnestly advise you to give 
your all to the exercise requirements to be found within the 
pages of this book—that is, if you really do want to become 
one of those revered animation masters of the future.
Tony White


ix
Contents
Preface	
xv
Thank You	
xvii
Introduction	
xix
Part  1  What This Book Is All About
The Importance of Drawing	
3
What This Book Will and Won’t Do	
5
How This Book Is Structured	
7
Illustration Pages	
9
The Process	
11
Simple Is Best	
13
Introducing Arnie	
15
The Key Pose Animation Process	
17

x
Contents
Gesture Drawings vs. Thumbnails	
19
Gesture Drawings...............................................................................................................................................................................................................................19
Thumbnail Drawings..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................20
Part  2  Now It’s Time to Draw!
Exercise 1. Anticipation	
23
Exercise 2. Posture	
27
Exercise 3. Physical Exercise	
31
Exercise 4. Sporting Observation	
35
Exercise 5. Single-Person Action	
39
Exercise 6. Two-Person Observation	
43
Exercise 7. Pose and Silhouette	
47
Exercise 8. Held Object with Good Silhouette	
51
Exercise 9. Held Object with Poor Silhouette	
55
Exercise 10. Blacked-in Silhouettes	
59
Exercise 11. Pose Alternatives	
63
Exercise 12. Emotions and Body Language: Sad	
67
Exercise 13. Emotions and Body Language: Happy	
71
Exercise 14. Emotions and Body Language: Transitions	
75
Exercise 15. Balance	
79
Exercise 16. Human Balance	
83
Exercise 17. Balance with Weight	
87
Exercise 18. Weight Shifts in Walks	
91
Exercise 19. Weight and Body Stance	
95

Contents
xi
Exercise 20. Balance and Dance	
99
Exercise 21. Form	
103
Exercise 22. Bouncing Ball	
107
Exercise 23. Squash and Stretch	
111
Exercise 24. Rotating Observational Point	
115
Exercise 25. Form Consistency	
119
Exercise 26. Rotating Objects	
123
Exercise 27. Sequential Action	
127
Exercise 28. Cup and Hand	
131
Exercise 29. Object Throw	
135
Exercise 30. Generic Walk	
139
Exercise 31. Bird Flight	
143
Exercise 32. Breakdown Positions	
147
Exercise 33. Achieving Weight	
151
Exercise 34. Thin People	
155
Exercise 35. Heavy People	
159
Exercise 36. Weight Carry	
163
Exercise 37. Nonobservational Drawing	
167
Exercise 38. Moving with Weight	
171
Exercise 39. Framing	
175
Exercise 40. Landscape: Vertical Framing	
179
Exercise 41. Landscape: Horizontal Framing	
183
Exercise 42. Two-Shot Action	
187
Exercise 43. Reaction Shot	
191

xii
Contents
Exercise 44. Person with Horizon	
195
Exercise 45. Perspective	
199
Exercise 46. One-Point Perspective	
203
Exercise 47. Two-Point Perspective	
207
Exercise 48. Three-Point Perspective	
211
Exercise 49. Forced Figure Perspective	
215
Exercise 50. Drawing Objects in Perspective	
219
Exercise 51. Light and Shade	
223
Exercise 52. Dark on Light	
227
Exercise 53. Light on Dark	
231
Exercise 54. Light within Dark	
235
Exercise 55. Rim Lighting	
239
Exercise 56. Light Layers	
243
Exercise 57. Strength of Line	
247
Exercise 58. Strong Foreground Line	
251
Exercise 59. Thicker Outline	
255
Exercise 60. Storyboarding	
259
Exercise 61. Extreme Wide Establishing Shot	
263
Exercise 62. Wide Shot	
267
Exercise 63. Medium Shot	
271
Exercise 64. Close-up Shot	
275
Exercise 65. Extreme Close-up Shot	
279
Exercise 66. Final Storyboarding Exercise	
283

Contents
xiii
Part  3  Appendix
Turnaround Arnie Model Sheet	
289
Try the Arnie Approach for Yourself	
291
Design Your Own Personal Arnie Character	
293
Your Own Character Turnaround Model Sheet	
295
Film Language	
297
Shots....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................297
Transitions..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................298
Continuity..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................298
Last Thoughts	
299
Animator’s Sketchclub	
301
DRAWTASTIC Festival of Drawing & Animation	
303
Resources	
305
Recommended Drawing Books for Animators............................................................................................................................................................................305
Tony White’s Books for Animators................................................................................................................................................................................................305
Tony White’s iBooks for Animators...............................................................................................................................................................................................305
Self-Published by Tony White.........................................................................................................................................................................................................305
About the Author	
307


xv
Preface


xvii
Thank You
To my loving wife, Saille—for loving the person I am 
instead of the person others would make of me. Your 
support in everything I try to do (often far too much) is 
an inspiration to me. Without you, none of it would be 
at all possible!


xix
Introduction
Draw what you see—not what you think you see!
Imagination is a wonderful thing. From it has come things of great wonder that have brought joy and inspiration to our world. 
Imagination is the wellspring of all the great books, films, shows, and just about everything else that has moved and enter-
tained us throughout the ages. In more recent times, all of the great animated classics have sprung from that infinite source 
we call imagination.
As animators especially, imagination is an amazing resource that provides us with so many options in approach that we can 
take when preparing or conceiving even the shortest of moving sequences. Like an actor on a stage, we need the inspiration of 
our imagination to guide us in how we portray a character delivering a line or action or performing a powerful emotion to the 
audience. However, beyond that point—in the actual mechanical creation of the chosen movement—imagination can be our own 
worst enemy! At this point, we need instead to draw on the reality of the world around us. This is because to realize the perfor-
mance we have imagined, we need to seriously study and research how that movement works in the real world to perfect our 
character’s actual execution of the actions required.
For example, if we want our character to perform gymnastic somersaults across the floor in an expression of joy or celebration, 
we don’t just do what we imagine it would do. If we did that our action would fall incredibly flat and be unconvincing. Instead, 
we need to watch gymnasts doing actual flick-flacks across the mat to understand how this action works mechanically. Balance, 
timing, arcs of action, anticipation, and overlapping action are all elements we can learn from by studying reality. Indeed, it is only 
by studying that real world around us that we will find those unique little things that will transform our animation to a higher 
level, whatever form of animation we execute. We merely have to train our eyes to see these things—and then apply them to our 
animation technique—which is what this sketchbook is all about!

xx
Introduction
So this book is all about the process of seeing, recording, and interpreting through drawing. It is through this process of observ-
ing and sketching that you will open to yourself a whole world of new understanding and expression that your mind can barely 
imagine. Watching in slow motion a sequence of an athlete, juggler, actor, or even everyday people walking about doing their 
business will reveal subtleties of pose, action, and timing that we cannot possibly visualize until we see it in action. The simple 
experience of studying people drinking coffee in Exercise 2 will immediately show us the various ways that people actually hold 
a cup or place their bodies. These variations alone will each tell their own story simply by capturing the poses that people adopt!
Therefore, do not take the observation and drawing challenges of this book lightly. Everything you attempt here is designed to 
open your eyes and teach you new things. Your imagination will set the stage, but your observation and drawings along these lines 
will dictate the performance. It is only by doing this that you will be fully able to push your animation to levels that the master 
animators of the past achieved. Look, learn, and draw—these are the foundations of what will make you a master animator too!

Part 1
What This Book Is All About


3
The Importance of Drawing
It must be stated right up front that The Animator’s Sketchbook is not a book that teaches you how to draw. That’s something 
you’ll hopefully have learned already—or if not, something you should consider more seriously. You don’t need to be able to draw 
like Rembrandt or Leonardo da Vinci, of course. But it is extremely valuable for any creative person to know their way around a 
pencil—even if they work in CG or another nondrawing animated discipline eventually. The “humble pencil” is the finest hard-
ware ever created to express an idea or put down a concept for later development. Indeed, pretty much most creations tend to 
begin with a simple pencil sketch or thumbnail scribble at the start of their conception. So master animators of the future, you 
neglect the power of the pencil at your own risk!

4
The Animator’s Sketchbook

5
What This Book Will and Won’t Do
What The Animator’s Sketchbook will do is point you in the right direction to see the information you most need to see and 
understand as an emerging animator. We live in a world of perpetual visual stimulus, but perhaps we often can’t see the forest 
for the trees when we look. So here you will find 66 exercises that will open your eyes to the moving world that is all around you. 
Then—perhaps the most revolutionary thing of all—The Animator’s Sketchbook is a book that actually requires you to draw in it 
as you read.
The Animator’s Sketchbook won’t tell you how you should draw—at least in terms of a drawing style. You will be expected to 
draw figures pretty much all the time, but the style and technique you adopt to do those drawings are entirely your decision. What 
is recommended, however, is that you draw in a style that is quick and you use a technique that can be worked with quickly and 
consistently. Many of the exercises in The Animator’s Sketchbook need to be sketched within a minimal amount of time, so you’ll 
definitely need to be able to draw them quickly but accurately. Speed, continuity, and clarity are definitely your biggest allies when 
it comes to arriving at a drawing that you are comfortable with.


7
How This Book Is Structured
I’m sure you will have seen that most textbooks on animation 
are packed full with text and illustrations that cover most of 
the aspects of the animation process—the author’s own books 
included. Traditional sketchbooks, on the other hand, are entirely 
devoid of anything except blank pages. The Animator’s Sketchbook 
positions itself somewhere in between these two extremes. It is 
done in this way so you will learn the core foundations of pose 
and movement through brief written guidelines as you use the 
additional blank spaces on each page to sketch out what you are 
required to observe and draw. In this unique way, The Animator’s 
Sketchbook offers itself up as a definitive, foundational workbook 
for students who wish to become master animators or for current 
professional animators (of every kind) who want to raise the bar 
on their own mastery accordingly.


9
Illustration Pages
On the page that follows most of the dedicated drawing and instruction pages you will find grayed-out images that illustrate the 
nature of the exercise you are about to attempt. If you choose to, you can draw over these in your own style, in a way to become 
more familiar with the challenge you are about to take on. Alternatively, you can use the blank pages as extra drawing opportu-
nities instead, i.e., where you can add more of your own original gesture drawings to supplement the drawing exercises you will 
be doing anyway. This is probably the preferred thing to do, as at the end of everything you will want to show your completed 
sketchbook, featuring as many of your own drawings as you can, when you pitch your animation show reel at important inter-
views. Clearly, the more drawings you pack into its every available drawing space, the more impressive it will be for you in the 
eyes of that important hiring person.

10
The Animator’s Sketchbook
Claire Fritz/Student.

11
The Process
The process of using The Animator’s Sketchbook is very simple. On almost all of opening pages of each exercise, you will find 
brief written guidelines that will help you to see and draw specific things that you need to observe as an animator. You will be 
directed to specific actions or locations that you need to find and draw. There will be a time limit given for each instruction too, 
so you will have to learn to discipline yourself in doing the exercise in the time required. When you have completed all the draw-
ing assignments in this book—and hopefully added many of your own too—you should have an immaculate, animation-focused 
sketchbook that will be a major part of your presentation material when you go out to work in the industry. There will of course 
be nothing like it out there—it will be entirely unique to you. This will hopefully put you ahead of your competition in any job 
or college position you apply for.

12
The Animator’s Sketchbook

13
Simple Is Best
Once upon a time, a Pixar recruiter announced that if a kid came through the door 
who couldn’t draw, but presented them with the most beautifully animated stick fig-
ure animation imaginable, they would hire him immediately. They explained that 
in a world where a knowledge of computers, software, and technology was the norm 
among student graduates these days, the hardest thing for them to find was those stu-
dent animators who knew how to move things well, i.e., according to the foundational 
principles of motion that have been laid down by the great animators of the past.
In this context, it didn’t matter how well a person drew of course—just that he 
could demonstrate what he knew with the skills he had. This book encourages that. 
The quality or finish of your actual drawings in The Animator’s Sketchbook is not as 
important as the knowledge and understanding that they are reflecting. Even if you 
really can only draw stick figures, it’s OK as long as you make sure that the poses and 
principles you are representing with them accurately reflect the pose or gesture you 
have observed. This is why simple really is best when it comes to how you approach the 
drawings you create in your sketchbook. You may well be able to draw like the finest 
old masters who have ever lived. But if your drawings don’t tell the story of what you 
have observed, then they will mean nothing in terms of your animation progression.


15
Introducing Arnie
To illustrate most of the exercise text in this book, I 
have used the simplest of simple illustrative charac-
ters—Arnie—to demonstrate the essence of what is 
being said. Arnie has been with me on my animation 
and teaching journey for a long time now. He is so 
easy to understand and draw that I find he’s a huge 
asset for student animators especially. Animation 
beginners are often overwhelmed by the complexity 
of the principles of movement they need to know—
let alone drawing a character that represents them. 
So by offering such a simple teaching form to them, 
it makes everything else they are attempting to learn 
and demonstrate so much easier.
Consequently, if you’re comfortable with drawing 
Arnie for your drawing exercises in this book, then 
by all means do so. I can only repeat that it is not the 
quality or the design of your drawings that matters 
here, but what you do with those designs. Arnie has 

16
The Animator’s Sketchbook
been tried and tested over the years as a great vehicle to represent the principles of movement, so it could make your life consider-
ably easier if you adopt him for your own gesture drawing exercises. If, on the other hand, you do feel a strong need to create a 
character of your own to work with, then that is great too. Just make sure that whatever character design you finally decide upon 
is fast and easy to draw, as the exercises that follow will often have strict and demanding time limits attached to them.
(Note:  You will find a useful turnaround model sheet of Arnie in the Appendix section at the back of this book. Accompanying that 
you will find additional exercises on how to design and create your own character too. It will be of great benefit to you if you work 
through these Appendix exercises before you do anything else, as these exercises will help you significantly in fully familiarizing your-
self with whatever character design you finally go with before taking on the core pose and gesture assignments to be found throughout 
this book.)

17
The Key Pose Animation Process
For those new to animation, it might help to explain a little about the basic approach—specifically the basic key pose animation 
process. Most animation is made up of key poses, breakdown positions, and inbetweens. However, the most important among all 
of these is the key poses. If you don’t get your key poses right, then no amount of finessing, rendering, or special effecting will 
ever make your animation right. This book deals primarily with the art of key poses, i.e., the art of seeing and interpreting them 
in real-life activities. Key poses (alternatively known as keys or key positions) are best defined as identifiable changes of direction, 
action, or emphasis within a particular sequence of movement. The better we can identify and implement these key poses, the bet-
ter our animation will become. Every master animator has to learn how to observe the key moments in the actions of people, ani-
mals, or animate objects if their animation is to truly come alive and be convincing. For example, if a person is hammering a nail 
into a wall, the first key pose might be with the hammer up, about to strike. It will then move back toward another key pose that 
prepares for the hit, and finally, the last key pose of the hammer actually hitting the nail will be established. There will of course 
be more of these, but these three will aptly illustrate the point for now. A master animator will understand the required key poses 
of an action in their mind, if they don’t, they will go out and study a similar action in the real world and make visual, reference 
sketches to enable them to understand the action better. This is precisely the approach this book takes and how you too will learn 
how to think and see like a master animator. (Note: For a more in-depth understanding of the much wider principles and pro-
cesses of animation, read the author’s previous books on the subject—a list of which can be found at the back of this publication.)

18
The Animator’s Sketchbook

19
Gesture Drawings vs. Thumbnails
Throughout this book, you will be asked to produce either gesture drawings or thumbnail sketches. So, let us define what these 
are before you start.
Gesture Drawings
A gesture drawing is essentially a fast, observational sketch where the artist is looking, interpreting, and drawing what he sees 
before him. Speed drawing is another term for these, if you like—although the drawings still have to be accurate even if they are 
drawn quickly. Gesture drawings for animation purposes can even be an exaggeration of what is seen—as long as these exaggera-
tions (or caricatures) are accurately reflective of what is seen and not just bad drawings. A gesture drawing is wholly concerned 
with the observer looking analytically at the pose or position of a character (or object) in front of him and then drawing speedily 

20
The Animator’s Sketchbook
what he actually sees (as opposed to what he thinks he sees). Therefore, gesture drawings are a fundamentally important weapon 
in an animator’s armory.
Thumbnail Drawings
In other parts of the book, you will be asked to create quick, imaginary, small-sized concept sketches of things you need to con-
ceive or think up. These are called thumbnail drawings. Thumbnail drawings (also known as thumbs or thumbnails) are effec-
tively a very quick scribble, sketch, or doodle that gets an initial idea down on paper ahead of further study or research taking 
place. These are therefore not final sketches, or even observational gesture drawings in any way. They are more a stream of con-
sciousness kind of thing, where you brainstorm your thoughts and get them down as quickly as possible. They are effectively the 
foundational basis upon which all future work is based, which is why many animators “thumb out” their animation ideas before 
fully commiting them to paper or computer.

Part 2
Now It’s Time to Draw!


23
Exercise 1
As a warm-up, let’s explore the notion of anticipation. With any main animated action there’s almost invariably a moment just 
preceeding it when the movement goes in the opposite direction. For example, if a character jumps into the air, there is often 
a move (anticipation) downward before he or she jumps upward. This applies to most of our real-world actions to some extent, 
which will need to be exaggerated significantly in animation if it is to work convincingly. This exaggeration is particularly notice-
able in classical cartoon animation, especially traditional Warner Brothers animation. Therefore, for this first exercise you should 
study and draw an appropriate pose for a real person about to hammer a nail into a piece of wood. When you have done this, 
observe what happens just before he or she hits the nail. Draw that position next to the first one on the next blank page. (Take no 
more than 2–3 minutes to complete both drawings.)
Anticipation

24
The Animator’s Sketchbook

25
Exercise 1.  Anticipation


27
Exercise 2
For our second drawing exercise let’s explore variations in posture. Find a popular coffee bar and observe everyone drinking their 
drinks. Note how although each person is effectively doing the same thing, their method—or posture—will be different as they 
do it. So, on the next blank page sketch 4 different pose positions of the people you are observing. If no suitable coffee bar is avail-
able for you to draw in, select any kind of public location where people are drinking. Exaggerate the pose positions if it helps you 
express the differences better—as a good animator would! (Take no more than 2–3 minutes per pose drawing.)
Posture

28
The Animator’s Sketchbook

29
Exercise 2.  Posture


31
Exercise 3
Now you have some idea of what a gesture drawing is all about, select 4 different people doing some kind of physical exercise. They 
might be digging, washing a car, sweeping the floor, etc.—whatever it is that makes them active. Draw your 4 people poses on the 
next blank page. (Take no more than 2–3 minutes per drawing to do this.)
(Note:  Your temptation in this and all the following action assignments will be to use a photograph or freeze a moment in time on 
a video to base your gesture drawing on. Try not to do this as the photographic lens can both distort and flatten any image it is cap-
turing. Its far better to use “live” activities to train your eye with, as these will give you a far better idea of the shape, form, volume, 
and depth of what you’re looking at. As a second choice, go to moving video on Vimeo, YouTube, etc., and only as a final resort use 
a photograph.)
Physical Exercise

32
The Animator’s Sketchbook

33
Exercise 3.  Physical Exercise


35
Exercise 4
By now you should be feeling more confident with sketching gesture drawings from observation—and maybe even beginning to 
train your inner “animator’s eye” to capture moving moments in time. So next observe serious sports men and women in compe-
tition. From their dynamic movements choose 4 extreme, defining poses and draw them on the next blank page. (Take no more 
than 2 minutes per drawing.)
Sporting Observation

36
The Animator’s Sketchbook

37
Exercise 4.  Sporting Observation


39
Exercise 5
Instead of selecting several different people doing different things, this time pick a single person executing several things in one 
complete action sequence. This suggests that you could remain in a sports environment showing a progression of action, or else 
someone going through the stages of an everyday chore. Sketch 4 gesture drawings that define different aspects of the sequence 
you’re observing. (Take no more than 2 minutes per pose drawing.)
Single-Person Action

40
The Animator’s Sketchbook

41
Exercise 5.  Single-Person Action


43
Exercise 6
Two-Person Observation
Pushing your gesture drawing observational skills a little further, we will now employ the scenario of two or more individuals 
interacting with each other. On the next blank page, sketch 4 separate gesture drawings that define their unfolding relationship 
with each other. These can be friendly poses, as with kids playing. They could be lovers in a park, walking hand in hand. They 
might even be more adversarial, such as two opponents in a boxing ring. Your challenge is to capture the give-and-take of their 
relationship as best you can. (Take no more than 5 minutes to do each drawing.)

44
The Animator’s Sketchbook

45
Exercise 6.  Two-Person Observation


47
Exercise 7
Pose and Silhouette
It might help to share another golden rule with you now. It is not enough to just create a great pose position. Experienced artists 
and animators all know that to maximize the visual impact of a posed image, it needs to be staged in such a way that the viewer 
will immediately see the story it’s trying to communicate. Communication in animated action especially is everything. Therefore, 
“silhouetting” is something that is extremely valuable to you. Silhouetting effectively means that if you choose to shade in your 
character pose black, then the silhouette it makes should still explain the story of the pose you have drawn completely. Hands, 
arms, and legs especially should be set away from the body in your poses, to make its silhouette stronger. To understand this fully, 
draw at the top of the next blank page these two versions of a character holding an apple. Compare the difference. Now shade 
in second versions of them both below and compare the difference from a silhouette point of view. (Take as long as you need to 
complete this exercise.)

48
The Animator’s Sketchbook

49
Exercise 7.  Pose and Silhouette


51
Exercise 8
Held Object with Good Silhouette
Now find a person from life who you can direct and then observe. Ask her to hold an apple, small ball, or similar object, out in 
front of her. Position yourself so you can see the most clear silhouetted position you can and make a gesture drawing of it. (Take 
no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)

52
The Animator’s Sketchbook

53
Exercise 8.  Held Object with Good Silhouette


55
Exercise 9
Held Object with Poor Silhouette
Using the same person and pose as the previous exercise, position yourself so that the apple—or object that is being held by the 
character—is positioned directly between you and the person who is posing. Create a new gesture drawing of this. (Take no more 
than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

56
The Animator’s Sketchbook

57
Exercise 9.  Held Object with Poor Silhouette


59
Exercise 10
Blacked-in Silhouettes
Finally, outline copies of both of the previous apple drawings and black them in to test the silhouettes they make. Compare the 
two. (Take as long as you like to complete this exercise.)

60
The Animator’s Sketchbook

61
Exercise 10.  Blacked-in Silhouettes


63
Exercise 11
Pose Alternatives
Every picture tells a story. It is important to remember that no animation will work successfully unless you know how to present 
it in a way that best tells the story. We know that most movies tell a story, as that is the essence of narrative filmmaking. However, 
animated storytelling must go much farther than this. Scenes within a film need to tell their own individual stories too. Actions 
within each scene also have to tell their own story. Even poses within an action must tell their own story if that action is to be 
convincing. Consequently, if you are not able to sketch gesture drawings that tell stories, then you will really struggle to animate 
well. As they say, the pose is everything. So this time, pick any of the action drawings you have drawn on the previous pages and 
use your imagination to conceive 4 new ways of expressing it. Sketch your 4 new ideas onto the next blank page. (Take no more 
than 3 minutes to do this.)

64
The Animator’s Sketchbook

65
Exercise 11.  Pose Alternatives


67
Exercise 12
Emotions and Body Language: Sad
Next, it is important to look at emotions and body language. As we all know, people at a funeral or memorial service often tend to 
look extremely sad. Sad is what we’re now looking for. So, select 4 examples of people looking sad, especially by way of their body 
language, and sketch a gesture drawing of each on the next blank page. Choose your pose positions well, remembering especially 
what you’ve learned about silhouetting in the previous exercise. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each sketch.)

68
The Animator’s Sketchbook

69
Exercise 12.  Emotions and Body Language: Sad


71
Exercise 13
Emotions and Body Language: Happy
Now by contrast, find a social gathering or public group that is displaying clear happiness and sketch 4 examples of people in 
happy poses. Again, facial information is not nearly as important as body language in these gesture drawings. (Take no more than 
2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

72
The Animator’s Sketchbook

73
Exercise 13.  Emotions and Body Language: Happy


75
Exercise 14
Emotions and Body Language: Transitions
Now reflecting your previous sad and happy drawings, sketch a series of 4 transitioning positions from sad to happy. Do all 
4 drawings in sequence on the next blank page. Your gesture drawings here will need to be the product of your imagination—
unless of course you can find a friend or colleague who will pose the changing positions for you to draw. (Take no more than 
3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

76
The Animator’s Sketchbook

77
Exercise 14.  Emotions and Body Language: Transitions


79
Exercise 15
Balance
Something that is not dealt with in most animation teaching books—or even online tutorials—is balance. Balance is a funda-
mental aspect of biped pose creation in particular. It took me a decade or more as a professional animator to fully recognize this 
principle, although once I’d got it, my work elevated to an entirely new level! Effectively, balance means that with any two-legged 
character moving, its center of gravity has to be over its point, or points, of contact with the ground. This effectively means that 
if it’s walking and both feet are on the ground at the same time—as in a stride position—the main weight of its body has to be 
located somewhere above the two feet positions. Alternatively, if only one foot is on the ground at any moment in time, then the 
body weight has to be above the foot that’s on the ground. So, look at this generic walking sequence and sketch on the next blank 
page 2 of the poses within it that represent the principles of balance mentioned above. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete 
each drawing.)

80
The Animator’s Sketchbook

81
Exercise 15.  Balance


83
Exercise 16
Human Balance
Open Google Images and type in the search term “human balance.” Review what comes up and then select 4 images that you feel 
most represent the principle of balance (i.e., the body mass is positioned over a single point, or points, of contact with the ground). 
Sketch out a gesture drawing for each of these on the next blank page. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

84
The Animator’s Sketchbook

85
Exercise 16.  Human Balance


87
Exercise 17
Balance with Weight
Observing people carrying heavy loads can shed further light on the nature of balance. For example, watch the different ways a 
shopper holds his body when (i) going into a store and (ii) coming out of it. Going in, he will pretty much walk normally. But com-
ing out—laden with heavy shopping bags—he will adjust his body lean significantly to compensate for the additional weight over 
his feet. Therefore, draw 2 gesture drawings on the next blank page that indicate the before and after of carrying a weight. Attempt 
to dramatize the differing nature of these 2 poses for maximum effect. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

88
The Animator’s Sketchbook

89
Exercise 17.  Balance with Weight


91
Exercise 18
Weight Shifts in Walks
If you study people walking from the front, you will note that they sway their body mass from side to side as they attempt each 
stride. This is another example of character balance in action. It is only when our weight is balanced over our contact foot that our 
free one can be lifted and brought through to make the next stride. Indeed, the larger or heavier a person is, the more likely she 
is to shift her weight from side to side even further. So, sketch out 4 gesture drawings on the next blank page, showing the shift 
of body mass as she walks. A view from the front or back will make this more evident. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete 
each drawing.)

92
The Animator’s Sketchbook

93
Exercise 18.  Weight Shifts in Walks


95
Exercise 19
Weight and Body Stance
As I hope you will have noticed already, there is a significant difference in the body stance of a person who is carrying a heavy 
weight and one who is not. The character carrying the weight will adjust his pose (and therefore his balance) to compensate. So 
find your own 2 examples of a person carrying a weight and not carrying a weight. When you have, sketch a gesture drawing 
for each—side by side—on the next blank page to show the difference between them. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete 
each drawing.)

96
The Animator’s Sketchbook

97
Exercise 19.  Weight and Body Stance


99
Exercise 20
Balance and Dance
Finally on balance. Study a dance sequence where a person is significantly moving their body weight from one foot to the other, 
such as in ballet, modern dance, or something similar. Identify 4 poses within that sequence where the balanced body shapes 
are very different and the center of gravity is always directly over their foot’s point of contact with the floor. (Take no more than 
2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

100
The Animator’s Sketchbook

101
Exercise 20.  Balance and Dance


103
Exercise 21
Form
When animating in a traditional hand-drawn animation style—or even blocking out poses for any other style of animation—one 
of the most difficult things to do is to keep the form consistent. Maintaining shape, proportions, and volume with any multiple 
drawings of the same character is difficult for anyone. Try the following yourself and see how good you are at it. (Taking no more 
than 3 minutes to execute each of the following drawings.)
	 1.	 Take a toy or a doll and draw it from one angle in the top left-hand quarter of the next blank page.
	 2.	 Next, turn the toy 90% and draw it again in the top-right quadrant.
	 3.	 Again, turn it another 90% and draw it this time in the bottom-left quadrant.
	 4.	 Finally, turn it 90% once more and draw it in the bottom-right quadrant. Now measure the various proportions and vol-
umes from drawing to drawing as best you can. If there is little variation, you’re a “master of form.” However, it is most 
likely that you won’t be that, so the following exercises will help.

104
The Animator’s Sketchbook

105
Exercise 21.  Form


107
Exercise 22
Bouncing Ball
Start simply with this bouncing ball exercise. At the peak of its bounce, a standard rubber ball will retain a perfectly spherical 
shape. However, after it descends and hits the ground, it will deform into a flatter, “squash” shape. Yet when it’s either ascending or 
descending, the ball will tend to adopt a longer, narrower “stretch” position. So, take a decorative ball and on the next blank page 
sketch all 3 modes of it bouncing: perfectly spherical, squashed, and stretched. Ensure that the overall size and volume within the 
ball are consistent from drawing to drawing. If you have space on the page, repeat this exercise more than once. (Take no more 
than 2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

108
The Animator’s Sketchbook

109
Exercise 22.  Bouncing Ball


111
Exercise 23
Squash and Stretch
Non-cartoon (i.e., anatomically based) animation will require you to apply the same squash and stretch distortion principles as 
with the bouncing ball; however, for this you’ll need to achieve it by working with the actual anatomy of the character, rather than 
distorting it as if it were made of rubber. To achieve this, you need to sketch a (say) jumping realistic figure through 3 modes of 
action: static, squashing, and stretching. This realistically means sketching first a standing figure, and then one with the knees 
bent and the body leaning forward slightly, in preparation for a jump, and finally, one where the figure is reaching up vertically, off 
the ground, at the height of the jump. Use a real-world reference for this if you can, and exaggerate the poses to provide a stronger, 
more dramatic effect. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

112
The Animator’s Sketchbook
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

113
Exercise 23.  Squash and Stretch


115
Exercise 24
Rotating Observational Point
Training your eye to appreciate form from every angle is really important to the modern animator, who more often than not deals 
with 3 dimensions, rather than 2. To help you do this, find a partner who is willing to pose for you. Sketch them first from a pro-
file view. Then, circle around him in approximate 20-degree increments, sketching him from each new angle. Keep this process 
going until you have sketched him from an entire 360-degree viewpoint, making sure that at each time you are maintaining the 
proportions and volume of his head and body consistently throughout. (Take no more than 5 minutes to complete each drawing.)
(Note:  If you want to really test the consistency of your form from drawing to drawing, film each sketch for 24 frames on a suitable 
video camera and then play back the video. Your drawings will appear to rotate, indicating quite clearly how well you have kept the 
consistency of form from beginning to end.)

116
The Animator’s Sketchbook

117
Exercise 24.  Rotating Observational Point


119
Exercise 25
Form Consistency
It is extremely important that you achieve form consistency when research sketching. To experience this, observe someone playing 
tennis and then draw on the next blank page 4 different gesture drawings from different moments within the action. As you do so, 
pay as much attention to maintaining a consistent bodily form as you do to recording the person’s actual physical pose positions. 
(Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

120
The Animator’s Sketchbook

121
Exercise 25.  Form Consistency


123
Exercise 26
Rotating Objects
Sometimes it is solid objects that need to be animated through a moving sequence, not bipedal bodies. So, follow the process of 
Exercise 24, but instead of drawing a posing figure, this time draw a solid object from around a 360-degree viewpoint. Your object 
could be a box, a car, or even a building. As long as it contains rigid, static shapes that you can draw from a 360-degree viewpoint, 
all is good. Again, work at keeping the core shape and form consistent throughout. (Take between 2 and 5 minutes to complete 
each drawing, depending on its complexity.)

124
The Animator’s Sketchbook

125
Exercise 26.  Rotating Objects


127
Exercise 27
Sequential Action
Animation is all about sequential action, and good sequential action is all about flow, placement, and timing. It therefore helps 
to study sequential action in real life to make the whole process clearer in your mind before attempting animation. This kind of 
visual research is so important to an animator, as no two people ever move in exactly the same way, even if they are doing pre-
cisely the same action. A walking action is a good example of this. Generically, everyone walks the same way—one leg in front of 
the other, with arms opposing. However, if you really look hard at the way people walk, you’ll see slight variations in their move-
ments. This can be a result of such factors as bodily limitations, mood, intention, and environmental or even weather-induced 
forces acting upon them. So, observe people walking in the street and sketch 4 different gesture drawings that epitomize the way 
they are walking. Exaggerate where necessary to make a point. (Take no more than 3 minutes to create each drawing.)

128
The Animator’s Sketchbook

129
Exercise 27.  Sequential Action


131
Exercise 28
Cup and Hand
Now something that is very simple and accessible to stage. Observe your nondrawing hand resting on the desk. Lift it from its 
starting position, grab a cup that’s farther away, bring the cup toward you, and then finally place it down on the desk just a little 
nearer than where your hand originally started. It’s a simple action, but if you break it down into a minimum of 8 gesture draw-
ings, you’ll see that this simple piece of sequential action contains more underlying movements and shifts of planes than you 
could possibly have imagined. For example, note the angles of the cup as the hand picks it up and moves it toward you, as well as 
the curved paths of action that your hand and the cup define as they moves from beginning to end. (Take no more than 2 minutes 
to complete each drawing.)

132
The Animator’s Sketchbook

133
Exercise 28.  Cup and Hand


135
Exercise 29
Object Throw
A really impressive piece of sequential action can be seen when a person is fast-throwing an object. Generally, they will hold the 
object in their hand, draw back their arm in readiness to throw, unleash the throw with their maximum effort (often leading from 
the shoulder, then the elbow, then the wrist, and finally the hand), follow through with their arm around the body when they have 
released the object, and then return to a standing position to observe where the object has landed. For this exercise, therefore, 
study the movement of a baseball pitcher or a javelin thrower, and create 6 gesture drawings that define the critical moments in 
that sequence. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

136
The Animator’s Sketchbook

137
Exercise 29.  Object Throw


139
Exercise 30
Generic Walk
Now returning to the walking action mentioned earlier. When a person walks generically, they will pretty much adopt the poses 
indicated on this page. Study this sequential action of two walk strides and familiarize yourself with it. Next, go out into a public 
place and sketch individuals you see as they walk by. Allocate a different person’s pose for each of the 9 positions you see in this 
sequence. (The first and last are the same.) After you’ve completed all 9 drawings, film them one after another, holding them for 
4 frames each if you can, and play back the video. This should give you a quite accurate, albeit slightly surreal, generic walking 
action. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

140
The Animator’s Sketchbook
KEY
STRIDE
PASSING POSITION
KEY
STRIDE
1
3
7
9
9
11
15
1
(5)
(13)

141
Exercise 30.  Generic Walk


143
Exercise 31
Bird Flight
Bird flight is more than just the bird moving straight wings up and down. There is, in fact, a very complex process of sequential 
action going on—founded on the anatomy of the bird in question. So study the video of a bird flying (in slow motion, if possible) 
and produce a minimum of 5 gesture sketches that define that action. If possible, also study the skeletal anatomy of the bird in 
question, which will indicate just how and why the wings move as they do. (Take no more than 4 minutes to complete each drawing.)

144
The Animator’s Sketchbook

145
Exercise 31.  Bird Flight


147
Exercise 32
Breakdown Positions
Return to your previous sequential drawings of a person throwing an object. Using these drawings, visualize and sketch on the 
next blank page how an inbetween drawing might look midway between each of your key positions. (Note: Quite often an inbe-
tween position is not entirely that, as parts of the body move farther or faster than others—known in animation terms as the ‘suc-
cessive breaking of joints’. Study your original reference footage to see what is happening in the midpoints of the particular pose 
sequence you have drawn.) If possible, trace every drawing separately in the middle of its own sheet of paper. Then videotape each 
drawing sequentially, holding them for 4 frames each. When playing the video back, you’ll get an instant appreciation of how the 
overall action is working and what that many drawings means when played back in real time on a video screen. (Take no more 
than 1 minute to complete each drawing.)

148
The Animator’s Sketchbook

149
Exercise 32.  Breakdown Positions


151
Exercise 33
Achieving Weight
Weight is essential to creating good animation, and there are ways of applying the illusion of weight that will improve signifi-
cantly the quality of animated movement. The effects of gravity (and therefore weight) can exert a significant effect on the way 
characters move or are posed. Weight pulls down on everything that exists in this world—often in the sense that they become 
shorter, slower, droopier, or more stooped. The effects of weight can also slow action down too. Therefore, before you observe 
real-world situations, use the next blank page to draw a number of thumbnail sketches that imply gravity affecting people and 
things. This is a random, stream-of-thought, brainstorming kind of thing, so don’t get too serious. As long as your thumbs sug-
gest weight or the effects of weight on things, all will be good. Fill up the page with as many drawn ideas as you can. (Take no 
more than 1 minute per sketch.)

152
The Animator’s Sketchbook

153
Exercise 33.  Achieving Weight


155
Exercise 34
Thin People
Now go outside and observe 4 very thin, light people who are moving normally. On the next blank page, sketch gesture drawings 
of each them, indicating their absence of weight. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

156
The Animator’s Sketchbook

157
Exercise 34.  Thin People


159
Exercise 35
Heavy People
Now by comparison, observe 4 very broad and heavy people and draw on the next blank page gesture drawings that define their 
bulk and weight. These should of course contrast greatly with your previous drawings of the lighter people. (Take no more than 
2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

160
The Animator’s Sketchbook

161
Exercise 35.  Heavy People


163
Exercise 36
Weight Carry
Next, study an individual who is carrying a significant weight—i.e., a man carrying a sack; a mother, a child; or a kid, a heavy 
toy—and sketch, on the next blank page, 4 separate gesture drawings of each. You are attempting here to show how they physically 
compensate for the weight they are carrying, so push your poses accordingly. And don’t forget what you learned about the use 
of balance, specifically the center of gravity needing to be over one or both feet if the character is standing. (Take no more than 
3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

164
The Animator’s Sketchbook

165
Exercise 36.  Weight Carry


167
Exercise 37
Nonobservational Drawing
Now, using only your imagination, on the next blank page draw 4 thumbnail sketches of the 4 individuals you featured in Exercise 
34 carrying the 4 individuals you featured in Exercise 35. Here you really have to apply exaggeration and caricature to commu-
nicate the visual story you are trying to communicate. But again, don’t neglect the element of balance at the same time. (Take no 
more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

168
The Animator’s Sketchbook

169
Exercise 37.  Nonobservational Drawing


171
Exercise 38
Moving with Weight
The last exercise with weight. Draw on the next blank page 4 gesture drawings that depict different individuals trying to push, 
pull, or otherwise move objects that are either too heavy to be moved or are resisting being moved at all. This should be based 
solely on observation—yet could be one of those rare occasions where you can resort to photographic reference material found on 
the Internet. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete each drawing.)

172
The Animator’s Sketchbook

173
Exercise 38.  Moving with Weight


175
Exercise 39
Framing
It is not just drawing a pose or a gesture dynamically that maximizes the impact of an image or its animation. Framing, i.e., just 
how you place your pose, gesture, or animation within the screen frame to ensure its maximum effect, is very important too. What 
helps is breaking up the screen format into thirds. In other words, if you place your main foreground object or character upon 
one of the vertical third line positions, you’ll find that, aesthetically, the shot is far more pleasing and impactful on the eye. It will 
more naturally draw the audience’s eye to it if you do so. Similarly, the same can apply to your background landscape material. 
If you place your environment’s horizon line on the upper or lower third division line, then it will give a far more dramatic effect 
to everything. For example, placing the horizon line on the lower third division line will tend to give the foreground object more 
height, or a sense of looking up on things. Alternatively, placing the horizon line on the upper third line will conversely make 
the foreground subject feel somewhat smaller and as if we are looking down on it. This can give a strong psychological message 
to the audience if we consciously work with it. So for this exercise, draw thumbnail sketches of some of your favorite paintings, 
photographs, or images that conform to the third rule. Fill the next blank page with your thumbnail sketches, providing yourself 
with a valuable archive of framing approaches that inspire you. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete each thumbnail.)

176
The Animator’s Sketchbook

177
Exercise 39.  Framing


179
Exercise 40
Landscape: Vertical Framing
More proactively, go outside and find for yourself a landscape view that has a vertical foreground object in it. Sketch 3 gesture 
drawing versions of this on the next blank page. One requires the vertical object to be in the center of the frame. One should have 
it placed on the right-side third division line. The final view needs to be placed on the left-side third division line. These drawings 
don’t need to be too detailed—just distinct enough to differentiate the foreground from the background. Consider them all and 
reflect on the merits, or not, of each. Make notes on the page if it helps you remember what you are noticing. (Take no more than 
4 minutes to complete each drawing.)

180
The Animator’s Sketchbook

181
Exercise 40.  Landscape: Vertical Framing


183
Exercise 41
Landscape: Horizontal Framing
Now find a similar view and sketch 3 gesture drawing versions of this. One should have the horizon line in the middle of the 
frame. Another should have the horizon line on the upper third division line. The last should have the horizon on the lower third 
division line. Review the three drawings and consider the merits, or not, of each. Make notes on the page if it helps you remember 
what you are noticing. (Take no more than 4 minutes to complete each drawing.)

184
The Animator’s Sketchbook

185
Exercise 41.  Landscape: Horizontal Framing


187
Exercise 42
Two-Shot Action
Now find two people who are talking with one another and sketch a single profile gesture drawing of them both at the top of the 
next blank page. Position one of the figures on the right-hand one-third line and the other on the left-side third line. Now beneath 
this draw 2 more views of the same shot—one from a three-quarter view seen from the left side and another from a three-quarter 
view from the right. Keep the two people approximately on the same one-third vertical lines, however. Lastly, under these sketch 
a fourth version of the shot, placing both characters anywhere you like within the frame. Consider which of the four views work 
best for you and why. Make notes on the page if it helps you remember what you are noticing. (Take no more than 4 minutes to 
complete each drawing.)

188
The Animator’s Sketchbook

189
Exercise 42.  Two-Shot Action


191
Exercise 43
Reaction Shot
Now you need to observe and sketch a three-quarter medium shot of a person looking. (A medium shot is a shot of a figure 
seen from the waist to the top of her head.) The person should be somewhat in profile and needs to be looking from one side 
of the picture to the other. Sketch 2 versions of this on the next blank page. The first should have the character located on the 
right-side third line, and the other on the left-side third line. Consider the two and decide which one works best for the story 
intention of the shot. Make notes on the page if it helps you remember what you are noticing. (Take no more than 3 minutes to 
complete each drawing.)

192
The Animator’s Sketchbook

193
Exercise 43.  Reaction Shot


195
Exercise 44
Person with Horizon
Finally, draw a figure from a back view as it looks away. Sketch 2 versions of this on the next blank page—one with the horizon 
beyond it on the lower one-third line of the shot and the other with the horizon on the upper one-third line. Consider the two 
versions and decide what different visual stories each is telling. Make notes on the page if it helps you remember what you are 
noticing. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete each drawing.)

196
The Animator’s Sketchbook

197
Exercise 44.  Person with Horizon


199
Exercise 45
Perspective
Perspective can often be incredibly important to animated action, in addition to shot construction. The farther away an object 
is, the smaller it will appear in the scene. The farther away a movement is in a scene, the slower it will appear to move. This is 
something that can be definitely exploited when animating. Perspective in backgrounds or environments also can be signifi-
cantly dramatized—specifically to draw attention to where you want the audience’s eye to focus. Animating in perspective can 
be very dramatic in other ways too. Therefore, on the understanding that the nearer an object or part of a person gets to the 
viewer, the larger it will appear, and vice versa, you can distort extremities accordingly. Animating backgrounds in perspective 
can provide some quite dramatic effects. So, go out and sketch on the next blank page examples of perspective and perspective 
manipulation that particularly appeal to you. Write notes beside your sketches to clarify why. (Take no more than 5 minutes to 
create each sketch.)

200
The Animator’s Sketchbook

201
Exercise 45.  Perspective


203
Exercise 46
One-Point Perspective
Perspective drawings can be drawn using three different viewpoint techniques: one-point perspective, two-point perspective, 
or three-point perspective. Here, we will start with one-point perspective. On the next blank page, draw a square that is posi-
tioned slightly to the left of frame center. Behind it, add a horizontal horizon line. Now, to add depth to the square and turn it 
into a cube in perspective, draw an angled line from the top of the right corner of the cube to somewhere along the horizon to 
the right. (Note: The point where this line dissects the horizon is called the vanishing point.) Draw a similar angled line from 
the bottom of the same side to the vanishing point on the horizon. Next, draw a vertical line somewhere away from the right 
side of the square that dissects both angled horizon lines to create a side to the square. Shade in the side to emphasize the cube’s 
depth. You’ve now created a three-dimensional shape, in perspective, using one-point perspective. (Take no more than 1 minute 
to complete this drawing.)

204
The Animator’s Sketchbook

205
Exercise 46.  One-Point Perspective


207
Exercise 47
Two-Point Perspective
On the next blank page, draw a vertical line representing the nearest corner of a cube that we’ll be creating. Center this line within 
the frame. Add a horizon line behind it, as you did before in Exercise 46. Now draw angled lines from the top of the vertical line 
to points along the horizon on both sides of the corner line. These are also known as vanishing points. Draw similar dissecting 
lines from the bottom of the vertical line to the same two vanishing points. Add vertical side lines to the right and left of the 
vertical line to suggest the depth of the cube on both its sides. Shade one of these sides to imply depth. You have now created a 
three-dimensional shape, in perspective, using two-point perspective. (Take no more than 2 minutes to complete this drawing.)

208
The Animator’s Sketchbook
V.P.
V.P.

209
Exercise 47.  Two-Point Perspective


211
Exercise 48
Three-Point Perspective
Lightly draw a vertical center line from the top to the bottom of the frame. Mark a single point (A) approximately two-thirds of 
the way up the center line and another single point (B) about halfway from the top point to the bottom of the frame. These rep-
resent the top and bottom of the nearest edge of a cube we will create. Draw a horizon line just above the top point. Next, draw 
angled lines from the top edge point to two vanishing points on the horizon line either side of the center line (VP1 and VP2). 
Draw similar lines from the bottom point on the center line to the same (VP1 and VP2) vanishing points on the horizon. Next, 
create a new vanishing point (VP3) near the bottom of the center line and draw angled lines upward in both directions so they 
can describe the left and right sides of the cube. Now, draw a dissecting line from the top part of the cube’s right-hand side (C) 
to the left-side vanishing point (VP1) on the horizon. Do the same for the cube’s left-hand side (D) to the right-side vanishing 
point (VP2). Finally, draw a line from the bottom corner of the cube’s right side (E) to the left horizon vanishing point (VP1) 
and a similar line from the bottom of the cube’s left side (F) to the right horizon vanishing point (VP2). This will now define 
the three sides (i, ii, and iii), in perspective, of a three-dimensional cube using three-point perspective. To make the cube more 
apparent, thicken the lines that define its front, top, and side edges and shade in one side face to suggest the depth. (Take no more 
than 4 minutes to complete this drawing.)

212
The Animator’s Sketchbook
V.P.
V.P.
V.P.

213
Exercise 48.  Three-Point Perspective


215
Exercise 49
Forced Figure Perspective
Now working more figuratively and less geometrically, sketch on the next blank page a character that is walking toward you. Next 
to it, draw an identical version of this figure pose, but this time exaggerate the perspective—meaning that the body parts nearest 
to you have to be drawn much larger, with the body parts farthest from you drawn significantly smaller. Compare the different 
visual effects between the two drawings. (Take no more than 4 minutes to complete each drawing.)

216
The Animator’s Sketchbook

217
Exercise 49.  Forced Figure Perspective


219
Exercise 50
Drawing Objects in Perspective
Finally, walking into the distance with perspective. On the next blank page, sketch out a scene in perspective where the farthest 
(smallest) part of the street is to the right of the frame and the nearest (largest) part to the left. Add a walking figure in full stride 
pose to the left (A) and a second drawing of the same character in a similar pose, but much smaller, to the right (B). Lightly draw 
in perspective lines between them both, i.e., from head to head and from feet to feet. Now, to calculate an accurately scaled half-
way stride postion, in perspective, you need to lightly draw a line from the top of the head of one character to the bottom of the 
feet on the other. Then do a similar thing with a line from the feet of the first character to the head of the second. Where they 
intersect, that is the natural perspective center for a middle pose between the first two (C). This process can be repeated between 
any two character positions in perspective until all the required perspective keys are achieved. (Take no more than 3 minutes to 
complete each figure drawing, although the street perspective drawing in the background will take longer of course.)
(Note:  This technique can be applied to drawn background elements too, such as telegraph poles alongside a railway track or lamp-
posts in a street, ensuring there is a natural perspective feel throughout.)

220
The Animator’s Sketchbook

221
Exercise 50.  Drawing Objects in Perspective


223
Exercise 51
Light and Shade
The use of light and shade can have a very dramatic effect on the way drawings—or animated sequences—are presented. The age-
old saying that comes to mind here is “Light over dark, or dark over light.” This means that when shading or coloring an image, 
make any foreground character you have appear light against a dark background, or dark against a light background. That will 
ensure it will appear stronger. This of course only maximizes the silhouette effect we worked with earlier. Another thing that is 
also good to remember here is that the eye is always drawn to the part of an image that has the strongest light and shade contrast. 
So, always remember to exploit this fact when you’re featuring an important piece of animated action within a scene. Practically, 
to reinforce all this, research paintings, illustrations, and film clips and draw quick thumbnail sketches of the most effective 
images you find. Work fast, but do add both light and shading—and observational notes—to your work. This will prove an invalu-
able archive of ideas and information for future use. (Take no more than 2 minutes per thumbnail drawing.)

224
The Animator’s Sketchbook

225
Exercise 51.  Light and Shade


227
Exercise 52
Dark on Light
Now find a location near you that has a strong foreground element and which also has an interesting background scene behind 
it. On the next blank page, sketch the scene and then darkly shade the foreground element in it to emphasize it. Ensure that the 
foreground element makes a strong silhouette as you render it. (Take no more than 5 minutes to complete this drawing.)

228
The Animator’s Sketchbook

229
Exercise 52.  Dark on Light


231
Exercise 53
Light on Dark
Using the same location, shade the background but not the foreground. Make sure that your foreground element still stands out 
in contrast to the rendered background. Compare this drawing with your previous one and make notes on the page regarding the 
differences between both. (Take no more than 5 minutes to complete this drawing.)

232
The Animator’s Sketchbook

233
Exercise 53.  Light on Dark


235
Exercise 54
Light within Dark
Select a location to draw that has a pretty dark overall feel to it but contains a strong element of light within one part of it. Sketch 
what you see on the next blank page, but add a silhouetted figure or object in front of the light area. Silhouette it darkly, so it has 
a strong contrast to the light area. (Take no more than 5 minutes to complete this drawing.)

236
The Animator’s Sketchbook

237
Exercise 54.  Light within Dark


239
Exercise 55
Rim Lighting
Select a location with a mood similar to the one you drew in Exercise 54, but this time put a darkly silhouetted figure into a darker 
area of the background. However, highlight just some parts of the figure using rim lighting (i.e., light that reflects from the outer 
edges of a figure’s outline to emphasize its contours against a darker background). Remember, though, that everything in the 
scene will also be influenced by the same light source that causes the rim lighting, although perhaps not so markedly. (Take no 
more than 5 minutes to complete this drawing.)

240
The Animator’s Sketchbook

241
Exercise 55.  Rim Lighting


243
Exercise 56
Light Layers
Finally with light. Seek an outside location that has many layered elements that reach off into the distance. On the next blank 
page, draw and shade each of the layered elements differently (i.e., with either them getting lighter the farther they are seen away 
from the viewer, or else darker). If you have the time and inclination, sketch both options and compare. (Take no more than 
8 minutes to complete this drawing.)

244
The Animator’s Sketchbook

245
Exercise 56.  Light Layers


247
Exercise 57
Strength of Line
We should briefly mention in conclusion that strength of line can have an important part to play in visual communication. 
Strength of line means how thick or thin you make your lines when creating a drawing or illustration. For example, most draw-
ings have an even line thickness all over, whether they are background or foreground objects being drawn. However, if you draw 
the foreground with a much thicker line, specifically the outline, then the foreground elements will tend to stick out from the 
background ones a little more. Sometimes, a single line can have a thick and thin element within it, which gives an entirely other 
effect. To familiarize yourself with different techniques, make some line thickness studies from other artists’ work. Fill the next 
blank page with thumbnail sketches and notes you have arrived at when looking at a number of different cartoon, comic book, or 
illustration styles. (Take no more than 3 minutes for each thumbnail drawing.)

248
The Animator’s Sketchbook

249
Exercise 57.  Strength of Line


251
Exercise 58
Strong Foreground Line
On the next blank page, draw, from your imagination, 3 frames that contain a strong foreground line element but with an even 
line thickness throughout. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)

252
The Animator’s Sketchbook

253
Exercise 58.  Strong Foreground Line


255
Exercise 59
Thicker Outline
Now draw the same 3 frames again on the next blank page. However, this time thicken the lines around the outside of the 
foreground element. Note how this time the foreground element really stands out against the background and has more visual 
impact. (Take no more than 5 minutes to complete this drawing.)

256
The Animator’s Sketchbook

257
Exercise 59.  Thicker Outline


259
Exercise 60
Storyboarding
Storyboarding is something that most animators will need to do at some stage in their career, especially those who are making 
animated films. It’s possible that you may not be required to create a formal storyboard for a film ultimately, but you will certainly 
be well advised to do a quick thumbnail storyboard of any animation sequence you’re about to create. Understanding of basic 
language of film is valuable here, as without having that kind of vocabularly, it’s going to be hard for you to find your voice. We’ll 
deal with that in a minute, however. First, to give you some kind of comparison, you need to create a quick storyboard before you 
learn the rules of filmmaking. Using about 6 frames on the next blank page, visualize and sketch out the story of a cowboy riding 
across a desert and suddenly being spooked by a rattlesnake that’s glaring at him. Once you’ve done that, we’ll walk you through 
a generic, classically-structured, more formulaic way of doing the same thing. (Take no more than 5 minutes to rough out your 
storyboard frames.)

260
The Animator’s Sketchbook

261
Exercise 60.  Storyboarding


263
Exercise 61
Extreme Wide Establishing Shot
There are a number of generic shots in filmmaking that an animated filmmaker can take advantage of when seeking to tell a 
strong filmic story. For our cowboy scenario, we’ll go over the most basic of these here, beginning with the extremely wide estab-
lishing shot. So, on the next blank page draw the first frame, which is a view of a wide and most expansive part of a hot, barren 
desert. It might show distant hills or mountains, or it might be just a flat horizon. There could even be a few cacti littering the 
scene way into the distance. But whatever you draw, try to get over the feeling of a huge landscape that dwarfs any human content. 
Use reference to guide you. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)
(Note:  For a wider understanding of film language, refer to the section in the Appendix at the end of this book. This will prove valu-
able to you as you move forward in creating more sophisticated storyboards as time goes by.)

264
The Animator’s Sketchbook

265
Exercise 61.  Extreme Wide Establishing Shot


267
Exercise 62
Wide Shot
This frame requires you to draw the audience into the scene a little more, providing more detail of the desert and its contents. It’s 
still a wide shot, but now that it’s somewhat closer, you need to indicate the tiny, dark silhouette of the cowboy on a horse riding 
toward the viewer. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing on the next blank page.)

268
The Animator’s Sketchbook

269
Exercise 62.  Wide Shot


271
Exercise 63
Medium Shot
Now we draw in even closer. Therefore, you should draw the cowboy on his horse, framed from his stomach area to the top of 
his hat. This medium shot should give the audience more visual information on the cowboy as he approaches, and your drawing 
should definitely suggest to us that he is most definitely a tough guy. Also, with the cowboy filling much more of the scene, now 
you won’t need to draw so much of the landscape detail behind him. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)

272
The Animator’s Sketchbook

273
Exercise 63.  Medium Shot


275
Exercise 64
Close-up Shot
The close-up shot brings the audience even closer to our subject’s face. Framing-wise, you now need to draw just his head and hat 
filling the frame, with very little of the landscape behind him being visible. The closeness of this shot will give the audience more 
information about our cowboy, such as the fact that a bead of sweat is clearly running down from his forehead to his cheek in the 
heat. (Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)

276
The Animator’s Sketchbook

277
Exercise 64.  Close-up Shot


279
Exercise 65
Extreme Close-up Shot
Finally, we feature only the cowboy’s cheek filling the frame as his finger wipes the sweat from it. Being so close in, we might only 
now notice other details about him, such as the fact that there is a jagged old scar on one of our cowboy’s cheeks. Your drawing 
should also confirm that this is clearly a very tough hombre. Alternatively, you could cut away to an extreme close-up shot of what 
the cowboy is seeing—maybe another cowboy’s finger on the trigger of a gun, or the glaring eye of a snake as it is about to strike! 
(Take no more than 3 minutes to complete this drawing.)

280
The Animator’s Sketchbook

281
Exercise 65.  Extreme Close-up Shot


283
Exercise 66
Final Storyboarding Exercise
Now that you have a sense of shot selection to dramatize story action, create a short storyboard sequence using the blank frames 
that follow. Taking your best shot at storytelling, share a significant moment in your own life—as if you were going to film it. Your 
story can be happy, sad, frightening, hilarious, indeed anything that has been especially significant to you. Select and draw your 
shots wisely and frame each image in accordance with everything you’ve learned throughout this book. Ultimately, you should be 
able to defend and justify every shot or framing choice you make, as you would need to do in a professional context anyway. (Note: 
There is no time limit to this exercise, although each frame should still be created with speed drawing sketching techniques.)

284
The Animator’s Sketchbook

285
Exercise 66.  Final Storyboarding Exercise

286
The Animator’s Sketchbook

Part 3
Appendix


289
Turnaround Arnie Model Sheet
Before animators bring a character to life—especially traditional hand-drawn animators, but also CG film and game character 
designers—a turnaround model sheet has to be created. A turnaround model sheet shows the character to be animated from 
every angle, so that every visual aspect of that character is known before it is worked with.
The following image is an Arnie turnaround model sheet I created to help me understand how the character works when seen 
from most angles. The reason that I created Arnie decades ago for my animation students is simply because he is simple to draw, 
which is something traditional 2D animation students especially are grateful for when they attempt to animate the exercises I give 
them. (Note: It is hard enough to work through exercises in movement, quite apart from stuggling to draw a difficult character 
at the same time.)
This particular turnaround model sheet looks a little formal at this stage. However, it will perhaps give students working with 
this book a simple-to-draw, yet well-structured character to work with in a speed drawing situation. You might choose to go with 
your own character of course, but this will be a safe start for you—and Arnie is still a character I use when going out and sketch-
ing pose reference for my own animation work.

290
The Animator’s Sketchbook

291
Try the Arnie Approach for Yourself
You may find that using Arnie for the assignments in this book frees you up from other pressures. For example, by working with 
someone else’s character that has been fully lab tested over the years, you will be able to better study the material without having 
to worry about creating a character design of your own that stands up to all the visual challenges you will face. Arnie really is fast 
and basic to draw, and as pose and gesture are the objectives within this book’s process, perhaps his minimalist approach is the 
easiest one to take for your sketching—short of a basic stick figure, that is. To find out how he works for you, sketch all three views 
on the graph guide on the next page. When you have your three Arnie poses complete, you might try to add the three-quarter 
front and three-quarter back views too. At the end of all that, you will certainly know if Arnie is the character of drawing choice 
for you.

292
The Animator’s Sketchbook

293
Design Your Own Personal Arnie Character
Having drawn my Arnie for yourself, perhaps you will now feel that he is not for you. If so, it’s time to create your own alternative 
character. On the next page, sketch out some thumbnail design ideas for a character of your own. Don’t be too detailed with it at 
this stage. Brainstorm ideas of shapes, styles, and forms. However, do bear in mind that what you will eventually arrive at must 
be simple and fast to draw, due to the speed drawing nature of the majority of the exercises in this sketchbook. Always remember, 
simple is best.

294
The Animator’s Sketchbook

295
Your Own Character Turnaround Model Sheet
Now that you’ve created many thumbnail ideas for your own Arnie character, select the one you most favor and, on the next page, 
create a formal turnaround model sheet of it. Once you’ve done this, you should stick with your character throughout this entire 
sketchbook program, so you get to really know and understand working with it. 
(Tip:  Choose your character well and choose it wisely. Time yourself when drawing each of the character views on your own model 
sheet too. That way, you’ll know if you’ll be able to draw it within the 2–5 minutes that most of this sketchbook’s assignments will 
require you to draw it in.)

296
The Animator’s Sketchbook

297
Film Language
I am totally convinced that pretty much all the information contained in this sketchbook so far will be of enormous value to you 
on your journey to animation mastery. However, from a storytelling or storyboarding point of view, there is a little more infor-
mation on film language that you might want at your disposal. I liken this to an artist having a palette of color options to choose 
from when attempting a painting. Film has its own palette of options, and here are 3 more of them.
Shots
Shots are the methods of framing a shot to tell a specific story. (Note: We have dealt with shot options earlier in the sketchbook, 
but this is a brief recap of what we have touched on, plus some extra thoughts about them.)
Ultrawide shot: This offers an extreme (often spectacular or overwhelming) panoramic shot that will set the scene for later 
options. Often, this is so wide a shot that there is rarely little chance of seeing a person or an object within the scale of the 
view being featured. This is usually a breathtaking opening sequence shot that establishes where the unfolding story will 
take place (an “establishing shot”).
Wide shot: This is similar to the ultrawide shot in that it is also a scene-setting establishing shot option. However, as it is not quite 
so extreme in its scale, it is more able to also feature a focal point in the shot at the same time, such as a person, car, or train.
Medium shot: This is used if requiring a person to be the prime focus of the scene. It approximately frames him from the 
waistline upward, to the top of his head.

298
The Animator’s Sketchbook
Close-up shot: This shot really draws us into the feature or emotions of a central character. It usually frames a character from 
her neck to the top of her head. If the face is not a feature of the action, however, the shot closely features another part of 
the body or another object.
Extreme close-up: This shot features a minute detail within a specific part of a face, body, etc., within a scene. It is used espe-
cially to share a specific piece of information, or close-up action, with the audience.
Transitions
The methods of moving from shot to shot throughout a sequence.
Cut: This is where one scene immediately transitions to another over one frame. This is a transition used most of the time by 
all filmmakers.
Dissolve (also known as a mix): This is a transition that takes place over a number of frames, i.e., where one scene is fading 
out over that number of frames while the next scene is fading in simultaneously. This kind of transition often implies a 
slight change in time or a softening of transition in some way.
Fade-out: A fade-out occurs when an outgoing scene simply drifts away—usually to black. It can indicate that a scene is fin-
ished but the director wants the audience to linger on it a little while longer. It can also imply a longer changing of time or 
a momentary pause before the next scene begins.
Fade-up: This is when an incoming scene slowly appears over a period of frames, usually emerging from black to a full expo-
sure. It is a gentle way of introducing a new sequence to the audience, or to indicate the end of a passing in time (especially 
if it follows a fade-out from the previous scene).
Wipe: This is where an invisible line crosses the screen—erasing the first outgoing scene from view and revealing the next 
incoming scene as it does so. It is pretty much an old-school approach to transitions, but it can be very effective in a retro 
style of filmmaking. Wipes can range from a single straight line to complex shapes or spirals of transitioning action.
Continuity
The rules of ensuring that there is no confusion in the minds of the audience about what is happening from scene to scene. Here 
are two critical ones.
	 1.	 If a character exits screen right in one shot, he needs to enter from screen left in the next, to keep the line of action moving 
along the same plane.
	 2.	 If two people are seen interacting during a number of scenes—with one positioned to the right and the other positioned 
to the left—they need to maintain that relationship throughout a sequence of subsequent shots. If they do not do this, the 
audience will be confused—on a subconscious level, if nothing else—and an important line of dialogue or action could be 
missed while the audience is trying to adjust to the sudden change of continuity.

299
Last Thoughts
At the beginning of this sketchbook, I suggest that drawing from life is the finest way of seeing and understanding 
what you are attempting, or about to attempt. I hope nothing you have since read in this book has changed your 
mind on this—it certainly hasn’t changed my mind in writing it. However, there are quite often circumstances 
where drawing from life is just not possible. For example, you may be animating a sporting action or a ballet 
sequence and it’s just not possible for you to be there in person to sketch what is happening. Consequently, my 
advice to you is move on to the next best possibility and work from there.
If you cannot possibly view action reference “live,” then your next best thing would be to film yourself or some-
one else acting out the movement for you. That way you’ll get the precise action you need on tape and can forever 
observe it—freeze framing as you go—when you need to.
If videotaping is not possible, then go online and view a video of something similar to what you want that has 
already been filmed. You can then adapt this to your needs as required.
If online film is not available, then perhaps Google Images will at least give you some frozen key pose positions of the action 
or at least something close to it.
The very last thing you want to do, however, is draw from your imagination—at least at the action research stage. Imagination 
is wonderful for origination of ideas, but when you need to practically put those ideas into practice, you should research any and 
all visual references you can to find how things actually do work and move.
If you are actually animating something that doesn’t exist in the real world anyway, you can rely on imagination to some extent 
of course. But even then, do go to the nearest possible reference you can find and base your judgment and animation approach on 

300
The Animator’s Sketchbook
this. For example, if you need to animate a dragon, find film footage of the nearest lizard or snake that somewhat looks like your 
dragon design and sketch out those movements for yourself. These will provide you with a great number of clues as to how your 
fantasy dragon might plausibly move in your fantasy piece.
By all means be creative in your imaginings, especially at the concept stage. This is what the world of animation is all about. But 
then go to the best reference source available to you to get the mechanics of movement right. In the long run, all these additional 
efforts will be greatly rewarded and you’ll be well on your way to that animation mastership that everyone aspires to.
Tony White

301
Animator’s Sketchclub
Readers of this book might like to be part of the author’s online Animator’s Sketchclub. Each month an animation-related draw-
ing challenge is set for anyone who is keen to improve their basic observational skills and share what they see by drawing it. 
Challenges are varied and have proven extremely popular with many of the thousands of members who have joined the group. 
Final challenge submissions are posted to a private Facebook group page, where the winner of each challenge and the runners up 
have his or her work displayed on the www.animatorssketchclub.com ‘Gallery’ page. That said, the Animator’s Sketchclub is not a 
competitive group. Indeed, members are very supportive of each other and respectful of everyone’s work—whether drawings are 
submitted by raw beginner or master professional.

Animator’s Sketchclub
302

303
DRAWTASTIC Festival of Drawing & Animation
Author Tony White is passionate about seeing a return of top quality 2D animation production in the USA. Since the closure of 
Disney’s traditional animation studio in 2002 and the advance of our increasingly digitally-obsessive age, the professional art-
form of hand-crafted 2D animation is in danger of being lost forever. This is a terrible tragedy as America once led the world in 
this particular field. Therefore, to encourage a renaissance of traditional 2D animation in the USA once more Tony has devised a 
two-fold plan. ‘Part A’ of this plan is to once again raise the consciousness of traditional art and animation in America. ‘Plan B’ is 
to encourage a viable 2D production industry once more—at least at the ‘indie’ production level if nothing else. Consequently the 
major part of ‘Plan A’ is the creation of the DRAWTASTIC Festival of Drawing & Animation. The festival, successfully launched 
on April 30, 2016 in Seattle, fundamentally supports all forms of animation—but especially so for traditional hand-drawn anima-
tion. Filmmakers from all over the world submit their work to DRAWTASTIC’s ‘2D OR NOT 2D’ event, each vying for one of 
Tony’s coveted ‘Golden Pencil Awards’. Top-level speakers from all aspects of the creative world—each having an allegiance to 
the ‘humble pencil’—also come to teach and conduct workshops at the event. DRAWTASTIC is an annual event, so all interested 
artists and filmmakers should visit the festival website at www.drawtastic.org for further information. It’s ‘Pencil Power’ at its 
very best!


305
Resources
Recommended Drawing Books for Animators
Drawn to Life by Walt Stanchfield, Volumes 1 and 2 (Focal Press)
Pose Drawing Sparkbook by Cedric Hohnstadt (Sparkbook Publishing)
Tony White’s Books for Animators
The Animator’s Workbook (Phaidon Press)
Animation from Pencils to Pixels (Focal Press)
How to Make Animated Films (Focal Press)
The Animator’s Notebook (Focal Press)
Tony White’s iBooks for Animators
Motion Comics (DRAWASSIC on iTunes)
Drawn Together, a compilation of work by 222 different animators/artists in support of traditional, hand-drawn animation 
(DRAWASSIC on iTunes)
Self-Published by Tony White
The Animator’s Job Coach (DRAWASSIC on Lulu.com)


307
About the Author
Tony White is a British Academy Award-winning animation director, animator, author, educator and mentor. At the begin-
ning of his career, he studied classical animation techniques with some of the finest masters of the art-form, specifically—Ken 
Harris (original lead animator of “Bugs Bunny,” “Roadrunner,” etc.), Art Babbitt (original lead animator on Pinocchio, Fantasia, 
etc.) and apprenticed with Richard Williams (3-time Oscar winner and author of The Animator’s Survival Kit). Tony is currently 
Program Director & Senior Instructor of the  Academy of Interactive Entertainment’s ‘Skills Center’ program and is founder/
CEO of DRAWASSIC, a new initiative that seeks to preserve, teach and evolve the art-form of traditional animation in this digital 
age. DRAWASSIC is currently developing a number of original indie animation projects, as well as hosting the groundbreaking 
‘DRAWTASTIC Festival of Drawing and Animation’ in Seattle. Tony’s best-selling animation books include: The Animator’s 
Workbook; Animation from Pencils to Pixels—Classical Techniques for Digital Animators; How to Make Animated Films, Jumping 
through Hoops: The Animation Job Coach and The Animator’s Notebook. Tony is currently developing his own online program in 
animation, to be launched under the title of the Animation Grail. This program will offer comprehensive foundational training 
for all students of animation, whether their interest be 2D, 3D or any other kind. Tony’s free online ANIMATOR’S SKETCHCLUB 
group currently exceeds over 6,000 members at the time of this book’s publication!

