ï 
.•y% 
the Beautiful Basics of Science 
A Whirligig Tour of 
•*W 
'«. •••/• 
Jf 
C-. 
••• 
I Natalie Anerier 
•i* 
L 
«v 
AUTHOR OF Woman: An Intimate Geography 

•••" 
^«y. 
$27.00 U.S. / $35.95 CAN. 
c. 
•?• 
From Me Pulitzer Prize winner and best-selling 
author of WOMAN, a playful, passionate guide 
to the science all around us 
WITH THE SINGULAR INTELLIGENCE 
and exuberance that made Woman an interna-
*•*• tional sensation, Natalie Angier takes us on a 
I?; whirligig tour of the scientific canon. She draws 
•Jt on conversations with hundreds of the world's 
jfi top scientists and on her own work as a Pulitzer 
Prize-winning writer for the New York Times to 
create a thoroughly entertaining guide to scien-
tific literacy. People magazine said, "Angier has 
that rare dual talent: a true passion for science 
combined with a poet's linguistic flair." Those 
gifts are on full display in The Canon, an ebul-
lient celebration of science that stands to 
become a classic. 
The Canon is vital reading for anyone who 
wants to understand the great issues of our 
time — from stem cells and bird flu to evolu-
tion and global warming. And it's for every par-
ent who has ever panicked when a child asked 
how the earth was formed or what electricity is. 
Angier's sparkling prose and memorable meta-
phors bring the science to life, reigniting our 
own childhood delight in discovering how the 
world works. "Of course you should know 
about science," writes Angier, "for the same rea-
son Dr. Seuss counsels his readers to sing with a 
Ying or play Ring the Gack: these things are 
fun, and fun is good." 
The Canon is a joyride through the major 
scientific disciplines: physics, chemistry, biol-
ogy, geology, and astronomy. Along the way, we 
learn what is actually happening when our ice 
cream melts or our coffee gets cold, what our 
liver cells do when we eat a caramel, why the 
horse is an example of evolution at work, and 
how we're all made of Stardust. It's Lewis 
Carroll meets Lewis Thomas — a book that 
will enrapture, inspire, and enlighten. 
0507 

NATALIE A N G I E R writes about biology for 
the New York Times, for which she has won a 
Pulitzer Prize, an American Association for the 
Advancement of Science journalism award, 
and other honors. She is the author of The 
Beauty of the Beastly, Natural Obsessions, and 
Woman: An Intimate Geography, which was a 
New York Times bestseller and a National Book 
Award finalist and was named a Best Book of 
the Year by the Los Angeles Times, the Chicago 
Tribune, People, National Public Radio, the 
Village Voice, and Publishers Weekly, among 
others. Angier lives with her husband and 
daughter outside Washington, D.C. 
'i 
x 
Jacket art © Marian Bantjcs 
...V"^.-.. 
H O U G H T O N 
M I F F L I N 
C O M P A N Y 
222 Berkeley Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02116 
www.houghtonmifflinbooks.com 

l*.&A*g. 
/ 
Praise 
for 
/ / 
The Canon 
"Every sentence sparkles with wit and charm. But there's passion in there 
too, and it all adds up to an intoxicating cocktail of fine science writing." 
— 
RICHARD DAWKINS 
author of The God Delusion 
"Natalie Angier has a combination of gifts that make her latest book, The 
Canon, an essential experience. Her command of language shames the 
poets; her grasp of how science works exposes the joy and beauty of dis-
covery, which I thought belonged only to the scientists. How dare she 
write so artfully, explain so brilliantly, rendering us scientists simulta-
neously proud and inarticulate!" 
— 
LEON LEDERMAN 
Nobel laureate 
"Finally, Nature has found a biographer who's up to the task. Every sin-
gle sentence of The Canon sparkles with enough intelligence and wit to 
delight science-phobes and science-philes alike. I loved it!" 
— BARBARA EHRENREICH 
JL»> 
author of Bait and Switch and Nickel and Dimed 
V 
V 
Ù 
"Drawing on her justifiably acclaimed journalistic skills, Natalie Angier 
#«Ç 
provides a masterful, authoritative synthesis of the state of knowledge 
»f 
% 
across the entire scientific landscape." 
*»\ 
/ 
— 
HOWARD GARDNER 
*•£ 
author of Five Minds for the Future and Frames of Mind 
"Natalie Angier makes planets and particles sexy. She lends molecules an 
air of mystery. She turns guys with lab coats and pocket protectors into 
»i 
-, 
i 
Daniel Craig. Don't ask how she does it, but she does." 
— 
SYLVIA NASAR 
author of A Beautiful Mind 
•J 
I 
ISBN-13: 978-0-618-24295-5 
^« 
ISBN-IO: 0-618-24295-3 
•* 

THE CANON

B O O K S 
B Y N A T A L I E 
A N G I E R
NATURAL OBSESSIONS
Striving to Unlock the Deepest Secrets of the Cancer Cell
THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY
New Views on the Nature of Life
WOMAN
An Intimate Geography
THE CANON
A Whirligig Tour of the Beautiful Basics of Science

THE CANON
Whirligig Tour
of the
^eautiful Basics of Science
Natalie Angier
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
Boston • New York 2007

Copyright © 2007 by Natalie Angier
All rights reserved
For information about permission to reproduce
selections from this book, write to Permissions,
Houghton Mifflin Company, 215 Park Avenue South,
New York, New York 10003.
Visit our Web site: www.houghtonmifflinbooks.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Angier, Natalie.
The canon : a whirligig tour of the beautiful basics
of science / Natalie Angier.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isBN-13: 978-0-618-24295-5
iSBN-10: 0-618-24295-3
1. Science — Popular works. 1. Title.
Q162.A59 2007
500—dc22 2006026871
Printed in the United States of America
Book design by Robert Overholtzer
MP 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

FOR RICK,
my one in 6.5 x 109


Contents
Introduction: Sisyphus Sings with a Ying 1
1. Thinking Scientifically: An Out-of-Body Experience 18
2. Probabilities: For Whom the Bell Curves 47
3. Calibration: Playing with Scales 71
4. Physics: And Nothing's Plenty for Me 87
5. Chemistry: Fire, Ice, Spies, and Life 121
6. Evolutionary Biology: The Theory of Every Body 147
7. Molecular Biology: Cells and Whistles 183
8. Geology: Imagining World Pieces 212
9. Astronomy: Heavenly Creatures 235
REFERENCES 
267
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
28O
INDEX 
282


THE CANON


Introduction
Sisyphus Sings with a Ying
W
HEN THE SECOND of her two children turned thirteen, my
sister decided that it finally was time to let their membership
lapse in two familiar family haunts: the science museum and
the zoo. These were kiddie places, she told me. Her children now had
more mature tastes. They liked refined forms of entertainment — art
museums, the theater, ballet. Isn't that something? My sister's children's
bodies were lengthening, and so were their attention spans. They could
sit for hours at a performance of Macbeth without so much as checking
the seat bottom for fossilized wads of gum. No more of this mad pinball
pinging from one hands-on science exhibit to the next, pounding on
knobs to make artificial earthquakes, or cranking gears to see Newton's
laws in motion, or something like that; who bothers to read the explan-
atory placards anyway? And, oops, hmm, hey, Mom, this thing seems to
have stopped working! No more aping the gorillas or arguing over the
structural basis of a polar bear's white coat or wondering about the
weird goatee of drool gathering on the dromedary's chin. Sigh. How
winged are the slippers of time, how immutably forward point their
dainty steel-tipped toe boxes. And how common is this middle-class
rite of passage into adulthood: from mangabeys to Modigliani, T. rex to
Oedipus Rex.
The differential acoustics tell the story. Zoos and museums of science
and natural history are loud and bouncy and notably enriched with the
upper registers of the audio scale. Theaters and art museums murmur
in a courteous baritone, and if your cell phone should bleat out a little
Beethoven chime during a performance, and especially should you be
so barbaric as to answer it, other members of the audience have been

INTRODUCTION • 
2
instructed to garrote you with a rolled-up Playbill Science apprecia-
tion is for the young, the restless, the Ritalined. It's the holding-pattern
fun you have while your gonads are busy ripening, and the day that
an exhibit of Matisse vs. Picasso in Paris exerts greater pull than an
Omnimax movie about spiders is the debutante's ball for your brain.
Here I am! Come and get me! And don't forget your Proust!
Naturally enough, I used the occasion of my sister's revelation
about lapsing memberships to scold her. Whaddya talking about, giving
up on science just because your kids have pubesced? Are you saying
that's it for learning about nature? They know everything they need to
know about the universe, the cell, the atom, electromagnetism, géodes,
trilobites, chromosomes, and Foucault pendulums, which even Stephen
Jay Gould once told me he had trouble understanding? How about
those shrewdly coquettish optical illusions that will let you see either a
vase or two faces in profile, but never, ever two faces and a vase, no mat-
ter how hard you concentrate or relax or dart your eyes or squint like
Humphrey Bogart or command your perceptual field to stop being so
archaically serial and instead learn to multitask? Are your kids really
ready to leave these great cosmic challenges and mysteries behind? I de-
manded. Are you?
My voice hit a shrill note, as it does when I'm being self-righteous,
and my sister is used to this and replied with her usual shrug of com-
mon sense. The membership is expensive, she said, her kids study
plenty of science in school, and one of them has talked of becoming a
marine biologist. As for her own needs, my sister said, there's always
PBS. Why was I taking this so personally?
Because I'm awake, I muttered. Give me a chance, and I'll take the jet
stream personally.
My bristletail notwithstanding, I couldn't fault my sister for deciding
to sever one of the few connections she had to the domain of human af-
fairs designated Science. Good though the Oregon Museum of Science
and Industry may be, it is undeniably geared toward visitors young
enough to appreciate such offerings as the wildly popular "Grossology"
show, a tour through the wacky world of bodily fluids and functions.
Childhood, then, is the one time of life when all members of an
age cohort are expected to appreciate science. Once junior high school
begins, so too does the great winnowing, the relentless tweezing away
of feather, fur, fun, the hilarity of the digestive tract, until science be-
comes the forbidding province of a small priesthood — and a poorly
dressed one at that. A delight in "Grossology" gives way to a dread of

INTRODUCTION • 
3
grossness. In this country, adolescent science lovers tend to be fewer in
number than they are in tedious nicknames: they are geeks, nerds, egg-
heads, pointy-heads, brainiacs, lab rats, the recently coined aspies (for
Asperger's syndrome); and, hell, why not "peeps" (pocket protectors) or
"dogs" (duct tape on glasses) or "losers" (last ones selected for every
sport)? Nonscience teenagers, on the other hand, are known as "teenag-
ers," except among themselves, in which case, regardless of gender, they
go by an elaboration on "guys" — as in "you guys," "hey, guys" or "hey,
you guys." The you-guys generally have no trouble distinguishing them-
selves from geeks bearing beakers; but should any questions arise, a
teenager will hasten to assert his or her unequivocal guyness, as I
learned while walking behind two girls recently who looked to be about
sixteen years old.
Girl A asked Girl B what her mother did for a living.
"Oh, she works in Bethesda, at the NIH," said Girl B, referring to the
National Institutes of Health. "She's a scientist."
"Huh," said Girl A. I waited for her to add something like "Wow,
that's awesome!" or "Sweet!" or "Kewl!" or "Schnitzel with noodles!"
and maybe ask what sort of science this extraordinary mother studied.
Instead, after a moment or two, Girl A said, "I hate science."
"Yeah, well, you can't, like, pick your parents," said Girl B, giving her
beige hair a quick, contemptuous flip. "Anyway, what are you guys do-
ing this weekend?"
As youth flowers into maturity, the barrier between nerd and herd
grows taller and thicker and begins to sprout thorns. Soon it seems
nearly unbreachable. When my hairstylist told me he was planning to
visit Puerto Rico, where I'd been the previous summer, and I recom-
mended that he visit the Arecibo radio telescope on the northwestern
side of the island, he looked at me as though I'd suggested he stop by a
manufacturer of laundry detergent. "Why on earth would I want to do
tfiatf" he asked.
"Because it's one of the biggest telescopes in the world, it's open
to the public, and it's beautiful and fascinating and looks like a gi-
ant mirrored candy dish from the 1960s lodged in the side of a cliff?"
I said.
"Huh," he said, taking a rather large snip of hair from my bangs.
"Because it has a great science museum to go with it, and you'll learn
a lot about the cosmos?"
"I'm not one of those techie types, you know," he said. Snip snip snip
snip snip.

INTRODUCTION • 
4
"Because it was featured in the movie Contact, with Jodie Foster?" I
groped frantically.
The steel piranhas could not be stilled. "I've never been a big Jodie
Foster fan," he said. "But I'll take it under advisement."
"Hi, honey!" my husband said when I got home. "Where did you put
your hair?"
In truth, I pull it out myself just fine, all the time. How could it be
otherwise? I am a science writer. I've been one for decades, for my entire
career, and I admit it: I love science. I started loving it in childhood,
during trips to the American Museum of Natural History, and then I
temporarily misplaced that love when I went to a tiny high school in
New Buffalo, Michigan, where the faculty was so strapped for money
that one person was expected to teach biology, chemistry, and history
before dashing off for his real job as the football coach. The over-
stretched fellow never lost his sense of humor, though. One morning,
as I approached his desk to present him with my biology project, a col-
lection of some two dozen insects pinned to cardboard, I noticed that
the praying mantis, the scarab beetle, and the hawk moth were not
quite dead, were in fact wriggling around desperately on their stakes. I
screamed a girlish stream of obscenities and dropped the whole thing
on the floor. My teacher grinned at me, his eyes merrily bug-eyed, and
said he couldn't wait until it was time for me to dissect the baby pig.
In college I rediscovered my old flame, science, and it was still blazing
Bunsen burner blue. I took many science courses, even as I continued to
think of myself primarily as a writer, and even as my fellow writers
wondered why I bothered with all the physics, calculus, computers, as-
tronomy, and paleontology. I wondered myself, for I was hardly a natu-
ral in the laboratory. I studied, I hammered, I nattered, I plucked out
my hairs, but I kept at it.
"Well, aren't you a little C. P. Snow White and the Two Cultures," said
a friend. "What's your point with these intellectual hybridization exper-
iments, anyway?"
"I don't know," I said. "I like science. I trust it. It makes me feel opti-
mistic. It adds rigor to my life."
He asked why I didn't just become a scientist. I told him I didn't want
to ruin a beautiful affair by getting married. Besides, I wouldn't be a
very good scientist, and I knew it.
So you'll be a professional dilettante, he said.
Close enough. I became a science writer.
So now, at last, I come to the muscle of the matter, or is it the gristle,
or the wishbone, the skin and pope's nose? I have been a science writer

INTRODUCTION • 
5
for a quarter of a century, and I love science, but I have also learned and
learned and not forgotten but have nevertheless been forced to relearn
just how unintegrated science is into the rest of human affairs, how
stubbornly apart from the world it remains, and how persistent is the
image of the rare nerd, the idea that an appreciation of science is some-
thing to be outgrown by all but those with, oddly enough, overgrown
brains. Here is a line I have heard many times through the years, when-
ever I've mentioned to somebody what I do for a living: "Science writ-
ing? I haven't followed science since I flunked high school chemistry."
(Or, a close second, ". . . since I flunked high school physics.") Jacque-
line Barton, a chemistry professor at the California Institute of Technol-
ogy, has also heard these lines, and she has expressed her wry amuse-
ment at the staggering numbers of people who, by their own account,
were not merely mediocre chemistry students, but undiluted failures.
Even years of grade inflation cannot dislodge the F as the modal grade
in the nation's chemistry consciousness.
Science writing, too, has remained a kind of literary and journalistic
ghetto, set apart either physically, as it is in the weekly science section of
the New York Times, or situationally, as it is by being ignored in most
places, most of the time, no matter how high the brow. Ignored by
Harper's, ignored by the Atlantic, ignored by, yes, The New Yorker, ig-
nored by the upscale cyberzines like Salon despite the presumably para-
geek nature of their audience. I've seen reader surveys showing that, of
all the weekly pull-out sections in the New York Times, the most popu-
lar is "Science Times," which runs on Tuesdays. Yet I also know, because
I have been told by kindhearted friends and relations, that many people
discard the whole section up front and unthumbed. Some of those pre-
emptive ejectors even work for the New York Times. Several years ago,
when the woman who was then the science editor of the New York
Times asked the man who was then the chief editor of the entire paper
to please, please, give the science staff some words of appreciation for
all their good work, the chief editor sent a memo assuring the staff how
much he looked forward to "Science Times" . . . every Wednesday.
When I first started writing for the newspaper, and I introduced myself
as a science reporter to the columnist William Safire, he said, "So I
would be likely to read you on Thursdays, right?" Harold Varmus, a No-
bel laureate, told me I should have replied, "Sure, Bill, if you read the
paper forty-eight hours late."
Oy, it hurts! How could it not? Nobody wants to feel irrelevant or
marginal. Nobody wants to feel that she's failed, unless she's in a high
school chemistry class, in which case everybody does. Yet I'll admit it. I

INTRODUCTION • 
6
feel that I've failed any time I hear somebody say, Who cares, or Who
knows, or I just don't get it. When a character on the otherwise richly
drawn HBO series Six Feet Under announces that she's planning to take
a course in "biogenetics" and her boyfriend replies, Bo-o-ring. Why on
earth are you doing that? I take it personally. Wait a minute! Hasn't the
guy heard that we're living in the Golden Age of Biology? Would he
have found Periclean Athens bo-o-ring too? When my father-in-law
finishes reading something I've written about genes and cancer cells
and says he found it fascinating but then asks me, "Which is bigger, a
gene or a cell?" I think, Uh-oh, I really blew it. If I didn't make clear
the basic biofact that while cells are certainly very small, each one is
big enough to hold the entire complement of our 25,000 or so genes —
as well as abundant bundles of tagalong genetic sequences, the func-
tion of which remains unknown — then what good am I? And when a
copy editor, in the course of going over a story I've written about whale
genetics, asks me to confirm the suggestions in my text that (a) whales
are mammals and (b) mammals are animals, I think, Uh-oh, but this
time in bold, twenty-six-point, panic-stricken type. Woe, woe, nobody
knows anything about science. Woe, woe, nobody cares.
Am I sounding self-pitying, a sour-grapes-turned-defensive whine?
Of course: a good offense begins with a nasal defensiveness. If I was go-
ing to write a book about the scientific basics, I had to believe that there
was a need for such a book, and I do. If I believed there is a need for a
primer, a guided whirligig through the scientific canon, then obviously
I must believe there to be a large block of unprimed real estate in the
world, vast prairies and deep arroyos of scientific ignorance and scien-
tific illiteracy and technophobia and eyes glazing over and whales hav-
ing their nursing privileges rescinded. In the civic imagination, science
is still considered dull, geeky, hard, abstract, and, conveniently, periph-
eral, now, perhaps, more than ever. In a 2005 survey of 950 British stu-
dents ages thirteen through sixteen, for example, 51 percent said they
thought science classes were "boring," "confusing," or "difficult" — feel-
ings that intensified with each year of high school. Only 7 percent
thought that people working in science were "cool," and when asked to
pick out the most famous scientist from a list of names that included
Albert Einstein and Isaac Newton, many respondents instead chose
Christopher Columbus.
Scientists are quick to claim mea culpas, to acknowledge that they
bear some responsibility for the public allergy toward their profession.
We've failed, they say. We've been terrible at communicating our work
to the masses, and we're pathetic when it comes to educating our na-

INTRODUCTION • 
7
tion's youth. We've been too busy with our own work. We have to pub-
lish papers. We have to write grant proposals. We're punished by "the
system," the implacable academic track that rewards scientists for fo-
cusing on research to the exclusion of everything else, including teach-
ing or public outreach or writing popular books that get made into
Nova specials. Besides, very few of us are as tele-elegant as Brian "String
King" Greene, are we? All of which amounts to: guilty as charged. We
haven't done our part to enlighten the laity.
A fair question to interject here is: Need we do anything at all? Does
it matter if the great majority of people know little or nothing about
science or the scientific mindset? If the average Joe or Sophie doesn't
know the name of the closest star (the sun), or whether tomatoes have
genes (they do), or why your hand can't go through a tabletop (because
the electrons in each repel each other), what difference does it make?
Let the specialists specialize. A heart surgeon knows how to repair an
artery, a biologist knows how to run a gel, a jet pilot knows how to illu-
minate the FASTEN SEAT BELT sign at the exact moment you've decided
to get up and go to the bathroom. Why can't the rest of us clip our cou-
pons and calories in peace?
The arguments for greater scientific awareness and a more comfort-
able relationship with scientific reasoning are legion, and many have
been flogged so often they're beginning to wheeze. A favorite thesis has
it that people should know more about science because many of the vi-
tal issues of the day have a scientific component: think global warming,
alternative energy, embryonic stem cell research, missile defense, the
tragic limitations of the dry cleaning industry. Hence, a more scien-
tifically sophisticated citizenry would be expected to cast comparatively
wiser votes for Socratically wise politicians. They would demand that
their elected representatives know the differences between a blastocyst,
a fetus, and an orthodontist, and that one is a five-day-old, hollow ball
of cells from which coveted stem cells can be extracted and theoretically
inveigled to grow into the body tissue or organ of choice; the next is a
developing prenate that has implanted in the mother's uterus; and the
third is never covered by your company's dental plan.
Others propose that a scientifically astute public would be relatively
shielded against superstitious, wishful thinking, flimflammery, and fraud.
They would realize that the premise behind astrology was ludicrous,
and that the doctor or midwife or taxi driver who helped deliver you ex-
erted a greater gravitational pull on you at your moment of birth than
did the sun, moon, or any of the planets. They would accept that the
fortune in their cookie at the Chinese restaurant was written either by a

INTRODUCTION • 
8
computer or a new hire at the Wonton Food factory in Queens. They
would calculate their odds of winning the lottery, see how ridiculously
tiny they were, and decide to stop buying lottery tickets, at which point
the education budgets of at least thirty of our fifty states would collapse.
This last figure, alas, is not a joke, suggesting that if a pandemic of ratio-
nal thinking should suddenly grip our nation, politicians might have to
resort to dire measures to replace the income from state lotteries and
state-owned slot machines, including — bwah-ha-ha! — raising taxes.
Lucy Jones, a seismologist at the California Institute of Technology,
knows too well how resistant people can be to reason, and how readily
they dive down a rabbit hole in search of axioms, conspiracy theories,
the rabbit's fabled foot. A hearty, fiftyish woman with short, peach-col-
ored hair and a rat-a-tat cadence, Jones serves as the United States Geo-
logical Survey's "scientist-in-charge" for all of Southern California, in
which capacity she promotes the cause of earthquake preparedness. She
has also been a designated USGS punching bag, officiating at media
squalls and confronting public panic whenever the continental plate on
which Southern California is perched gives a nasty shake. Like seismol-
ogists everywhere, she is trying to improve geologists' ability to predict
major earthquakes, to spot the early warning signs in time to evacuate
cities or otherwise take steps to protect people, their domiciles, that
treasured set of highball glasses from the 1964 World's Fair. Jones has
heard enough earthquake myths to shake a trident at: that fish in China
can sense when a temblor is coming, for instance, or that earthquakes
strike only early in the morning. "People tend to remember the early-
morning earthquakes because those are the ones that woke them up
and scared them the most," Jones said. "When you show them the data
indicating that, in fact, an earthquake is as likely to happen at six P.M. as
six A.M., they still insist there must be some truth to the story because
their mothers and grandmothers and great-uncle Milton always said it
was true. Or they will redefine 'early morning' to mean anything from
midnight until lunchtime. And, by gosh, it's true: many earthquakes
that occur, occur between twelve A.M. and twelve P.M. Uncle Milton was
right!"
The public also believes that seismologists are much better at pre-
dicting earthquakes than they claim, but that they perversely keep
their prognostications to themselves because they don't want to "stir a
panic."
"I got a letter from a woman saying, 'I know you can't tell me when
the next earthquake is going to be,'" Jones said, "'but will you tell me
when your children go to visit out-of-town relatives?' She assumed I'd

INTRODUCTION • 
9
quietly use my insider's knowledge on behalf of my own family, while
denying it to everybody else. People would rather believe the authorities
were lying to them than to accept the uncertainty of the science." With a
minimum of scientific training, Jones said, people would realize that
the words "science" and "uncertainty" deserve linkage in a dictionary
and that the only reason she would send her children to visit out-of-
town relatives would be to visit out-of-town relatives.
Many scientists also argue that members of the laity should have a
better understanding of science so they appreciate how important the
scientific enterprise is to our nation's economic, cultural, medical, and
military future. Our world is fast becoming a technical Amazonia, they
say, a pitiless panhemispheric habitat in which being on a first-name
basis with scientific and technical principles may soon prove essential
to one's socioeconomic survival. "Soon after the Industrial Revolution,
we in the West reached a point where reading was a fundamental pro-
cess of human communication," Lucy Jones said. "If you couldn't read,
you couldn't participate in ordinary human discourse, let alone get a
decent job.
"We're going through another transformation in expectations right
now," she continued, "where reasoning skills and a grasp of the scien-
tific process are becoming things that everybody needs."
Scientists are hardly alone in their conviction that America's scien-
tific eminence is one of our greatest sources of strength. Science and
engineering have given us the integrated circuit, the Internet, protease
inhibitors, statins, spray-on Pam (it works for squeaky hinges, too!),
Velcro, Viagra, glow-in-the-dark slime, a childhood vaccine syllabus
that has left slacker students with no better excuse for not coming to
class than a "persistent Harry Potter headache," computer devices named
after fruits or fruit parts, and advanced weapons systems named after
stinging arthropods or Native American tribes.
Yet the future of our scientific eminence depends not so much on any
cleverness in applied science as on a willingness to support basic re-
search, the pi-in-the-sky investigations that may take decades to yield
publishable results, marketable goodies, employable graduate students.
Scientists and their boosters propose that if the public were more
versed in the subtleties of science, it would gladly support generous an-
nual increases in the federal science budget; long-term, open-ended re-
search grants; and sufficient investment in infrastructure, especially
better laboratory snack machines. They would recognize that the basic
researchers of today help generate the prosperity of tomorrow, not to
mention elucidating the mysteries of life and the universe, and that you

INTRODUCTION • 
10
can't put a price tag on genius and serendipity, except to say it's much
bigger than Congress's science allotment for the current fiscal year.
Yes, let's cosset the scientists of today and let's home-grow the
dreamers of tomorrow, the next generation of scientists. For by foster-
ing a more science-friendly atmosphere, surely we would encourage
more young people to pursue science careers, and keep us in fighting
trim against the ambitious and far more populous upstarts India and
China. We need more scientists! We need more engineers! Yet with each
passing year, fewer and fewer American students opt to study science.
As a National Science Board advisory panel warned Congress in 2004,
"We have observed a troubling decline in the number of U.S. citizens
who are training to become scientists and engineers," while the number
of jobs requiring such training has soared. At this point, a third or more
of the advanced science and engineering degrees earned each year in
the United States are awarded to foreign students, as are more than half
of the postdoctoral slots. And while there is nothing wrong with the in-
ternational complexion that prevails in any scientific institution, for-
eign students often opt to take their expertise and credentials back to
their grateful nation of origin. "These trends," the Science Board said,
"threaten the economic welfare and security of our country."
Who can blame Americans for shunning science when, for all the
supposed market demand, research jobs remain so poorly paid? After
their decade or more of higher education, postdoctoral fellows can ex-
pect to earn maybe $40,000; and even later in their careers, scientists of-
ten remain stubbornly in the stratum of the five-figure salary. David
Baltimore, a Nobel laureate and the former president of Caltech, who
spent much of his early career at MIT, observed that the classic bakery
for an upper-crust life, Phillips Academy prep school in Andover, Mas-
sachusetts, where his daughter was a student, has an excellent science
program, one of the best. "But you never see Andover graduates at
MIT," he said. "Academy alumni with quantitative skills go on to be-
come stockbrokers. There are damned few patrician scientists."
Beyond better pay, science needs more cachet. Science advocates in-
sist that if science were seen as more glamorous, racier, and more avant-
garde than it is today, it might attract more participants, more brilliant
young minds and nimble young fingers willing to click pipettes for
twenty hours at a stretch. "Things were different while I was growing
up," said Andy Feinberg, a geneticist at Johns Hopkins University. "It
was the time of Sputnik, the race into space, and everybody was caught
up in science. They thought it was important. They thought it was ex-
citing. They thought it was cool. Somehow we must reinvigorate that

INTRODUCTION • 11
spirit. The culture of discovery drives our country forward, and we
can't afford to lose it."
These are all important, exciting, spirited arguments for promoting
greater scientific awareness. I'd love to see more young Americans be-
come scientists, especially the girl who serves as the vessel of my DNA
and as a deduction on my tax return. I'd also be happy to see voters
make smarter and more educated choices in Novembers to come than
they have in the past.
And yet. As Steven Weinberg, a Nobel laureate and professor of phys-
ics at the University of Texas, points out, many issues of a supposedly
scientific slant cannot be decided by science at all. "When it comes to
something like the debate over an antiballistic missile defense system,"
he said, "I've been more bothered by the fact that our leaders seem to be
the sort of people who don't read history rather than by the fact that
they don't understand X-ray lasers." Can science really decide an issue
like whether we should extract stem cells from a human blastocyst?
All science can tell you about that blastocyst is, yep, it's human. It has
human DNA in it. Science cannot tell you how much gravitas that
blastocyst should be accorded. Science cannot settle the debate over the
relative "right" of a blastocyst to its cellular integrity and uncertain fu-
ture — deep freeze for possible implantation in a willing womb at some
later date? or a swift bon voyage down the fertility clinic drainpipe? —
versus the "right" of a patient with a harrowing condition like multiple
sclerosis or Parkinson's disease to know that scientists have unfettered,
federally financed access to stem cells and may someday spin that access
into new therapies against the disease. This is a matter of conscience,
politics, religious conviction, and, when all else fails, name-calling.
In sum, I'm not sure that knowing about science will turn you into a
better citizen, or win you a more challenging job, or prevent the occa-
sional loss of mental faculties culminating in the unfortunate purchase
of a pair of white leather pants. I'm not a pragmatist, and I can't make
practical arguments of the broccoli and flossing kind. If you're an adult
nonscientist, even the most profound midlife crisis is unlikely to turn
you into a practicing scientist; and unless you're a scientist, you don't
need to know about science. You also don't need to go to museums or
listen to Bach or read a single slyly honied Shakespeare sonnet. You
don't need to visit a foreign country or hike a desert canyon or go out
on a cloudless, moonless night and get drunk on star champagne. How
many friends do you need?
In place of civic need, why not neural greed? Of course you should
know about science, as much as you've got the synaptic space to fit. Sci-

INTRODUCTION • 12
ence is not just one thing, one line of reasoning or a boxable body of
scholarship, like, say, the history of the Ottoman Empire. Science is
huge, a great ocean of human experience; it's the product and point of
having the most deeply corrugated brain of any species this planet has
spawned. If you never learn to swim, you'll surely regret it; and the sea
is so big, it won't let you forget it.
Of course you should know about science, for the same reason Dr.
Seuss counsels his readers to sing with a Ying or play Ring the Gack:
These things are fun, and fun is good.
There's a reason why science museums are fun, and why kids like sci-
ence. Science is fun. Not just gee-whizbang "watch me dip this rose into
liquid nitrogen and then shatter it on the floor" fun, although it's that,
too. It's fun the way rich ideas are fun, the way seeing beneath the skin
of something is fun. Understanding how things work feels good. Look
no further — there's your should.
"I was in college and in a debate with my father," said David Botstein,
a geneticist at Princeton University. "He wanted me to be a doctor. I
wanted to be a scientist. I had made it pretty clear to him that I wasn't
going to medical school, and in fact I was already engaged in some re-
ally interesting research on DNA. One evening, a buddy of my father's,
a general surgeon, cross-examined me about what it was I planned to
do. How could anything be more interesting than human physiology
and putting together broken bones? We were both having a little drink,
and I explained to him what the structure of DNA meant, and its impli-
cations. This was back around i960, when the field of molecular biology
was just getting started. At the end of our conversation, my father's
friend looks up, and says, 'You are the luckiest guy in the world. You are
going to get paid to have fun.'"
Peter Galison, a professor of the history of physics at Harvard Uni-
versity, marvels cheekily at the thoroughness with which the public im-
age of science has been drained of all joy. "We had to work really hard
to accomplish this spectacular feat, because I've never met a little kid
who didn't think science was really fun and really interesting," he said.
"But after years of writing tedious textbooks with terrible graphics, and
of presenting science as a code you can't crack, of divorcing science
from ordinary human processes that use it daily, guess what: We did it.
We persuaded a large number of people that what they once thought
was fascinating, fun, the most natural thing in the world, is alien to
their existence."
Granted, all the scientists I interviewed who attested to the fun of sci-
ence are safely and amply granted, are flourishing in their fields and

INTRODUCTION • 
13
have personal cause to think the universe is a magical place. Yet I know
plenty of very successful writers who think of themselves, not as the
luckiest hey-you-guys in the world, but as cursed, as miserable, as being
in their trade because they have no choice, no other marketable skills.
"A writer is somebody for whom writing is more difficult than it is for
other people," the novelist and essayist Thomas Mann complained.
"When I come home for lunch after writing all morning, my wife says I
look like I just came home from a funeral," said Carl Hiaasen — and he
writes comic novels. David Salle, the artist, moaned to Janet Malcolm of
The New Yorker about the miseries of painting. "I find it extremely dif-
ficult. I feel like I'm beating my head against a brick wall," he said. "I feel
that everyone else has figured out a way to do it that allows him an ef-
fortless, charmed ride through life, while I have to stay in this horrible
pit of a room, suffering." For their part, scientists are extremely bright
and driven and — don't let their shorts and T-shirts fool you — carnivo-
rously competitive; yet through it all they gush about the good fortune
and great fun of being scientists, and they're not selfish and they're will-
ing to share their glee.
"So, yes, we did it, we pushed the boulder to the top of the hill, and
we made people think science is boring," Galison continued. But there's
something to be said for a boulder in that position: it holds a lot of po-
tential energy, and it's practically begging to be dislodged. A few well-
placed shoves, a joining of shoulders for a hearty oomph, and the boul-
der may well be released from its unnatural bondage, to tumble earth-
ward with a Newtonian roar.
This book is my small attempt to lend a deltoid to the cause, of nudg-
ing the boulder and unleashing the kinetic beauty of science to wow
as it will.
Maybe you're one of those people who hasn't clicked with science since
that dreadful year of high school when you flunked physics because you
showed up for the final exam an hour late, in your pajamas, and carry-
ing an insect collection. Or maybe you fulfilled your college science re-
quirements by taking courses like the Evolutionary Psychology of Inter-
net Dating, and you regret that you still can't tell the difference between
a proton, a photon, and a moron. Or maybe you're just curiouser and
curiouser and you don't know where to start. You think that the begin-
ning might be a reasonable place, but whose beginning? Not the kiddie
beginning, not the contemptuous or embarrassing or didactic digit-
wagging beginning, but the beginning as an adult. The beginning as a
relationship between equals, you and science. And before you raise your

INTRODUCTION • 
14
hands defensively, and cry, Whoa, that's not a fair competition, me ver-
sus science, let me say, It's not you against science, but you with science,
you the taxpayer who supports science whether you realize it or not,
you the person who does science more often than you'd suspect. Every
time you try to isolate a problem with the vacuum cleaner, for example
— machine heats up; machine stops running; holy hairball, when was
the last time you changed the bag in this thing, anyway? Or when you
know that if you don't stir the hollandaise sauce constantly at a hot but
not boiling temperature you'll end up with a mass too lumpy to pour
over your asparagus. You do science, you support science, you're baking
the cake, you may as well lick the spoon.
This beginning is the beginning as scientists see it, or at least as
they've agreed to see it because some reporter has shown up at their of-
fice door, plunked herself down in a chair, and asked them to consider
a few very basic questions. Scientists have long whinnied about ram-
pant scientific illiteracy and the rareness of critical thinking and the
need for a more scientifically sophisticated citizenry. Fair enough. But
what would it take to rid people of this dread condition, this pox populi
ignoramus, and replace it with the healthy glow of erudition? What
would a nonscientist need to know about science to qualify as scien-
tifically seasoned? If you, Dr. Know, had to name a half-dozen things
that you wish everybody understood about your field, the six big, bold,
canonical concepts that even today still bowl you over with their beauty,
what would they be? Or if you're the type of professor who still on occa-
sion teaches undergraduate courses for those soft-shelled specimens
known as "nonmajors," what are the essential ideas that you hope your
students distill from the introductory class, and even retain for more
than a few femtoseconds after finals? What does it mean to think scien-
tifically? What would it take for a nonscientist to impress you at a cock-
tail party, to awaken in you the sensation that hmm, this person is not a
buffoon?
When confronted with the query "What do you wish people knew
about science?" many scientists felt compelled to talk about the urgent
need to improve science education in primary and secondary school,
which is a noble and necessary goal and worth urging at all relevant op-
portunities, but few adults have the luxury of a K-through-12 encore. To
the well-intentioned curriculum revisionists, I gave my emphatic agree-
ment, then pleaded that they take pity on the post-pedagogued. Surely
not even the most feebly educated adult is beyond hope? Let's focus on
them: What should nonspecialist nonchildren know about science, and
how should they know it, and what is this thing called fun?

INTRODUCTION • 
15
Realizing that the term "science" is a bit of a bounder, which can be
induced via modifiers like "social" or "soft" to embrace anthropology,
sociology, psychology, economics, politics, geography, or feng shui, I
decided to focus on those sciences generally awarded the preamble
"hard." These are the physical and life sciences, which in their broadest
categories include physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and astronomy.
These are the subjects that people tend to find the most daunting and
abstruse, and that have the worst customer service desks. At the same
time, they are the fields in which the greatest progress has been made,
where the discoveries of the last century have been the grandest and
most buoyant, and where a shopworn term like "revolutionary" still
rightly applies. Scientists have probed the Joycean chambers of the
atom, read the memoirs of the cosmos virtually back to the moment of
crowning, detangled the snarls of our DNA, and mapped the twitchy
globe of Silly Putty we call our castle and our home. These are the fairy
tales of science, tales, as one scientist put it, "that happen to be true."
They are hard the way diamonds and rubies are hard: they're built to
last, and they sure look swell in the light.
In the course of my research, I interviewed and gathered insights from
hundreds of scientists, often in person, sometimes by phone and e-
mail, at many of the nation's premier universities and institutions. I
spoke with Nobel laureates, members of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, university presidents, institute directors, MacArthur geniuses. I
also sought out researchers who were known as brilliant teachers, who
had won their university's version of the "most adored professor of the
year" award, or who were cited on student Web sites for being excep-
tionally clear, inspirational, entertaining, or, that old reliable, "awe-
some." Even the most difficult, desultory conversations, the ones that
had me feeling like a Victorian dentist — all pliers and no nitrous — al-
most invariably yielded a gem or two. Scientists talked about the need
to embrace the world as you find it, not as you wish it to be. They de-
scribed their favorite molecules. They told jokes, like the one about
physicist Werner Heisenberg, whose famed uncertainty principle says
that you can know the position of an electron as it orbits the nuclear
heart of an atom, or you can know its velocity, but that you can't know
both at once. To wit: Heisenberg is scheduled to give a lecture at MIT,
but he's running late and speeding through Cambridge in his rental car.
A cop pulls him over, and says, "Do you have any idea how fast you
were going?"
"No," Heisenberg replies brightly, "but I know where I am!"

INTRODUCTION 
• 
l6
"Now, you tell that at a cocktail party, and people will walk away
from you," said Michael Rubner, a materials scientist at MIT. "Tell it in
front of five hundred eighteen-year-olds at MIT, and they just roar."
I also pushed scientists to get beyond the knee-jerk tutorials, to ex-
plain, as much as was possible, what exactly they mean by some of the
terms so often used as introductory definitions. You've likely heard, for
example, the purportedly kindergarten description of the atom, that it
is composed of three different classes of particles: protons and neutrons
sitting sunlike at the center, electrons whizzing in orbits around them.
You might also have heard that protons have a "positive charge," elec-
trons a "negative charge," and neutrons "no charge." Well, that sounds
breezy enough: a plus sign, a minus sign, and free with purchase. But
what in the name of Mr. Rogers's last cardigan are we really talking
about? What does it mean to say that a particle has "charge," and how
does this subatomic "charge" of the light brigade relate to more famil-
iar, real-world displays of electric "charge"? When your car breaks
down in the middle of nowhere, for example, and you realize, on tak-
ing out your cell phone to call for help, that you forgot to re-"charge"
the battery, and suddenly it's not a beautiful day in the neighborhood
after all?
I also sought, as much as possible, to make the invisible visible, the
distant neighborly, the ineffable affable. If a human cell were blown up
to the size of something you could display on your coffee table, would
you want to? What would it look like? You say that the average cell is a
very busy place. Is that busy like Manhattan, or busy like Toronto?
It's not that I wanted to take dumbing-down to new heights. In pep-
pering sources with the most pre-basic of questions and tapping away
at the Plexiglas shield of "everybody knows" until I was about as wel-
come as a yellow jacket at a nudist colony, I had several truly honorable
aims. For one thing, I wanted to understand the material myself, in the
sort of visceral way that allows one to feel comfortable explaining it to
somebody else. For another, I believe that first-pass presumptions and
nonexplanatory explanations are a big reason why people shy away
from science. If even the Shlemiel's Guide to the atom begins with a
boilerplate trot through concepts that are pitched as elementary and
self-evident but that don't, when you think about them, really mean
anything, what hope is there for mastering the text in cartoon balloon
number two?
Moreover, in choosing to ask many little questions about a few big
items, I was adopting a philosophy that lately has won fans among sci-

INTRODUCTION • 1J
ence educators — that the best way to teach science to nonscientists is to
go for depth over breadth.
After countless interviews and many months of labor, I began to ex-
perience the wonderful, terrible sensation of "déjà-knew": scientists
were telling me the same things I'd heard before. Wonderful, because it
meant I could be fairly confident I had a defensible corpus of scientific
fundamentals that weren't entirely arbitrary or idiosyncratic. Terrible,
because it meant the time for reporting was over, and the time had
arrived for writing, the painful process, as the neuroscientist Susan
Hockfield so pointedly put it, of transforming three-dimensional, par-
allel-processed experience into two-dimensional, linear narrative. "It's
worse than squaring a circle," she said. "It's squaring a sphere." And to
think I was brought to tears in an art class because I couldn't draw a
straight line.

Thinking Scientifically
An Out-of-Body Experience
S
COTT STROBEL, A BIOCHEMIST at Yale University, is tall, tidy,
and boyishly severe, his complexion a polished apple, his jaw ajut,
his hair a sergeant's clipped command. He looks athletic. He keeps
pictures of his three beaming children on his desk. I am not surprised
to learn that he graduated summa cum laude from Brigham Young
University. He might be good company at a family picnic, but on this
fluorescent-enhanced midweek morning, as we sit around his office
coffee table engaged in what he has deemed a form of constructive en-
tertainment, Strobel is about as much fun as an oncologist.
Strobel has taken out his personal kit of Mastermind, a game I had
never seen before and knew nothing about. He often plays the game
with the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in his lab. They
love it. So, I later discovered, do my husband and daughter. Now Strobel
is teaching me to play Mastermind, but of the many words competing
for the tip of my tongue, "love" is not one of them.
In Mastermind, he explains, you try to divine your opponent's hid-
den sequence of four colored pegs by shuffling your own colored pegs
among peg holes. If you guess a correct color in the correct position,
your opponent inserts a black peg on his side of the board; a correct
color in an incorrect position gets you a white peg; and the wrong color
for any position earns you no peg at all. Your goal is to end up with four
black pegs on your adversary's end in as few rounds as possible.
"Got it?" he says, pushing the board in my direction.
"I never really liked games," I plead. "Don't you have any nice slide
presentations instead?"
"I have a point to make with this," he says. "Go ahead."

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY 
• 
19
Without a tornado or the sudden onset of pneumococcal pneumonia
to deliver me, I sigh and arrange my pegs in a pleasant police lineup of
blue, red, yellow, green. Strobel responds in a pattern of blacks, whites,
and blanks. I lunge with a red piece, he parries by plucking off a white
peg. Green here? Sorry, dear. I'm trying my best, but I have a wooden
ear for the game, and I make bad choices and no progress. I fight back
tears, which fecklessly leap to freedom as sweat. I curse Strobel and all
scientists who ever lived, especially the inventor of the pegboard.
Finally, Strobel takes pity on me. "Well, I think you get the idea," he
says. He sweeps the malignant little pins back into their box, and I lapse
into limp remission.
Mastermind, he declares, is "a microcosm for how science works." By
insisting I play the game, he was trying to impress on me an essential
truth about science. And while the dramady at Strobel's gaming table
was not my favorite hour, in its intensity and memorability it reflects
the strength with which scientists, whatever their specialty, agree with
this truth.
Science is not a body of facts. Science is a state of mind. It is a way of
viewing the world, of facing reality square on but taking nothing on its
face. It is about attacking a problem with the most manicured of claws
and tearing it down into sensible, edible pieces.
Even more than the testimonials to the fun of science, I heard the
earnest affidavit that science is not a body of facts, it is a way of think-
ing. I heard these lines so often they began to take on a bodily existence
of their own.
"Many teachers who don't have a deep appreciation of science pre-
sent it as a set of facts," said David Stevenson, a planetary scientist at
Caltech. "What's often missing is the idea of critical thinking, how you
assess which ideas are reasonable and which are not."
"When I look back on the science I had in high school, I remember it
being taught as a body of facts and laws you had to memorize," said Neil
Shubin, a paleontologist at the University of Chicago. "The Krebs cycle,
Linnaean classifications. Not only does this approach whip the joy of
doing science right out of most people, but it gives everyone a distorted
view of what science is. Science is not a rigid body of facts. It is a dy-
namic process of discovery. It is as alive as life itself."
"I couldn't care less whether people memorize the periodic table or
not," said David Baltimore, the former president of Caltech. "I under-
stand they're more concerned with problems that are meaningful in
their own lives. I just wish they would approach those problems in a
more rational way."

THE 
CANON 
• 
20
When science is offered as a body of facts, science becomes a glassy-
eyed glossary. You skim through a textbook or an educational Web site,
and words in boldface leap out at you. You're tempted to ignore every-
thing but the highlighted hand wavers. You think, if I learn these terms,
maybe I won't flunk chemistry. Yet if you follow such a strategy, chances
are excellent that you will flunk chemistry in the ways that matter —
not on the report card in your backpack, but on the ratings card in your
brain.
The conjuring of science as a smarty-pants set of unerring facts that
might be buzzed up on a Jeopardy! afternoon also suits the opponents
of science, like the antievolutionists who seize on every disputed fossil
to question the entire Darwinian enterprise. "Creationists first try to
paint science as a body of facts and certainties, and then they attack this
or that 'certainty' for not being so certain after all," said Shubin. "They
cry, 'Aha! You can't make up your mind. You can't be trusted. Why
should we believe you about anything?' Yet they are the ones who con-
structed the straw man of scientific infallibility in the first place."
"Science is not a collection of rigid dogmas, and what we call scien-
tific truth is constantly being revised, challenged, and refined," said Mi-
chael Duff, a theoretical physicist at the University of Michigan. "It's
irritating to hear people who hold fundamentalist views accuse scien-
tists of being the inflexible, rigid ones, when usually it's the other way
around. As a scientist, you know that any new discovery you're lucky
enough to uncover will raise more questions than you started with, and
that you must always question what you thought was correct and re-
mind yourself how little you know. Science is a very humble and hum-
bling activity.
"Which doesn't mean," Duff added hastily, "that there aren't arrogant
scientists around."
Back at Yale University, Strobel further explains the message of Mas-
termind. If science is not a static body of facts, what is it? What does it
mean to think scientifically, to take a scientific whack at a problem? The
world is big. The world is messy. The world is a teenager's bedroom: Ev-
erything's in there. Now how do you get it to the kitchen sink? How can
you possibly begin to make sense of it? One furred fork, one accidental
petri dish, one peg hole at a time.
"If you're trying to pose a question in a way that gets you data you
can interpret, you want to isolate a variable," Strobel says. "In science we
take great pains to design experiments that ask only one question at a
time. You isolate a single variable, and then you see what happens when
you change that variable alone, while doing your best to keep every-

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY 
• 
21
thing else in the experiment unchanged." In Mastermind, you change a
single peg and watch the impact of that deviation on your "experi-
ment." In science, if you'd like to know, for example, whether a chemical
reaction depends on the presence of oxygen, you would stage the exper-
iment twice, first with oxygen, then without. Everything else you'd keep
the same to the closest approximation possible — same heat, same light,
same timing, same type of container; and, just to be safe, same white
socks and Tevas.
You don't need to work at a laboratory bench to follow a scientific
game plan. People behave scientifically all the time, although they may
not realize it. "If someone is trying to fix a DVD player, they do ex-
periments, they do controls," said Paul Sternberg, a developmental biol-
ogist at Caltech. "Step one is observation: What does the picture look
like? What are the possible things that could be wrong here? Is it really
the player, or could it be the television set? You come up with a hypo-
thesis, then you start testing it. You borrow your neighbor's DVD
player, you hook it up, you see your TV set is fine. So you check your
DVD's input, output, a couple of wires. You may be able to track down
the problem even without really understanding how a DVD player
works.
"Or maybe you're trying to troubleshoot your pet," Sternberg said.
"Why does the fish look funny? Why is my dog upset? I'll feed the ham-
ster less or I'll feed it more, or maybe it doesn't like the noise, so I'll
move it away from the stereo system. Should I take Job A or Job B? Well,
let me see how long the drive would be from the office to my daughter's
school during rush hour; that could be the killer factor in making a de-
cision. These are all examples of forming hypotheses, doing experi-
ments, coming up with controls. Some people learn these things at an
early age. I had to get a Ph.D. to figure them out."
A number of scientists proposed that people may have been more
comfortable with the nuts and bolts of science back when they were
comfortable with nuts and bolts. "It was easier to introduce students
and the lay public to science when people fixed their own cars or had
their hands in machinery of various kinds," said David Botstein of
Princeton. "In the immediate period after World War II, everybody
who'd been through basic training knew how a differential gear worked
because they had taken one apart."
Farmers, too, were natural scientists. They understood the nuances
of seasons, climate, plant growth, the do-si-do between parasite and
host. The scientific curiosity that entitled our nation's Founding Fa-
thers to membership in Club Renaissance, Anyone? had agrarian roots.

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 2
Thomas Jefferson experimented with squashes and broccoli imported
from Italy, figs from France, peppers from Mexico, beans collected by
Lewis and Clark, as he systematically sought to select the "best" species
of fruits and vegetables the world had to offer and "to reject all others
from the garden." George Washington designed new methods of fertil-
izing and rotating crops and invented the sixteen-sided treading barn,
in which horses would gallop over freshly harvested wheat and ef-
ficiently shake the grain from the stalks.
"The average adult American today knows less about biology than
the average ten-year-old living in the Amazon, or than the average
American of two hundred years ago," said Andrew Knoll, a professor of
natural history at Harvard's Earth and Planetary Sciences Department.
"Through the fruits of science, ironically enough, we've managed to
insulate people from the need to know about science and nature."
Yet still, people troubleshoot their pets, their kids, and, in moments of
utter recklessness, their computers, and they apply scientific reasoning
in many settings without realizing it, for the simple reason that the
method works so well.
Much of the reason for its success is founded on another fundamen-
tal of the scientific bent. Scientists accept, quite staunchly, that there is a
reality capable of being understood, and understood in ways that can
be shared with and agreed upon by others. We can call this "objective"
reality if we like, as opposed to subjective reality, or opinion, or "whim-
sical set of predilections." The contrast is deceptive, however, for it im-
plies that the two are discrete entities with remarkably little in com-
mon. Objective reality is out there, other, impersonal, and "not me,"
while subjective reality is private, intimate, inimitable, and life as it is
truly lived. Objective reality is cold and abstract; subjective reality is
warm and Rockwell. Science is effective because it bypasses such bina-
ries in favor of what might be called empirical universalism, the rigor-
ously outfitted and enormously fruitful premise that the objective real-
ity of the universe comprises the subjective reality of every one of us.
We are of the universe, and by studying the universe we ultimately turn
the mirror on ourselves. "Science is not describing a universe out there,
and we're separate entities," said Brian Greene. "We're part of that uni-
verse, we're made of the same stuff as that universe, of ingredients that
behave according to the same laws as they do elsewhere in the universe."
A molecule of water beaded on a forehead at Yale University would
be indistinguishable from a molecule of water skating through space
aboard Comet Kohoutek. Ashes to ashes, Stardust to our dust. As I'll de-
scribe later in detail, the elements of our bodies, and of the earth, and of

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
2 3
a painted Grandma's holiday apron, were all forged in the bellies of
long-dead suns.
To say that there is an objective reality, and that it exists and can be
understood, is one of those plain-truth poems of science that is nearly
bottomless in its beauty. It is easy to forget that there is an objective,
concrete universe, an outerverse measured in light years, a microverse
trading in angstroms, the currency of atoms; we've succeeded so well in
shaping daily reality to reflect the very narrow parameters and needs of
Homo sapiens. We the subjects become we the objects, and we forget
that the moon shows up each night for the graveyard shift, and we often
haven't a clue as to where we might find it in the sky. We are made of
Stardust; why not take a few moments to look up at the family album?
"Most of the time, when people walk outside at night and see the stars,
it's a big, pretty background, and it's not quite real," said the Caltech
planetary scientist Michael Brown. "It doesn't occur to them that the
pattern they see in the sky repeats itself once a year, or to appreciate
why that's true."
Star light, star bright, Brown wishes you'd try this trick at night: Pay
attention to the moon. Go outside a few evenings in any given month,
and see what time the moon rises, and what phase it's in, and when it
sets, and then see if you can explain why. "Just doing this makes you re-
alize that the sun and moon are both out there," he said, "and that the
sun is actually shining on the moon, and the moon is going around the
Earth, and that it's not all a Hollywood special effect." Brown knows
first-eye how powerful such simple observations can be. It was the sum-
mer after he'd graduated from college, and he was biking across Europe
and sleeping outside each night. In accordance with his status as young,
footloose, and overseas, he wore no wristwatch, so he sought to keep
time by the phases of the moon. "I realized that I had never noticed be-
fore that the full moon rises when the sun sets," he said. "I thought, Hey,
you know, this makes sense. I suppose I should have been embarrassed
not to have noticed it before, but I wasn't. Instead, it was just an amaz-
ing feeling. The whole physical world is really out there, and things are
really happening. It's so easy to isolate yourself from most of the world,
to say nothing of the rest of the universe."
The last spring of my father's life, before he died unexpectedly of a
fast-growing tumor, he told me that it was the first time he had stopped,
during his walks through Central Park in New York, and paid attention
to the details of the plants in bloom: the bulging out of a bud from a
Lenten rose, the uncurling of a buttery magnolia blossom, the sprays of
narcissus, Siberian bugloss, and bleeding heart. I was so impressed by

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 4
this that, ever since, I have tried to do likewise, attending anew to
the world in rebirth. Each spring I ask a specific question about what
I'm seeing and so feel as though I am lighting a candle in his memory,
a small focused flame against the void of self-absorption, the blind-
ness of I.
Another fail-safe way to change the way you see the world is to invest
in a microscope. Not one of those toy microscopes sold in most Science
'n' Discovery chain stores, which, as Tom Eisner, a professor of chemical
ecology at Cornell, has observed, are unwrapped on Christmas morn-
ing and in the closet before Boxing Day. Not the microscopes that mag-
nify specimens up to hundreds of times and make everything look like
a satellite image of an Iowa cornfield. Rather, you should buy a dissect-
ing microscope, also known as a stereo microscope. Admittedly, such
microscopes are not cheap, running a couple of hundred dollars or so.
Yet this is a modest price to pay for revelation, revolution, and — let's
push this envelope out of the box while we're at it — personal salvation.
Like Professor Brown, I speak from experience. I was accustomed to
looking through high-powered microscopes in laboratories and seeing
immune cells and cancer cells and frogs' eggs and kidney tissue from fe-
tal mice. But it wasn't until my daughter received a dissecting micro-
scope as a gift, and we began using it to examine the decidua of
everyday life, that I began yodeling my hallelujahs. A feather from a
blue jay, a fiddlehead fern, a scraping from a branch that turned out to
be the tightly honeycombed housing for a stinkbug's eggs. How much
heft and depth, shadow and thistle, leap out at you when the small is
given scope to strut. At a mere 40 X magnification, salt grains look like
scattered glass pillows, a baby beetle becomes a Fabergé egg, and, as
much as I hate mosquitoes, a mosquito under the microscope is pure
Giacometti: Thin Man Takes Wing, with Violin.
Yes, the world is out there, over your head and under your nose, and
it is real and it is knowable. To understand something about why a
thing is as it is in no way detracts from its beauty and grandeur, nor
does it reduce the observed to "just a bunch of" — chemicals, mole-
cules, equations, specimens for a microscope. Scientists get annoyed at
the hackneyed notion that their pursuit of knowledge diminishes the
mystery or art or "holiness" of life. Let's say you look at a red rose, said
Brian Greene, and you understand a bit about the physics behind its
lovely blood blush. You know that red is a certain wavelength of light,
and that light is made of little particles called photons. You understand
that photons representing all colors of the rainbow stream from the sun
and strike the surface of the rose, but that, as a result of the molecular

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
2 5
composition of pigments in the rose, it's the red photons that bounce
off its petals and up to your eyes, and so you see red.
"I like that picture," said Greene. "I like the extra story line, which
comes, by the way, from Richard Feynman. But I still have the same
strong emotional response to a rose as anybody else. It's not as though
you become an automaton, dissecting things to death." To the contrary.
A rose is a rose is a rose; but the examined rose is a sonnet.
That the universe can be explored and incrementally understood
without losing its "magic" does not imply a corollary: that maybe
"magic" is true after all, is hidden under accretions of apparent order,
and that one of these days reality will kick off on a bucking broomstick
toward Hogwarts on the hill. The universe still brims with mysteries, of
course, but, in their conviction that the universe is knowable, scientists
doubt that these question marks, once they have been understood well
enough to become commas, will prove to be regions of arbitrary law-
lessness or paranormality. "We have a pretty good idea of what kind
of world this is, and it is not as mysterious, in the conventional sense of
the word, as some people might wish," said Steven Weinberg. "It's not
a world in which human destiny is linked to the positions of planets,
or where people can be cured by crystals or bend spoons with their
thoughts. Sometimes the police will call in a psychic to help solve a
crime, and you'll hear a discussion on television for or against. But this
isn't really an open question."
For example, one of the great conundrums in astronomy is the na-
ture of something called dark energy, a kind of antigravitational force
that appears to be pushing the accelerator pedal of the universe. The
universe, as we'll discuss later, was born in the celebrated Big Bang
about 13.7 billion years ago and has been expanding ever since; that
much is clear and nearly incontrovertible. Yet until quite recently scien-
tists thought that the rate of expansion was slowing down. You know
how it is: a youthful burst of levity, and then the years start tugging
on the back of your shorts. So, too, it was believed, for the universe:
the gravitational pull of all its mass was supposed to be slowing down
its rate of expansion. Instead, researchers have seen the opposite. The
expansion is speeding up. Galaxies are flying away from one another at
an ever increasing pace. Our universe has found a second wind. What
is the meaning of this shadowy force, this type A provocateur, this en-
ergy so studiously seditious it hides behind dark glasses? Does its exis-
tence call into question the entire edifice of astrophysics, of what we've
learned about the universe to date? To quote that most cerebral of com-
ics, Steve Martin: "Nah!" Scientists are dazzled by dark energy. They are

THE 
CANON 
• 
26
impressed by its size and strength. They want very, very much to under-
stand it. Nobody I spoke with, however, felt threatened by it. They have
some ideas about what dark energy may be. They're open to other,
better suggestions. They're just not about to consult a psychic for help
in finding the body.
After all, history is replete with "unfathomable" mysteries that have
been fathomed into the archives. The physicist Robert Jaffe of MIT
cited the case of what might be called spire and brimstone. The cathe-
drals and churches of Christendom traditionally were built on the high-
est promontory in town and outfitted with the loftiest steeples parishio-
ners could afford, the better to reach toward heaven and vamp for the
neighbors. Unfortunately, those tall, wooden towers attracted more
than envy: churches were regularly struck by lightning and burned to
varying degrees of a crisp. "Every time this happened, there would be a
wrenching dialogue about sin and the vengeance of God," said Jaffe,
"and what the parish had done to bring the wrath of the Lord upon
them." Then, in the eighteenth century, Benjamin Franklin determined
that lightning was an electric rather than an ecclesiastic phenomenon.
He recommended that conducting rods be installed on all spires and
rooftops, and the debates over the semiotics of lightning bolts vanished.
Nowadays, a fire in a church is less likely to be considered an act of God
than of a tippling priest who neglected to blow out the candles.
Scientists may believe that much, if not all, of the universe will prove
comprehensible, yet interestingly, this comprehensibility continues to
astound them. Immanuel Kant observed that "the most astonishing
thing about the universe is that it can be understood." This was hardly a
clause in a prénuptial agreement. As the Princeton astrophysicist John
Bahcall put it in an interview shortly before he died, we crawled out of
the ocean, we are confined to a tiny landmass circling a midsize, mid-
dle-aged, pale-faced sun located in one arm of just another pinwheel
galaxy among millions of star-spangled galaxies; yet we have come to
comprehend the universe on the largest scales and longest time frames,
from the subatomic out to the edge of the cosmos. "It's remarkable, it's
extraordinary, and it didn't have to be that way," Bahcall said.
In other words, we can count our lucky stars that the stars can be
counted. "You can imagine a universe that's complicated no matter how
you look at it or try to break it down," said Brian Greene. "But we don't
live in that kind of universe, and I for one am grateful." The world may
seem confusing, chaotic, unspeakably rude, yet underlying it all is a cer-
tain amount of order. "The wonder of science is that a few very simple
ideas can yield incredibly rich phenomena," said Greene. "It's astound-

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
2.J
ing that a few symbols on a blackboard underlie so much of what we
experience." Ah, yes, "a few symbols on a blackboard," the smudged gar-
den of glyphs that covered Greene's blackboard, and the green boards
and the black-markered white boards of every physicist I visited. Physi-
cists don't just scribble equations when they're posing for cartoonists.
They scribble to one another, too. They talk the talk, they chalk the
chalk, and they, like us, marvel at how often their abstract computa-
tions fit the fleshiness of life. The physicist Eugene Wigner talked of
"the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics" — in delineating the
present, disinterring the past, and baking a trustier fortune cookie.
With the aid of mathematics, scientists can calculate solar eclipses
thousands of years in advance, for example, or gauge when to launch a
space probe so that it will rendezvous with Neptune, or predict the life
span and death throes of a distant star. Mathematics has proved to be
such a potent means for dissecting reality that many scientists see it as
not merely a human invention, like a microscope or a computer, but a
reflection of traits inherent to the cosmos, a glimpse into its underlying
architecture and operating system. By this view, you needn't be the
hominid descendant of a lungfish or the intellectual descendant of the
Greek mathematician Euclid to realize that the structure of space-time
has a distinct saddleback geometry to it, which we earthlings label non-
Euclidean. "When somebody says they were the first person to discover
quantum mechanics or relativity or the like, I always think to myself, it's
probably been discovered millions of times before, by other civiliza-
tions elsewhere in this galaxy or in other galaxies," said the theoretical
physicist John Schwarz of Caltech.
For all the power of math in making sense of reality, though, math
should not be thought of as something inviolate, matchless, even sa-
cred. A mathematical description of a phenomenon is not a "truer" de-
scription than an equivalent, nonmathematical explanation would be,
any more than the word "table" is a truer rendering of "a piece of furni-
ture having a smooth, flat top on legs" than are the words "mesa,"
"tavolo," or "lijst." Math is a language, not the language, and its symbols
can be explained in other idioms, including that lovely English dialect
called Plain. For all but a tiny clique of researchers known as pure
mathematicians, who have scant interest in connecting the dots be-
tween theorem and you-are-here, math is a means to an end, and the
end must do more than make the pi higher. It must deliver reality back
to us, this time with chapter headings, annotations and footnotes, and
wise verbs strong enough to bear the weight of the inevitable sentence
endpoint, the question mark. I get irritated with scientists who com-

THE 
CANON 
• 
28
plain about the reluctance of popular science writers to include a sprin-
kling of math in their narrative, and who insist that the story told is
therefore incomplete and even slightly misleading, as though the point
of the math was the math was the math. "In principle, every equation
can be expressed in English as a sentence," said Brian Greene. Admit-
tedly, such transpositions often would be clumsy sentences, and you
wouldn't want to curl up with a book of them, but the moral is clear:
even if you remain numb to numbers, you can still understand what
they have to tell us about the universe. You can become scientifically
quite sophisticated without mastering much if any math. "I have never
felt that science was quite so dependent on mathematics as some scien-
tists do," said Kip Hodges, director of the School of Earth and Space Ex-
ploration at Arizona State University. "Mathematics is a way of describ-
ing nature but not necessarily of understanding it."
Yes, our children should be taught much more math and in far
greater depth than they currently are in the average American class-
room. Absolutely. But we must face the sad truth that children can take
it, and adults cannot. As a consequence of brain biology, children are
brilliant at learning new languages of all sorts. Their neurons are practi-
cally liquid, pouring across local loci and making new friends and syn-
apses with hardly a grunt of effort. As we age, however, the cells settle
into place, maybe invest in a sofa and china cabinet, and the entire
neuronal matrix, slowly but unmistakably, starts to harden. By our late
twenties or early thirties, the mind is made up: it has taken a stand on
life, it knows from whence it speaks, and that commitment is reflected
in its structure. Of course we can learn new things, up until the day we
learn how to die; but chances are excellent that most adult learning
takes place through the prism of preexisting skills. So if math is all
Greek to you, take comfort in the following: (a) Why shouldn't it be?
Many of the symbols used in math are letters from the Greek alphabet;
and (b) it's Greek to a surprising number of scientists, too. As it hap-
pens, many biologists, chemists, geologists, and astronomers are rela-
tively poor mathematicians. Bonnie Bassler of Princeton, considered
one of the brightest young stars in the field of bacterial ecology, con-
fessed to me that she is "terrible at math" and always has been. "I can
balance my checkbook if I have a calculator," she said. "I can do frac-
tions. But that's it. Somehow it didn't matter, and I ended up here."
Even physicists, for whom math is indispensable, have their limits.
Steven Weinberg may have won a Nobel Prize for helping to develop
the mathematics that merged two of nature's four fundamental forces,
electromagnetism and the weak force, into a single theoretical bundle

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
2 9
called the electroweak force — and this is not something you could do
by reviewing your old high school algebra notes — yet he said he re-
cently switched from particle physics to cosmology because the math in
particle physics was getting beyond him.
Yet while a mastery of math is not essential to appreciating and even
practicing science, you can't avoid, while milling through the fair-
ground of Science Mind, bumping into a few cousins from math's ex-
tended family. One is quantitative thinking, to which the next chapter is
devoted: becoming comfortable with concepts of probability and ran-
domness, and learning a few tricks about how to break a problem into
tractable pieces and to whip up a back-of-a-wet-cocktail-napkin esti-
mate of some seemingly incalculable figure, like, how many school
buses are in your county, or how many people would have to hold
hands to form a human chain around the globe and how many of them
will be bobbing in open ocean and had better bring a life jacket, shark
repellent, and a copy of their dental records just in case? True, you can
likely find the answers to these and other fun FAQs on the Internet,
yet the habit of thinking in stepwise, quantitative fashion, and facing
a problem head-on rather than running off screaming to Google, is
worth cultivating. Second only to their desire that science be seen as a
dynamic and creative enterprise rather than a calcified set of facts and
laws, scientists wish that people would learn enough about statistics —
odds, averages, sample sizes, and data sets — to scoff with authority at
crooked ones. Through sound quantitative reasoning, they reason, peo-
ple might resist the lure of the anecdote and the personal testimonial,
the deceptive N, or sample size, of "me, my friends, the doorman, and
the barista at Caribou." With a better appreciation for the qualities of
quantities, people might be able to set aside, if only temporarily, the
stubbornness of a human brain that evolved to focus on the quirks and
peccadilloes of a small, homogeneous tribe, rather than on the daunt-
ing population densities and polycultural vortices that characterize life
in contemporary Gotham City. There is a little principle called the law
of large numbers, which among other things means that if the group
you're considering is very big, nearly anything is possible. Events that
would be rare on a limited scale become not merely common, but ex-
pected. One favorite example among the numerati is that of repeat lot-
tery winners, people who have won big prizes two or more times and
who invariably provoke clucks of awe, envy, what-are-the-odds. "The
really amazing thing would be if nobody won twice," said Jonathan
Koehler, a professor of economics at the University of Texas.
By thinking small in a large land, we get a skewed sense of what's

THE 
CANON 
• 
30
meaningful and what's happenstance. "People are overly impressed by
coincidences, and they get fooled by them," said John Allen Paulos, a
mathematician at Temple University and the author of Innumeracy
and many other books. Paulos has toyed with the idea of playing the
Barnum card to make a point while making a profit. He could start a
newsletter of random predictions about the stock market and mail it to
two large sets of readers. One group would receive a newsletter predict-
ing that the market would rise in the next three months; another would
be told that the market would go bearish. Three months later, he'd see
how the market had fared, and direct his next newsletter solely to the
recipients of his correct first guess, again separating them into two
camps. Half would be flagged to expect a bull market, and half would
be warned of an imminent downturn. By the third newsletter, he could
boast to a winnowed but still substantial pool of readers, Hey, I've suc-
cessfully predicted the stock market for two cycles running, and then
ask, Care to invest $10 to receive my next divination? (Keep Paulos's
scheme in mind should you receive any suspicious solicitations from
Temple University.)
Another aspect of quantitative reasoning that characterizes the scien-
tific mindset is this: there must be some quantity to it, some substance,
some evidence. Science demands evidence: Does this sound, well, self-
evident? Maybe so, but it's a lesson that can be awfully hard to swallow,
and must be taken again and again, our daily ABCs and periodic
Mendeleevs, folic acid for the backbone, iron in homage to the core of
the earth. It's hard to swallow because we love opinions. The most thor-
oughly read pages in a newspaper are the opinion pages — the editori-
als, the columns and commentaries, the bellicose lettres from readers
living somewhere in the state of Greater Umbrage. Opinions are to have
and to hold, in sickness and in health, over breakfast or by blog. Opin-
ions feel good. You're entitled to yours; I'll indulge mine. "In politics,
you can say, I like George Bush, or I don't like George Bush, or I do or
don't like Howard Dean or John Kerry or Mr. Magoo," said Andrew
Knoll of Harvard. "You don't need a principled reason for that political
opinion. You don't need evidence that someone else can replicate to
justify your opinion. You don't need to think of alternative explanations
that would render your opinion invalid. You can go into the voting
booth, and say, I prefer this or that politician, and cast your vote ac-
cordingly. You don't need excuses for the foods you like, either. If you're
ordering dinner at a restaurant, you can ask that your steak be cooked
rare or medium or well-done, and the waiter isn't likely to stop and de-

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
3 1
mand that you present evidence to back up your taste, at least not if he
wants his tip.
"Unfortunately, people often regard science the same way, as a matter
of opinion," Knoll continued. "I do or don't like George Bush, I do or
don't believe in evolution. It doesn't matter why I don't believe in evo-
lution, it doesn't matter what the evidence is, I just don't believe in it."
You, the evolutionist, "believe" in evolution; I, the creationist, do not.
You have your opinion, I have mine, and it takes all kinds of nuts and
dips to make a party, right?
At which point most evolutionists are likely to get very impatient and
form opinions of their interlocutor that they may or may not choose to
express. Scientists can be quite hard on one another, too. They sneer,
they dismiss, they scrawl comments on one another's submitted reports
like "I feel sorry for whoever funded this so-called research" or "I
wouldn't publish this at the bottom of a birdcage." Yet for all the crude
inanity of its more extreme sputterings, the attack-dog stance is part of
science's strength. The big difference between science and many other
aspects of life is, to quote George W. Bush's response to a disgruntled
citizen at a July Fourth picnic, "Who cares what you think?" Your opin-
ion doesn't count. Your fond hopes and fantasies of Paradigms Found
don't count. What counts is the quality and the quantity of the evidence.
"How you want it to be doesn't make any difference," said the biolo-
gist Elliot Meyerowitz of Caltech. "In fact, if things are turning out the
way you want them to, you should think harder about how you're doing
your experiments, to make sure you're not introducing some bias." As
members of the human race, scientists are born to be biased, particu-
larly in favor of their personal biases. After all, we're stuck in our skulls
for the whole four-score sentence of sentience. We can't brainhop or
mindswap; we merely window-shop. I think, therefore I am right. Yet
while self-delusion has been shown to be an extremely useful tool in
many situations — particularly when trying to persuade a potential em-
ployer or love interest of your extraordinary worth — it is, in the words
of the MIT molecular biologist Gerald Fink, "the enemy of science."
"Those of us who are not overly philosophical believe that there is a
reality to nature but that it can be very hard to see it and understand it,
given all our biases," Meyerowitz said. "The reason a scientist spends all
those years in training, as an undergraduate, graduate student, and
postdoc, is to learn to deal with personal biases." Good scientists spend
a lot of time assuming they're up to no good. They are anti-Sixth
Amendment, guilty until proven innocent, or penitents in search of re-

THE 
CANON 
• 
32
demption. "If you're doing your job," said the chemist Daniel Nocera of
MIT, "you should be the one who disproves yourself most of the time."
It doesn't matter what sort of story you tell yourself as you are doing
your experiments, what hypothesis you formulated before you started
clicking your pipette or infusing your fetal mice with fluorescent green
marker from a jellyfish. Just make sure that the endpoints are pure of
heart. "The results section of a scientific paper is where you show you're
a good scientist. Here is where you say, I did the experiment properly,
and collected the data properly and the data are right," said Nocera. "In
the discussion section, where you talk about the implications of the
work, you can sound smart or stupid, and tell an interesting story or
not. I warn my students, you may sometimes be stupid and you may
sometimes be smart, but you must always be good. When I read the re-
sults section of your paper, everything in there has got to be right."
Darcy Kelley, a neuroscientist at Columbia, sounds a similar warning
knell to her students: "Your data should be true even if your story is
wrong."
How do scientists seek to purge their work of bias and bad data?
Through frequent ablutions at the baptistry of the Control. As vital to
the integrity of a scientific report as the finding being showcased are all
the no-shows offered in comparison: We did operation A to variable B
and got result Z; but when we subjected B to operations E, I, O, U, and
even Y, B didn't budge. When researchers at Boston University wanted
to show that the eggs of a red-eyed tree frog would hatch early expressly
to avoid prédation by an oncoming snake, allowing the preemie tad-
poles to leap to safety in the water below, it wasn't enough to film the
unripe eggs bursting open on the approach of an oviphagous serpent:
after all, who's to say that the eggs were responding to a snake-specific
threat rather than to an ambient disturbance? The scientists demon-
strated the precision of the frog eggs' monitoring system by exposing
them to a variety of recorded vibrations of equal amplitude from dis-
tinct sources — slithering snake, passing human footsteps, hammering
rain. Only with a snake shake would the tadpoles make haste.
A lovable control is often blind: those who perform the experiment
should be unaware of what's control and what's the real thing until all
the results are in, at which stage the code can be broken. Sometimes de-
vising the right controls is the hardest part of a study. When researchers
sought to demonstrate the effectiveness of acupuncture to treat a vari-
ety of ailments — lower back pain, diabetes, depression — they yearned
to be taken seriously. They were tired of their colleagues' twitchy-kneed
rejection of all alternative healing practices, and they were really tired of

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
3 3
the catty references to "quackupuncture." They wanted the fourteen-
karat validation of a blinded study, in which one group of patients re-
ceived acupuncture and one did not, and neither set would know who
was the treated, who the placebo. But how to fool some of the people
some of the time about a procedure as palpable as playing pincushion?
The researchers' solution was dapper and to the point: one group of pa-
tients would be given needles inserted into officially designated acu-
puncture nodes, while the second group would have needles inserted
into "sham" spots on the body that acupuncturists agreed should have
no effect. When patients with lower back pain reported relief from
bona fide needling but not from sham acupuncture, even the most
skeptical Western doctors had to concede that the 5,000-year-old prac-
tice might have its limited uses.
"In my life as a scientist, the thing I worry about the most is, What
are the right controls?" said Gerald Fink. "You send a paper off for pub-
lication, and you're stricken with doubt: Did I do it? Did I use the right
controls?"
Another route to data security is . . . another route. Approach a prob-
lem from many angles and see if you always end up in Rome. One of
my favorite examples of meticulous cartography is a report by Gene
Robinson, a neuroethologist at the University of Illinois in Urbana-
Champaign. Neuroethologists study the neurobiology of behavior, in
Robinson's case of bee behavior. He's exploring how gene activity in
the brain is linked to an individual's conduct, and he has decided that
the best way to address these big, socially flammable questions is on the
modest terrain of the bee brain, which would fit snugly into the belly
of this b. His question: How does a bee know what to be and not to
be? How does a worker bee know that she's meant to spend the first half
of her six-week life performing hive-bound duties like tending to the
eggs, cleaning out the combs, feeding the voracious queen? And what
prompts her at three weeks of age to shrug off her nurse's togs and ven-
ture out into the world as a forager, a tireless gatherer of nectar and pol-
len, and the happenstance key to floral fecundity? What changes occur
in the bee brain that might explain the dramatic career shift, with its
concomitant capacity to fly a dozen miles a day and not get lost, and to
dance the sororal dance that soundlessly booms to workmates the loca-
tion of blossoms worth probing?
Robinson's team presented various threads of experimental evidence
that a gene designated (why not) the foraging gene might be at the
heart of the professional overhaul. Firstly, the scientists demonstrated
that if they removed all the foraging bees from a hive and thereby

THE 
CANON 
• 
34
forced some of the young nurse bees to assume breadwinning duties
prematurely, the foraging gene flicked on abruptly inside the cells of the
bees' beleaguered brains. Secondly, they showed that if they fed young
bees sugar water laced with a chemical known to stimulate the activity
of the foraging gene artificially, the sedentary cell dwellers suddenly
started venturing outside, precociously prepared to gather ye rosebuds.
Finally, if the researchers gave young bees another sort of stimulatory
chemical that failed to activate the foraging gene, the bees remained
hive-bound, a demonstration that not just any chemical kick would do
the trick.
Through each evidentiary strand, and every corresponding control,
still the discovery held. Unless the foraging gene blazed on, the bee
didn't budge. A modest finding perhaps, but one chiseled and polished
until it was the bees' knees.
Scientists demand evidence, and they are merciless toward a re-
searcher who gives a PowerPoint presentation with feeble data. "It's a
very aggressive, confrontational process," said Lucy Jones. "Conflict is
part of the day-to-day reality of how science is done." I have heard sci-
entists guffaw loudly during talks, when it was quite clear that the pre-
senter wasn't telling a Werner Heisenberg joke. I have seen scientists un-
der fire turn as pale as marzipan and start to quiver and almost spit,
though I have never seen one cry onstage; and murders in the scientific
community are surprisingly rare, although suicides, unfortunately, are
not. The scientific hazing can give the enterprise a doctrinaire air, one
intolerant of creativity, new ideas, anything that might upset the com-
placent status quo. It feeds the familiar E = me2 of the Hollywood sci-
entist-hero, the lone genius battling an entrenched and blinkered the-
ocracy with only his girlfriend to believe in him and remind him to
bathe at least once a week. Now, it is true that when a pharmaceutical
company has a best-selling drug at stake, company scientists can be sus-
piciously quick to dismiss studies showing a cheaper, competing prod-
uct to be as good or better than the company's billion-dollar gravy boat.
Even without the lure of big profits, research scientists often have egos
that might best be measured in the astronomical unit known as the
parsec; as a result, scientists may defend their research and their per-
spective long after the data have naysayed them. David Baltimore re-
called an MIT scientist who died only within the last couple of years
and who was one of the last remaining critics of the theory of the origin
of the universe that is now almost universally accepted by astronomers
and indeed the entire scientific community. "He didn't believe in the
Big Bang," said Baltimore, "and he was in everybody's face about it."

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
3 5
Egos and academic mastodons notwithstanding, scientists are deeply
skeptical when they hear amazing new results, and with good reason:
many of these results are bad, are more awful than offal — a product
that at least has a shot at fertilizing something better down the line.
"Most of the time, when you get an amazing, counterintuitive result,"
said Michael Wigler of Cold Spring Harbor Lab, "it means you screwed
up the experiment."
People have the mistaken impression that the great revolutions in the
history of science overturned prevailing wisdom. In fact, most of the
great ideas subsumed their predecessors, gulped them whole and got
bigger in the act. Albert Einstein did not prove that Isaac Newton was
wrong. Instead, he showed that Newton's theories of motion and grav-
ity were incomplete, and that new equations were needed to explain the
behavior of objects under extreme circumstances, such as when tiny
particles travel at or near the speed of light. Einstein made the pi wider
and lighter and more exotically scalloped in space and time. But for the
workaday trajectories of Earth spinning around the sun, or a baseball
barreling toward a bat, or a brand-new earring sliding down a drain,
Newton's laws of motion still apply.
"The rules of science are quite strict," said the Berkeley astronomer
Alex Filippenko. "I get messages every day from people who have ideas
that sound interesting but that are terribly incomplete. I tell them,
Look, you have to formulate your proposal much more coherently, in a
way that explains not only the one new thing you're concerned with,
but that is consistent with everything else we know, too. Any new, revo-
lutionary idea has to explain the existing body of knowledge at least as
well as the ideas we already accept."
On very rare occasions, scientists present a revolutionary idea in such
a compelling, comprehensive, and vine-ripened form that even the
skeptics are sold. One example is the famously brief paper in the April
1953 issue of the journal Nature by James Watson and Francis Crick, de-
scribing the incomparably uncluttered structure of deoxyribonucleic
acid, or DNA. For years, many of the world's great geneticists were con-
vinced that proteins, rather than nucleic acids, carried genetic informa-
tion in the cell. Their reasoning was simple. Proteins are complex. They
are the most complex molecules known in the cell. Genetic information
seems pretty complex. Who better to bear the burden of complexity
than the complex? On beholding the elegance of the double helix, how-
ever, and the smartness with which the four subunits of the twisting
ladder paired with one another, and the ease with which one strand of
the molecule might serve as a template for creating an entirely new

THE 
CANON 
• 
36
copy of DNA to bequeath to a daughter cell, geneticists realized how the
entire story of life could be told in its taciturn code.
Another legendary wowzer occurred at a geoscience meeting in the
1960s, when researchers offered evidence for plate tectonics, the theory
that explains the origins of the ragged peaks and plunging canyons, the
sputtering fumaroles and shimmering lava flows, and all the other An-
sel Adams centerfolds that surround us. Lucy Jones's thesis adviser was
at the meeting and told her how extraordinary the presentation was.
"The evidence was so overwhelming, so compelling," she said, "that no-
body could argue with it." Even more surprising, she added, "nobody
wanted to."
Such Rocky triumphs, though, are extremely atypical. More often,
scientists carp and cavil, demand better controls, offer a contrarian in-
terpretation of the results, or write snide comments in the margins
of a peer's manuscript. More often, science progresses fitfully, and indi-
vidual experimental results are as modest as a bee's cerebrum. This is
not an indictment against science. The power of science lies precisely
in its willingness to attack a big problem by dividing it into many
small pieces, its embrace of the unfairly maligned practice known as
reductionism. At the same time, the piecemeal approach demands that
scientists be circumspect to an often tedious degree and that they resist
— no matter how much they are pushed by their university's public re-
lations department or by desperate journalists — making more of the
data than the data make of themselves. It would be cheating to do oth-
erwise. It would be cheating to declare that science works by isolating
variables, one colored peg at a time; and then to decide, when you've
got a handsome little result, that, whaddya know, you're a holist at
heart, and that Whitman had a point about the universe being in every
blade of grass. The best scientists don't overreach or grandstand, at least
not until they've retired into the armchair comforts of emeritus profes-
sorship, a time of life sometimes referred to as philosopause.
For working scientists, by contrast, all chairs are folding chairs: here
today, tossed in the closet tomorrow. Scientists are accustomed to un-
certainty, and to admitting how little they know. In fact, not only are
they accustomed to uncertainty — they thrive on it. This is another
of the core messages they'd like people to absorb, right down to their
stem cells if possible: that science is an inherently uncertain enterprise,
and that the uncertainty is, paradoxically, another source of its power.
"We're out there looking for new patterns, new laws, new fundamentals,
new uncertainties? said Andy Ingersoll, an astronomer at Caltech. "And
as we're looking, and discovering new things, we're debating about

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
3 7
what we see. We express our differences of opinion, sometimes strongly,
until the public gets confused. Doesn't science know the answer to any-
thing? Well, yes, eventually a consensus may be reached about a partic-
ular problem. But by then, we've already moved on to the next uncer-
tainty, the next unknown. You don't linger." Ignorance is bliss, and
always an excuse. "What motivates scientists is a lack of information
rather than the presence of information," said Scott Strobel. Sometimes
a consensus really is consensual, as it overwhelmingly is with Darwin's
theory of evolution by natural selection (and more on this profoundly
important organizing principle of biology, and the circus of manufac-
tured tsuris that surrounds it, later), and as it firmly is in the case of
global warming. For all the talk of "controversy," the great majority of
climate scientists concur that average temperatures on Earth are climb-
ing, and that some, if not all, of the rise is the result of human activity,
notably the compulsive burning of combustible materials to power
every aspect of contemporary life, including the need for more air-
conditioning.
At other times, a scientific consensus amounts to little more than
mass agnosticism. Take the question of whether chemical pollutants
contribute to breast cancer. On the one hand, many industrial chemi-
cals have been shown to cause breast tumors in lab animals; inherited
factors fall short of explaining most human cases of the disease; and
breast cancer rates vary significantly from nation to nation, all suggest-
ing that environmental carcinogens somehow contribute to the malig-
nancy. On the other hand, study after study seeking to link pesticides,
power plants, or other specific environmental insults to human cancer
have failed to reveal any convincing connection, leaving most scientists
either skeptical or resolutely noncommittal about the contribution of
chemical pollutants to breast cancer — much to activists' dismay.
"You don't want people to think that science is a joke, and that we
don't know anything," said the Caltech astronomer Chuck Steidel, "but
the truth is that the process of reaching a consensus is extremely messy
and requires that a huge number of hurdles be overcome. Often, when
results are presented to the general public, they're made out to be much
more rock-solid than they are."
Science is uncertain because scientists really can't prove anything, ir-
refutably and beyond a neutrino of a doubt, and they don't even try. In-
stead, they try to rule out competing hypotheses, until the hypothesis
they're entertaining is the likeliest explanation, within a very, very small
margin of error — the tinier, the better. "Working scientists don't think
of science as 'the truth,'" said Darcy Kelley. "They think of it as a way of

THE 
CANON 
• 
38
approximating the truth." By accepting the proximate and provisional
nature of what they're working on, scientists leave room for regular up-
grades, which, unlike many upgrades to one's computer operating sys-
tem, are nearly always an improvement on the previous model. For
example, after scientists determined that DNA, rather than proteins,
served as nature's preeminent guardian of genetic information, they be-
gan to see that DNA was not the sole guardian of the code of life, and
almost certainly wasn't the original one. They gradually gained respect
for RNA, the molecule they once dismissed as a mere bureaucrat paper-
clipped between the imperial DNA that issues commands in the cell
and the industrious proteins that do the cell's work without surcease.
Scientists spied in RNA many talents that made it a likely ancestor of
DNA, the primordial vessel of heredity and continuity back when life
was new; only later did RNA cede its replicative and procreative role to
the sturdier strands of DNA.
More recently, scientists have amassed evidence that some proteins,
called prions, can act like DNA after all, replicating in the brains of mad
cows and their unlucky human consumers. The discovery of prions and
their infectious, photocopying potential earned a Nobel Prize for Stan-
ley Prusiner in 1997.
None of these findings undermine the strength of the original Wat-
son-Crick discovery. "Just because RNA and proteins can carry infor-
mation in some circumstances doesn't detract from the centrality of
DNA as the primary bearer of hereditary information," said David Bal-
timore. "As our concepts become more precise, more sophisticated, the
absolutes become less absolute." In other words, by accepting that they
can never know the truth but can only approximate it, scientists end up
edging ever closer to the truth. The tonic surgery of chronic uncer-
tainty.
For those outside the operating theater, however, all the quarreling,
the hesitation, the emendations and annotations, can make science
sound like a pair of summer sandals. Flip-flop, flip-flop! One minute
they tell us to cut the fat, the next minute they're against the grains.
Once they told us that the best thing to put on a burn was butter. Then
they realized that in fact butter makes a burn spread; better use some
ice instead. All women should take hormone replacement therapy from
age fifty onward. All women should stop taking hormone therapy right
now and never mention the subject again. Didn't scientists predict in
the 1960s that a population bomb was about to explode, and that we'd
all die of starvation or crowd rage? Now demographers in developed
countries fret that women aren't breeding fast enough to restock the tax

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
3 9
base and that nobody will be around to pay tomorrow's nursing home
bills. Why should we believe anything scientists say? For that matter,
why should we do anything that scientists suggest, like thinking about
global climate change and the inevitable depletion of Earth's fossil fuels
and adjusting our energy policies accordingly? That's what scientists say
today. But if I hang on to my Hummer long enough, hey, maybe they'll
decide that extravagant plumes of exhaust fumes are good for the envi-
ronment after all!
This is one of science's bigger public relations problems. How do you
convey the need for uncertainty in science, the crucial role it plays in
nudging research forward and keeping standards high, without under-
mining its credibility? How can you avoid the temptations of dogma-
tism and certitude without risking irrelevance? "People need to under-
stand that science is dynamic and that we do change our minds," said
Dave Stevenson. "We have to. That's how science functions.
"Part of critical thinking," he added, "includes the understanding
that science doesn't deal with absolutes. Nonetheless, we can make
statements that are quite powerful and that have a high probability of
being correct."
One trick to critical thinking is to contrast it with cynicism, which
happens to be one of my most comfortable and least welcome of men-
tal states. Cynics dismiss all offerings, sight unseen, data unmulled. An-
other drug that cures breast tumors in mice? Go tell it to Minnie. The
fossil of a new dinosaur species disinterred? I can hear Stephen Jay
Gould grumbling from the great beyond: Dinosaurs are a cliché. Pre-
emptive cynicism may be rooted in insecurity, defensiveness, a gloomy
disposition, or simple laziness; whatever its cause, it is useless.
Deborah Nolan of the University of California, Berkeley, encounters
it constantly in her introductory statistics course — the slapdash bash-
ing, the no-it-all choir. She confronts cynicism calmly and strives to
replace it with hard-nosed thought. Each semester she'll present her
students with newspaper stories that describe an array of medical, sci-
entific, or sociological studies: Should victims of gunshot wounds be
resuscitated by the paramedics in the ambulance, through drugs deliv-
ered intravenously, or is it better to wait until they get to the hospital?
Does a surgeon perform better while listening to music in the operating
room, or not? Does the mental well-being of a mother have a greater
impact on her interaction with an infant, or with a toddler? Nolan will
ask the students for their impressions of the articles. Regardless of the
subject matter, or whether the students are majoring in science, the lib-
eral arts, or hotel management, their initial response is the same: a syn-

THE 
CANON 
• 
40
chronized sneer. You can't believe what you read in the newspapers,
they'll insist. Nolan asks them what, precisely, they don't believe about
the stories. They examine the articles again, this time with more care.
Well, it's just... why should I believe it?
Nolan then shows them the original journal studies on which the
newspaper stories were based, and she and the students begin, method-
ically, to pick the studies apart. They consider who the research sub-
jects were, whether the participants were divided into two or multiple
groups, the basis on which they were assigned to one group or another,
and how the groups were compared. They discuss the strengths and
limitations of the study, and why they think the researchers designed it
as they did, and what the students might have done differently if they
were running the study themselves. Enlightened now with this insider's
intelligence, the students then reread the newspaper stories, to see if the
reporters accurately conveyed the essence of the studies.
Most of the time, Nolan said, the students are impressed and appre-
ciate that the reporters did their jobs after all, a change of heart that so
surprised me I had her repeat the words slowly and clearly and right
into my tape recorder.
More to the point, when the students come across an example of in-
eptitude, they can articulate why they feel dissatisfied. "They started off
being highly skeptical of everything they read, without knowing quite
why," she said. "But as critical thinkers, they could back up their com-
ments and misgivings with precise descriptions of what was in the orig-
inal study and what was omitted."
I also like Bess Ward's method for converting her students from cyni-
cal derision to clinical precision. Ward is a professor of geosciences at
Princeton University, and every year she tells her students, Pick a worry,
any worry. She has them pose a question about an everyday concern of
theirs, a personal habit or indulgence or preferred food that they may
have heard or read a negative report about. Their task is to figure out,
Should I really worry, or not? How big a risk am I taking if I continue to
eat or act as I do, and how does this risk compare to other risky behav-
iors that I freely or of necessity engage in? Or should I feel guilty about
my little luxuries because they may be harming others, or are bad
enough for the environment that I can't quite justify them?
"I tell them, choose something that you relate to and that may some-
times nag at you from the background of your mind. Drinking a lot
of coffee, or taking birth control pills, or eating tuna sandwiches, or
bungee jumping," she said. "The idea is, look at the evidence and do a
risk assessment."

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
4 1
For most of these concerns, the basic data points, the worry wartlets,
are accessible on the Internet. The Environmental Protection Agency's
Web page, for example, offers so-called reference doses for virtually
every toxic chemical you're likely to encounter — scientific estimates of
how much of the chemical you can be exposed to without suffering
harm. Here you will find the average concentration of mercury in an
average Charlie tuna presented as milligrams of toxin per kilogram of
fish. You will also find how many milligrams of mercury a person can
safely ingest per kilogram of his or her own body weight before needing
to worry about achiness, bleeding gums, swelling, blindness, coma, and,
well, I think I'll just go with the arugula salad, thanks.
Or let's say you're fretting, as one of Ward's students did, over the rel-
ative riskiness of a weekly manicure. When you're in a nail salon, you're
breathing in all the fumes from nail lacquers and the solvents that re-
move them, an ambient nosegay only slightly more sensual than that of
the elephant facility at the National Zoo. But is obnoxious necessarily
noxious? On the EPA Web page, you will discover that nail polish and
polish remover contain toluene, a moderately toxic petroleum extract
that also happens to be moderately volatile — i.e., it evaporates easily
into the air you'll soon be breathing. The EPA also offers figures on tol-
uene concentrations in different workplace settings, including nail sa-
lons. Elsewhere on the Internet, you can gather results from inhalation
surveys to see how much air the average person breathes in over the
course of an hour, which is about how long you'll spend on a task that is
literally as thrilling as watching paint dry. After analyzing these and
other statistics, you may conclude, as the young student did, that her
weekly manicures are reasonably harmless, but that she wouldn't want
to work ten-hour shifts in a nail salon and that maybe she should give
really big tips to the women who do.
Another surprising barrier to thinking scientifically is that we often be-
lieve we already understand how many things work, especially simple
things we were supposed to have learned in one of our formative, sin-
gle-digit grades. Even absent specific exposure to this or that kiddie
science problem via a parent, a camp counselor, or the Professor on
Gilligans Island, we develop an intuitive grasp of physical reality, a set
of down-to-earth, seemingly sensible explanations for everyday phe-
nomena: why it's hot in the summer and cold in the winter, or what's
going on when we throw a ball into the air. Sometimes these intuitive
concepts are so comfortably lodged in our brains that if that tossed ball
were to become a cartoon piano and fall on our heads, we'd pick our-

THE 
CANON 
• 
42
selves up like a dazed Wile E. Coyote, shake the twinkling phosphenes
from our eyes, and go back to our same misguided schemes for catching
the bleep-bleep Road Runner.
Susan Carey, a professor of cognitive neuroscience at Harvard, has
explored the ways that our lovingly cultivated and often erroneous
models of physical reality can subvert understanding and impede our
capacity to learn. She uses as an example a ball that has been tossed into
the air and then falls back to the ground. Say you draw a picture of this
trajectory, she said, with a series of balls in a steep arc to represent the
ball rising upward, at midpoint in the air, and coming down again. You
then ask people to draw arrows showing what sort of forces they think
are acting on the ball during its trajectory — their strength and direc-
tion. The vast majority of people look at the picture and draw big force
arrows pointing up while the ball is headed skyward, and big arrows
pointing downward while the ball is descending. A sizable fraction of
respondents, recognizing that gravity is acting on the ball during its en-
tire voyage, will add little arrows pointing down next to the big arrows
pointing up for the ascent portion of the curve. For the ball at its zenith,
many will draw a little up arrow and a little down arrow that effectively
cancel each other out.
It makes sense, doesn't it? Ball going up, force arrows pointing up;
ball going down, force arrows plunging earthward. In fact, it makes so
much sense that people believed exactly this model of motion for hun-
dreds of years. There's even a name for it — the impetus theory, the idea
that when something is in motion, a force, an impetus, must be keeping
it in motion. As reasonable and as obvious as this theory seems, how-
ever, it is wrong. True, there was an upward force exerted on the ball
when it first was thrust into the air, compliments of the pitcher. But
once the ball has been launched, once it is in midexcursion, there is no
more upward force acting on it. Once the ball is in the air, the only force
acting on it is gravity. All those arrows on the diagram should be point-
ing down. If there were no gravity to worry about, a ball tossed upward
would keep sailing upward, no further encouragement necessary. This
is one of Isaac Newton's many brilliant productions, the famed law of
inertia: an object at rest tends to stay at rest, unless induced by the
nudge of a police officer's stick to get up off the park bench, this isn't
the Plaza Hotel, you know; while an object in motion tends to stay in
motion unless a force is applied to stop it. Yet even though we have
heard about the law of inertia, and have seen the movie showing what
happens when a jealous computer clips an astronaut's tether in the
weightlessness of space — there he go-o-o-es — still we have trouble ap-

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y 
• 
4 3
plying the idea of inertia to something in motion, and still we draw dia-
grams of ascending balls with upthrusting arrows.
"People come to science learning with a coherent, rather systematic
theory of mechanical phenomena, and it's usually a variant of impetus
theory," said Carey. "And often, as they learn about Newtonian theory,
force, momentum, inertia, pressure, they simply assimilate the new in-
formation into their preexisting concepts." She and other researchers
have found that even among people who have had a year of college
physics, a high proportion will explain the ball's trajectory in impetus
terms. "They hadn't undergone a conceptual change," she said. "The in-
tuitive concepts they started with still held sway."
Sometimes a piece of knowledge learned early can make a powerful
impression, can become an intuitive understanding that is then sum-
moned forth in a valiant effort to explain something else. For example,
researchers have shown that many people, on being asked why it is
warm and sunny in the summer and cold and sullen in the winter, at-
tribute seasonality to the comparative distance between Earth and the
sun. They begin by stating a fact picked up at some point in elementary
or high school — that Earth's orbit around the sun is not a perfect cir-
cle, but an ellipse. They then explain that, when Earth is closest to the
sun on its ovoid track, we have summer; and when it is farthest away,
it's time for road salt.
Walter Lewin, a professor of physics at MIT, showed me a video of
Harvard seniors being asked, at their commencement ceremony, to
explain why we have seasons. Again and again the young men and
women, cucumber-confident in their caps and gowns, explained it as
a matter of Earth being farthest from the sun in winter and closest
in summer. The respondents weren't all art history or English majors,
either, but included a few physics and engineering students as well.
Lewin, who is Dutch and therefore gratuitously tall, has an Einstein-
ian froth of whitish hair, a loping, electric style, and a facial expression
often tuned to an impish, resigned incredulity. "The misconceptions of
high school," he said, "can dog you for the rest of your life."
It's true that Earth's orbit is elliptical, he said, but only modestly so.
Yet when the students try to explain in a drawing how the shape of our
planet's orbit causes the seasons, they invariably exaggerate the eccen-
tricity of the ellipse into something with the contours of a Tic Tac. Now
they have a visual representation of how they view the seasons. You see
way out here, at the farther elliptical tip of the orbit? That's winter. You
see this tip, where we're squeezing toward the sun? That's summer.
"They fail to ask the question, If this were the case, why, then, is it win-

THE 
CANON 
• 
4 4
ter in the Southern Hemisphere when it's summer in the North, and
vice versa?" said Lewin. "They can't shake the image of the all-powerful
ellipse from their minds."
As it happens, Earth is slightly farther from the sun in July than it is
in December, yet none of this matters. Seasonality is the result, not of
orbital geometry, but of Earth's tilt: the fact that the globe is spinning
on an axis that is tipped over 23 degrees relative to the plane of Earth's
migration around the sun. As a result, sometimes the Northern Hemi-
sphere points toward the sun and is bathed in a comparatively stronger
and more direct blast of heat and light, and everybody living between
Caracas, Venezuela, and Wood Buffalo, Canada, is advised to wear
plenty of sunscreen, long-sleeved clothing, a sombrero, and a canvas
tarp. Six months later, when Earth is at the opposite end of its lazy-Su-
san revolution, the Northern Hemisphere is tipped away from the sun,
and it's the Southern Hemisphere's time to get braised.
Again, most people know about Earth's tilt, if for no other reason
than their childhood exposure to that obligatory household prop, the
four-color globe, on which half the countries have long since been re-
named, redrawn, and overtaken by a military junta, and which was
rarely used except for the purposes of spinning it around on its notably
slanted axis until it squealed. Because the spinning was understood to
explain why we have days and nights, however, the angle of the rotation
was as likely to be erroneously lumped together with the day-night ker-
nel of kiddie wisdom as with any explanation for snow days and sum-
mer vacations.
Nor is it necessary that we learn our misinformation in childhood
to hang on to it as a toddler would a small, shiny choking hazard.
Whether sizing up new acquaintances or seizing on novel ideas, we re-
main forever at the mercy of our first impressions. We hear an explana-
tion for something we hadn't been exposed to before, it sounds good
and tastes better, and — you didn't just swallow that thing, did you?
Cindy Lustig, a professor of psychology at the University of Michigan,
recently demonstrated the ease with which our mind makes up its mind
about new things. She gathered together forty-eight of the standard ac-
ademic research subjects — undergraduate students —and instructed
them to make an association between two related words, like "knee"
and "bend" or "coffee" and "mug."
On a follow-up test, she asked her subjects to change the association,
so that instead of answering the "knee" cue with "bend," the person was
to reply "bone"; for the coffee prompt, "cup" rather than "mug." OK,
time for lunch. Later that day, Lustig divided the group of subjects in

T H I N K I N G 
S C I E N T I F I C A L L Y • 
4 5
two. Half were told to revert to the original association when con-
fronted with the cue word. No problem: knee bend, coffee mug. The
other group was asked to say whichever of their learned responses came
to mind. Half of them would reply "bend" or "mug," and half "bone" or
"cup." Good enough. Flip of the coin. Ah, but the next day, what then?
When the random-answer subjects were again asked to say whatever re-
sponse came to mind on hearing their cue words, a sizable majority
conjured up their first tutorial, getting the bends, getting mugged. The
earliest link, said Lustig, had become the brain's default setting.
Reporters know this tendency all too well, of the mind's readiness to
make a quick connection and then seal it with an acrylic topcoat. I re-
member writing a story for the front page of the New York Times in
1991, about the spectacular discovery that we humans and other mam-
mals have many hundreds of genes devoted to the production of odor
receptors, the molecules studding the cells of our nasal passages that al-
low us to detect the thousands of aromas surrounding us. When I first
heard the name of one of the smell researchers, Linda Buck, I immedi-
ately thought of another Linda with a similar surname, Linda Hunt, the
New Jersey-born actress who won an Academy Award for playing a
Chinese-Indonesian man. Well, both names are U-based, and you can
hunt a buck, right? Ding-dong, connection made! Which is which? A
wicked switch! I continued reporting the story. The hours flapped past.
And when I finally got down to writing, I couldn't help but revert on
cue to the earliest connection I'd made in the "Linda with the monosyl-
labic, rather bland last name" category, and I typed in Linda Hunt. Only
at the last minute, right before the piece was to go to press, did I dou-
ble-check the name against the journal article — and gasp at my error.
Fortunately, I had time to make the change and save myself from pro-
longed humiliation. Linda Buck and her collaborator, Richard Axel,
have since been awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery, but there's
still no Oscar in sight.
While simple facts like name spelling are easy to check and correct,
it's much trickier to confront your preconceptions and misconceptions
and to articulate how or why you conceive of something as you do. Your
ideas may be vague. You're not sure where they came from. You feel stu-
pid when you realize you're wrong, and you don't want to admit it, so
you say, To hell with it, I'm no good at this, good-bye. Please don't do
that. If you realize you might have put those up arrows on the ascend-
ing ball, too, or you weren't sure about the seasons, or you thought the
lunar phases were the result of Earth's shadow being cast on the moon,
rather than the real reason (that half the moon is always lit by the sun,

THE 
CANON 
• 
46
and half is always dark, and that as the moon makes its month-long
revolution around Earth we see different proportions of its light and
dark sides), blame it on the brain and its insatiable greed, for picking up
everything it comes upon and storing it in the nearest or most logical
slot, which may not be right, but so what. That you have to be willing
to make mistakes if you're going to get anywhere is true, and also a tru-
ism. Less familiar is the fun that you can have by dissecting the source
of your misconceptions, and how, by doing so, you'll realize the errors
are not stupid, that they have a reasonable or at least humorous prove-
nance. Moreover, once you've recognized your intuitive constructs,
you have a chance of amending, remodeling, or blowtorching them as
needed, and replacing them with a closer approximation of science's
approximate truths, now shining round you like freshly pressed coins.

Probabilities
For Whom the Bell Curves
A
T THE START of each semester, Deborah Nolan teaches her el-
ementary statistics students a basic, bilateral lesson in life: that
it's really hard to look accidental on purpose; and, on the flip
side of the same coin, that randomness can look suspiciously rigged.
And what better way to prove her point than by flipping coins?
Nolan divides her class of sixty-five or so students into two groups.
The members of one group are instructed to take a coin from their
purse, pocket, or friendly neighbor, and to flip the coin one hundred
times, recording the results of each toss on a sheet of paper. The other
students are told to imagine tossing a coin one hundred times, and to
write down what they think the outcome would be. After signing their
work with an identifying mark known only to themselves, the students
are to place the spreadsheets of heads and tails face-down on Nolan's
desk.
Nolan then leaves the room, and the students start flipping coins and
writing, or coining flips and writing. On returning, Nolan glances over
the strings of one hundred Hs and Ts and declares each to be either
real tossups or faked ones. Nolan is nearly always right, and the stu-
dents, she said, are "aghast." They think she must have cheated. They
think she peeked or had an informant. But she doesn't need to play
Harriet the Spy. As it happens, true happenstance bears a distinctive
stamp, and until you are familiar with its pattern, you are likely to think
it is messier, more haphazard, than it is. Nolan knows what real ran-
domness looks like, and she knows that it often makes people uncom-
fortable by not looking random enough.
In the real tossing of a coin, flick after flick, you will find many

THE CANON 
• 
48
stretches of monotony, strings of five heads or seven tails in a row. Now,
this is no big deal if you do it long enough and begin to realize that, in
the course of one hundred or two hundred flips, clumping happens. Yet
when we watch somebody flip a coin in shorter stretches, and especially
if we have something riding on the outcome — who gets to choose the
vacation destination, for example, or who has to remove the dead opos-
sum from under the porch — we become very dubious when the coin
starts repeating itself. Six tails? Where did you get that quarter from
anyway? a Tom Stoppard play?* Let me try.
In their fantasy flippings, the students compensated for their inher-
ent chariness of "too much coincidence" by frequent hopping back and
forth, head to tail. In general, the act of jotting down a triplet would set
off an alarm bell in the student's head, resulting in a deliberate change
of face. "When I look at the fabricated coin tosses, the length of the lon-
gest run of heads or tails is way too short," said Nolan. "And overall, the
number of switchbacks between heads and tails is way too high." People
know there's a fifty-fifty chance for a given outcome with each toss, and
they know that, on average, one hundred tosses will yield something
close to fifty heads and fifty tails. OK, forty-eight tails, fifty-two heads, I
can live with that. But six tails in a row?
"People want to apply the fifty-fifty rule over a very short period of
time," said Nolan. "They have a skewed sense of probabilities, and they
think the odds of getting multiple heads or tails in a row are much
smaller than they are. In fact, the probability of getting four heads or
four tails in a row is one in eight, so there's a pretty high chance of it
happening." Nolan derived her figure by using the simple multiplica-
tion rule that applies to figuring out coin-flipping odds.t You have, of
course, a 50 percent chance of tossing a head (or a tail) with each throw
— in other words, a probability of 0.5. To calculate the odds of getting
two heads in a row, you multiply the two odds together: 0.5 times 0.5, or
0.25 — a 25 percent chance that you, the penny pitcher, would see a pair
of Lincolns. If you want to ratchet up the number of flips in your prob-
ability estimate, just keep multiplying. The prospect of seeing four
* Tom Stoppard's pleasurably unsettling comedy Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead opens
with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern on the road to Elsinore, repeatedly flipping coins and getting
heads every time.
t This multiplication rule only applies to calculating probabilities when each event in the sequence
is independent of the other, as it is when you're tossing a coin. It could not be applied in cases
where one event is likely to influence the other. For example, you can't calculate the likelihood of a
man having a beard and mustache by multiplying the individual probabilities together, because,
Abraham Lincoln notwithstanding, men with beards generally opt for mustaches as well.

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
4 9
heads emerge with four tosses is thus 0.5 quadrupled, which works out
to a one-in-sixteen chance. But because we specified beforehand that
we wanted to calculate the odds of seeing four heads or four tails, rather
than four heads, period, we must add the two probabilities together,
and one-in-sixteen plus one-in-sixteen is one in eight.* Granted, the
odds of remaining one-sided decrease considerably with each addi-
tional toss. The likelihood of flipping six consecutive heads or tails is
only about one in thirty-two, or 3 percent. This modest potential,
though, applies to a single bout of a half-dozen flips. When you're
flipping a coin one hundred times, the odds begin to add up, and so,
too, do the clusters.
I tried Nolan's coin-tossing exercise myself several times, and over a
dozen rounds of one hundred flips each, I never completed a set of one
hundred without getting at least one string of six or seven heads or tails
in a row, often more than one unbroken sextuplet per set, as well as
many quintuplets and quartets. My record for monotony was nine
heads in a row, which even now, knowing what I know and assuming a
determination to outfox the instructor, I would feel queasy about in-
cluding in a display of faux flipping.
Until they're schooled in the expansive possibilities of probability
theory, Nolan's students regard the notion of randomness as a kind of
nervous tic: sorry, sorry, can't stop twitching! Anything beyond this
perpetual pinging and ponging, Abe and his monument, and what
would you have? A pattern. From a pattern, it's a small step to assuming
a point or a portent, and the next thing you know, some poor rabbit is
forfeiting its foot to a key chain. "Because many people don't have a real
feel for how likely it is for events to happen, they start to attribute hid-
den meaning to something that's random," said Nolan. "If they see a
run of heads or tails beyond a certain length, they begin looking for
reasons."
Here we find the basis for superstitiousness, she said. A chance oc-
currence occurs. Not knowing the odds behind it, we marvel, Now, re-
ally, what are the odds? Surely too tiny for chance!
Alan Guth, a physicist at MIT, described an example from his own
family of how easily we turn the random into an omen. An uncle of his,
who'd lived alone, had been found dead in his home, and a policeman
had come to deliver the bad news to Guth's mother. While the officer
was there, Guth's sister, who was traveling on business, happened to
* This additive rule requires that the two events be mutually exclusive, and again coin tossing fits
the bill: with only a single penny on hand, you can't flip four heads and four tails simultaneously.

THE 
CANON 
• 
50
call. "My mother and sister were both shocked at the timing of the call,
that it coincided with the policeman's visit, and the news of my uncle's
death," said Guth. "They thought there had to be something telepathic
about it." When Guth heard from his mother of this "miraculous" in-
stance of kin-based telecommunion, he couldn't help but do some
quick calculations. As a rule, his sister phoned their mother about once
a week. She tended to call either first thing in the morning or in the eve-
ning, when she had a free moment and when her mother was likeliest to
be around. The policeman had arrived at his mother's house at about
5:00 P.M., and, because there were several solemn orders of business to
discuss, his visit had lasted more than an hour, possibly two.
All factors considered, Guth said to me, the odds of his sister calling
while the policeman was on-site were on par with flipping five heads
or tails in a row. "This is not what I would consider a highly improba-
ble event," said Guth. Lucky, yes, given his mother's need for comfort
from a loved one, but nothing for which the telepathy option need be
considered.
The more one knows about probabilities, the less amazing the most
woo-woo coincidences become. My mother told me an amusing story
about an acquaintance of hers whose fate, over a six-month period, had
seemed linked to her own as though by an idle Pan. The acquaintance
was, appropriately for our purposes, an old math professor of hers.
Week after week, my parents kept running into him somewhere on
Manhattan's sprawling cultural turnpike — an off-Broadway play, a free
piano recital, a Bergman movie, the Monet Water Lilies room at the
Museum of Modern Art. The first few times, my mother and her pro-
fessor chortled awkwardly over the similarities of their taste. Soon, they
were content to nod vaguely from across the room. The coup de grace-
less came a few months later, in July, and in another country. My par-
ents were strolling along the boulevard St.-Michel on their first trip to
Paris, when who should they see but the good professor, sitting at a café.
Judging by the way he held his newspaper ostentatiously in front of his
face, my mother knew he had spotted them first.
Had my mother been of a superstitious bent, she might have thought
the universe was trying to tell her something. ("Your professor hates
you!") She is, however, one of the least superstitious people I know, and
she understood that (a) those who like Monet like French art; (b) Paris
is famous for its world-class collection of French art; (c) "April in Paris"
sounds romantic, but "An American in Paris" sounds like July; and (d)
an outdoor café is the best place to while away many hours not drinking

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
5 1
a cup of cold espresso, not smoking the lit Gauloise in the ashtray, and
not really reading the Herald-Tribune.
John Littlewood, a renowned mathematician at the University of
Cambridge, formalized the apparent intrusion of the supernatural into
ordinary life as a kind of natural law, which he called "Littlewood's Law
of Miracles." He defined a "miracle" as many people might: a one-in-a-
million event to which we accord real significance when it occurs. By
his law, such "miracles" arise in anyone's life at an average of once a
month. Here's how Littlewood explained it: You are out and about and
barraged by the world for some eight hours a day. You see and hear
things happening at a rate of maybe one per second, amounting to
30,000 or so "events" a day, or a million per month. The vast majority
of events you barely notice, but every so often, from the great stream of
happenings, you are treated to a marvel: the pianist at the bar starts
playing a song you'd just been thinking of, or you pass the window of a
pawnshop and see the heirloom ring that had been stolen from your
apartment eighteen months ago. Yes, life is full of miracles, minor, ma-
jor, middling C. It's called "not being in a persistent vegetative state"
and "having a life span longer than a click beetle's."
And because there is nothing more miraculous than birth, Deborah
Nolan also likes to wow her new students with the famous birthday
game. I'll bet you, she says, that at least two people in this room have
the same birthday. The sixty-five people glance around at one another
and see nothing close to a year's offering of days represented, and
they're dubious. Nolan starts at one end of the classroom, asks the stu-
dent her birthday, writes it on the blackboard, moves to the next, and
jots likewise, and pretty soon, yup, a duplicate emerges. How can that
be, the students wonder, with less than 20 percent of 365 on hand to
choose from (or 366 if you want to be leap-year sure of it)? First, Nolan
reminds them of what they're talking about — not the odds of match-
ing a particular birthday, but of finding a match, any match, somewhere
in their classroom sample. She then has them think about the problem
from the other direction: What are the odds of them not finding a
match? That figure, she demonstrates, falls rapidly as they proceed.
Each time a new birth date is added to the list, another day is dinged
from the possible 365 that could subsequently be cited without a match.
Yet each time the next person is about to announce a birthday, the pool
the student theoretically will pick from remains what it always was —
365. One number is shrinking, in other words, while the other remains
the same, and because the odds here are calculated on the basis of com-

THE 
CANON 
• 
52
paring (through multiplication and division) the initial fixed set of
possible options with an ever diminishing set of permissible ones,
the probability of finding no birthday match in a group of sixty-five
plunges rapidly to below 1 percent. Of course, the prediction is only a
probability, not a guarantee. For all its abstract and counterintuitive
texture, however, the statistic proves itself time and again in Nolan's
classroom a dexterous gauge of reality.
If you're not looking for such a high degree of confidence, she adds,
but are willing to settle for a fifty-fifty probability of finding a shared
birthday in a gathering, the necessary number of participants accord-
ingly can be cut to twenty-three. Throw a couple of dozen people to-
gether at a cocktail party, in other words, and you have a slightly better
than even chance that two of them will be birth-date mates, who, if they
discover the fact, will likely exclaim over the coincidence and segue to a
discussion of astrology. Or, if their birthday happens to be February 16,
and they're talking to me at this imaginary cocktail party, they will hear
of the many other date mates who preceded them — Susan the San
Francisco photographer, who always brought her golden Labradors on
assignment; Frank the Atlanta businessman, who briefly sublet my
apartment and whooped it up at the neighborhood tiki bar; Michelle,
my brother's girlfriend; and, first but ever least, Robbie, a high school
boyfriend of mine, who was cute and smart and studiously mean.
Maybe it was his rising sign, or something his poor mother ate.
Through exercises like Birthday Buddies, Nolan's students begin to
see the world as both surprisingly predictable and full of surprises. It is
a place where small numbers can take on grand airs and seem, on first
pass, more meaningful than they are: how could a meager number like
23 possibly perform like 365 without some sort of cosmic motivational
speaker prodding it from behind?
It is also a venue large enough for rarities to become regulars, where
so many millions of lottery tickets have been sold that ridiculous pat-
terns emerge. A sixty-year-old Australian man buys a Lotto ticket be-
fore leaving for vacation, worries that he bought the wrong sort of
ticket, and asks a friend back in Sydney to buy another, then frets on re-
turning home that his friend fumbled the request and so decides to
spring for a third entry — and ends up with three winning tickets in
hand. A woman in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, responds to her husband's
hankering for an expensive experimental airplane kit, Sure, honey, go
ahead and splurge "when you win the lottery," just as her father had
won the state's $2.7 million Megabucks jackpot a dozen years earlier;
her husband takes the suggestion seriously and scores a $2.5 million

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
5 3
Megabucks prize himself. Or officials for a large multistate Powerball
lottery drawing become suspicious when no players scattered among
the 29 participating states come in to claim second-place prizes, rather
than the 4 or 5 such winners expected from the drawing. But each of the
no petitioners had guessed 5 out of the 6 Powerball numbers correctly,
and each was entitled to anywhere from $100,000 to $500,000 apiece,
depending on the initial bet. Behind the startling outbreak of good for-
tune was a fortune cookie. All the second-place winners had based their
choice on the 6 digits they'd seen on the little slip of paper tucked inside
a Chinese fortune cookie, a fortune that, like the cellophane-wrapped
bill brightener that held it, had been produced in bulk at the Wonton
Food factory in New York.
Most of us are not accustomed to a probabilistic mindset, and in-
stead approach life with a personalized blend of sensations, convictions,
desires, and intuitions. Our gut is certainly a significant piece of prop-
erty. The gastrointestinal tract measures about thirty feet from throat to
rump and accounts for 10 to 15 percent of one's body weight — but its
physical dimensions are nothing compared to its metaphoric value, as
the source of our cherished "instincts." We meet new people, we size
them up and get a "gut feel" for what they're like, and we contrast them
with others in our acquaintance until we find the closest fit. Ah, now
we've got them sussed, trussed, and mounted. Now we can safely nap. If
our gut instinct happens to clash with logic, probability, or evidence,
guess which claimant wins?
Jonathan Koehler of the University of Texas admits that he is not al-
ways a popular guest at a wedding. He sits at the ceremony and listens
to the giddy couple exchange vows of permanent devotion, passion, and
respect. He hears the toasts attesting to the unmistakable rightness of
the match, how anybody who knows this man and this woman could
tell from the start that the union was "meant to be" and is "like no
other," and he thinks, Hmm, I've been to four weddings in the past year.
Who's it going to be, then: Zack and Jenny? Sam and Brianna? Brad and
Briana? Or Adam and Hermione, now lip-locked so protractedly before
me? Which two of these four pairs of besotted newlyweds will end up
carrying botulinum-tipped spears into divorce court ten years hence?
After all, minor fluctuations notwithstanding, the American divorce
rate has been remarkably stable at 50 percent for nearly half a century.
Koehler is friendly and chatty and sometimes shares his musings
with other wedding guests. They look at him as though he had belched,
or speculated on the correlation between the size of the bride's brassiere
and that of the groom's paycheck.

THE 
CANON 
• 
54
"They find it repugnant to talk statistics at a wedding," he said. "They
want to know how I can say such a thing. Why, you don't know any-
thing about this couple! Just look at how happy they are, how deeply in
love, how overjoyed their families are. True enough — but I know gen-
eral frequency statistics. I also know that every couple gets married with
kisses and toasts and high hopes, so these details shouldn't affect the
probabilities we assign to them. Until you tell me something outside the
norm, something diagnostic that has been shown to affect one's proba-
bility of divorce — for example, both partners being over the age of
thirty-five, which is known to lower the probability of divorce — I'll as-
sume the normal statistical risk applies." Koehler, who has the slight
build and dark, floppy hair of Michael J. Fox, insists he's not a "cynical,
bitter little man" or a self-satisfied bachelor: to the contrary, he recently
got married himself. He's simply accustomed to viewing the world as an
extravaganza of sample spaces.
"People don't tend to pay attention to the background information,
the sample space," he said. "They take the foreground information
without context, and they accept it at face value."
And while full frontal credulity may be the lubricant of matrimony,
he said, at other times it helps to look at the big-sky backdrop. More
than once Koehler has calmed a jittery passenger seated next to him on
an airplane by quoting probabilities. You would have to fly on a com-
mercial airline every day for 18,000 years, he tells them, before your
chances of being in a crash would exceed 50 percent. You want to know
what 18,000 years looks like? Think "twice as far back as the dawn of ag-
riculture."
Koehler has also examined the errors that people make in deciding
how to invest their money. In one study, he and his colleague Molly
Mercer showed subjects mockups of advertisements for mutual funds.
To the first group they displayed an ad from a small company with a
phenomenal track record. It operated only two funds, but each consis-
tently outshone a benchmark market index like Standard & Poor's.
Now it was starting up a third fund: Wanna invest? The next set of sub-
jects was treated to an ad from a large mutual fund company, which
mentioned that it ran thirty funds and then showed the results of the
two funds that "killed" the market index; it, too, was seeking investors
for a new fund. Yet another group saw a pitch from the same large com-
pany, again attempting to entice investors to a new fund by highlighting
the lavish returns on its two star funds, but this time with no reference
to the many other, and presumably far less impressive, money sinks in
its corporate portfolio.

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
5 5
Koehler and Mercer found that subjects generally were impressed by
the small company's results and voiced a willingness to buy into their
latest start-up fund. They were equally unimpressed by the big com-
pany with thirty funds. "People recognized that, Oh, you're showing me
only the best two out of thirty, and they said, Sorry, not interested," said
Koehler. But when confronted with ad number three, from the big com-
pany that boasts of its two knockouts while omitting any reference to its
baseline operations, subjects again fell prey to the lure of the fabulous
foreground. They greeted it with the same enthusiasm accorded the
small company.
"From a mathematical standpoint, the fund from the investment
group that's two-for-two is a much better risk and is much likelier to
outperform the market than is that of a group that's two-for-question-
mark," said Koehler. "But people often forget to ask, What's the ques-
tion mark here? They're not thinking about the sample space."
Unfortunately for us poor hayseeds seeking a place to plant our pay-
checks, real-life advertisements for mutual funds are not legally obliged
to divulge their losers and thus they rarely do. Even the advice of "ex-
perts" may not enhance our prospects. "We got the same pattern of re-
sponses to our ads," Koehler said, "whether we asked undergraduates or
professional investors."
Koehler conceded that it's not easy to think about a sample space, the
background context, the teeming multitudes beyond the home team in
front of you. "We're not hard-wired to think probabilistically," he said.
"We're hard-wired to respond to life subjectively, empathetically, and
on the fly, which may be a generous impulse in some cases, but at other
times it clouds our judgment and is flat-out wrong." One approach he
takes to encourage a quantitative mindset is applying it right where
subjectivity has the greatest stranglehold on sense: our people skills. He
uses exercises like the notorious Linda Problem. Students are given a
paragraph describing a hypothetical character named Linda, who is
said to be a thirty-year-old American woman who majored in philoso-
phy, graduated with high honors, and has been active in the nuclear
freeze and antidiscrimination movements.
Following that tapas of a biography are eight statements, which the
readers are asked to rank in order of probability that they apply to
Linda. Among them: Linda is a bank teller; Linda is a feminist; Linda is
married and has two children; Linda lives in a university town; Linda is
a feminist and a bank teller.
Time and again, Koehler said, readers think they know Linda. She's a
feminist — that they rank high. And she probably lives in a university

THE 
CANON 
• 
56
town. The married-with-kids part, who can say, so that gets a listing
somewhere in the middle. But a bank teller? That description doesn't
sound like Linda at all, and it earns an average ranking way at the
bottom of the stack. She could, however, be a feminist and a bank teller,
couldn't she? Readers assign the composite declaration a higher proba-
bility than bank teller alone. "Almost ninety percent of people do this,"
said Koehler. "They argue, she's definitely not a bank teller, but she
could easily be a bank teller and a feminist. At least that's got some
of Linda in there. That seems to be the way people think about proba-
bility."
There is, of course, a higher probability of Linda being a bank teller
than a bank teller and a feminist. In order to be a bank teller and a femi-
nist, she must be a bank teller; and the unconditional probability of one
event occurring — in this case, bank tellerdom — is always going to be
greater than the conditional conjunction of that event plus a second
event — bank tellerdom and a familiarity with the works of Simone de
Beauvoir and Gerda Lerner.
Yet even as people accept that Linda might be a feminist bank teller,
they feel uncomfortable thinking of Linda's overall prospect of being a
bank teller, period. Some might think that to use the job description
alone negates, misrepresents, or shortchanges an essential aspect of her
being, just as I've felt compelled to qualify my answer whenever people
have asked what my father did for a living: he was a machinist at Otis
Elevator Company, I say, but he was also an artist who made intricate
pen-and-ink drawings, i.e., he was no Archie Bunker. Alternatively, peo-
ple might be unconsciously fleshing out the statement "Linda is a bank
teller" with a clause, "but she is not a feminist," to place it in direct con-
trast to the statement "Linda is a feminist and a bank teller."
However understandable and folksy may be the urge to rank the con-
ditional above the unconditional premise in Likely Lines about Linda, it
is incorrect, and when Koehler's students realize the error of their
weighs, they feel foolish at first, and then eager to try the trick on family
and friends, and finally liberated. Where else can they apply their new-
found wisdom, their awareness of how important it is to consider back-
ground?
Nowhere is the utility of sample-space tracing more obvious than
when interpreting the results of a medical test. As a number of studies
have revealed, doctors are not always skilled at estimating probabilities
or putting a test result in proper context, which means that patients
may be sent into paroxysms of anxiety, soul-searching, and planning of
funeral choreography unnecessarily, or at least prematurely.

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
5 7
Let's take as an illustrative but purely hypothetical example the fol-
lowing scenario. You're at the doctor's office for routine maintenance,
and you happen to notice a sign advertising the monthly special: an
AIDS test that is described as "95 percent accurate." You are not in any
of the standard high-risk groups for the disease — though you did have
crab lice back in college — but as a conscientious citizen and aspiring
hypochondriac, you decide to roll up your sleeve and get screened.
A week later, the receptionist from the temp agency who's been filling in
for your doctor's phlebotomist calls with grim news: you tested posi-
tive. You feel the blood abandon your head and reconvene around your
plantar warts. You can't speak. The receptionist mumbles how sorry she
is, and how she loved Tom Hanks in Philadelphia. How sorry should
you be, especially since you've never forgiven Hanks for The Man with
One Red Shoe7. The test is "95 percent accurate." You came out positive.
Assuming the results weren't caused by a major mechanical screwup
like a swapping of test tubes or charts at the laboratory, there's a 95 per-
cent chance you're infected with the AIDS virus, right?
Unbate your breath. Even if it was your vital fluid that yielded the
positive result, the real odds are much, much smaller than 95 percent
that you are genuinely HIV-positive. In the lively Port Said of the free
market, the definition of a test's accuracy can vary depending on the
needs and temperament of its parent pharmaceutical company, but in
general this figure would mean the following: on the one hand, the test
will accurately detect the human immunodeficiency virus in 95 per-
cent of those who have it but will fail to catch 5 percent of those in-
fected; on the other hand, it will correctly rate as negative 95 percent of
all noncarriers, but — and here's where your comfort food comes in —
it will mistakenly generate a positive result for 5 percent of uninfected
patients. Why should you find solace in a puny false-positive figure like
5 percent? Because the potential pool, the sample space, embodied in
that figure is formidable. In the United States, HIV infection remains
relatively rare, afflicting about 1 in 350 people. Taking a more popu-
lation-worthy slant on the problem, that means in a random group of
100,000 Americans, some 285 will be HIV-positive, and 99,715 not. Yet
if we screened all 100,000 with our AIDS test, what would we expect?
The assay would accurately pick up 271 of the 285 viral carriers; but it
would slap a fallacious writ of panic on some 4,986 noncarriers. To cal-
culate the odds that a positive result means you are actually infected,
you divide the total number of true positives you'd expect in your
sample space (271) by the total number of positives overall — false
(4,986) and true (271) together. Slice 271 by 5,257, and you end up with a

THE CANON 
• 
58
probability of 5 percent. The gist of that calamitous phone call, then,
amounts to the flip figure of your initial fears: there is a 95 percent
chance you're virus-/ree.*
None of this is to suggest that estimating probabilities in most real-
world settings is easy, or that you should start second-guessing medical
advice by running your test results through a two-way ANOVA statisti-
cal analysis. Still, it never hurts to ask some simple questions, such as,
How common is this illness or condition in the general population? In
other words, What is the size of the sample space I'm up against? This
question is particularly useful in trying to get a reasonable sense of a
"risk factor," or of one's "relative risk" compared to Max and Bryanna
Populi. For example, five bad sunburns before the age of fifteen is said
to double your odds of developing malignant melanoma. How awful! A
few lousy days at Camp Minnehaha spent extracting oar splinters from
your palms and taking group lanyard lessons under the full noonday
sun, and you can raise your risk of contracting a potentially deadly skin
cancer by 100 percent? Yes, but as it happens, melanoma is quite rare,
afflicting only 1.5 percent of the U.S. population; so even with the legacy
of your childhood stir-fries, and assuming no other risk elevators like a
family history of the disease, you're still talking about a lifetime risk be-
low 4 percent. By all means, watch out for the appearance of new skin
moles, particularly those shaped like raisins, Rorschach blots, or the lit-
erary caricatures of David Levine; and make sure that you and your
loved ones are fully shellacked in sunblock prior to opening the window
shades; but putting your dermatologist's pager on speed dial is surely
going too far.
You might also want to ask your doctor about the published rates of
false negatives and false positives for a given assay, and whether the
measure of those accuracy statistics is itself accurate. Most health care
professionals, despite their descriptor, are far more concerned with di-
agnosing and treating illness than they are in minimizing the number
of false alarms their screens may activate among the healthy. As they see
it, it's worse to miss a real case of a disease than to spot what initially
looks like trouble and then find out, whew, you're fine after all. Yet for
you the medical consumer, the devastating impact of a false positive,
however brief its tenure, can feel like an illness, so if there's any way to
* I must emphasize that the "95 percent accuracy figure" bandied above is strictly hypothetical, and
that the true accuracy rate for today's HIV tests is much better, greater than 99.9 percent. Never-
theless, the use of medical assays and "routine screens" is rising sharply, and many of them suffer
from distressingly high and decidedly nonhypothetical rates of false positives. Caveat pattens.

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
5 9
combat it with an estimate like the one for our hypothetical AIDS test,
fire away.
Another way to feel more comfortable around quantitative reasoning
is to try some at home, starting with a fun exercise that I'll call, until
somebody stops me, the Fermi flex, after the great Italian physicist
Enrico Fermi. In addition to being one of the giants of twentieth-cen-
tury science, Fermi was a leader of the Manhattan Project during World
War II, an assignment that for some reason had its stressful moments.
To fortify morale and remyelinate the frayed nerves of his fellow bomb
makers, Fermi would throw out quirky mental challenges. How many
piano tuners are there in Chicago? he might ask, or, How many pounds
of food do you eat in a year? As Fermi saw it, a good physicist, or any
good thinker, should be able to devise an ad hoc, stepwise scheme for
attacking virtually any problem and coming up with an answer that lies
within the vaunted terrain known as "an order of magnitude." In other
words, you shouldn't have to multiply or divide your estimate by a fac-
tor often or more to embrace the real answer. If the real answer is 5,400,
you should be able to get an estimate in the range from 1,000 through
9,999; if the answer is 33,000, your Fermi-approved margin extends
from 10,000 through 99,999.
Flexible enough, but how can you even begin to approximate the di-
mensions of an obscure trade like piano tuning in a city with which
you have only the barest of airport hub acquaintance? In his admira-
ble book Fear of Physics, the fearless physicist Lawrence Krauss shows
the way. Chicago is one of the nation's largest cities, he says, which
means its population must be up in the multimillion range, but not
the 8 million of America's urban heavyweight, New York. Let's give it
4 million. How many households does that amount to? Say four peo-
ple per dwelling, or some 1 million households. Think about the rate of
piano ownership among your acquaintances: maybe 10 percent of the
homes you know? So we've got roughly 100,000 Chicago pianos in need
of occasional tune-ups. What's "occasional"? Once a year seems like a
reasonable guess, at a fee of, say, $75 to $100 per tune-up. Now con-
sider how many pianos a full-time piano tuner must tune to stay sol-
vent. Maybe 2 a day, 10 a week, 400 to 500 a year? So we divide 100,000
by 400 or 500. All conjectures hazarded, we might expect to find a labor
force of 200 to 250 pulling strings somewhere in the fabled birthplace
of the skyscraper, the well-tailored gangster, and a bland, eponymously
named rock band from the 1970s. By the order of his majesty's order
of magnitude, Krauss writes, "this estimate, obtained quickly, tells us
that we would be surprised to find less than about 100 or more than

THE 
CANON 
• 
60
about 1,000 tuners." No need for shock therapy: the actual answer is
about 150.
My turn. I decided I'd try estimating the number of school buses in
my county in Maryland, Montgomery, which extends from the border
of Washington, D.C., at the southern edge up to points north near Bal-
timore. Mainly I was curious about how many buses sit idle during the
county's vast number of "snow" days, which in this delusional plow-
averse state are declared, not on the basis of verifiable accumulations of
the white, fluffy substance called "snow," but rather on the premonition
of snow as determined by a single factor: before venturing outside, you
must put on something called "a coat."
In any event, how many of those cheery yellow child chariots can
Montgomery County claim? From my obsessive scrutiny of election re-
sults every November, I happen to know that the county has about
500,000 registered voters. I also know that, given its proximity to our
nation's capital, the region is politically plugged in and has a high rate
of voter registration, maybe 70 percent, among eligible citizens. So I'd
estimate the adult population to be around 650,000, or about 300,000
potential pairs. How many of these adult pairs are between the ages of
twenty-five and fifty-five, the demographic likely to have school-age
children? Let's say 150,000. And let's say that half of them have children,
the most popular number being 2 per couple, with maybe 1.5 of those
offspring in school. That gives us 110,000 kids in the Montgomery
County school system. Some of those children are in private schools;
others live close enough to walk or sniffle piteously enough to get
driven. Let's cut the bused population in half, to 55,000. How many lit-
tle scholars can you pack into one vehicle? Maybe 50? So that brings us
down to about 1,100. But before we rest on our guesstimate, we must re-
call that school buses barrel through multiple routes each morning,
which is why the wretched teenagers living next door to me have to be
up and out the door to catch their bus by 7:15, while my elementary-
school daughter gets to leave seventy minutes later. Assuming two
routes a day per vehicle, we might wager that there are some 550 school
buses in the Montgomery County public school system. Or at least
somewhere between 100 and 1,000.
Consulting the Web page for the Montgomery County school sys-
tem, I find that it owns about 250 school buses, half of my predicted
sum, but still well within an order of magnitude of it. True, you could
conclude that I might have saved myself the trouble by consulting the
Internet to begin with; but I appreciated the exercise, the thinking
through of the different parts of the puzzle — the number of fecund

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
6 l
adults that might surround me, the likelihood of them acting out their
fecundity, how many kids are in my daughter's cohort of standardized
test-takers, and so forth. Through regular sessions of Fermi flexing, you
get a better sense of how the world looks and how the pieces fit to-
gether. And while learning to admit that you don't know something is a
worthy skill in its own right, better still if you can rally an algorithm to
relieve your ignorance. If you're talking to a coworker who tells you his
goal is to jog the equivalent of once around the Earth, and you realize
with some embarrassment that you don't know or can't recall the cir-
cumference of the Earth, and you don't like this pompous coworker
enough to give him the satisfaction of asking, Oh, and how far might
that be? you can do a quickie estimate. Think about some geo-detail
you do know — say, the duration and destination of a very long flight.
My husband recently flew nonstop from New York to Singapore aboard
Singapore Air; and though he slept for most of the eighteen-hour jour-
ney, he did manage to collect goodies like a cute hot-water bottle and a
pair of booties with antiskid strips on the bottom. Singapore is very far
from America's eastern seaboard, just about halfway around the globe,
I'd guess. Jets average some 500 to 600 miles per hour. So 9,000,11,000,
miles to Singapore, and double that for a round-the-world belt of
18,000 to 22,000 miles. The circumference of the Earth, in fact, is 24,902
miles at the equator (or 40,076 kilometers to most earthlings, including
those who live at the equator). Our frequent-flier-derived answer, then,
is well within the Fermi order of magnitude mandate. Yet jet-setting is
one thing; literal globetrotting quite another. Glancing at the generous
circumference of your colleague's waistline, which does not bespeak a
natural athlete's physique, you smile broadly and wish him Godspeed.
Why, a random act of quantitative reasoning has even made you appear
kind.
For all the power of quantitative reasoning and probabilistic analysis,
Mark Twain, as ever, had a point about statistics: damn, can they lie.
One of the finest and funniest popular science books ever written is the
1954 classic How to Lie with Statistics, by Darrell Huff, on the theme of
how the experts are doing exactly that to you every day. Take the much-
bandied and seemingly redoubtable term "statistically significant." Call
a result "statistically significant," and it sounds as though there's no ar-
guing the point. "Even some scientists and physicians have been brain-
washed into thinking that the magic phrase is the answer to every-
thing," said Alvan Feinstein, a professor of medicine and epidemiology
at the Yale University School of Medicine. But what does "statistically
significant" signify? Although definitions vary depending on who's ban-

THE 
CANON 
• 
62
dying, the unadorned phrase generally means that the correlation you
the scientist have hit upon — an association between a particular ge-
netic mutation and a disease, for instance — has a probability value, or
p value, of 5 percent, which in turn means that there is, at most, a 5 per-
cent chance that your patent-pending correlation was due to chance
alone. In other words, there is a 95 percent chance that you are onto
something. A "p = 0.05" is the minimum passing grade that, according
to scientific convention, renders a result "statistically significant" and
eligible for submission to at least a sprinkling of the 20,000 or so
research journals published worldwide. Yet consider how easy it is to
beat this degree of significance to a senseless blubber. The hypothetical
AIDS test discussed earlier would have a p value of 0.05; that's what its
"95 percent accuracy" rate is all about. The outcome? A pool of false
positives big enough to do laps in. For this reason, many scientists don't
feel comfortable with such a lax measure of confidence, and they won't
publish until their p values have a couple more zeros to the right of the
dot, and the odds of the result being a mere fluke pretty much equal to
their chance of, say, winning the Nobel Prize. Twice.
Another slippery statistics term that has found its way into popular
usage, and political abusage, is "average." As in: the average tax refund
from the president's tax cut program will be $1,500. That sounds pretty
decent, until you discover that the statistical "average" doesn't mean the
"usual amount" of rebate that the "usual sort" of American family can
expect to see. The statistical average, which is also known as the norm,
is the statistical mean, a number you get by adding up all your quanti-
ties and dividing the sum by the number of data points — in this case,
the grand total of tax refunds divided by the number of rebate checks
cut. The problem with such calculations is how readily they can be
skewed by, for example, the inclusion of a few colossal givebacks. If
twenty families living on Creston Avenue in the Bronx receive tax
refunds of anywhere from $100 to $300 per household, but a family
with a floor-through on Manhattan's Gramercy Park gets an 1RS mash
note worth $70,000, the "average" refund for those twenty-one families
would be about $3,500. Gee, thonx, said the Bronx. I feel richer already.
Do you mind if I give a Bronx cheer?
A much more revealing data point would be the median tax cut, the
value you'd see if you laid each of the twenty-one rebate checks in a row
from feeblest to fattest and looked at the figure on the midpoint refund —
the eleventh check. It would be about $200, a far truer measure of what the
average Jones in our sample received than is the obfuscating "average."
These days, given the growing gulch between extreme wealth and ordi-

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
6 3
nary income in our country, financial matters often are best explored as
medians rather than as averages or norms. If you include the wealth of a
few Bill Gateses and Warren Buffetts in any calculus of "income norms,"
you'll make the whole population look comfortably flush, even as the
great majority of families earn considerably less than your stated aver-
age or indeed what they might need to cover their monthly Visa bill.
Yet means and medians are not always so mismatched. Many times,
they congregate closely beneath the comfortable shade of the celebrated
parasol we know as the bell curve. This essential scientific principle un-
fortunately took on a neocon connotation in the mid-1990s, when
Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein adopted it as the title for their
best-selling book about race and IQ. But Bell Curve: The Concept is
much deeper and more illuminating than Bell Curve: The Tract. It's ex-
traordinary how much of the world settles into a bell curve when you
sally forth to size up its parts. If you were to go into a field of daisies,
and measure the heights of, say, three hundred flowers, and mark those
heights on a graph, you'd find a few shorties on the left end of the chart,
and a few gangly overreachers on the right, but the great majority
would amass in the midrange, and the contours of your distribution
plot would, yes, ring a bell. The same for measurements you might
make of the daisies' leaves, or of the diameter of the yellow centers.
You'd have a few outlier examples of any given feature — stubby leaves,
moon pie faces — but most would cluster around a central value that,
whether you figured it as the mean or the median, would pretty much
define the average dimensions of this most fetchingly normative of
floral ambassadors.
In her class, Deborah Nolan also brings the bell curve to life by play-
ing tailor to her students. "I take many different measurements of them,
height, shoulder width, the distance from the shoulder to elbow, the el-
bow to the fingertips, the distance from the pinkie to the thumb."
Plotting the results of each tally on the blackboard for her five or six
dozen students, she shows them how nature adores a good hump.
The same bell curve contour would define the results of coin-flipping
bouts. If you performed 1,000 bouts of 100 coin flips, you'd have a
sprinkling of really skewed ratios of, say, 71 heads and 29 tails, or even a
freakish 80-something tails, teen-something heads, but the great bulk
would be in the neighborhood of fifty heads and fifty tails.
Finding the contours of a normal distribution for a given problem is
part of what science is all about. What's your mean value, and how do
you know when you've got it? If you're trying to figure out the average
alcohol consumption among students at a local college, how many peo-

THE 
CANON 
• 
64
pie must you interview to feel confident you haven't inadvertently sam-
pled a few too many frat boys, liars, or Seventh-day Adventists? When
do you know you've amassed a large enough sample that the midpoint
of your bell curve has meaning, that it captures the representative slice
of reality you're after? You don't want to end up like the three statisti-
cians out on a duck hunt: the first one fired a shot that sailed six inches
over the duck, the second fired a shot six inches under the duck, and the
third one exulted, "We got it!" The rules for determining the statistical
soundness of a sample size are complex and depend on the particulars
of the problem, but a couple of tenets generally apply: the sample
should be as large as is practically and economically possible; and once
the sample population is settled on, the net should be as finely meshed
as you can make it. Nothing tarnishes the credibility of a sample like the
desire to be sampled, which is why the results of a sex survey of the
readers of Maxim magazine may be far less revealing than any of the
garments on the females displayed therein. A good pollster will hound
and rehound the very people who least want to cooperate.
The fact that so many things in life, from the length of a human pin-
kie to a roll of the dice, conform to a bell curve pattern of data points
says something fundamental, if potentially dispiriting, about life: that
it's much easier to be ordinary — that is, to dwell somewhere within the
normal distribution of whatever category you're measuring — than to
be outstanding (or, for that matter, grossly inadequate). Parents want
each of their offspring to be what Gertrude Stein is purported to have
called "an immortal something or other"; and inspirational spots on
public television always feature children dreaming of being great suc-
cesses — the next Thomas Edison, a world-famous chef, the first astro-
naut on Mars. Yet distribution theory reveals that values cluster around
midpoints, and that mediocrity loves company. As a result, the only way
for most children to be "outstanding," "genius material," or even merely
"gifted and talented" is to redefine your terms ("of course you're ex-
traordinary: there's never been anybody in the history of the human
race with precisely your DNA!"), inflate your grades, or dump your
rankings altogether.
Bell curves aren't cast in bronze, and their midpoints can be coaxed
over a bit in a preferred direction, usually gradually, sometimes dramat-
ically. With a few changes in public health practices, for example, like
pumping sewage out of town instead of slopping it out the window,
and encouraging doctors to scrub their hands between patients, the av-
erage life span in the United States nearly doubled between the mid-
1800s and the mid-i9oos. In another twentieth-century great leap up-

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
6 5
ward, the American-born-and-fed children of immigrants soon tow-
ered over their parents, pushing the two bulges of the bell curves for
height — one for women, one for men — rightward by several inches.
Average IQ scores also have risen in the past half century, for reasons
that remain unclear.
Whichever way a bell curve swings, there is always a big fat greedy
bulge somewhere, sucking up the bulk of the population. Indeed, the
pull of the bell's bulge is so relentless that it's been given its own term:
regression to the mean. By this principle, the extraordinary tends to
lose its edge over time. If two unusually tall parents have a child, the
child is likely to be taller than average, but slightly shorter than his or
her same-sex parent; the child, in other words, will regress toward the
mean. Why should this be so? Because the parents reached their impos-
ing stature through a combination of genetics and a series of small
happenstances during development that all shook out in favor of added
vertically; and though they may pass along genes that generally
enhance height, the chance settings that accentuated their loftiness will
be reset to zero with the new generation and are unlikely to reposition
themselves as a series of pluses once again. It can happen, but the
odds are against it, just as they are against a mother flipping five heads
in a row, handing the coin to her daughter, and having her daughter
promptly repeat the trick. While population averages in height or intel-
ligence may advance over time, regression to the mean serves as a coun-
terweight, a stabilizing trend that helps keep cockiness in check.
John Allen Paulos proposes that regression to the mean could ex-
plain the legendary Sports Illustrated jinx: the long-standing observa-
tion that quite often, after an athlete appears on the cover of Sports Il-
lustrated, that person goes into decline, fumbling the ball, botching the
serve, assaulting the fans. Such unstellar turns could result from the
pressures of fame, or a superstition subsumed into self-fulfilling proph-
ecy, but Paulos thinks otherwise. "When do you appear on the cover of
Sports Illustrated? When you've done extraordinarily well for a period
of time and are at the top of your game," he said. "By implication,
you're not going to be able to maintain your outlier status for very
much longer." You are going to start regressing, however slightly, back
toward the mean streets of the mean.
The same might be said for many a miracle cure in the annals of al-
ternative medicine. People often resort to alternative therapies when
they have been ill for some time, and have failed to find relief in a main-
stream medicine chest. They are at their wits' end, desperate for relief. A
friend recommends bee pollen, or shark cartilage, or powdered bear

THE 
CANON 
• 
66
carbuncle, and they decide to give it a swallow. A week later, they're
largely healed; after two, enzealed. Why didn't their physician recom-
mend bear carbuncle in the first place? Was it because the pharmaceuti-
cal industry can't patent or profit from it and so hasn't distributed edu-
cational literature and free samples? Or was the doctor too narrow-
minded to consider a therapy that looks like the sort of thing you can
order through the back pages of the Utne Reader? Perhaps. Or perhaps
the cure had nothing to do with the ingested novelty item, and instead
represented another instance of regression to the mean. After many
weeks precariously poised on the outlier tail of illness, people slip back
into the comfortable lap of health, the physiological norm that our im-
mune system grants us most of the time and that we take for granted
until it is gone.
That people readily attribute a spontaneous recovery to some bold
move, some agency, on their part, demonstrates the human desire to
feel in control of one's destiny, yes. But it also underscores our readiness
to conflate correlation with causation, which brings us to yet another
way in which we may be snookered by statistics. Just because two traits
or events are frequently found in the same package doesn't mean that
one is responsible for the other. Sometimes the independence of oft
linked items is easy to discern. In Sweden, many people are blond and
blue-eyed, but obviously the Viking coolness of their gaze is not what
blanched their hair, or vice versa. At other times, conjoined traits seem
more portentously causal, but one must take great care before sketching
out the flowchart. For example, many high school dropouts smoke cig-
arettes. Among adults in the United States, 35 percent of those who
never finished high school are regular smokers, compared to 14 percent
of those with a college degree. But does one characteristic in this corre-
lation cause the other, and if so who does what to whom? Do high
school dropouts smoke at two and a half times the rate of college grad-
uates because they left school before learning just how bad the habit is?
Do they smoke comparatively more because they're likelier to be in
dead-end jobs that make them depressed, and nicotine, as a compound
that both stimulates and relaxes, is just the sort of double-edged drug
dépressives crave? Or did their addiction to cigarettes prompt them to
drop out in the first place — to get a job to support an increasingly
expensive habit, or to escape the chronic censure of their teachers? Or
are dropping out of high school and smoking cigarettes useful as signs
of sedition, to advertise one's hostility toward society? Or are drop-
ping out and smoking signs of submission, to advertise one's fealty to
a gang?

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
6j
Drawing causal arrows from one behavior or outcome to another is
often fraught with danger, but that doesn't stop people from trying. In
How to Lie with Statistics, Darrell Huff cites an example from a Sunday
supplement called "This Week," in which an editor answered a reader's
question about the effect that going to college has on one's odds of re-
maining unmarried. "If you're a woman, it skyrockets your chances of
becoming an old maid," the editor replied. "But if you're a man, it has
the opposite effect — it minimizes your chances of staying a bachelor."
The editor then quoted from a Cornell University study of 1,500 "typi-
cal middle-aged college graduates," in which 93 percent of the men were
married, compared to 83 percent for the general population, while only
65 percent of the women were married. "Spinsters were relatively three
times as numerous among college graduates as among women of the
general population," the editor ominously concluded. The lesson for the
1950s gal was clear: going to college, like getting fat or contracting a
mild case of polio, can seriously diminish one's romantic opportunities.
Boys do not wed the bookish coed.
Hold your Miss Havishams, huffed the progressive-spirited Darrell.
Before we breezily turn a correlation into an open-and-shut case of
cause-and-effect, who's to say that all those "old maids" in the Cornell
survey pined to get married in the first place? They could very well have
seen college as a way to escape matrimony and gain economic indepen-
dence. For that matter, if college-bound women are relatively more sin-
gle-minded than other women to begin with, who knows what impact
their university experience may have had on them; perhaps even fewer
of the Cornell coterie would have gotten married if they hadn't gone to
college. All these possibilities are equally valid conclusions, said Huff.
"That is, guesses."
Those who are statistically sophisticated can, if they choose, squeeze
a number set until it squeals "Ninety-six Tears." Sir Richard Peto, an ep-
idemiologist at the University of Oxford, made this point absurdly clear
when the editors at The Lancet asked him to perform additional statisti-
cal analyses on a landmark report he and his colleagues had just sub-
mitted to the British medical journal. In their study, the researchers
showed that heart attack victims had a comparatively better chance of
surviving if they were given aspirin within a few hours of the attack.
The Lancet editors wanted the epidemiologists to break the data down
into subgroups, to see whether different patients might benefit more or
less from aspirin depending on their age, previous health status, or
other characteristics. Sir Richard balked. He knew that if you fiddled
with and whittled down your numbers long enough, all sorts of spuri-

THE 
CANON 
• 
68
ous connections might arise through chance alone. The editors insisted.
Finally, Peto relented, and gave them the subsidiary calculations they
desired — but only on condition that they include in the publication
one statistical "link" he'd uncovered that would drive home the need to
regard the whole subgroup massage exercise with appropriate skepti-
cism. Welcome back to the zodiac. Aspirin may be a lifesaver for heart
attack victims born under ten of the twelve astrological signs, Peto
wrote, but for those who happen to be a Libra or a Gemini, so sorry, the
drug appears to be worthless. (Note to Libras and Geminis with current
or suspected cardiac activity: consult your doctor, astrologer, or local
cable company about whether "salicylic acid" might be a better choice
for you; but under no circumstances should you contact Dr. Peto, who
is a Taurus.)
In a similar bid to demonstrate the dangers of crackpot correlations,
Sherman Silber, a reproductive surgeon in St. Louis, and two colleagues
published the results of their willfully whimsical fishing expedition
through a database of twenty-eight infertility patients. They used a
computer program to identify any traits whatsoever that might link
those women who had succeeded in becoming pregnant. Bless my
speculum, what have we here: those patients whose last names began
with the letters G, Y, or N were significantly more likely to end up bear-
ing a child than were their less auspiciously surnamed peers. After ad-
mitting to a certain amount of ego gratification at the coincidence, Dr.
Silber warned that many a "statistically significant" correlation in the
scientific and medical literature may be just as specious as his game of
GYN-ecology, but that few, unfortunately, will be as "patently ridicu-
lous" and thus as easy to defrock.
If it's hard for the workaday doctor or researcher to recognize every
sham correlation that might pop up on PubMed, none of us can escape
the occasional hoodwink. And as tempting as it might be to defend
yourself proactively by damning all statistics indiscriminately, Frederick
Mosteller, a statistician at MIT, had a point when he said, "It is easy to
lie with statistics, but it is easier to lie without them." Nevertheless,
there are some steps you can take to, as Huff put it, "talk back to a sta-
tistic." Among the biggies recommended by many scientists is to ask a
simple question: Does the figure, finding, or correlation make sense,
that is, accord with what you know of objective reality? "You have to
look at the biological plausibility," said James L. Mills, chief of the pédi-
atrie epidemiology section of the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development. "A lot of findings that don't withstand the test of
time didn't really make any sense in the first place."

P R O B A B I L I T I E S 
• 
6 9
I once reported on an astonishing discovery from the world of
primatology: In the typical social grouping of chimpanzees, with multi-
ple adult males living with multiple adult females, and manic multiple
mating on the scale of the old Manhattan swingers' haunt Plato's Re-
treat, it seemed that the resident males were often wasting their time,
Darwinically speaking. Yes, they were consorting with the resident fe-
males, over and over again, but DNA analysis seemed to indicate that,
despite the males' exertions, half the baby chimpanzees in a given group
had been sired by fathers other than the resident studs. How could this
be? The discovery roiled the close-knit but competitive community of
chimpanzee researchers. Over decades of fieldwork, devoted ape gapers
from Jane Goodall onward had seen virtually no evidence of extratroop
cavorting, of females sneaking off for liaisons with nonresident males.
The short answer to "How could it be?" is "Oops." As another team of
researchers determined a year later, the finding that defied biological
plausibility turned out to be erroneous, the regrettable outcome of
suboptimal genetic samples crossed with misleading statistical compar-
isons of the chimpanzees' DNA. On reanalyzing the DNA fingerprints,
the primatologists brought molecular evidence into alignment with
field studies and showed the resident male chimpanzees to be the true
father figures to whatever hairy bairns would dare gambol among
them.
Once again, the abiding scientific verity proved apt: when confronted
with an astonishing result, cache a kernel of doubt until the finding has
been independently verified, preferably by an old rival of the researcher
who had hoped to do anything but.
Other questions to ask of a statistic include: Who discovered you?
Was it an interested party with an economic, emotional, or political
stake in the outcome? Pharmaceutical companies had abundant in-
centive to promote so-called hormone replacement therapy as a cure
for anything that frails you, and for a few years in the 1990s huge num-
bers of women were convinced that the benefits of drugs like Premarin
in keeping their hearts hale, their spines straight, and their collagen
bouncy far outweighed any small, added risk of breast cancer the hor-
mones might bring. But when a reasonably impartial jury, the Women's
Health Initiative, tackled the worthiness of the hormones on a nation-
wide scale, they found the risks dwarfed the benefits, that in fact the
benefits were almost negligible. Unfortunately, most drugs are not sub-
ject to a similar degree of federally financed scrutiny. The pharmaceuti-
cal industry pays for most of its own safety and efficacy trials, and, yes,
many instances of corporate chicanery or negligence have surfaced over

THE CANON 
• 
JO
the years: warnings about the dangers of the painkiller Vioxx ignored,
evidence that some antidepressants may raise the risk of suicide among
adolescents suppressed. Still, your best bet is to ask where a statistic
comes from, and whether it has been verified by an impartial source.
As mentioned earlier, you should also seek to put a statistic in
context and bring key background facts to the fore. If you hear that the
incidence of a childhood cancer rose by 50 percent between last year
and this, take a look at the numbers for the preceding five years. Child-
hood cancers are always devastating, but thankfully even the common-
est members of the perverse class — leukemia, for example, or neuro-
blastoma — are still quite rare. With rare diseases, a few extra cases can
make a huge difference in rates. Look at how the figures fluctuate over
time. If there's been a slow but steady rise in incidence over a decade,
then a report warning of the trend merits attention. But for an erratic
zigging and zagging, random misfortune is as likely an explanation for
a bad year as anything else.
Above all, remember that numbers are not mystical, infallible, or
always pure of heart. Many people say they hate being treated as "just
another statistic." Well, a statistic is never "just" a statistic, either. It's
the product of a human mind, a human judgment call, human imagi-
nation, human bias, human weakness. Learning to think quantitatively
helps one surmount a tendency to accept a quantity without quibble
or qualification. A young relative of mine recently took the SAT and
scored 1,300 out of 1,600. My family obviously has known her for years,
but now we had a quantity by which we could really peg her to the
board: she's pretty smart, but not flagrantly smart. A few months later,
without the aid of a tutor or a Stanley Kaplan course, she took the SAT
again, and scored 1,410. Phew! She's not just pretty smart, she's ex-
tremely smart.
The Scholastic Aptitude Test may be a wholly hominid invention,
written by a small cabal of elders for untold throngs of youngers, but we
treated it as though it offered cosmic truth. And when it presented two
different versions of that truth, we did what any loving family would do,
and called the first figure a liar.

Calibration
Playing with Scales
O
F THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS, the one with perhaps the
most diverse menu of antivenins is the sin of pride. Need a
quick infusion of humility? Climb to a scenic overlook in the
mountain range of your choice and gaze out over the vast cashmere
accordion of earthscape, the repeating pleats swelling and dipping si-
lently into the far horizon without even deigning to disdain you. Or try
the star-spangled bowl of a desert sky at night and consider that, as
teeming as the proscenium above may seem to your naked gape, you are
seeing only about 2,500 of the 300 billion stars in our Milky Way — and
that there are maybe 100 billion other star-studded galaxies in our uni-
verse besides, beyond your unaided view. A visit to a cemetery also does
the trick: no, not one of those poignant churchyards tucked beside a
James Renwick, Jr., cathedral, where the gravestones are few, slate, and
safely antique; but a place like the Montefiore Cemetery complex in
Queens, in which my grandmother, two of her siblings, and maybe an-
other 150,000 of the recently deceased are buried, and which sprawls for
several hundred acres just off the Long Island Expressway.
Yet of the many humbling tonics to which I have willingly or inci-
dentally been exposed, perhaps the most effective was also the most
humble. Not long ago, I revisited the old Bronx neighborhood where I
spent my childhood, and I was overcome with an embarrassing case of
existential angst. It wasn't that the neighborhood had changed terribly
much. True, the apartment building where we lived had been torn
down and replaced by a parking lot, but many of the surrounding pre-
war buildings were still standing, as grimily well intentioned as ever. In-
stead, what distressed me was how minor and compressed everything

THE 
CANON 
• 
72
seemed, how much shorter the distances between the touchstones of
my formative years were in reality than in memory. The geography of
my childhood had been momentous, every block a continent, every or-
dinary excursion my own private odyssey. The weekly pilgrimage to the
Garden Bakery for a loaf of challah or seedless rye, and maybe a black-
and-white cookie if Lady Luck had chatted up my mother beforehand?
Surely we're talking a half mile or more! No. The bakery is gone, but the
corner remains, a mere two blocks from my home. The daily trek to P.S.
28, my elementary school, along a slalom of uphills and downhills,
switchbacks and sinister intersections, and the dauntingly long stretch
at the end where a gang of girls had assaulted me and stolen my brand-
new purse? Four and a half blocks.
Obviously my sense of scale had been out of whack and off the map,
a puerile version of Saul Steinberg's often imitated Manhattanite's view
of the world. I'd felt overwhelmed in childhood by every detail of my
microhabitat, and so I'd exaggerated the physical dimensions of my
surroundings to match their emotional might. Now that I could size up
the neighborhood through the pitilessly polished lens of adulthood, I
realized how slight my all had been, how badly I had misjudged the dis-
tance between any two points. It wasn't my fault. I was a kid, and chil-
dren are by nature preternaturally alert to the particulars of the niche
into which they've been thrust. But the experience offered a graphic
example of how often we humans stumble over our scales. Through-
out history, people have wildly misjudged distances, proportions, com-
parisons, the bead of being. We non-Native American Americans owe
our presence in and possession of the New World to that colossal na-
vigational blunder called the "Enterprise of the Indies," Christopher
Columbus's attempt to reach the Far East by sailing west. Maps tradi-
tionally are centered on the land most beloved by the mapmaker — Jeru-
salem to the medieval illuminist, country of birth or current employer
to the cartographers of today. By all appearances, we have evolved to
view life on a human scale, to concern ourselves almost exclusively
with the rhythms of hours, days, seasons, years, and with objects that
we can readily see, touch, and count on, because those are what we
have to work with, those are the ambient utensils with which we must
build our lives.
Yet the vital pacemakers and proportions of daily life are entirely in-
cidental. Consider, for example, that satisfying quantity, the handful.
We humans are able to glance at groupings of up to about five objects
together and instantly know, without counting, the quantity, a skill
thought to be a legacy of the five fingers with which we've always

CALIBRATION • 
73
grabbed at treasures like ripe blueberries (or better yet, chocolate-cov-
ered blueberries) and against which we could then evaluate the magni-
tude of the plucked bounty. Yes, we have ten fingers, but we're a strongly
handed species, about 90 percent of us right-handed, and we do most
of our grasping with that favored fivesome. It's remarkable how dif-
ficult it is to see a cluster of, say, seven or eight objects and recognize
them as such without going through the tedium of counting — unless,
that is, they're arranged in tidy subgroups of five or fewer. Our sense of
time, too, reflects our everyday experiences. The basic unit of ordinary
time, the second, corresponds remarkably closely to the two most basic
rhythms of life: the time it takes to fill our lungs with a breath and the
duration of a single healthy heartbeat.
Because our solar system formed when a great mass of gas, dust, and
rock began collapsing in on itself (a subject we'll take up in some detail
later), and because gravitational condensation causes bodies to start
spinning like those amazing vertigo-proof figure skaters, all the planets
rotate on their axes at greater or lesser speeds. Earth happens to be spin-
ning at a rotational speed that takes just about twenty-four hours
to complete (23.934 hours, to be exact). As Annie Dillard said, "How
we spend our days is, of course, how we spend our lives," and the
boundaries of those days are the accidental bounty, a literal spinoff, of
gravity. In fact, Earth's dervish dancing has been gradually slowing
down, largely as a result of the tidal tugging of our tagalong moon.
Early on, Earth completed a twirl in only ten hours, and even as recently
as 620 million years ago a day was done in 21.9 hours, nightmarish no-
tions for those of us already inclined to whine about deadlines and
sleep deprivation.
Location is everything, and it was ours during the birth of the solar
system that granted us our annum. Earth sails around its orbit of more
than half a billion miles at 66,600 miles per hour because of its distance
relative to the gravitational master, the sun. Venus, by contrast, is 26
million miles closer to the sun than we are, which means that (a) its or-
bit is shorter than ours; (b) the comparatively greater gravitational pull
of the sun prompts Venus to dash through each lap at a heightened pace
(78,400 miles per hour); and (c) a year there lasts only 226 Earth days,
another unpleasant thought for book writers with contracts to fulfill.
And let's not dwell on that solar toady of a planet named after the Ro-
man god with feathers on his shoes, where a "year" lasts less than three
months.
What little visceral sense we have of history tends to be based on the
average human life span of some three-score and ten. Any interval

THE 
CANON 
• 
74
greater than a century in either direction blurs in our mental calendar
into an ameboid abstraction. I've known for most of my life that my
ancestor Silas Angier fought in the Revolutionary War, but until re-
cently I had no idea how many generations lay between him and me.
When people would ask me, in light of my surname, whether I am
French, I'd reply, Not lately, and I'd explain that the Angier family came
to America from England in the seventeenth century; and while I was at
it, I'd throw in a reference to my heraldic vinculum to our nation's
founding. "In fact, my great-great-great, great-great" — a rapid waving
of the hand backward through air and space-time — "great-great and
so forth grandfather Silas Angier fought in the Revolutionary War."
Wow, they'd say. Is there something wrong with your hand?
In the course of writing an essay about Fitzwilliam, New Hampshire,
however, the town in which Silas and many other Angiers are buried, I
had another of those back-to-the-Bronx moments, an embarrassed rec-
ognition of my distorted sense of scale. By going through town records,
I determined that the greats between Silas and me were not so great af-
ter all, that they could be sized up handily with a finger to spare. He
of the musket, breeches, and tricornered hat, the fellow born six years
before Thomas Jefferson, was merely my great-great-great-great-grand-
father. Contrary to myth, time doesn't fly particularly fast when you're
dead.
Kings and assorted other highnesses often believed their personal
parts to be of sufficiently divine proportions to merit adoption as stan-
dard units of measurement. The Roman emperor Charlemagne de-
clared in the ninth century that the length of his foot would hence-
forth be the foot; and by that measure the emperor, who was said to
be of good but not towering physical stature, could boast of standing
seven feet tall. Three centuries later, the British monarch King Henry I
decreed that the yard would be equal to the distance from his nose to
the tip of the middle finger of his extended arm. The ever roaming
Romans devised the concept of the mile as the distance a man can cover
in 1,000 full-stride, manly paces; "mile" comes from the Latin term
milia passuum, or thousand paces.
All such measurements were gradually standardized beginning in the
Renaissance and continuing into the twentieth century. And while I am
an ardent partisan of the metric system that has been embraced by all
scientists and by virtually every nation save ours, I admit that there is
nothing particularly fundamental about most of the metric units. They
are not based on essential properties of atoms, or light, or gravity.
(With one notable exception: the metric of temperature, degrees Cel-

CALIBRATION • 
75
sius, is derived from critical phases of a cosmically abundant molecule
without which we could not exist — water. The temperature at which
water freezes is given the coveted slot of naught as o degrees Celsius,
while the boiling point of water is designated as 100 degrees Celsius.)
Regardless of origin, the metric system is defensible for its base-ten
beauty, its ease of arpeggioing up and down the keyboard. How many
millimeters in a centimeter, centimeters in a meter, meters in a kilome-
ter? That's 10, loo, and 1,000 respectively. How many inches in a foot
and a yard, how many yards in a mile? 12, 36,1,760. Gee. Tough choice
about which system we should be teaching our kids. So why does my
daughter still have to learn both? When are we going to give up our
inches, take out our miles, and toss them all on one last Fahrenheit fire?
I have a sneaking but wholly unsubstantiated suspicion that the real
block-and-tackle to American metrification is the American football
field, and the hallowed quantum of the ten-yard line.*
Metric or otherwise, our anthropocentric sense of scale can impede
our comprehension of the cosmos, indeed of virtually every science
apart from the psychology of our distorted sense of scale. Thus, the sci-
entists I interviewed were unanimous in their conviction that people
would benefit enormously from a better grasp of nature's true dimen-
sions: the length and breadth and tenure of the visible universe, the
timeline of life on earth, the sublime spaciousness that persists even
down to the imperceptible atom. Talk about the size of the cell, they
said, and of the cell's citizens, the proteins, the hormones, the com-
pressed coil of genes cloistered away in the nucleus. And what of the pi-
rates that invade the cell: How big is yersinia, bacterial bearer of plague,
compared to a white blood cell that yearns to knock it offstage? Re-
member the viruses: Where might Ebola weigh in? And how many of
any could dance on a pin?
Frankly, I can't imagine a happier assignment than to talk about
scales, especially because I don't have to step on any of them and then
start pushing them around the bathroom floor until I find the best spot.
Sometimes just knowing how the things you can't see compare to the
things you can't miss is the better part of understanding. Moreover,
practicing scales in nonhuman keys can have the salubrious effect of
forcing you to question who's normal and who alien. "In my field of
particle physics, the notion of time is essential, but we deal with times
that are vastly different from everyday human concepts," said Robert
* Following the lead of my nation's educational system, I will alternate between metric and the old
British units throughout the book.

THE 
CANON 
• 
j6
Jaffe of MIT. "We deal with things like the time it takes light to cross a
proton, on the order of 10 to the minus 24 seconds." In other words, a
trillionth of a trillionth of a second. "People say, that's ridiculous, how
can you be dealing with such ephemera," he said. "But the sense of
alienation that people bring to the subject is a result of an anthropocen-
tric concept of time that is in fact the real oddball here. Our perception
of time is very unusual and hard to find in other systems of physics. It's
easy to find extremely short time scales, like those that apply to many
subatomic particles, and it's easy to find extremely long time scales, like
those that pertain to the universe and to very stable particles, but it's
very unusual to find scales like hours, days, and years. Our quirky con-
cept of time has to do with the celestial mechanics of our solar system,
and of the fact that we're poised between the energy scale of gravity and
the world of nuclear forces."
To play any scales beyond our pedestrian ones, to talk of celestial har-
monics or quantum dynamics, you need scientific notation, otherwise
known as the powers of ten. The power of this notation has almost but
not quite infiltrated popular culture, thanks in good part to Philip and
Phylis Morrison's best-selling book Powers of Ten. But scientific nota-
tion deserves even greater magnitudes of fame, for it is both lovely and
useful, like a fine old oak table with claw feet and spare leaves for when
company comes. It's called powers of ten because you're asking, How
many times do you have to multiply your figure by ten to get to where
you're going? Ten times ten, or 102, is 100; ten times ten times ten, or 103,
is a thousand. Add another power of ten to that string, and you've got
104, or 10,000. Scientific notation allows you to write perversely large
numbers in compact form, and to manipulate them with the sort of
ease rarely encountered beyond the privacy of your microwave oven. As
of late 2006, for example, the U.S. national debt stood at $8.5 trillion.
You can write that out in long form, as 8,500,000,000,000, and almost
feel the red ink flowing from your veins. Alternatively, you can translate
the quantity into scientific notation, by putting a decimal point imme-
diately after your leftmost digit, and counting rightward to find your
power of ten, or exponent. With a figure like 8.5 X 1012, you won't feel
nearly so overwhelmed, and may even come to think of such sums as
reasonable and rational, at which point you'll be qualified to run the
Office of Management and Budget.
To gain a quick grip on things by way of scientific notation, it helps
to memorize those superscripts that correspond to numbers you know.
A thousand with its three zeros is 103, a hundred thousand 105, a million

C A L I B R A T I O N 
• 
J~J
io6, a billion io9, a trillion io12, a googol io100, a Google a search engine
and transitive verb, and Gogol a nineteenth-century Russian novelist.
You can see, then, why "exponential growth" is so pushy. The exponent
of a billion may be only three more than that for a million, but that cute
little three means, I raise you a thousandfold, dear.
Scientific notation works just as well for the furtive as for the discur-
sive, although in this case you're talking about powers of one-tenth
rather than powers of ten. One-tenth of one-tenth is one-hundredth,
written as io~2; one-tenth of one-hundredth is one-thousandth, or io~3.
Keep biting the right-handed bit of Alice's toadstool. Down you go,
you're a fractionated Italianate family. You're milli — a thousandth, io~3;
or micro — a millionth, io~6; or nano — a billionth, io~9; or pico — a
trillionth, io~12; or femto — a millionth of a billionth, io~15.
Now we can start to examine a world that stretches beyond the realm
of ordinary accountability. What happens, for starters, in subsections of
seconds? In a tenth of a second, we find the proverbial "blink of an eye,"
for that's how long the act takes. In a hundredth of a second, a hum-
mingbird can beat its wings once, and it is by the grace of this hyper-
bolic wing-flinging that these birds can hover like helicopters to sup in
midair.
A millisecond, io~3 seconds, is the time it takes a typical camera
strobe to flash. Five-thousandths of a second is also the time it takes the
Bolitoglossa rufescens, a Mexican salamander that resembles a blade of
grass and that owns one of the fastest tongues in nature, to extrude its
mauve sling and snag its prey.
In one microsecond, io~6 seconds, nerves can send a message from
that pain in your neck to your brain. On the same scale, we can illumi-
nate the vast difference between the speed of light and that of sound: in
one microsecond, a beam of light can barrel down the length of three of
our metric-resistant football fields, while a sound wave can barely tra-
verse the width of a human hair.
Yes, time is fleeting, so make every second and every partitioned sec-
ond count, including nanoseconds, or billionths of a second, or io~9
seconds. Your ordinary computer certainly does. In a nanosecond, the
time it takes you to complete one hundred-millionth of an eye blink, a
standard microprocessor can perform a simple operation: adding to-
gether two numbers, say, or flagging that questionable travel-and-ex-
penses figure on your tax return.
The fastest computers perform their calculations in picoseconds, or
trillionths of a second, that is, io~12 seconds. If you could observe the in-

THE 
CANON 
• 
78
timate behavior of the water molecules in your lukewarm bottle of
Dasani, you would see that every three picoseconds or so, the weak
chemical links that hold adjacent water molecules together dissolve and
reform again, a shimmering glimpse of the tentative nature of even the
most carefully marketed products.
Ephemera, however, are all relative. When physicists, with the aid of
giant particle accelerators, manage to generate traces of a subatomic
splinter called a heavy quark, the particle persists for a picosecond be-
fore it decays adieu. Granted, a trillionth of a second may not immedi-
ately conjure Methuselah or Strom Thurmond to mind, but Dr. Jaffe
observed that the quark fully deserves its classification among physicists
as a long-lived, "stable" particle. During its picosecond on deck, the
quark completes a trillion, or io12, extremely tiny orbits. By contrast,
said Jaffe, our seemingly indomitable Earth has completed a mere 5
times 109 orbits around the sun in its 5 billion years of existence, and is
expected to tally up maybe another 10 billion laps before the solar sys-
tem crumples and dies. "That brings us up to 15 times 109 orbits, con-
siderably fewer than 1012," said Jaffe. "In a very real sense, then, our solar
system is far less stable" than particles like the heavy quark. The shack-
les of "our personal, anthropocentric conception of time," said Jaffe,
"make it hard for us to understand the vastness of the stability that
these particles embody."
Scaling down to an even less momentous moment, we greet the
attosecond, a billionth of a billionth of a second, or io~18 seconds. The
briefest events that scientists can clock, as opposed to calculate, are
measured in attoseconds. It takes an electron twenty-four attoseconds
to complete a single orbit around a hydrogen atom — a voyage that the
electron makes about 40,000 trillion times per second. There are more
attoseconds in a single minute than there have been minutes since the
birth of the universe.
Still, physicists keep coming back to the nicking of time. In the 1990s,
they inducted two new temporal units into the official lexicon, which
are worth knowing for their appellations alone: the zeptosecond, or
10"21 seconds, and the yoctosecond, or io~24 seconds. The briskest time
span recognized to date is the chronon, or Planck time, and it lasts
about 5 X 10-44 seconds. This is the time it takes light to travel what
could be the shortest possible slice of space, the Planck length, the size
of one of the hypothetical "strings" that some physicists say lie at the
base of all matter and force in the universe. Chronons and strings re-
main more in the realms of mathematics and philosophy than empiri-

C A L I B R A T I O N 
• 
7 9
cal reality, however; and no one knows what would happen if we shaved
our numbers further, and took a long gambol on a really short Planck.
The universe, though, doesn't only like to cut things short; it also opts
for the sagging saga approach, dictating thick volumes of time that are
nearly as unfathomable as Finnegans Wake.
Consider Earth time, which really is a Joycean "riverrun, past Eve and
Adam's." If you had all the time in the world, what would you have?
Creationists, scanning the pages of Genesis, Galatians, and other bibli-
cal sources, and counting up the "begat"s, bellow, "Six thousand years!"
But the creationists' clock is — what's the word for "off by six orders of
magnitude"? — cuckoo. There are one or two otherwise productive ge-
ologists who believe the biblical story of creation and insist that Earth
really is young but that God has given it the illusion of great antiquity —
but that's out of more than 100,000 geoscientists working in the United
States alone. No, had you world enough and time, you'd have 4.5 billion
years, for it was that long ago that Earth, and the other planets of the
solar system, condensed from the flattened Frisbee of rock and dust
surrounding the newborn sun. Now, on first mull, 4.5 billion years
doesn't sound excessive, decrepit, or particularly awe-inspiring. After
all, if you added up the birthdays of every human alive today, assuming
a median age of twenty-six, you'd have about 170 billion years.
Yet 4.5 billion years stretched end to end, as they have been, lend
Earth an extraordinary degree of flexibility, have made it a place where
nearly everything is possible, the comical mandatory, the provisional a
familiar pest who never misses a party. Over 4.5 billion years, seas and
savannas have swapped places; Earth's magnetic poles have flipped and
flopped and flipped again; glaciers have gripped nearly the entire globe
in a snowman's nelson; and sumptuous tropical forests of towering
club mosses and ginkgo trees, millipedes as long as men are tall, and
dragonflies with a falcon's wingspan have stretched from Antarctica
and Australia up through Europe and the Americas. Oh, yes, it can be
almost impossible to think in geologic time, even for geologists.
"I look at time differently now that I am forty-six than I did when I
was twenty, and I will look at it differently again when I am seventy-
five," said the geologist Kip Hodges. "But none of this is going to put me
in a position where I can understand 500 million or 650 million years,
let alone 4.5 billion years."
In an effort to convey the great girth of Earth time, geologists who
regularly communicate with the laity have conceived a wide assortment

THE CANON 
• 
8O
of metaphors and colorful visual aids, often involving long skeins of
knotted yarn or multiple rolls of toilet paper. The science writer Nigel
Calder tried comparing the passage of a billion years to a stroll down
the island of Manhattan. To your right, ladies and gentlemen, you'll see
the George Washington Bridge, and the first signs of unicellular life
forms! Hiking past Central Park, Times Square, the Empire State Build-
ing: and more unicellular life forms! Other chroniclers have condensed
the history of Earth into a single year, while still others have compacted
it into a single day.
My favorite time-warp device is the one conceived by Kip Hodges, of
imagining Earth as a human being with a seventy-five-year life span.
"It's a real eye opener to think of the pace of our planet's devel-
opment and the pace of evolution, in human terms," he said. By this
reckoning, where twelve months is the equivalent of 60 million years,
Baby Earth fattened up on a very fast track. It had finished condens-
ing from the planetary disk around the sun and accreting added bits
of rocks and metals to reach its present dimensions by one year of age.
A month or two later, our big burbling bundle had belched up from
its bowels a thick atmosphere of carbon dioxide, steam, nitrogen, sul-
fur, methane, and a smattering of other elements, a miasmic mix that
our lungs would find utterly unacceptable but that allowed liquid wa-
ter to wallow in the craterous basins on its surface rather than boil
away into space. Early in its adolescence, Earth did what a human
teenager should not do, and, somewhere, somehow, its saturated, still
febrile tissue gave birth to the earliest forms of life. Roughly eight to
ten weeks postpartum, blue-green strains of bacteria began spitting
oxygen into the atmosphere, sparking a biochemical revolution that
life eventually would put to spectacular use. Not until age sixty-three,
however — about 700 million years ago — would we see the debut of
multicellular animals. Mother Earth reached a grandmotherly seventy-
two years before dinosaurs appeared, and the first ape didn't arrive
until May or June of the final year, age seventy-five, of our handily,
anthropocentrically foreshortened Life of Gaia. Modern Homo sapiens
awaited the chiming in of December 31, agriculture and animal hus-
bandry arose at 10:00 P.M. that night, the first writing was scrawled and
the first wheel turned an hour later, the American Revolution was
fought at 11:58 P.M., and Neil Armstrong muddied up the moon and mud-
dled his way into Bartlett's at twenty seconds to midnight.
Looked at from this perspective, it wasn't just Rome that was built in
a day, but all of human history.
As ancient as Earth may be, the universe, of course, is more ancient

CALIBRATION • 
8l
still. But it is not outrageously more ancient. It is not an order of mag-
nitude, or ten times, more ancient than is Earth. Instead, it is only some
three times older: 13.7 billion years have passed since the Big Bang gave
leave for all being to begin. Personally, I've never been impressed with
the age of the universe. To the contrary, its youthfulness makes me un-
comfortable, the way I feel when I see the captain entering the cockpit
of the plane I'm boarding, and he looks just old enough to no longer
need a car seat. Only 13.7 billion years have passed since the beginning
of everything — all time, all laws, all complaints? Yet when I've asked as-
tronomers whether they agreed that the universe is remarkably under-
age for something so universal, they've stared at me as though it were a
trick question, or a tedious exercise in metaphysics, before answering,
Well, no, now that you mention it, it doesn't seem especially young to
me at all. And the reason they see 1.37 X 1010 as being a perfectly reason-
able vintage is that when it comes to cosmology, if it's about time, it's
about space, and the spaces that the stuff of the universe has managed
to cast itself across in these peri-14 billion years are so very, very great.
For astronomers, it is difficult to do justice to the scales of cosmic
distances. Nearly everything is far away, farther away than you think no
matter how innate your anomie. The one exception to this fearful far-
ness is the moon. Our moon is only 240,000 miles away, or ten times
the circumference of Earth; if you could fly there by ordinary jet, it
would take twenty days. But that's it for the whimsical honeymoon op-
tions, practically speaking. A journey by jet to the sun would last
twenty-one years, at which point passengers should be advised that
contents in the overhead compartment, and the compartment itself,
may have melted.
To gain a richer sense of cosmic proportions, we can paraphrase
William Blake, and see the Earth as a fine grain of sand. The sun,
then, would be an orange-sized object twenty feet away, while Jupiter,
the biggest planet of the solar system, would be a pebble eighty-four
feet in the other direction — almost the length of a basketball court —
and the outermost orbs of the solar system, Neptune and Pluto, would
be larger and smaller grains, respectively, found at a distance of two and
a quarter blocks from Granule Earth. Beyond that, the gaps between
scenic vistas become absurd, and it's best to settle in for a nice, comfy
coma. Assuming our little orrery of a solar system is tucked into a quiet
neighborhood in Newark, New Jersey, you won't reach the next stars —
the Alpha Centauri triple star system — until somewhere just west of
Omaha, or the star after that until the foothills of the Rockies. And in
between astronomical objects is lots and lots of space, silky, sullen,

THE 
CANON 
• 
82
inky-dinky space, plenty of nothing, nulls within voids. Just as the do-
minion of the very small, the interior of the atom, is composed almost
entirely of empty space, so, too, is the kingdom of the heavens. Nature,
it seems, adores a vacuum.
"The universe is a pretty empty place, and that's something most
people don't get," said Michael Brown of Caltech. "You go watch Star
Wars, and you see the heroes flying through an asteroid belt, and they're
twisting and turning nonstop to avoid colliding with asteroids." In real-
ity, he said, when the Galileo spacecraft flew through our solar system's
asteroid belt in the early 1990s, NASA spent millions of dollars in a
manic effort to steer the ship close enough to one of the rubble rocks to
take photos and maybe sample a bit of its dust. "And when they got
lucky and the spacecraft actually passed by two asteroids, it was consid-
ered truly amazing," said Brown. "For most of Galileos journey, there
was nothing. Nothing to see, nothing to take pretty pictures of. And
we're talking about the solar system, which is a fairly dense region of the
universe."
Don't be fooled by the gorgeous pictures of dazzling pinwheel galax-
ies with sunnyside bulges in their midsections, either. They, too, are
mostly ghostly: the average separation between stars is about 100,000
times greater than the distance between us and the sun. Yes, our Milky
Way has about 300 billion stars to its credit, but those stars are dis-
persed across a chasmic piece of property 100,000 light-years in diame-
ter. That's roughly 6 trillion miles (the distance light travels in a year)
multiplied by 100,000, or 6 X 1017, miles wide. Even using the shrunken
scale of a citrus sun lying just twenty feet away from our sand-grain
Earth, crossing the galaxy would require a trip of more than 24 million
miles.
Interestingly, the distances between galaxies are relatively manage-
able compared to the gulfs between stars within a galaxy. That is, the
average distance from one galaxy to the next is only a few tens of
times larger than is the size of either galaxy, while the separation be-
tween stars is hundreds of thousands or millions of times greater than
any single stellar diameter. "This is why stars don't run into each other,
but galaxies do," said Robert Mathieu, a professor of astronomy at the
University of Wisconsin. Our own Milky Way is expected to collide
someday with its nearest neighbor, M31 — more familiarly known as
the Andromeda galaxy —but we're talking about an awfully delayed
train wreck, maybe 4 billion years in the future. Moreover, given their
individual porousness, the fact that there are such wide breaches be-

CALIBRATION • 
83
tween each galaxy's solar wares, it will not be a particularly violent
event, either.
In large part, cosmological metrics remain tragic, pious, almost im-
possible to forgive. With an estimated 100 billion galaxies in the uni-
verse, each outfitted with some 100 billion to 200 billion stars, we have
a stellar inventory of 1022 far-flung suns: so many stars to yearn to-
ward, so many ways to get lost in the dark. The distances from one to
the next are so forbidding that, even if the universe teems with intelli-
gent life, we are less likely to hear from an alien civilization than par-
ents are from their college-age children. Yet before we curl into a
Beckettian state of amniotic gloom, we might consider the perspective
of Maarten Schmidt, one of the grandmasters of astrophysics. Schmidt
has argued that, far from being a vast moor of anesthetizing propor-
tions, the universe is unexpectedly compact, even homey. Schmidt, a
courtly Dutchman in his seventies, has white hair and smock-blue
eyes, and as he sat and talked in a calm, quietly animated voice, he kept
his long arms folded neatly over his long, crossed legs. If you go outside
at night, he said, and the sky is clear and you're far from a city, you can
see Andromeda, that next-door galaxy we're expected to bump into
someday.
"To get from Andromeda to what we would call the edge of the ob-
servable universe, you need only go out by a factor of three thousand,"
he explained. "The edge of the known universe, then, the most distant
point from which light has been able to reach us, is only three thousand
times as far from us as is our closest galaxy.
"Now suppose you look at the house nearest yours, and suppose it's a
hundred yards away. If you were to go out three thousand times that
distance, you'd have traveled only three hundred thousand yards, or
about two hundred miles. So if you drew a circle around your entire
community, your entire world, and that circle had a diameter of two
hundred miles, wouldn't you think your community quite manageably
proportioned? Wouldn't you be surprised at how close the edge of your
world turned out to be? This is why I've argued that our universe, at
least what we can see of it, is small.
"Of course, I realize that my position is totally indefensible," he said,
before promptly defending it with a small, courtly smile.
Appealing though Schmidt's case may be in comparing the cosmos to
a kind of picket-fenced pueblo, when it comes to professional-grade
smallness, the bona fide articles are molecules and particles. You think

THE 
CANON 
• 
84
you're living a normal, life-sized life, on human terms, driving to the
supermarket and foraging for nuts, tubers, and pork chops; but in fact
"life-sized" has nothing to do with you, the contents of your shopping
cart, or Charlemagne's feet. The real merchants of life, the objects that
keep life alive and qualify as life-sized, are all invisible. They are too tiny
to be viewed with the naked eye, are instead microscopic, which means,
of course, you need a microscope to see them. Unfortunately, for most
of us, invisible often translates into insignificant — or, as my grand-
mother so musically put it, "Feh." Thus we are left with scant sense of
just how invisible the components of which we are constructed really
are. How big is a cell, or a protein sticking out of the fatty surface of said
cell, or the DNA molecule at the center of the cell? When you look at
the tip of your finger, roughly how many skin cells are you seeing? How
about a bacterium — bigger or smaller than one of those rough skin
cells? The water molecules that bond, de-bond, and re-bond so rapidly:
Where do they fit on the mise en scène of the unseen?
To orient ourselves in the prefecture of feh, let's exploit the old theo-
logical dance floor, the head of a pin. A pinhead is two millimeters, or
two-thousandths of a meter, across. By comparison, the average human
hair is one hundred microns wide (a micron, you'll recall, being one-
millionth of a meter). You could, then, drape twenty hairs over a pin-
head if you pack them close together. Half the diameter of a human
hair, or fifty microns, represents pretty much the lower limit of even the
sharpest human eye's natural resolving power; anything smaller, and,
well, there's a reason why "the width of a human hair" is so often used
to mean "extremely narrow by naked-eye standards." In other words,
you can't see an individual speck of ragweed pollen, which is twenty
microns wide, without some sort of magnifying device. But among the
allergy-prone, you needn't be seeing to be sneezing, and the 10,000 or
so pollen grains that might cling to your pinhead are quite enough for
"Gesundheit."
A human white blood cell is twelve microns wide. If the surface of
your pinhead were wallpapered with white blood cells, you would be
looking at about 28,000 of them. The wiener-shaped E. colt bacterial
cell is two microns long by half a micron across, allowing 3 million
of them to colonize your sewing notion; and, given E. coifs pervasive-
ness, they've probably done exactly that. Bacteria as a rule are much
bigger than the other microscopic characters that we designate as
"germs" — the viruses. Unlike a bacterium, a virus is not a cell. It lacks
nearly all the ingredients of a cell, most notably any means of autono-
mous replication, and instead must infiltrate the cells of other organ-

CALIBRATION • 
85
isms and hijack the resident reproductive machinery for the sake of
personal perpetuity. Shiftiness demands thriftiness: even a large virus
like the Ebola pathogen has just one-tenth the footprint of E. coli. A tiny
virus like the rhinovirus that causes the uncommonly contagious com-
mon cold is only three-hundredths of a micron, or thirty nanometers
across, and tens of millions of them can sail through the air on a droplet
sneezed forth by your ruby-nosed coworker.
Cracking open a human cell, you'll find the labor force of life, the he-
roic biomolecules that do all the work of keeping you alive for the 3 bil-
lion seconds of your life, give or take a few 1025 attoseconds. Hemoglo-
bin, the blood-borne protein that captures oxygen molecules from the
lungs and delivers them throughout the body, measures about five
nanometers in diameter, a sixth the size of a cold virus. Collagen, the
connective protein that gives both skin and Jell-O their bounce, is long,
thin, and tough, like a piece of superfloss a few nanometers across and
hundreds of nanometers long.
Deep within the belly of virtually every cell is our DNA — the cele-
brated, if symbolically overperfumed, corkscrew of a molecule that
holds all our genes. This double helix is squeezed into a knobbly bundle
that, depending on what the cell is doing, may measure anywhere from
100 to 1,000 nanometers in diameter. Even toward the upper range of
DNA packaging, maybe 5 million of these little human genomes — 5
million Holy Grails, 5 million Books of Life, 5 million blueprints for a
baby — could perch on a pinhead.
Proteins and DNA are blubbering baleens compared to other mole-
cules of the cell. A glucose molecule, the simple sugar that fuels activity
within your ever busy body cells, is only one-sixth the size of a hemo-
globin protein, and the oxygen molecule that hemoglobin carries is
one-third the size of that sugar.
Oxygen molecules are our clearest, shortest links to life. Deprive any
part of our bodies of oxygen, and the asphyxiated tissue will start to die
within minutes. What are these indispensable links but cufflinks, each
molecule a dapper doublet of oxygen atoms, of O2s, linking us to life,
and linking us, on our scalar sally, downward to atoms. Sirs and mad-
ams, we're all made of atoms, and atoms are tiny. But how silly to try
conveying information by choosing the smallest and most illegible
typeface possible, and me not even a writer of pharmaceutical inserts.
Atoms are way beyond the font. There are more than one hundred dif-
ferent types of atoms, from lightweights like hydrogen and helium
through welterweights like tin and iodine and out to such mumbling
mooseheads as ununpentium and ununquadium, but they're all pretty

THE 
CANON 
• 
86
much the same nearly nil size. You can fit more than three atoms in a
nanometer, meaning it would take io13, or 10 trillion of them, to coat
the disk of our pinhead. And the funny thing about an atom is that its
outlandish smallness is still too big for it: almost all of its subnanometer
span is taken up by empty space. The real meat of an atom is its core, its
nucleus, which accounts for better than 99.9 percent of an atom's mat-
ter. When you step on your bathroom scale, you are essentially weigh-
ing the sum of your atomic nuclei. If you could strip them all from your
body, go on a total denuclear diet, you'd be down to about 20 grams, the
weight of four nickels. Or roughly the weight of the doornail that you
would be as dead as.
Those remaining twenty grams belong to your electrons, the funda-
mental particles that orbit an atom's nucleus. An electron has less than
Xsoo the mass of a simple atomic nucleus. Yet the cloud of one or more
of these fairy-Ariel electrons that surrounds the atomic core defines
the edge of the atom and hence its size. And, oh, how vast is the gulf
between chunky core and orbiting cloud. The diameter of the atomic
nucleus is just Xoo,ooo the size of the entire electron-limned sub-
nanometer atom. Viewed from the more impressive angle of volumet-
rics, we see that, while the nucleus may make up nearly all of an atom's
mass, of the meaty matter we weigh and inveigh against, it takes up only
a trillionth of its volume.
Here it is worth a final reversion to metaphor. If the nucleus of an
atom were a basketball located at the center of Earth, the electrons
would be cherry pits whizzing about in the outermost layer of Earth's
atmosphere. Between our nuclear Wilson and the flying pits, however,
there would be no Earth: no iron, nickel, magma, soil, sea, or sky. Once
again, there would be nothing, literally, to speak of. Inner space, outer
space, galactically, atomically, no matter. We live in a universe that is
largely devoid of matter. Yet still the Milky Way glows, and still our he-
moglobin flows, and when we hug our friends, our fingers don't sink
into the vacuum with which all atoms are filled. If in touching their
skin we are touching the void, why does it feel so complete?

Physics
And Nothing's Plenty for Me
L
ET'S SAY THAT an asteroid portentously resembling a Tyran-
nosaurus rex, a giant trilobite, or Steven Spielberg were to slam
into Earth tomorrow, annihilating the bulk of human civilization
and the billions of civilians therein. What small sliver of human culture
would be most worth preserving? What single piece of knowledge, what
insight into the nature of the universe, would prove most useful to the
few survivors as they struggled to rebuild all hope and opus of Homo
sapiens7. Lovers of the arts might suggest the collected works of William
Shakespeare or Johann Sebastian Bach. The medically minded might
vote for antibiotics, anesthesia, a general recognition of what not to do
with the contents of one's chamber pot. Richard Feynman, the great
physicist and titularly designated Genius and Joker, took seriously the
problem of post-apocalypse reconstruction. "If, in some cataclysm, all
of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only one sentence
passed on to the next generation of creatures, what statement would
contain the most information in the fewest words?" Feynman asked
rhetorically during one of his famed lectures. "I believe it is the atomic
hypothesis, or the atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it, that all
things are made of atoms. Little particles that move around in perpet-
ual motion, attracting each other when a little distance apart but repel-
ling upon being squeezed into one another." Take that one sentence, he
said, stir in "just a little imagination and thinking," and you have The
History of Physics, Phoenix Rising edition.
Physics is one of those modest disciplines that, in the words of a pop-
ular text by Steven Pollock, a physics professor at the University of Col-
orado, is nothing less than "the study of what the world is made of, how

THE 
CANON 
• 
88
it works, and why things in the world behave the way they do." And the
less said, the better. Physics revels in reductionism, a word that to many
implies "simplistic" and "probably not applicable to anybody in my so-
cial circle," but really is another way of saying "understanding some-
thing complex in terms of its constituent parts." That, of course, is what
most sciences seek to do, but physics goes the furthest, breaking apart
the constituent parts until they're crying for Muster Mark.* Physics is
the science of starter parts and basic forces, and thus it holds the an-
swers to many basic questions. Why is the sky blue? Why do you get a
shock when you trudge across a carpeted room and touch a metal door-
knob? Why does a white T-shirt keep you cooler in the sun than a black
one, even though the black one is so much more slimming?
As the science of starter parts and forces, physics can also be de-
fended as the ideal starter science. Yet standard American pedagogy has
long ruled otherwise. In most high schools, students begin with biology
in tenth grade, follow it with chemistry, and cap it off in their senior
year with physics, a trajectory determined by the traditional belief that
young minds must be ushered gently from the "easiest" to the "hardest"
science. More recently, though, many scientists have been campaigning
for a flip in the educational sequence, teaching physics first, the life sci-
ences last. Leading the charge for change is Leon Lederman, a Nobel
laureate in physics and professor emeritus at the University of Illinois,
who has the distinctive shock of almost fluorescent white hair with
which the elder statesmen of physics are so often blessed.
Lederman and others argue that physics is the foundation on which
chemistry and biology are built, and that it makes no sense to start slap-
ping the walls together and hammering on the roof before you've
poured the concrete base. They also insist that, taught right, physics is
no "harder" than any other subject worth knowing. Some schools have
adopted the recommended course correction, and others are sure to
follow. I not only agree with the logic of Lederman's from-the-ground-
up approach; I also trust his populist heart. Lederman, it so happens,
has long been lobbying the networks to do their bit for science's public
image by starting a television series based on a team of laboratory sci-
* In the mid-twentieth century, Murray Gell-Mann, a theoretical physicist and puckish promoter
of Finnegans Wake, famously named the fundamental building blocks of matter "quarks," after a
line from James Joyce's least readable novel: "Three quarks for Muster Mark! / Sure he hasn't got
much of a bark / And sure any he has it's all beside the mark." Despite Joyce's presumed intent that
"quark" be pronounced to rhyme with Mark and bark, the subatomic particle generally is articu-
lated kwôrk (as in pork), which also happens to be the preferred pronunciation for the creamy,
acid-cured cheese product popular in Germany.

PHYSICS 
• 
89
entists. Physicists, biochemists, drama or sitcom, Lederman doesn't
care; what counts is that the characters defy geek stereotypes with their
emotional struggles and interpersonal parries, their drive and self-
doubt, their prominent cheekbones and stylish footwear.
Physics, then, is the pylon science, the discipline on which the others
are piled, if sometimes peevishly. And as Feynman proposed in his
Duck and Recovery plan, the most fundamental facet of this founda-
tional field is the atom.
Everything, every single thing deserving of the designation "thing," is
made of atoms. Even those things that are not obviously thingly can,
in the end, be stripped to their atomic Skivvies. Thoughts, for exam-
ple. As they drift from your brain and through the Sheetrock of your
office cubicle, they seem defiantly fleeting, robustly substance-free. Yet
the brain cells that gave rise to your thoughts are all built of atoms, and
if one thought triggers another it does so via the transmission of
neurochemicals along synaptic pathways in your brain, which again are
vast assemblages of atoms; and if you tap your thoughts down in an
electronic journal for later dissemination as friendly spam, you despoil
an innocent screen by rearranging the atoms of its phosphor-coated
surface.
The atomic Tinkertoy set of which we are constructed happens to be
a magnificent system for getting things right.
"If you want to replicate something, you will make fewer mistakes if
it is made up of discrete units than if it is made up of continuous mate-
rial," said Ramamurti Shankar, a professor of physics at Princeton Uni-
versity. "By analogy, you will make fewer mistakes if you are trying to
spell a word than if you are trying to reproduce a color." It's good to
know, at a gut level, he added, "that there are only a hundred-odd dif-
ferent letters, different types of atoms, to worry about."
That all matter is built of atoms is one of those profound insights
into the nature of reality that gestated in larval, largely figmental form
for some two thousand years, before twentieth-century physicists like
Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr finally offered experimental evidence of
the atom's existence. The Greek philosopher Democritus argued circa
400 B.C. that everything was made of invisible, indivisible particles,
which varied in shape, size, and position and which could be mixed
and matched to yield every manner of matter. Democritus called these
particles atomos, meaning "unbreakable" or "uncuttable." Among the
fiercest opponents of this early version of atomic theory was Aristotle,
who, for all his brilliance, had a habit of dismissing some really fine
ideas. Aristotle insisted that the world was composed, not of discrete

THE 
CANON 
• 
90
particles, but of four essences or qualities — earth, fire, air, and water.
Aristotle's woolly, wrong-headed, but admittedly evocative schema held
sway for hundreds of years, and still claims a sizable fan base among
followers of astrology.
The early models of atoms resembled our solar system, with the nu-
cleus as the sun and the electrons orbiting like planets around it. An-
other familiar portrayal of the atom is the Spirograph-style icon from
the 1950s, of a central disk surrounded by three or four ellipses, like the
official emblem for Arco, Idaho, which proudly describes itself as the
"First City in the World to Be Lit by Atomic Power." An atom doesn't
look anything like a solar system or a kitschy city logo, though. You
can't really say what it looks like, in the ordinary visuospatial sense of
the phrase. Not merely because the atom is invisible to the unaided eye.
Cells and bacteria are "invisible," too, but you can see a cell or a microbe
perfectly well with the right microscope. The problem with atoms, as
Brian Greene made plain to me, is that they are so small they fall into
the perilous domain ruled by Werner Heisenberg's uncertainty princi-
ple: you view it, you skew it.
"If we could blow up an atom to something the size of, say, a paper-
weight on your coffee table," I asked Dr. Greene, even as I noted that his
coffee table was free of any papers in need of weighting, "what would
we see?"
"'See'?" he echoed, so slowly the word sounded multisyllabic. "What
would we see? I don't want to sound Clintonesque here, but it depends
on your definition of see.
"When we talk about seeing things in the everyday world, we're talk-
ing about light," he explained. "We're talking about photons of light,
particles of light, banging into our eyes and allowing us to see. But
when you get down to the scale of the atom, those photons can change
the nature of the thing you're seeing." The electrons that surround the
atom can absorb and emit photons, he said, and when they do, the elec-
trons jump around, altering the atom's conformation. "We long to im-
pose the everyday experience of sight on the tiny little atom, but to do
so requires that we change the atom itself. We can't literally see down
there."
OK, forget the literal paperweight, I said. What might we figuratively
not really see?
"A cloud," he said. "A picture of an electron cloud is a reasonably ac-
curate way to think about it." Like a tumbling dust bunny that you can
never quite catch with your DustBuster? I asked. Or the cloudy smear
on a television news report when the identity of a moving figure must

P H Y S I C S 
• 
9 1
be concealed? Well, sort of, Greene replied. But not like a swarm of
gnats. Not an aggregate of many distinct objects. The image of an elec-
tron cloud is really a device to depict probability distributions, he said,
telling you where an atom's electrons are likely to be found, and to give
you a sense of how the electron's potential positions are distributed.
Even for the simplest atom, hydrogen, which has just one electron
whizzing about the single proton of its nucleus, the electron has so
many points it may be found, so many places it has been and will be
again, that the entire boundary of the hydrogen atom can be envisioned
as a spoonful of cloud.
Yet before we get carried away with this lovely image of electron dis-
tribution plot as Pre-Raphaelite hairdo, we must keep in mind that Ar-
istotle erred: matter is not a sweep of qualities all blending seamlessly
together. Atoms may and often do attract each other. Atoms form
bonds, usually by sharing electrons consigned to each participant atom's
outermost orbit. Through the artful bartering of electrons along their
frontiers, two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom conjoin to form a
molecule of water. But, importantly, the atoms do not merge, or invade
one another's comparatively vast expanse of empty inner space. The at-
oms remain discrete entities, distinct particles composed of protons
and neutrons in the nucleus, a huge amount of hollow space, and a
cloud cover of electrons located far, far from the nucleus. The hollow
space is, as a rule, a sacred place. Neither the electron clouds nor the nu-
clear particles of one atom will penetrate the inner void of another
atom and take a tour, maybe sidle up to the foreign nucleus, wave hi
and bye, and then head home again. Only under extraordinary condi-
tions, as in the high-pressure furnace of the interior of a star, can two
atoms be squashed together, at which reaction their nuclei combine to
form a new, heavier type of atom, another element further along the
periodic scale, a subject we'll visit later.
Most of the time, though, atoms maintain their autonomy and eth-
nic identity, including when they are in a stable molecular relationship
with other atoms. The hydrogen and oxygen atoms with which the
oceans are filled remain hydrogen and oxygen to their core and can be
plucked free from one another, although it takes energy to cleave the
bonds of a water molecule or any other molecule and isolate the con-
stituents. It is an astonishing thought that every last backdrop and
foreprop of our lives, the sweet air we breathe, the cool water we drink,
the speed bumps we bump over, all consist of discrete, hollow particles,
trillions upon quintillions of vacuum-filled atoms that will get close to
each other, but never too close. As Feynman said, atoms will attract if

THE 
CANON 
• 
92
they're a little distance apart, but if you start getting pushy, they push
right back.
What is it that keeps atoms discrete, and in such anally compulsive
need of their "space"? And why, if most of matter is empty, am I sit-
ting here on a reasonably comfortable mahogany chair rather than fall-
ing plunkity-plunk through the hollow atoms of the furniture, floor,
planet, to join poor Commander Frank Poole in his death drift across
the velvet void of outer space?
The answer lies in the dispositional humors of the subatomic parti-
cles — the pieces of which an atom is constructed — and the ploys,
counterploys, and compromises in which they tirelessly engage. In the
nucleus are the heavyweights, the protons and neutrons, which manage
to make up more than 99.9 percent of an atom's mass while occupying
only a trillionth of its volume. All atoms are not the same, of course.
Our world trembles and gleams with atoms of gold, silver, bismuth,
platinum, lead, sodium, mercury, indium, iridium, xenon, carbon, sili-
con, and some one hundred other basic syllables of being that we call
the elements. The elements are substances that refuse to be reduced to
simpler substances through normal chemical or mechanical means. If
you have a sample of pure lead, you can break it apart or melt it down
into smaller lumps of lead, but each piece will still be composed of lead
atoms, and not the gold you might covet or the strontium you probably
don't, unless you're in the pyrotechnics business and appreciate its
flammability. And while the different atoms are all about the same size
— a tenth of a billionth of a meter across — they diverge in their mass,
in the number of protons and neutrons with which their nucleus is
crammed. Hydrogen, the lightest and by far the most common element
in the universe, has the maximum minimalist of a nucleus, composed
of a single proton; however, there are variants of the atom, given the
unflattering designation of "heavy hydrogen," which possess one or
even two neutrons in addition to the single proton. Many of the more
familiar elements have pretty much the same number of protons and
neutrons in their hub: carbon the egg carton, with six of one, half dozen
of the other; nitrogen like a 1960s cocktail, Seven and Seven; oxygen an
aria of paired octaves of protons and neutrons.
Yet these elements, too, can be found in fattened versions of them-
selves, called isotopes, the added bulk compliments of extra neutrons.
Carbon, for example, exists in an eight-neutron isotope that is so unsta-
ble, and so predictably prone to jettisoning its eighth neutron, that ar-
chaeologists and paleontologists use its pace of neutron ejection, or de-

P H Y S I C S 
• 
93
cay, as a kind of clock to help them date ancient buried treasures, be
they the caried teeth of a prehistoric king who had an obvious taste for
sweets, or animal bones carved into the first dental tools, or the charred
remains of the first dentist.
Among the nuclei of heavier elements, protons are usually outnum-
bered by neutrons, sometimes substantially so. Mercury's 80 protons,
for example, are raised 1.5 to 1 by the slippery metal's 120 neutrons. But
protons more than compensate for their minority status by their un-
shakable sense of self-worth. For while any type of atom may have a
few neutrons more or less without losing its essential identity, its pro-
ton census is nonnegotiable, the most elemental element of an ele-
ment. Proton content alone distinguishes one species of atom, one ele-
ment, from another and therefore serves as the element's official atomic
number. Gold holds 79 protons in its nucleus, and hence is given the
atomic number of 79; while at slot 78 we find platinum, which, for all its
117 neutrons, is one proton shy of being, figuratively speaking, as good
as gold.
So what grants protons their privileged status? If protons and neu-
trons are similarly proportioned, and equivalently responsible for the
roughage in your broccoli floret or the buoyancy in your daughter's
balloon, why is it proton tally alone that separates selenium, atomic
number 34, an essential dietary nutrient that helps convert fats and pro-
tein into energy, from arsenic, atomic number 33, a highly toxic sub-
stance that is used to kill rats, weeds, and the occasional Roman em-
peror?
The answer is electric charge: a proton has it, while a neutron does
not. The neutron, true to its name, is an electrically neutral particle, and
if a neutron were to order a drink at the bar, as another MIT joke has it,
and then ask how much it owed, the bartender would reply, "For you,
no charge." The proton, true to a whimsical convention that dates back
to Benjamin Franklin and his kite, is said to be a positively charged par-
ticle, while the atom's other electrically charged particle, the electron, is
said to be negatively charged. The terms positive and negative are not
judgment calls — a reflection of physicists' preference for one particle
over another, or of the proton's capacity to improve property values
while the electron leaves old car parts strewn on the lawn. The vocabu-
lary could as easily have been reversed, and the proton designated as neg-
atively charged and the electron pronounced positive, but they weren't,
so let's not. What is important is that the charge of one counterbalances
the charge of the other. An electron may be more than one thousand
times lighter than a proton, but its charge is every bit of a match for that

THE 
CANON 
• 
94
of the nuclear giant. And well matched they are, for protons and elec-
trons attract each other, just as opposites are legendarily said to do in
the macroscopic community, although in that case the reaction all too
often ends up requiring the intervention of other macroscopic units
known as divorce attorneys.
But what exactly is this subatomic charge, this positive charge of the
proton that attracts and tit-for-tats the negative charge of the electron?
When you talk about a fully charged battery, you probably have in mind
a battery loaded with a stored source of energy that you can slip into the
compartment of your digital camera to take many exciting closeups of
flowers. In saying that the proton and electron are charged particles
while the neutron is not, however, doesn't mean that the proton and
electron are little batteries of energy compared to the neutron. A parti-
cle's charge is not a measure of the particle's energy content. Instead,
the definition of charge is almost circular. A particle is deemed charged
by its capacity to attract or repel other charged particles. "A charge is an
attitude; it is not in itself anything," said Ramamurti Shankar. "It's like
saying a person has charisma."
Another way of defining charisma is "force of personality," which
brings us to the reason why charged particles react to other charged
particles. They are obeying the laws of electromagnetism, one of the
four fundamental "forces" of nature. You've probably heard about these
four fundamental forces, and you might know them by name: electro-
magnetism, gravity, the strong force, and the weak force. But "force,"
like "charge," is one of those words that comes up so often in everyday
conversation that its meaning seems deceptively self-evident, and it is
rarely explained in the context of fundamentalism. What distinguishes
a fundamental force of nature from the more familiar, frightening
forces of nature, like hurricanes, earthquakes, Donald Trump's hair-
piece?
A fundamental force is best thought of as a fundamental interaction,
a relationship between two chunks of matter. It turns out that there are
just four known ways that one piece of matter can communicate with
another, four approaches to acknowledging the existence of a body
other than one's own. Each of these interactions differs in strength and
range, operates according to a distinct set of rules, and yields distinct
results. They are not, however, mutually exclusive. For example, all bod-
ies, no matter how minute, are gravitationally attracted to one another.
Charged or neutral, spinning or sedate, masses make passes through the
universal come-on of gravity. Yet difficult though it may be to believe if
you've ever tried putting on a fake set of wings and then flapping your

P H Y S I C S 
• 
95
arms while jumping from the roof of your house, gravity is by far the
weakest of the four fundamental forces. It makes its impact felt only on
relatively large chunks of matter like stars, planets, and chowderheads
leaping from rooftops.
If you take a couple of electrically charged particles, on the other
hand, they're gravitationally attracted to each other, sure. But, being
charged, they're also under the sway of the electromagnetic force, which
is, oh, about io40, or more than a trillion trillion trillion, times stronger
than gravity. Depending on whether the particles are of the opposite or
similar charge, the electromagnetic force will either pull them closer or
push them apart, gravity be damned.
Scale and context always dictate which force will be with you. In one
sense, for example, the strong force merits its swaggering codpiece of a
name, for it is the strongest binder known in the universe, more than a
hundred times stronger than electromagnetism. The rules of its engage-
ment keep protons and neutrons glued together in the nucleus, overrid-
ing the electromagnetic repulsion that otherwise would send all those
positively charged protons fleeing, one from the other. But the strong
force operates only across the ludicrously short distances between and
within the particles of the nucleus. As for the weak force, the prompter
of neutron decay and the fussy obscurantist of the force quartet, its
reach is also limited to nuclear dimensions.
Physicists propose that the four forces are really four manifestations
of a single underlying superforce, and that when our universe was
young, firm, and hot, the forces behaved as one, too; only with the inev-
itable aging and cooling and spreading of the cosmos did the single
force fracture into four separate instruments. Scientists' quest to unite
the four forces into a single equation, a Grand Unifying Theory suc-
cinct enough to fit onto one of those scratchy XXL Beefy T-shirts with
the too high collar that nobody wants to wear, is an effort to discover
the primal commonality underlying the current plurality.
Whether they succeed or not in tracing the math to glory, we live in a
world of four fundamental forces, four distinct means of matter-to-
matter communication; and whatever parleying occurs among parti-
cles, and the organisms constructed of those particles, occurs through
one or more of the four. The ball you threw into the air, as it makes its
way up and down, is responding to the lure of gravity. But what of the
force that sent the ball flying in the first place? You the pitcher applied a
force to it in the classic, Newtonian sense of the word, meaning you
flexed your muscle and caused a stationary object to start moving.
Through what fundamental force, though, did the particles of your

THE 
CANON 
• 
96
hand convey their message to those of the ball? You may be Ty Cobb,
Pete Rose, or the decidedly Beefy-T David Wells, but sorry, it's not the
strong force.
For the source of our sporty fling, and of the many other ways
we seize the day and size it up with all five senses, we must look again to
the atom's architecture, and the loves, snubs, and limits that keep it
standing.
The electron, with a designated minus sign tattooed on its forehead,
finds the positive proton terribly attractive, and wants to spend its time
somewhere in the vicinity of one. Yet the electron is also in constant,
twirling motion, and how grateful we should be for its vigor. You'd
think that these oppositely charged particles would fall into each other's
arms, that the electron, smitten by the Grace Kelly glow emanating
from the nucleus, would simply dive toward the proton and not stop
until it had reached its destination. You'd think that all atoms would
collapse like popped bubble wrap, taking every one of us precious
parcels down with them. But no, the tremendous momentum of the
electron throws it into orbit around the nucleus, keeping it at a distance
and on the fly, just as the angular momentum of the planets ensures
that they continue wheeling around the sun to which they are gravita-
tionally attracted, rather than plunging into its fiery depths like ker-
nels into a corn-burning stove. Electrons can never stop to catch their
breath. For one thing, they have no lungs. For another, if electrons did
stop moving, you'd be able to tell both where the particles were and
how fast they were — or rather, were not — going. Heisenberg said in no
uncertain terms that you can't know both details about an electron si-
multaneously, so, oops, gotta dash. Electron speed changes depending
on how excited the particles are: in the laboratory they can be propelled
toward the velocity of light, but even on an ordinary day spent clouding
around the atom, they race about at 1,370 miles per second —fast
enough to circle Earth in 18 seconds.
Yet electron pace is hardly the sole determinant of an atom's configu-
ration. The entire carousel flirtation between proton and electron is as
vigorously supervised and ritualized as an antebellum courtship. Elec-
trons cannot flit about wherever they please, but are confined to specific
zones, or shells, around the protons to which they are so attracted. The
shells are arrayed one inside the other, and each is able to accommodate
a set number of electrons. The shell closest to the nucleus has room for
just two electrons, the two subsequent beltways have space for eight
negative particles apiece, while those farther out can manage eighteen
or more electrons. Once a shell is filled, even the president and his

P H Y S I C S 
• 
97
cloud of armored SUVs couldn't nose their way in. An electron also
cannot travel in between shells, just as you cannot stand between two
steps of a staircase. An electron can, however, switch from one byway to
another, assuming there's room. Sometimes, if an atom is blasted with a
beam of light, a few of its electrons may become stimulated and jump
to vacancies in shells farther from the nucleus. But "jump," in the
quirky subatomic subculture at the base of all being, does not mean
"bound in a continuous motion from here to there"; it means "disap-
pear momentarily from the shell I was in and reappear suddenly in the
shell above me." This Houdini maneuver is the famed "quantum leap,"
for the electron is shifting from one permissible shell, or energy level, or
quantum, to the next, without trying to ram through concrete barriers
between lanes. The expression "quantum leap" long ago found its way
into popular language, usually to mean something like "a really big
change" or "a great jump forward," and though some people have
griped that it's a misuse of language because the distance between
electron shells is so vanishingly small, I'd say the criticism is mis-
placed. Quantity notwithstanding, a genuine quantum leap is qual-
itatively spectacular, a bit of Bewitched without the insufferable hus-
band.
An atom's demand for electrons, and thus the number of orbital
shells that surround it, emanates from its protons. As it happens, an
atom is like Switzerland; it prefers to assume a neutral stance whenever
possible. This preference requires that each of its protons, the compara-
tively massive, electrically charged, and imperious components of the
nucleus, be paired with an electron. An atom of gold, with its 79 pro-
tons, requires 79 electrons to reach its favored state of neutrality. An
atom of gold, then, is a snaggle-toothed hundred millionth of a centi-
meter of a beast, comprising a nucleus of 79 protons and 118 neutrons,
and then, far, far from the dense, thumping heart, 6 cloudy shells, 6
probability pathways along which 79 electrons spin.
Yet even with all its intricacy, its swirling bazaar of particles, an atom
of gold, like all atoms, is hollow, is nearly nothing, is emptier than a fra-
ternity beer keg on Sunday morning. Why, then, do the two gold rings
on my fingers — one my wedding ring, the other a gift from my hus-
band in honor of our daughter's birth — feel reassuringly firm and
enduring, slim, smooth circles that I never remove, yet which are palpa-
bly, as well as symbolically, not-me? Sometimes, in winter, my fingers
shrink enough that the rings slide about and threaten to slink right over
the knuckle and down the sink. But neither ring ever evinces the slight-
est inclination to fall right through the diameter of my finger like a hot

THE 
CANON 
• 
98
knife through butter, as hollow as my finger atoms and ring atoms may
be. So what gives, or rather, what doesn't give?
The answer, again, is charge, this time of electrons. All atomic nuclei
are surrounded by clouds of negatively charged electrons, and like
charges repel. The electromagnetic force is second only to the strong
force in its exertions, and so the repulsion is serious. "Electrons don't
like being around other electrons," said Shankar. "Atoms keep a com-
fortable distance from each other because of their electrons. It is re-
ally the electromagnetic force that keeps you from falling through the
floor."
As we'll see in the next chapter, chemistry explains why the atoms of
our fingers or those of a piece of wood manage to stay together and
maintain a semblance of solidity. Nevertheless, said Brian Greene, "If
you could imagine zooming in close enough to see the atoms of your
fingers interacting with the atoms in this table, or this chair" — he
touched each item of furniture in turn — "you would see their outer
electrons repelling each other with electromagnetic force. Any time you
touch or feel something, that is the electromagnetic force at work.
"In fact, electromagnetism governs all our senses," he said. Sight: the
electromagnetic waves that we call light waves convey their message by
interacting with the electrons in the atoms of our retina. Hearing: at-
oms of air press against the atoms of our auditory canal, and the conse-
quent skirmishing among electrons is interpreted by the brain as Bach's
Sonata for oboe and harpsichord. Taste and smell: food atoms poke
their electrons against the atoms of the taste buds on our tongue and of
the olfactory receptors in our nose, and the specific pattern of taste and
smell receptors thus chafed informs the brain, Roast chicken. Gee. I
haven't had any of that since last night.
Even as protons and neutrons form the overwhelming bulk of mat-
ter, of our bodies, the floor beneath our feet, the stained upholstery on
our seat, the leftovers we are about to eat, it is the electrons, those
fidgety flecks that account for less than a tenth of 1 percent of an atom's
mass, that allow us to perceive and embrace the world around us. To
frame it another way, it is one electron's antipathy toward another that
shields us from the essential emptiness of every entity, that allows the
protons and neutrons to puff with pride and play the pooh-bah, the fat
of the land. How are they to know that, when you look at a table or any
other object, you're not seeing the regal nuclear particles, but rather
light bouncing off the electron mask with which each atom is adorned.
Consider, then, that, while the force of gravity may keep our feet on

PHYSICS 
• 
99
the ground and our planet skating around the sun, electron hostility is
what makes the trip worthwhile.
I hate winter, the whole surgical tool kit of it: the scalpel cold, the re-
tractor wind, the trocar dankness. I hate the snow, whether it's fluffy
virginal or doggy urinal. I hate the inevitable harangues about how you
lose 30, 50, 200 percent of your body heat through your head, because
above all I hate winter hats and refuse to wear one. What happens with
a hat? You take it off, and half your hair leaps up and waves about like
the cilia of a paramecium, while the rest lies flat against your skull as
though laminated in place.
The last section ended with a paean to electron hostility. This one be-
gins with a peeve about electron mobility, the source of what is para-
doxically, and somewhat inaccurately, called static electricity. The peeve
can't last long, though, for I love subatomic nomadism when it's not
wasting time raising manes or sticking skirts to stockings but is instead
making itself useful by toasting bagels and running blenders, or for that
matter allowing brain cells to fire or muscle cells to extend or contract.
And guess whose fleet feet are behind the flicking of a switch that we in
the West so take for granted and depend on that major blackouts cost
billions in lost business? The electron, from the Greek word for "am-
ber," the fossilized trickles of tree sap that, according to Greek myth,
were the sun-dried tears of the gods, and that, according to Greek expe-
rience, were readily charged when rubbed with cloth.
Electrons are extremely tiny. They have mass, but the amount is so
modest that they can sometimes behave almost like photons, the mass-
less particles that carry light. Moreover, as far as we know, electrons are
elementary particles, meaning they can't be broken down into even
smaller particles. Scientists can crack apart the nuclear particles, the
protons and neutrons, into even smaller subnuclear particles, called
quarks. But no matter how they have slammed and shazammed elec-
trons in the brutal conditions of a high-energy particle accelerator, they
have not found subelectronic components inside.
Electrons have internal integrity, but atomic fealty is another matter.
For electrons, one proton is as good as the next, and though the attrac-
tion between the negatively and positively charged particles is reason-
ably strong, it is also, in some cases, a surprisingly easy connection to
rupture. If you drag a comb through your dry hair, the comb will strip
off millions of electrons from the outermost shells of the atoms of your
coiffure. That comb is now bristling with extra electrons, and thus is a

THE CANON 
• 
1 0 0
negatively charged device. If you then hold the comb close to a few
snips of paper, the pieces will hesitate for a moment, and then jump up
and stick to the teeth of the comb. This act of lévitation is evidence of
electronic itinerancy. During that initial hesitation, many electrons on
the surface of the paper clippings were repelled by the bolus of elec-
trons presented to them on the negatively charged comb, and jumped
aside, either to the edges of the paper, or off the scraps altogether. As a
result, the surface atoms of the paper pieces suddenly found themselves
in a state of electron deficit; and how better to resolve the crisis than by
bounding toward the surfeit of negative particles beckoning from the
comb overhead? Yes, the very same grooming tool that had thrust the
paper into a predicament of positivity in the first place. It's like entre-
preneurial capitalism. Forget about finding an extant consumer de-
mand to be filled; go out there and dig a new need from scratch.
The Winter Hat Trick is a slightly different composite of repulsive re-
actions and rebound attractions. Why do some hairs stick up and out
when you remove your wool cap? In being pulled off your head, the
wool scrapes electrons from the outer layers of your hair, transforming
each strand into an electron-depleted, positively charged object. Posi-
tive repels positive just as negative repels negative, so the strands try to
get as far from one another as possible. At the same time, the positively
charged hairs closer to your scalp and face become unusually attractive
to the electrons in your skin, drawing the strands in close enough so the
electrons can hopscotch between flesh and tress.
Importantly, charged atoms seek to fill their vacant shells or to shed
their excess electrons and return to the bliss of Swiss neutrality; and so,
too, of necessity, do the objects to which the disgruntled particles are
hitched. Some materials are more apt than others to help alleviate one's
imbalance of electric charges, a facility that usually requires a high tol-
erance for the most totable of motes, electrons. The metal of a door-
knob is an excellent Ellis Island for electrons, for when metal atoms ar-
range themselves into molecules, the electrons in their outer shells are
often loosely attached and free to roam about from one metal atom to
another. The neighborly sharing of electrons tends to strengthen the
bonds among atoms, lending metals their legendary toughness and his-
toric utility to the military profession. A metal's steady electron churn-
ing also means there are always holes to be found, regions of positive
charge toward which immigrant streams of electrons will be drawn.
Metals, in short, are superb conductors of electron flow.
Dry air is an abysmal conductor of electrons. The reason why static
cling and shocking handshakes are a particular problem in winter is

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 0 1
that indoor, heated air tends to be extremely dry. Thus, any charged
particles you may have gathered on your person by walking across a
carpeted room or removing an overcoat will likely remain on your per-
son unless or until they have somewhere else to go. They'll tug remain-
ing layers of clothes together, or they'll jump from you to the proffered
hand of a newcomer — especially if that person is wearing a metal ring.
In that single shocking moment, about a trillion electrons typically leap
to their new host, bringing the donor back to the near neutrality that
usually characterizes the human body.
On a muggy summer day, by contrast, water molecules in the air,
which happen to be slightly positively charged on one end, tend to wash
the odd electron from foot or fabric fairly quickly, returning you to a
state of private tranquillity before you reach the door.
Not so for the world outside. The forked lightning of a fabulous sum-
mer thunderstorm offers the most spectacular example in nature of
how a swelling buildup of charge disparities — between slip-sliding
stacks of air masses, and between turbulent atmosphere above and
stolid terrasphere below —is resolved by the abrupt conductance of
negative and positive charges from cloud to ground and back up again,
all courtesy of the bucket brigade of water droplets in the intervening
sky. Lightning, in other words, is a doorknob spark on a very big scale.
You can call it the vente grande version of static electricity, if you like.
But you do so at your peril: The word "electricity," like "force," like
"charge," means different things to different people, or to the same peo-
ple in different moods and typefaces. And for some scientists and engi-
neers, the constant, careless bandying of the term "electricity" makes
them so ANGRY they could BLOW A FUSE. William J. Beaty, an elec-
trical engineer who keeps an uppercase-heavy Web site devoted to ex-
plaining electromagnetism and the many myths and misconceptions
surrounding it, complains that electricity is a "catchall word" applied
helter-skelter to a welter of very different phenomena: electrical energy,
electric current, electric charge, electric bills. For the sake of clarity, he
argues, maybe we'd be better off if we all agreed that "ACTUALLY,
'ELECTRICITY' DOES NOT EXIST!"
Beaty is mostly right on two counts. First, the term is terribly vague,
far more so than many other examples of crossover vocabulary. Whereas
"force" and "charge" retain specific scientific meanings apart from their
everyday sentiments, "electricity" does not. It survives among scientists
mainly as a folksyism, the way herpetologists still talk to the public
about "reptiles," even though they abandoned the term among them-
selves years ago as archaic and imprecise.

THE CANON 
• 
1 0 2
Second, as far as most people are concerned, the thing they are likeli-
est to call "electricity" barely seems to exist until it ACTUALLY does not
EXIST! That is, when they are at their desk laboring frantically on their
computer — too frantically to bother saving their work now and again
— and suddenly, "Hey, what the Helmholtz happened to all the electric-
ity??!!" For many of us, electricity is the invisible power we expect
to purr forth bounteously from wall outlets or spring-loaded sets of
alkaline batteries and light our lamps, warm our rooms, chill our food,
clean our clothes, and run the little digital clocks embedded in at
least seventy-four household devices, including the cat box. "Electric-
ity" is what we try to guard our toddlers against by plugging up empty
outlets with pronged pieces of plastic. If electricity isn't the right word,
what is? Of greater relevance, what is this thing we've been misnaming
all these years?
Here is where many researchers might question Beaty's uppercased
rebuff of the word. As they see it, the topic of electricity and how it
works offers a beautiful opportunity for conveying many fundamental
principles of physics in a single jolt. Sure, "electricity" is used at the
whimsical and often confused discretion of the speaker to describe a
motley set of physical events, but if you take each of those effects in
turn and reflect on where it fits into the ordinary extraordinary act of
filling a room with a fistful of fabricated sun, you may surmount your
conviction that you'll always be left in the dark.
I mentioned earlier that lightning is a kind of Wagnerian show of static
electricity, although scientists like Beaty would howl, again rightly, that
there is nothing "static" about it.
Nevertheless, people of varying degrees of electrical expertise have
long distinguished between the flying sparks and thunderbolts that
they can't control, and the electric currents that they generally can (un-
less they work for my utility company). An electric current, like static
cling, arises from the peregrinations of charged particles, but in an elec-
tric current the flow of particles is continuous and targeted and expen-
sive; static cling is episodic and unmanageable, a little offer-with-pur-
chase that you can't quite refuse.
Comprehending and domesticating electricity for the betterment of
the better-off segments of humankind took centuries of work by a pro-
cession of scientists whose names have been immortalized in an envi-
able format: as standard international units of measurement to be
memorized by physics students on the eve of finals. There was Count
Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist who invented the chemical bat-

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 0 3
tery; James Prescott Joule, a British physicist who showed that heat is a
form of energy; Charles Augustin de Coulomb, a French physicist and
pioneer in the study of magnets and electrical repulsion; James Watt, a
British engineer and inventor who designed and patented a very good
steam engine but who never worked as secretary of the interior for the
Reagan administration; André Marie Ampère, a French mathematician
and physicist who discovered the relationship between magnetic force
and electric current and whom we honor in the ampere, or amp, but
not, curiously enough, in the verb "amplify," which derives from the
Latin word for "enough"; Luigi Galvani, who discovered that electric
currents prompt contractions in nerves and muscles, and whose name
is behind the thesaurus-friendly "galvanize"; and Georg Simon Ohm, a
German physicist who determined the relationship between voltage,
current, and resistance in an electrical current, and who is rumored to
have practiced yogic meditation when he thought nobody was around.
From Ohm we get ohm, the unit used to measure resistance in an
electrical circuit or device. And though no one expects you to master
the nuances of units or their namesakes (except to remember who the
real watt's Watt was and what that Watt was not), the ohm is a good
place to start talking about the electricity coursing through your cords,
and what it says about all of us.
Resistance, in the broad, Newtonian sense, is a force, like friction,
that works in the opposite direction of a moving body and tends to
slow the body down. When it comes to an electric current, resistance is
a measure of how much a material impedes the free flow of electrons
from input to household device. The higher the resistance and the
larger the ohm, the slower the flow. Dry air, as I've discussed, has ex-
tremely high resistance to electron passage. Metals tend to have low re-
sistance and conduct electron flow readily. Some metals are better con-
ductors than others because they have comparatively more gaps in their
shells, which are open for electron trafficking. The shells of copper and
tungsten, for example, are particularly well honeycombed, bearing va-
cancies in their penultimate as well as their outermost shells. So it is
that copper is often spun into electrical wiring, while the comparatively
rarer tungsten is reserved for the delicate filaments of a light bulb.
Of course, you don't want unregulated electrons cruising in your
home — exposed bundles of wires that, if touched, will divert some of
their sizzle in your direction. The metal conduits of a common cord
come wrapped in layers of insulation, a material with a comfortably
large ohm, such as rubber or plastic, where the atoms clutch their
electrons tightly and have no desire or patience for the passage of way-

THE CANON 
• 
1 0 4
faring particles. Electrons may gather readily on the surface of a bal-
loon, but the rubber resists their transdermal penetration — as does the
rubber or similar insular material wrapped around an electric wire.
But what does it mean to talk about a flow of electrons, or an electric
current? It means that energetic charged particles are being directed
along a pathway, such as a length of wire, usually toward a target, where
they will be expected to do some work. Not all or even most of these ex-
cited electrons will traverse the entire length of the conducting corridor.
Some may flow all the way through; the majority will jostle an atom en
route, loosening an orbiting electron and pushing it forward, then
moving into the vacancy itself. The important point here is that a large
stream of trillions of electrons is either getting a push from behind or a
pull from up ahead, and is excited, anxious, driven.
Now, electrons are always on the move, no matter what. As they
cloud around an atom, they refuse to stop. The electrons in a discarded
fragment of copper wire are jiggling about continuously, hopping from
one metallic atom to its neighbor, rearing back at any sign of other elec-
trons, with the territorial indignation of cats. Yet these are ordinary
electron motions, powerful enough to fulfill the edicts of their atoms,
but not enough to do more, not enough to flip a switch or turn a gear. If
the electrons are to take on any organized, extracurricular activities,
they must feel inspired. They must be animated. They must eat.
Electrons have mass — an exceedingly small amount of mass, but mass
nonetheless. Electrons, then, are a form of matter. They are condensed
fragments of the cosmos that need some reason to get out of bed in the
morning and off the couch in the evening. They are not self-motivated.
That is to say, they are not a form of energy, or at least not of useful
energy.
The vast splintered vale of our universe, as far as we know, is stocked
with two basic offerings, two categorical insults to His Lowly Holiness
of Absolute Nothingness that might otherwise have held sway: matter
and energy. For all the comparative emptiness out there and in here, we
still have our amulets of somethingness. We still have matter and en-
ergy. True, Albert Einstein famously demonstrated that matter and en-
ergy are two ends of the same lucky horseshoe, and that matter is, in the
words of the science writer Timothy Ferris, "frozen energy." From tiny
quantities of mass we can extract enormous plumes of energy, as the
nuclear bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki proved all too
darkly. Our sun, too, shines by transforming its core tissue into the pure
energy of light and heat; but because it can squeeze so much radiance

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 0 5
from so little solar mass, it has shone for 5 billion years and will burn
for at least 5 billion more.
Nevertheless, in our workaday world, matter and energy, like the four
fundamental forces of nature, behave according to distinct operating
manuals, and are proud of their specialized talents. Matter is indispens-
able to the making of all things — planets, the Crab Nebula, 350,000
species of beetles, four members of the Beatles. Matter comprises the
hundred-odd elements in any number of mixes, matches, solids, liq-
uids, or gases. But mass can do nothing of interest without energy. The
formal définition of energy is "the capacity to do work," which sounds
drearily nagging. Have you finished your algebra yet? OK, then, time to
practice piano! Better to think of energy as the opposite of parental or
pedantic. Think of energy as romantic. Think of it as a lover, or the idea
of a lover, as the spark that makes matter matter. You want to turn on a
light. You want electrons to surge through your circuits. They will not
move of their own accord. You must excite them. You must supply a
source of energy, which will stimulate the electrons in the circuits and
send them streaming and screaming to do your bidding.
In thinking about energy, forget for a moment the upsetting image of
large oil rigs being constructed in the world's few remaining wilder-
nesses, where the heavy machinery may scar the landscape and disrupt
the ecosystem long after having extracted the bare semester's worth of
fossil fuels that lie underneath. Consider happier ways to get energy.
You can eat a bowlful of cherries, offering your body a source of com-
plex carbohydrates that it can break down into smaller pieces, thus re-
leasing the so-called chemical energy that had held the carbohydrate
chains together. You can set up a windmill that exploits the moving
currents of air to turn a blade that turns a crank that powers a pump
that generates an electric current. Or you can hoist the rigs of your sail-
boat and let the mechanical might of the wind carry you from one lei-
sure-time activity to the next. You and your lover can snuggle in front
of a fireplace and warm yourselves with the "heat energy" generated by
the combustion of a selection of seasoned hardwood logs, perhaps kin-
dled by crumpled pieces of newspaper or the old love letters of unfaith-
ful partners past. If you see a cockroach too large and revolting to fit
comfortably beneath the sole of your tennis shoe, you can kill it with
the "gravitational energy" supplied by the release of a brick from your
hand onto the floor.
All of these disparate forms of energy that we describe as chemical,
mechanical, heat, gravitational, or hysterical are variations on two
mega-categories of energy: stored energy, which is more grandly known

T H E CANON 
• 
1O6
as potential energy; and moving, or kinetic, energy. A ripe cherry holds
potential energy in its carbohydrate bonds. As those bonds are system-
atically pried apart by metabolic enzymes in your cells, some of the
fruit's potential energy is converted into kinetic energy that you can
then use to go shopping for more cherries. A frozen lake in the moun-
tains is a reservoir of potential energy that, when the ice thaws in spring
and starts burbling downward, becomes kinetic energy of considerable
scenic value. A lit match translates the potential energy of timber into
the kinetic energy of hot, dancing flames. Lift a brick, and you essen-
tially inject it with potential energy. Drop the brick, and potential en-
ergy quickly expresses itself as a kinetic whop on the greasy auburn
exoskeleton of an unfortunate Periplaneta americana.
The energy that we call electric energy also has its potential and ki-
netic guises. Electrons and protons are, as a fundamental feature of our
atomic world, drawn irresistibly toward each other. Separate them, and
the electromagnetic force will hound them to find some way to rectify
the imbalance. Move toward a proton! Fill that hole! What do you think
you are, a neutron? The electromagnetic force also urges particles of the
same charge to keep a certain distance from others of their kind. Push
two like charges unnaturally close together, and they will feel hemmed
in, keyed up, anxious to spring away. The electric power on which we
are so dependent takes advantage of these particulate impulses in nu-
merous ways. We have batteries in which one set of chemical reactions
generates a buildup of excess electrons on one end, while a different set
of chemical reactions yields a preponderance of positively charged at-
oms, or ions, on the other end. Give the opposing charges a chance to
mingle, and the resulting burst of energy just may light up the room.
For the electric current to flow, however, it needs a path, a circuit, a
conductor, just as the excess electrons you picked up from the carpet re-
quired the bridge of your finger on doorknob or on nose of pet in order
to reach more positive pastures. A length of metal wire linking the bat-
tery's negative and positive poles provides that path. The excess elec-
trons at one end feel the tug of positive ions over yonder, and a con-
comitant repulsion from the other negative yokels around them. They
begin jostling atoms in the wire, which shed some of their outer elec-
trons, which in turn thump the atoms a little farther along, and like a
row of clattering dominoes the charge is propelled forward. The poten-
tial energy of the battery's chemicals is reinterpreted as the kinetic en-
ergy of jostling atoms and electrons, which can be tapped to run a mo-
tor or heat the filament of an incandescent bulb until it radiates light,
wondrous light, compliant Tyger burning bright.

PHYSICS 
• 
1 0 7
The electric current that streams from your wall sockets courtesy of
your local utility also relies on a pushing and pulling of electric charges
along compliant channels. The initial sequestering of positive and neg-
ative charges is not easy. It takes work to keep protons from electrons,
and work requires energy. A fruit tree needs the sun's radiant bounty to
blossom, and a power plant needs one source of energy to spawn the
handy electric kind its customers demand. Most power plants in the
United States burn coal, gradually converting the substantial sums of
potential energy banked in these fossilized briquettes of ancient forests
into a river of charged particles tumbling forward in a furious crusade
to meet their match. And one of the ways that the transformation from
charcoal to sparkle unfolds is through the second half of the force in
charge of charge: magnetism.
As Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell determined more than
a century ago, the electric force and the magnetic force are intimately,
mathematically related. Both physicists were brilliant pioneers in the
quest to unify the fundamental forces of nature, an industry that keeps
thousands of theoreticians gainfully employed to this day. For his effort,
Faraday was awarded not one but two standard units of measurement
— the farad and the faraday. As for Maxwell, we honor him each time
we utter the compressed term he coined: electromagnetism.
But what is magnetism, and why do you have too much of it on your
refrigerator door? How are electricity and magnetism related? They are
both, it turns out, very good at fieldwork. They generate fields of their
own — magnetic fields and electric fields — and the field of one force
can affect the behavior of the other force. To talk about a "field" is an-
other way of saying, action at a distance, or, the pluck doesn't stop here.
The earth has a gravitational field, a tugging of other bodies toward it-
self, which progressively weakens the farther from Earth you manage to
fly. Similarly, a charged particle like an electron or a proton has an elec-
tric field around it, a personal sphere of influence that projects into
space and that either repels or attracts other charged particles. As with a
gravitational field, an electric field gets feebler the farther from its
source you roam. And, as anybody who has ever played with a couple of
bar magnets or with Thomas the Tank Engine trains knows, magnets
have distinct fields, too, regions of force that radiate outward from each
end of the magnet and either repel or suck closer the ends of the other
bar. From whence this rigid animal's magnetism? Whether it is a bar
magnet, a classic horseshoe magnet painted silver and red, a lodestone
at the natural history museum, or the bendable black backing that
keeps your veterinarian's business card on perpetual display, the items

THE 
CANON 
• 
10 8
we call magnets have the unusual property of spin synchronization. As
electrons float around an atom, they also spin on their axes, although
"spin" in the curiouser context of Quantum Corner is not exactly like a
spinning disco ball or planet; for one thing, it takes an electron two
complete rotations to get back to where it started from. Nevertheless,
electrons cloud around the nucleus and gyrate on their toes, each pro-
ducing a tiny magnetic field as it spins. Some may be spinning in one
direction, some in another, the end result being that in most atoms, the
magnetic effects of these motions cancel each other out. In some met-
als, though, like iron, cobalt, and nickel, the electron spins can become
synchronized, either temporarily or permanently, amplifying those lit-
tle magnetic fields into one big one. Now you have a magnet, an object
that, among other properties, generates a magnetic field, attracts iron
and steel, and is keenly responsive to electricity.
Send an electric current through a wire and, depending on which di-
rection its electrons are flowing in, the current can demagnetize a mag-
net, remagnetize a demagnetized magnet, or turn a nonmagnetic metal
temporarily magnetic. The flowing electrons of the electric current af-
fect the distribution of the atoms in the magnet or magnet aspirant,
aligning atoms of similar spin and thus magnetizing the material in
some cases, or jumbling up clockwise and counterclockwise spinners
and demagnetizing the substance in others.
The wheelings and dealings are mutual, and a magnet can set an elec-
tric current coursing along a wire with cardiovascular verve. If a copper
wire is spun quickly around a magnet, the magnetic field will jostle the
electrons in the copper and start them dancing from shell to shell, atom
to atom. Add a positive incentive to one end of the wire, and the elec-
tron surge will flow fiercely toward it. Power plants often create electric
currents by spinning large copper coils inside giant magnets at very
high speeds, the rotation driven by a coal-powered turbine engine. The
domino wave of hyperexcited electrons in the coil is then transmitted
along a lengthy grid of power lines, some of them tucked underground,
others fastened onto high-tension towers that loom phantasmically
over the highway, like a procession of giant Michelin Men with arms of
aluminum lace.
When you flip on your home computer, you divert some of the elec-
tric current rowing merrily along the wires in that utility pole outside
your place of residence, directing it through the distribution line that
feeds your household wiring and allowing it to stimulate the electrons
in the computer cord. The kinetic energy pumped into the cord can
then be assigned to a task, like activating a tiny motor in the computer's

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 0 9
hard drive. Or it can re-separate the positive and negative charges in
your computer's battery pack: the business we call "charging" the bat-
tery, again to the annoyance of electro-purists, who observe that no
new charges are added, but rather the existing ones yanked apart and
sufficiently segregated so their eventual reunion will have some oomph.
With a comfortable supply of potential energy in your battery and at
your disposal, you won't weep should a great static stutter in the sky
knock a tree onto your utility pole. The lights may wink off but, lo, the
computer still beams, and you can work, work, work in the dark.
The transmission of electric current requires a circuit, a pathway of at-
oms amenable to bartering charged particles, growing excited in the
process, and propelling that wave of kinetic energy forward. Yet electro-
magnetic energy, that is, electromagnetic radiation, needs nothing to
propagate it from here to there. Waves of electromagnetic energy can
travel just fine through a vacuum, which is lucky for us, or we'd die of
cold and hunger and an unslakable longing for the sun. Because the
term "electromagnetism" encompasses so many different concepts —
the attraction between electrons and protons in an atom and between
socks and sheets in a dryer, the flow of charged particles through a wire
and the bilious glow of a fluorescent light bulb — it can be easy to over-
look or misconstrue the specific beauty of electromagnetic radiation
and the incomparable lightness of light.
Nearly all the energy on which we earthlings rely begins with the
waves of electromagnetic radiation that billow forth so extravagantly
and implausibly from our sun. We may burn coal to make steam to
turn turbines to spin coiled copper to make an electric current to heat
and light our house on a winter's night, and we may chemically and
pyrotechnically "refine" crude oil extracted from thick layers of mud-
stone, limestone, and calcium sulfate beneath the Saudi Arabian desert
into the petroleum that runs our vehicles, but all those "fossil fuels,"
those stashes of archaic vegetable matter compacted into dense energy
candy through 300 million years underground, were fueled first by
sunlight. Plants have the molecular tools to capture solar radiation and
put it to use. Plants then become food for others — fast food for the
cherry pickers of today, or slow food as the fossil fuels of the future. No
matter: the real hero here, the author of every story and the wearer of
every toque, is the sun. "When you eat a green, leafy vegetable, you are
eating photons of solar energy," said Daniel Nocera of MIT. "You are
biting the light of the sun."
We tend to think of sunlight as the light that we see, that the cells of

THE 
CANON 
• 
110
our retina are able to capture and transmit as nerve impulses to be in-
terpreted by the brain. We think of sunlight, in other words, as what we
call "visible" light, the small slice of the electromagnetic spectrum that
our human eyes can see. Yet most of the sun's light is metaphorically
dark, is outside the tiny percent of the electromagnetic spectrum that
our relatively impoverished vision can detect. If the sun were a Baskin-
Robbins shop with 100 billion flavors on the menu, we would be capa-
ble of tasting only 5 of them. We're aware of some of the sun's invisible
powers — the thermal radiation that feels warm on the skin, the ultravi-
olet radiation that makes wrinkles begin. But there are many other spe-
cies of the electromagnetic spectrum, many ways you can wave and stay
light on your feet. Here's a little riddle that Bob Mathieu of the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin in Madison would like everybody to be able to an-
swer. "What do all these things have in common: radio waves, micro-
waves, infrared, optical, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays?" he asked
rhetorically. "They are all light."
Fine. They are all light. They are all electromagnetic radiation. They
are all — what? Electromagnetic radiation is really a couple of big mov-
ing fields, one electric, one magnetic, traveling together at right angles
to each other. Hard to envision, I grant you, but think of this: An elec-
tron is surrounded by an electric field, the charismatic attitude, or force
of personality, that other charged particles respond to. If you move a
stream of electrons back and forth quickly along a metal conductor, the
herking and jerking of their electric fields will generate a magnetic field,
which wraps around that conductor the way your fingers wrap around
a bicycle handle. The newborn magnetic field in turn provokes the for-
mation of yet another electric field, which then takes up the dare and
creates a new magnetic field. Iteration and reiteration, Pete and Repeat,
the electric and magnetic fields continue spooling out novel counter-
part fields. And as each neonatal field arises, it can amplify, diminish, or
otherwise modify the existing fields, depending on whether the fields'
peaks and troughs synchronize or interfere with each other. This oscil-
lating blossoming of fields begins rippling outward as electromagnetic
radiation — as light. The electrons may be stuck on their trolley line,
but the electromagnetic field they fomented can break free and soar
through the air or through no air at all, traveling at 300,000 kilometers
per second, the universal speed limit at which light has license to fly.
All types of electromagnetic radiation can travel at the speed of light,
but they do so with their distinctive style. Depending on how their mu-
tually interacting and propagating fields manipulate one another, light
waves may journey in long, gentle swells or compressed, nervous spikes,

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 1 1
or any dimension between. You may get a pure signal of like-minded
waves or a sampler of shorties, mediums, and XXLs. It is similar to what
happens when you drag your hand back and forth through bath water.
If you whip up the water haphazardly, peaks and troughs and froths of
varying sizes will emerge from the stir. If you get into a cadence of
swishing, however, you can instigate a smooth, sinuous, motivated
wave, which would surely buoy a rubber duckie outward through all
space, time, and divinity if not for the walls of the tub.
Our versatile sun bakes up a banquet of electromagnetic fields and
radiates light across the spectrum. But because it is a medium-sized,
middle-aged star that, in the stellar scheme of things, is only under
moderately high pressure at its core — the source of its electromagnetic
glow — a handy proportion of its light is of spritely but not histrionic
energy, leaping through space in graceful, compact wavelengths. Those
wavelengths happen to lie in or near the visible zone of the electromag-
netic spectrum, although "happen to" has nothing to do with it. Our
eyes evolved to respond as best they could to ambient light, and the sun
is very good at propagating light waves that are between 15 and 32 mil-
lionths of an inch long. This is the slice of light that we immodest Homo
taxonomists have designated as visible light, or optical light, or day-
light. Yet the terms are terribly blinkered. Other animals can see light
lying well outside the so-called visible range — in the ultraviolet, in
the infrared, in radar. Bees, for example, see perfectly well in the ultravi-
olet range, and many flowers beckon their pollinators with ultraviolet
stripes, while the pits of a pit viper detect infrared light, the signature
thermal radiation that emanates from meal and menace alike.
Different wavelengths of light are adept at different feats. Radio
waves, being very long, can travel without being absorbed or scattered
by air molecules, and the longest ones bend readily around the curve of
the Earth. They are therefore excellent at transmitting broadcast signals
from far-flung radio and television stations to the appropriate receiving
device in your home or automobile or, as some people swear, the fillings
in one's teeth.
Next down on the electromagnetic spectrum is the ill-named light
brigade, microwave radiation. Microwaves are not micro at all, but
reasonably wide-bodied, extending from about a centimeter up to a
meter in length. Like radio waves, they're long enough to convey sig-
nals through the air unfazed. Unlike radio waves, they can be focused
into a highly directional beam and hence transmit the signals from one
horned antenna to another with a relative degree of security and pri-
vacy. Radar is a form of microwave radiation, a directional pulsing of

THE CANON 
• 
1 1 2
microwaves that reflect off solid objects and back to a receiver, revealing
the location of pinged objects with extraordinary precision. A top-of-
the-line radar can pinpoint the whereabouts of a housefly two kilome-
ters away, although clearly this is a radar with far too much time on its
hands.
Over on the other end of the spectrum, we have X-rays, which are ex-
tremely short, about a ten millionth of a millimeter across, or roughly
the width of an atom. X-rays are energetic enough to pass directly
through most parts of the body but are absorbed by high-density
tissues like bone. Yet despite their long-standing utility to medicine,
dentistry, biology, and astronomy, X-rays have yet to shed their campy
secret-agent of an alias, bestowed on them in 1892 by their discoverer,
Wilhelm Roentgen, because he had no idea what they were. Even after
the electromagnetic nature of X-rays was elucidated, the quizzical con-
sonant stuck, and by the looks of it will forever mark their spot.
Moving past X-rays, we come to gamma rays, which are pretty much
as cinched a wavelength as we can measure. Gamma rays are shorter
than a proton's bow tie, but they shoulder massive backpacks of energy.
The sun's gamma rays do not make it through our stacked atmosphere
without getting lost in the bowels of air molecules en route. Neverthe-
less, the rays are potentially hazardous to human health and its services.
People who fly frequently on long intercontinental flights that cruise
through the diaphanous stratosphere six or eight miles above Earth
may be exposed cumulatively to undesirable quantities of solar gamma
radiation. And should a star located anywhere within about 25,000
light-years from the Earth explode into a supernova, the burst of gamma
rays thus unleashed could well knock out entire telecommunication
systems. Cell phones, blogs, e-mail, e-dating, e-gads — life as we know it
e-rased in a flash.
On the flossy face of it, nature doesn't act like much of a miser. At the
end of each spring, forest floors are littered with hundreds of times
more fallen blossoms than could ever have borne fruit, and armies of
sprouting acorns that will die long before they crown, and the bones of
fledgling songbirds that proved surplus and were expelled from the
nest. As the brain of a human fetus grows, one hundred neurons must
die for every brain cell that settles in and synaptically connects to its
neighbors; and the prenate's fingers and toes likewise are whittled down
from primordial flippers that fan out from the ends of its limbs.
In its daily sixteen hours of grazing, an elephant eats the equivalent
of its trunk's weight in food: three hundred pounds of grass, leaves,

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 1 3
roots, bark, branches, bamboo, berries, corn, dates, coconuts, plums,
sugar cane, and, as I discovered in my girlhood, Ring-Dings. The ele-
phant's intestines extract only a small portion of the nutrients in that
extraordinary intake, though, and the rest is discarded in a similarly as-
tonishing output of about two hundred pounds of dung per day.
Yet beneath nature's extravagant breast lies a thin-lipped bursar, tal-
lying every bean and brain cell, pricing every sheaf of grass. Nature is a
tenacious recycler, every dung heap and fallen redwood tree a bustling
community of saprophytes wresting life from the dead and discarded,
as though intuitively aware that there is nothing new under the sun.
Throughout the physical world, from the cosmic to the subatomic, the
same refrain resounds. Conservation: it's not just a good idea, it's the
law. Isaac Newton discovered some of the laws of conservation. By the
law of the conservation of momentum, for example, if a 5,000-pound,
all-terrain SUV traveling at 30 miles per hour were to slam headlong
into an angry 12,000-pound elephant ring-a-dinging toward it at 25
miles per hour, the relatively more momentous product of the ele-
phant's mass multiplied by its pace would be only partly offset by the
opposing but smaller momentum of the moving vehicle, and some of
that elephant ire would be transferred to the vehicle, tossing it back-
ward and into the nearest baobab tree.
The law of the conservation of charge means that for every positive
charge generated over here, there has to be a net negative charge some-
where else: if, through combing your hair, you turned a few strands into
mutually repulsing objects of positivity, you must have infused your
comb with extra electrons. You can't snuff out or neutralize a particle's
innate charge, and, as far as scientists can tell, the universe is electrically
balanced: for every electron there is a proton (turn, turn, turn). You
cannot drum up a negatively charged atom or group of atoms — a neg-
ative ion — without simultaneously yielding a positive ion.
Perhaps the most profound of all the preservation statutes — and one
of two laws of conservation that scientists repeatedly told me they
wished the public understood — is the law of the conservation of en-
ergy, also known as the first law of thermodynamics. I've long loved the
word "thermodynamics," for both its sound and sense of heat in mo-
tion. The science of thermodynamics is the study of the relationship be-
tween kinetic and potential energy, and heat. The major premise under-
girding the discipline is this: in a closed system, the total amount of
energy, including heat, is always conserved. Energy cannot be created,
replicated, or conscripted from other dimensions. Energy cannot be
destroyed, redacted, or forced into early retirement. Energy can only

THE 
CANON 
• 
114
change hands or be converted from one form to another. The qualifying
phrase here is "in a closed system." Many systems we encounter in our
daily lives are not closed. If you're boiling water on the stove, you can
continue adding more energy to the system — that is, the saucepan —
simply by keeping the burner on. The kinetic energy released by the
protracted combustion of natural gas will be transferred steadily to the
water molecules, causing them to bobble about faster and faster until
they undergo a phase shift and turn to gas. Even after all the water has
boiled away, the energy from the burning natural gas can continue
working the system, oxidizing the metal alloys of the saucepan and rup-
turing the bonds among them, and melting the tough resin polymers
of the handle, until finally you, the negligent cook, will need to open
another system — the windows and doors of your home, to clear the
kitchen of the stench of your favorite saucepan gone to pot.
Other familiar systems, though, are effectively closed — for example,
a child on a playground slide. The child climbs to the top of the slide,
gathering potential energy in the ascent. The child then sits at the top of
the slide, takes a breath, makes sure the parent or guardian is watching
with the appropriate mix of excitement and admiration, and lets go,
cashing in the stored gravitational energy for the thrill of kinetic energy,
along with the inevitable sideline seat warmer of heat. If you added up
the kinetic energy of the descent and the energy transferred by heat to the
slide, the child's bottom, and the air molecules she rushed past, the sum
would equal the gravitational energy with which the transaction began.
The sun and Earth comprise another energy system best thought of
as isolated, at least until we invent some version of a Star Trek warp
drive and can seek out new life and new Saudi Arabias. For the time be-
ing, energy derived from solar radiation or its chemical, composted, or
meteorological offspring — coal, wood, wind currents —or from the
manipulation of matter on Earth in nuclear power plants or the still
fanciful fusion rings, will have to suffice.
The system to close all systems, though, is the universe itself. The first
law of thermodynamics applies to the entirety of the cosmos. What we
have is what we've got and will always have. The energy released at the
moment of the Big Bang, 13.7 billion years ago, is our first E, our final E,
our only hope and dowry. No deposits, no returns, no spontaneous
generation — exchanges for in-store merchandise only. This is not a bad
law, really, and in a way it gives salve to the soul. For one thing, there is
enough energy to fuel the 10 billion trillion stars of the 100 billion gal-
axies of the electromagnetically visible universe, as well as the huge
quantities of dark matter and dark energy that are lightless and invisi-

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 1 5
ble but that we know are out there. Our universe is like a French pastry:
full of air yet unspeakably rich, and really, don't you think one will do?
For the nonreligious among us, the law of the conservation of energy
offers the equivalent of a spiritual teddy bear, something to clutch at
during those late-night moments of quiet terror, when you think of
death and oblivion, the final blinding of I. The law of conservation of
energy is, in effect, a promise of eternal existence. The universe is, prac-
tically speaking, a closed system. Its total energy will be conserved.
More will not be created, none will be destroyed. Your private sum of E,
the energy in your atoms and the bonds between them, will not be an-
nihilated, cannot be nulled or voided. The mass and energy of which
you're built will change form and location, but they will be here, in this
loop of life and light, the permanent party that began with a Bang.
"Nothing is destroyed, nothing is ever lost, but the entire machinery,
complicated as it is, works smoothly and harmoniously . . . the most
perfect regularity preserved," waxed the British physicist Joule of ther-
modynamic's first law. I tell this to my daughter whenever she's scared
of the dark, and though she'd prefer a more personalized form of per-
petuity, she's found some warmth in this thermodynamic verity. On
leaving the house one frigid morning for school, she glanced wistfully
at Manny, a purring, well-fed spit curl of fur tucked in the arm of the
couch. "After I die," my daughter said, "I hope some of my atoms can
find their way into a cat."
Just as the "First World War" carries the suggestion of others and the
addition of a qualifying Roman numeral I after "Queen Elizabeth" or
"King Felipe" means that others with that name have since been at least
nominal heads of state, so the first law of thermodynamics sounds like
we're just getting started. In fact, there are four basic laws of thermody-
namics — and one of them, conceived after the first, was given the fun-
loving name of "the zeroth law of thermodynamics" — but the most
important by far are the first and the second. It's like the amendments
to the U.S. Constitution. The first guarantees freedom of speech, press,
and religion. The second protects your right to bear a howitzer. What
more do you need?
As it happens, scientists view the second law of thermodynamics as a
firearm of sorts, spraying a scattershot of slugs through the house,
knocking pictures from the walls, blowing out the flat-screen television,
and making chintzmeat of the furniture. If the first law of thermody-
namics is the "good news," as Robert Hazen and James Trefil have writ-
ten, "a natural law analogous to the immortality of the soul," then the

THE CANON 
• 
I l 6
second law is the "bad news," a natural law that helps clarify why the
body grows old. The second law might also be called the "Humpty
Dumpty directive." Once the big, smirking, pedantic, cravated egg had
his great fall, all the king's horses, all the king's men, all the plastic sur-
geons, duct tape, and members of the National Transportation Safety
Board couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again. The second law is
the reason why either you or a hired professional must expend consid-
erable effort to clean your house, but if you leave the place alone for two
weeks while on vacation, it will get dirty for free. It explains why some
drinks taste good cold, some taste good hot, and most taste lousy at
room temperature — red wines, of course, excepted. The second law
guarantees a certain degree of chaos and mishap in your life no matter
how compulsively you plan your schedule and triple-check every re-
port. To err is not just human: it's divined.
These are some of the philosophical implications and sneaky fine-
print clauses of the second law. What are the physical principles behind
it? The first, deceptively modest premise of the law is that heat will not
flow spontaneously from a cold body to a hot one. If you are carrying
an ice cream cone around on a hot day, the ice cream will start to melt.
If you continue carrying it around on a hot day, it will melt more, drib-
bling down the cone, snaking over your fingers, and splattering to the
ground. The ice cream will not change its mind and start to freeze up
again. On the flip season, if you take your hot coffee outdoors in winter
and you don't have a well-insulated mug, the coffee will quickly grow
cold. It won't figure out a way of extracting and concentrating whatever
small amounts of heat might be had from the moving air around it. In
our universe, the spontaneous flow of heat is unidirectional, moving
from a warm body to a cooler one. Time and time and time again, the
warmth of the summer air will head into your ice cream, and the
warmth of your coffee diffuse into the winter snap, and if you suddenly
start finding otherwise, maybe it's time to consider rehab.
On a molecular level, heat's arrow makes sense. The molecules of a
warm object are moving faster than those of a cool object. As the ener-
getic particles bump into the more stately molecules, they transfer some
of their energy to the slow motes, and become less energetic in the bar-
ter. The hot summer air molecules bump into the crystals of your ice
cream, the crystals start jiggling and break apart; and though the air
molecules right around the cone cool down slightly as they convey their
verve to the ice cream, it's hard to tell when there's so much hot air to go
around. In your hot coffee, the fast-moving molecules at the surface
share their energy with the cold air just above them. Those heated air

PHYSICS 
• 
117
molecules jiggle the air above, while the heat rising from farther down
in the cup jiggles the slowed coffee molecules at the surface. In either
case, for the transfer of energy from hot to cold not to occur, the cool,
slow molecules would somehow have to resist the comparatively greater
impact of the speedy, heated molecules, and there is no way for them, of
their own accord, to rebuff the body blows.
The result of heat's natural tendency to flow from hot spot to cold is
a gradual leveling and homogenization, a diffusion of energy into a
limper and less organized pattern. The ice cubes in a glass of lemon-
ade left out on a counter lose their structure. As the heat in a cup of
coffee drifts into its surroundings, the molecular reactions that ac-
count for the beverage's rich, aromatic zest likewise slow down, and the
coffee starts to taste bland. To maintain structure, to maintain a tem-
perature gradient that resists the spontaneous wafting of heat toward
coolness, you need an inoculum of energy. You can keep your ice nicely
cubed in a freezer, but the intricate cooling mechanism of a refrigerator
or freezer is driven by electricity, as are the coolant coils in an air condi-
tioner. You can warm your house in the winter, and counter the gradual
loss of that warmth into the frigid air outside, but again you need en-
ergy: a wood-burning stove, a furnace fueled by oil or natural gas. No
matter how well insulated your home, still there will be a gradual loss of
heat to the street, and the consequent call for fresh fodder.
This leads to the second premise of the second law, which can be
simply stated as: nothing's perfect. More formally, you can never build
an engine that would be 100 percent efficient, able to turn every gram of
fuel you feed it into useful, honest, Protestant ethic-approved work. You
cannot build a perpetual-motion machine that will keep clicking and
tocking without periodic help from outside, though Leo only knows
that thousands of humans from da Vinci fore and aft have tried. They
fought the second law, the law won. No matter how generously lubri-
cated an engine may be, no matter how beautifully honed and fitted its
gears, some amount of the energy that drives it will be lost as heat, will
be puffed into the sky rather than turned to the task at hand. Some ki-
netic energy will end up exciting the air molecules around the engine,
or the atoms of the base surrounding the moving parts, or the bolts
holding the parts together. Something, somewhere, will take the heat
and squander it. Most machines, including all the small, organic ones
inside the cells of our body, are far less efficient than 100 percent, or
even 50 percent. Many plant species, for example, manage to translate
only 5 percent of the energy coming at them from the sun into stored
energy to grow on.

T H E CANON 
• 
I l 8
To understand the inevitability of inefficiency, think for a moment
about a simple part of a car engine, the up-down, in-out motions of the
pistons in the cylinders that turn the crankshafts. Each time a piston is
thrust down through its cylinder, the air within is compressed and
heated. As a result, not only is some of the energy from combustion
waylaid into an unnecessary stimulation of the cylinder's air molecules,
but now that hot, surly air must be removed from the cylinder before
the piston cycle can begin again; otherwise, the engine will overheat
and blow a fuse, pop a gasket, disengage from the vehicle's central pro-
cessing unit, or otherwise cease to function. That demand means open-
ing an exhaust valve to dump the hot air into the atmosphere, where it
will abandon all pretense of productive, taxpaying citizenship and in-
stead start mingling with other hotheaded gases that have nothing
better to do than disrupt the global climate.
In sum, first you have to pay for something you didn't need or want
in the first place, then you have to pay to get rid of it. Sounds like many
things in life, doesn't it? Desserts and the gym, the injury you acquired
at the gym when you dropped a dumbbell on your finger and the doc-
tor's bill for sewing the finger together again, your daughter's pet Afri-
can bullfrog and removal of your daughter's decomposing African bull-
frog from under her bedroom floorboards. Nothing's perfect, nobody's
perfect, and the smart ones don't waste too much time trying to be.
Which brings us to the third and potentially most depressing premise
of the second law: every isolated system grows more disordered with
time. Or, as a sign on my editor's door put it, ENTROPY ALWAYS GETS
YOU IN THE END.
The word "entropy" has gained a certain popular cachet, and is often
used as a synonym for chaos, but the two terms have distinct meanings.
In physics and mathematics, chaos refers to systems like the weather,
or a nation's economy, that seem random and unpredictable but that
often have regular, repeated patterns underlying them — high pressure
clouds, the PBS broadcasts of Suze Orman. Entropy, by comparison, is a
measure of how much energy in a system is "not available to do work."
The energy is there, but it might as well not be, like a taxi passing you
on a rainy night with its NOT IN SERVICE lights ablaze, or a chair in a
museum with a rope draped from arm to arm, or a teenager. Rudolf
Clausius, a German physicist and thermodynamics pioneer, coined the
term "entropy" from the Greek word for "transformation," and he
coined it with care, to sound as much like "energy" as possible. Wher-
ever you have energy, Clausius said, entropy is sure to follow, with
crowbar in hand.

P H Y S I C S 
• 
1 1 9
The first law of thermodynamics insists that energy can be neither
created nor destroyed. The second law replies, Fine, then I'll have to set-
tle for breaking its knees.
In a closed system, entropy creeps higher, and order slowly subsides.
It is a cold, hard, tepid, flaccid, probabilistic truth. If you bring a pot of
water to a full boil, put an egg in it, cover the pot with a tight-fitting lid,
and turn off the flame, you'll have a reasonably isolated system. The wa-
ter will be hot enough to cook the egg to a soft-boiled or medium-soft
consistency. But at some point before the egg reaches the child-friendly
status of maximum firmness, the system will lose its culinary power.
Much of the kinetic energy that the water molecules had won through
boiling will be shrugged off as heat into the air under the lid. In their
less vigorous state, the water molecules abutting the eggshell cannot
continue revising, linking, and cross-linking the egg proteins and cho-
lesterol chains within. The total energy of the system may be the same
as it was when the lid first descended, but it has become diffuse, and de-
fused — it's no longer cooking with gas.
The second law, alas, has overwhelming odds in its favor. When phys-
icists speak of an ordered system, they mean one in which the compo-
nents are organized in a regular, predictable pattern, as the atoms of so-
dium and chloride are neatly stacked in a crystal of salt, or as books are
arranged in a meticulously managed library — thematically and alpha-
betically. But think of that library, and how easy it is to perturb its or-
der. You don't have to reduce the entire collection to a jumble on the
floor; a single, misinserted volume is enough to ruin a scholar's whole
morning. In fact, there is only one way for the books to be arranged on
the shelves in a flawless Dewey-decimal sequence, but thousands upon
hundreds of thousands of ways that they can be set astray. Herein lies
the engine of entropy. Order, by definition, has restrictions and limita-
tions, while disorder knows no bounds. The odds of the boiled water in
our pot retaining its heat by dint of the agitated water molecules on the
surface repeatedly bumping into only other water molecules below and
beside them, rather than some of them slapping against the air mole-
cules above, are infinitesimally small. In theory, it could happen, just as
you theoretically could close your eyes, begin tossing a couple of hun-
dred bricks into the corner, and find, on opening your eyes, that you've
thrown them into the perfectly aligned, beautifully crafted Flemish-
style hearth wall of your dreams. In probabalistic reality, you will be
treated to the sight of a haphazard pile of half-cracked bricks and a haze
of pulverized clay, and to the sound of the police pounding on your
front door with heavy objects of their own.

THE CANON 
• 
1 2 0
No, if you want that ton of bricks to shape up into a presentable
mantelpiece, you'll have to get out your trowel, bucket, and mortar, and
you'll have to invest some of your stored chemical energy arranging and
rearranging the bricks and daubing over the rough spots, sort of the
way evolution did with us. You can also count on the need for periodic
touchups and repointings, as the impact of heat, gravity, dankness,
cold, grease, pine tar, mold, the rattle of passing garbage trucks, the
time you called in the unlicensed chimney sweep because you didn't re-
alize you had to open something called a "flue," all nudge the wall's
brick and cement molecules into predictably shabbier configurations.
Eventually, you or one of your descendants may decide that the wall
is splintered and sagging in so many places that it's easier to get out the
sledgehammer and start all over again.
By the second law of thermodynamics, the energy of a system may
remain the same in quantity, while steadily declining in quality. The
concentrated energy of petroleum is quite useful; the dispersed energy
of excited molecules of carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxide belched out
of a car's exhaust pipe is not. The darkest readings of the second law
suggest that even the universe has a morphine drip in its vein, a slow
smothering of all spangle, all spiral, all possibility. In this version of the
apocalypse, universal entropy is rising, productive energy falling, and
the entire package fading into cool irrelevance. Today, the explosive
death of one star can infuse a nearby gas cloud with so much energy
and matter that it collapses into a brand-new baby star, and the stellar
life cycle pedals on. In the bigger and more estranged cosmos of the dis-
tant future, there may be no suns left with the will to explode, or nurs-
eries to seed with their heirlooms of light.
But before we get carried away by a formaldehyde gloom, let's re-
member that, whatever its eventual fate, the universe still has an awful
lot of time left to play, and that it is a comic genius and an aesthete that
defies its innate sloth, its entropie drift, with sustained symphonies of
disciplined beauty. The universe loves patterns, and it can't seem to stop
finding new styles of light and character, and functional forms and
dysfunctional forms just for the fun of it. From formlessness came
the cloud of glory we named atom, from ashes and dust came stars so
formally formed that we can tell by their light how long they will shine
and when and how they will die. Atoms were not content to stay in their
element, as lonely elements, but instead linked arms with other ele-
ments, becoming the molecules of which our world is forged, and the
chemistry was right to scoff in the face of the law, and declare, Let's go
get a life.

Chemistry
Fire, Ice, Spies, and Life
T
HE NEXT TIME you think you are being teased, picked on, and
put upon, don't bother getting defensive. Don't give your tor-
menters the pleasure of your petulance. Instead, why not try the
chemist's solution, and fight fire with . . . a party trick?
Many chemists admit to the occasional indulgence in a persecution
complex. They feel demonized by the public and marginalized by other
scientists. Chemistry is the subject that at least 6 out of every 6.0225
Americans insist they "flunked in high school." The boilerplate evil sci-
entist of Hollywood is often some type of chemist, a white coat cack-
ling over his boiling beakers and crackling gadgetry. People rant against
all the "chemicals" in the environment, as though the word were synon-
ymous with "poisons." The environment, chemists counter-rant, is
nothing but chemicals, and the same can be said for us. "We're just self-
replicating carbon units, that's what we are," said Donald Sadoway, a
professor of materials chemistry at MIT. "We're not a heck of a lot dif-
ferent than the carbon-based fiber in a steel-belted radial tire, so maybe
we shouldn't take ourselves too seriously."
When not feared as a threat to air, water, fish, and fowl, chemistry is
belittled as bureaucratic, a field neither fish nor fowl. Roald Hoffmann,
a chemist and poet-playwright at Cornell University, has observed that
because chemistry is "poised between the physical and biological uni-
verses" and "does not deal with the infinitely small or large," it may be
thought fussy and tedious, "the way things in the middle often are."
Some of the most heedless squeezers on chemistry's domain are those
passengers seated on either side of it. "Chemistry is the core science, the
central science, yet its contributions are often overlooked, including by

T H E CANON 
• 
1 2 2
many biologists, physicists, medical researchers, and others who should
know better," said Rick Danheiser, a chemistry professor at MIT. Even
the much discussed book The End of Science, which argued that the ma-
jor scientific disciplines were reaching the limit of their explanatory
power and would soon be irrelevant, didn't bother mentioning chemis-
try. Danheiser sighed theatrically. I guess we're not even sexy enough
for an obituary, he said.
Time for that party trick. Danheiser, a boyish-looking baby boomer
with a build that could be described as neither infinitely small nor large,
and who balanced the casual bohemianism of his beard with the casual
preppiness of a polo shirt and khaki slacks, pushed his chair back, and
began rummaging through the drawers of his desk. No luck. He walked
over to his bookcase, scanned the shelves, and ran his hands over the
edges of those above eye level. Still nothing. Finally he asked me if I
happened to have any matches on me. I told him, No, I'm not a smoker.
"Well, that's good, as far as your health is concerned," he replied. "But
it's too bad for the point I want to make." A round of charades would
have to do.
Danheiser took a stick of plastic of the type that chemists use to
construct stick models of molecules. "Pretend this is a match," he said
of the sticklet, and I nodded. "This," he said, lifting the sticklet over
his desk, "is physics." He let the stick drop on his desk. Plink. "And this,"
he said, scraping the stick's virtual phosphor on a virtual matchbook
cupped in his hand, "is chemistry." He held up the stick triumphantly
for me to gaze on the fabled flame. It was a good thing that I could sum-
mon up an image of combustion well enough to smile and nod appre-
ciatively at Danheiser's act because two other chemists went through
similar matchless presentations with me, to make the point about the
soul of their discipline. Chemists may feel unappreciated. They may be
thought by many adult survivors of a high school education to have the
sex appeal of a cold sore. Yet chemists know that through it all they can
claim Prometheus as their prophet, and that if they can't find a match
in their pocket, there's always the fire inside.
And while we're on the subject of myths and fantasies, a couple of
other legendary figures are relevant to chemistry's specific alchemy.
One is Goldilocks, whose story offers a plangent alternative to the cliché
of chemistry as gray middleman. For Goldilocks, it is the extremes that
prove stiff and humorless, the extremes that can never suffice. Too hot
will strip the epidermis from your tongue, the electrons from your at-
oms; too cold, and you can't taste a thing. Too hard, you're not alive; too
soft, you've already died. Goldilocks's preferred habitat, her optimal

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 2 3
culture medium, is that of the harmonious compromise, the world she
calls "just right." It is a world fit for children, human and ursine alike, a
world suited for growth, for the calibrated assimilation of atoms into
molecules, molecules into compounds, units into chains, chains into
pleats, folds, tissues, organs, eyes, snouts, and mouths that shout. A
world that is safe for children is a world of immense molecular diver-
sity, where a million molecules and compounds bloom, and where no
molecule is left unclaimed for very long. The chemist's world is the
world around us, a pampered stratum of relatively mild temperatures,
and manageable atmospheric pressure, and liquid water in abundance
to bring molecules together and lubricate their discourse.
Roald Hoffmann said, "There is no chemistry to speak of on the
surface of the sun. It's all atoms and ions — atoms that have been
shocked apart."
On Earth, under our conditions, we have lots of chemistry. We have
temperature conditions where molecules can exist in three different
states, as solid, liquid, or gas, and where, with the input of energy, from
the light of the sun or the heat of a fire, those molecules can change into
other molecules, into other complex assemblages of atoms. "What a
dull world it would be if there were only 115 of us, and what a dull world
it would be if there were nothing more than the 115 elements, 115 differ-
ent types of atoms, end of story," Hoffmann said. "But that isn't how
our world works. From the 115 elements you can build a near infinity of
molecules, of any type you need, to get all the structural and functional
diversity you can ask for. There are at least 100,000 different molecules
in the human body. Some 900 volatile aroma components have been
found in wine. Chemistry is molecules. We are molecules. Chemistry is
a truly anthropic science."
On the surface of the sun, where temperatures hover around 10,000
degrees Fahrenheit, the atoms are in shock, yet they are not alone. All
around them are other atoms, most of them hydrogen, but with a de-
cent number of helium atoms as well as a scattering of carbon, nitro-
gen, oxygen, and neon, to name a few. What is the difference between
the atoms that congregate on the face of our sun, and those that com-
pose the face of our daughter? What must atoms do en masse to qualify
as molecules, what password must they utter?
"The name is Bond, James Bond." said Donald Sadoway. "Chemistry
is all about making and breaking bonds." In his impeccably tailored
Italian suit, crisp white shirt, and elegantly vivid tie done in an expert
double Windsor knot, Sadoway had a distinctly Bondish beam himself.
Molecules, he said, and the broader category of compounds and mix-

THE CANON 
• 
1 2 4
tures, are more than cohorts of atoms that all happen to be in the same
vicinity, like passengers on a train or marbles in a box. To merit desig-
nation as molecules or chemical compounds, the constituent atoms
must be stuck together with some sort of electromagnetic glue. The at-
oms must share their outermost electrons with one another, or must
feel the persistent tugging of an oppositely charged atom by their side.
Chemistry is about molecules, and making bonds and breaking bonds.
Chemical bonds are forged of electromagnetic forces, of the innate at-
traction between electrons and protons, and the fickleness of electrons,
the willingness of those negatively charged particles to list one moment
toward this proton, one moment toward that. Chemistry exploits elec-
tron restiveness to snap the hundred-plus elements of the periodic table
into hundreds of thousands of configurations, and to break the bonds
apart again and rearrange the pieces again and restock the shelves with
new and improved molecular merchandise. Brighter whites! Nightlier
darks! Sweeter smells, stronger laminates, longer polymers, snappier
comebacks. Whatever your chemical demand, whatever shape, size, or
attribute your molecule must possess, chances are you'll find it some-
where in the well-stocked toy box that is our Goldilocks world — if not
prefabricated naturally, then conjured in a laboratory. Roald Hoffmann
has called chemistry "the imagined science"; the great nineteenth-cen-
tury French chemist Claude Berthollet declared it an art. "Chemistry is
almost alone among the sciences in its ability to make new things," said
Stephen Lippard, a professor of chemistry at MIT. "Beyond studying
the world as it exists, we can put together combinations of molecules in
ways never dreamed of before." A computer screen so flexible you can
roll it up like a newspaper and stash it in your pocket; a windshield that
cleans itself; artificial arteries that don't get clogged and that the im-
mune system won't assault; antidepressants that conquer despair with-
out the standard civilian casualties of fat and frigidity. Such is the stuff
that chemists' dreams are made of.
And as in sleep or art, it is not always clear who is the dreamer, who
the dream. "My field is material chemistry, and one thing we don't ad-
mit to young students is how clueless we really are," said Frank DiSalvo,
a professor of chemistry at Cornell University. "Much of what we come
up with we happen on by trial and error, and we can't predict what we'll
get ahead of time. We just don't know the rules of the game for more
than a handful of the elements we work with." In theory, he said, all the
material needed to construct any device imaginable, a warp drive, a
transporter, the perfect toupee, is already there, somewhere in the peri-
odic table. It's figuring out where it is, and with whom it should con-

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 2 5
sort, and under what conditions, that keeps the midnight Bunsens
burning. "If every person on the planet were a materials chemist,"
DiSalvo said, "it would still take a millennium or longer to understand
the periodic table well enough to make all the things we want to make."
The basic themes of chemistry are molecules and the bonds that
bind and define them. As with the lovable British hit man of twenty-
odd films, there is more than one way of being a Bond. You have your
suave, supple, catlike bond, your stiff-shanked bond, your uncommit-
ted, barely there bond. The type of bond that links together atoms in a
molecule, or one molecule to another, explains why the carbon lattices
of a diamond are hard enough to be a girl's best friend forever, while the
carbon chains in our food are broken down with only moderate meta-
bolic effort, and the carbon molecules on the graphite tip of a pencil
can be transferred onto paper using only the most feathery of strokes.
Bonds are stirred, bonds are shaken, bonds, like rules, are made for
breaking.
The strongest and simplest but by no means most simple-minded
bond in nature is the covalent bond, when two atoms team up and
share a pair or more of electrons for the sheer goose-down comfort of
it. The bond arises between players in a similar state of discretionary
desire: their outermost shells don't really need extra electrons, but they
have room for them anyway. The individual atoms theoretically are ca-
pable of electromagnetic self-sufficiency, the number of orbiting, nega-
tively charged electrons balancing the number of positively charged
protons within. But the orbital paths or shells along which electrons
travel as they circumnavigate an atom are designed to accommodate a
set number of negative particles apiece, the atom's particular proton
needs notwithstanding. Orbital shells, in other words, are a lot like clos-
ets: happiest when filled.
Atoms with a moderate degree of empty shell space often end up
consorting together, and satisfying each other's closet cravings by swap-
ping their outermost electrons back and forth, back and forth. In that
way, they get the sensation of orbital satiety without becoming for-
mally, electrically charged, as they would if they picked up one too
many electrons full-time, or if they lost the members of their partially
filled outer shell altogether. The shared electrons may sometimes be
found closer to the outer shell of one atom, at other times nearer to the
cloud around the other, but more often fluttering somewhere in be-
tween.
"On the one hand, the two atoms want to come together, because
their shared electrons want to feel the effects of both positive nuclei,"

THE CANON 
• 
1 2 6
said Roald Hoffmann. "On the other hand, the nuclei don't want to get
too close to each other. The compromise distance is the bond length,
and it acts as a kind of spring linking the atoms together." Boing, boing,
please do as I say, first you come closer, now hop away.
The participants in this covalent Slinky sling may be atoms of the
same element. A couple of hydrogen atoms, for example, each with
their lone electron in a shell built for two, may pool their particles cova-
lently to form a molecule of H2, while the oxygen we breathe consists
mostly of O2, vaporous plumes of covalently twinned oxygen atoms
that share not just one but two pairs of electrons per partnership.
Alternatively, a covalent vinculum may clasp together two entirely
different elements into a so-called compound. Hydrogen and its only-
child electron can be hitched to chlorine, which has seven of its seven-
teen electrons fluttering around an outer shell suited for eight, to form
the familiar chemical, hydrogen chloride, a colorless, suffocating, corro-
sive gas used in making plastics and many other industrial operations.
Nitrogen, with five electrons in its outer shell, and oxygen with six, both
have outer orbital capacity for eight electrons and can join forces in a
variety of permutations. One nitrogen covalently bonded to one oxygen
gets you nitric oxide, NO, a clear, potent gas that is quite toxic in large
quantities but that the body exploits judiciously for tasks like relaxing
muscles, battling bacteria, sending signals in the brain, and engorging
the genitals during sexual arousal. In another magic merging of nitro-
gen and oxygen, a covalently packaged pair of nitrogen atoms can be in-
duced to fraternize covalently with a unit of oxygen, yielding nitrous
oxide, N2O, a sweet-smelling psychoactive gas that makes dentistry al-
most affable, if never truly laughable. The carbohydrates in our diet are
covalently bonded armadas of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms —
carbon and water — the exact proportions and positioning of each ele-
ment in a given array determining whether the carbohydrate is complex
and nutritious or sugary and suspicious.
As a rule, elements are more stable and less chemically reactive when
they're in a bonded relationship than when they're out of one, for the
same reason that married people are celebrated as society's source of
levelheaded bourgeois dependability. When you are married, your cou-
pling capacity is more or less filled, and you are considered "taken." Not
for nothing is the emblem of marriage, the wedding ring, a closed cir-
cle. Similarly for chemical partners in bondage: their reactive parts are
already busy and so are unavailable for other relations.
Molecular marriage does not, however, demand monogamy. Many
elements have more than one reactive option, more than one electron

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 2 7
consigned to life in a half-full orbit and thus in a position to conjugate
covalently with another atom. Many elements, then, are polygamous
by nature, and each has its romantic limit, the maximum number of
partners with which it can conjoin simultaneously. That figure is
known as the element's valence number, from the Latin word valentia,
for "power" or "capacity." The closer an element comes to filling all its
gaps, the more stable, the less chemically predatory, it becomes. The
reason why nitric oxide is such a prickly chemical is that, although its
nitrogen and oxygen components are covalently linked, both still have
room for more electrons and will readily engage in supplementary af-
fairs or frank acts of larceny. Nitric oxide is particularly deft at stealing
electrons from iron atoms at the core of hemoglobin molecules, dis-
rupting hemoglobin's ability to convey oxygen throughout the body.
In the case of nitrous oxide, by comparison, all three of nitrogen's
available outer electrons are fully engaged in covalent liaisons and are
not open for further chemical dalliances, making laughing gas a reason-
ably benign compound when used in moderation. Nevertheless, the
persistence of reactive prospects on the oxygen end of the coalition
means that nitrous oxide also can disturb hemoglobin performance,
and if you breathe the gas too long you will suffer gradual oxygen de-
pletion and eventually laugh your last.
Nitrogen on its own is capable of extreme stability. In the absence of
any pressure to bond cross-culturally with oxygen, hydrogen, or the
like, two nitrogen atoms will readily fulfill each other's every need by
sharing all three pairs of their available electrons. This triple-bonded
nitrogen duet makes for an exceptionally doughty and unreactive mole-
cule that lasts and lasts, which is why liquid nitrogen is the chemical of
choice for long-term storage of such prized biomédical goods as blood,
sperm, fertilized embryos, evidence from a crime scene. About 78 per-
cent of our atmosphere consists of triple-bonded nitrogen gas, com-
pared to the 21 percent assigned to oxygen; but while our lungs are de-
signed to extract that oxygen from the air and put it to work in every
cell of the body, and we are incapable of living without oxygen for more
than a few minutes at a time, the nitrogen we inhale is of no use to us
physiologically, and we either exhale it immediately, or excrete it later as
waste. The nitrogen we do need, for our cells and our DNA, we obtain
from food, where the nitrogen arrives in a form that has been conve-
niently "fixed" for us, that is, combined with oxygen and hydrogen, by
compliant microorganisms in the soil; those microbes had "fixed" the
nitrogen from the air and fed it to plants, which in turn fed it to us or to
the animals we eat. From wherever on the food chain we can pinch it,

THE CANON 
• 
1 2 8
this molecularly domesticated form of nitrogen is essential to our per-
petuation, and all of us can be said to have a nitrogen fixation.
Yet what feeds life can also seed annihilation. Triplex nitrogen is gen-
erally unreactive, and its three covalent bonds are very difficult to break,
but with the right chemical or incendiary maneuvers they can be bro-
ken; and upon rupturing they release large amounts of energy into their
surroundings — in short, they go boom. For that reason, most explosive
mixtures, including dynamite, gunpowder, and the stuffing in your av-
erage nonnuclear bomb, contain some form of thrice-bonded nitrogen.
Chemistry is about molecules, and the word "molecule," like so many
scientific terms, has its precise and its casual definitions. Its meticulous
meaning is a group of atoms linked together by covalent bonds, by a
sharing of pairs of electrons. Yet even chemists sometimes dispense
with the formalities and call any sort of chemically bonded substance a
molecule, offhandedly referring to molecules of table salt, for instance,
or the molecules of magnesium bromide in a bottle of milk of magne-
sia. In truth, sodium chloride, magnesium bromide, calcium chloride
and the like are not molecules but ionic compounds, and though the
hero here is still a bond, Sean Connery it is not. The ionic bond that
brings us condiments, pebbles, eggshells, Alka-Seltzer, many household
cleaning products, and a surprising selection of psychiatric drugs, is
stiffer and more strait-laced than a covalent bond, less pliable, more
predictable. A brick, a rock, the salt of the earth. An ionic bond is Roger
Moore.
In contrast to a covalent bond, which can join together atoms of the
same or different elements, an ionic bond can only assimilate the dis-
similar. The reason for that is embedded in the term: an ionic bond is a
bond between ions, or electrically charged atoms. It is the attraction
that a negatively charged atom, laden with one or maybe more elec-
trons than its proton content calls for, feels for a positively charged
atom, one that has too few electrons to suit its nuclear desires. Some el-
ements are quite prone to becoming negative ions, others to having an
electron stripped away and leaving them positive, but no element is in
jeopardy of both ionization fates. When ion-plus seeks ion-minus, you
know there's no chance of incest.
The elements at greatest risk of electron loss are those with a single
or maybe two electrons in an outer shell intended for throngs. Several
inner layers of electron shells separate the outlier from the positive
charges in the nucleus. A glancing blow, a brisk breeze, a winking
neighbor, and, whoops, the electron's gone.
By contrast, elements likeliest to turn negative are those whose outer

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 2 9
shells are practically filled, but there's room for one more. Sure, the ele-
ment can and often does enter into a covalent time-share, but, Oh, the
temptation to go further: just one more electron, one little extra charge,
and the entire house would be occupied in earnest, and how whole-
some, how aesthetically gratifying that would feel. Just one last little af-
ter-dinner mint...
Consider, then, the lovely symmetry of salt. On one side we have so-
dium, a soft metal with the silvery sheen of herring scales. Sodium has
eleven electrons, two in the innermost orbit, eight in the next, and, in
orbit number three, a solitary sailor with a distinct propensity for
jumping ship. Across the aisle, we see chlorine, a corrosive, greenish yel-
low gas. The outer shell of chlorine, as I mentioned earlier, is one elec-
tron shy of satiety, and so chlorine leans toward mean, toward stealing
electrons where it can. You can't eat pure sodium, and you shouldn't
breathe pure chlorine: they're both toxic. Put the two together, though,
and enjoy the show. In a fiery reaction, the sodium atoms essentially
wilt and shrug off their extra electrons into the palms of their chlorine
counterparts. The sodium atoms in the sample are now electron-de-
prived and positively ionized, while the chlorines, in fully staffing their
orbits, have turned negative (which grants them a name change to
"chloride"). Now the two elemental tribes truly want each other. Now
the sodium and chloride ions are drawn closer not by the middling de-
sire to round out their shells, but through the much stronger draw of
electromagnetic attraction.
At the same time, we have two competing pressures: the attractive
tug opposites feel toward each other, and the repulsive sensation be-
tween the like-charged ions. As a result, the atoms quickly settle into a
regular alternating pattern of chloride and sodium atoms. They stack
up neatly in three dimensions like a balanced composition of oranges
and grapefruits. These repetitive, geometrically elegant atomic arrays
are crystals — salt crystals. What before were two substances that you
wouldn't have fed to your old home economics teacher even after she
gave you a C for sewing your apron pocket on upside down have con-
densed into a seasoning so precious that wars have been fought over it,
and soldiers given money specifically to buy it — hence the world "sal-
ary," from the Latin salarius, a stipend for salt. If you were to look at
some table salt under a microscope, you'd see just how crisply Pythago-
rean the grains are, like a sprinkling of art deco glass bricks. Bear in
mind that each one of those crystals is an ensemble of a billion billion
chlorine and sodium ions, more atoms per granule than there are stars
in the Milky Way. Now, would you please pass the salt?

THE CANON 
• 
130
Yet another sort of atomic bond is the metallic bond, the almost so-
cialist sharing of electrons among many atoms in, for example, a piece
of copper wire, or the gold of a wedding ring, or the soft sodium sample
before its encounter with chlorine. In a metallically bonded substance,
the outermost electrons float about in what's often called an "electron
sea," being tugged first toward one atom, then toward another, their
fluidity accounting for a metal's capacity to conduct an electric current.
The bonds that bind atoms and ions together are all fairly strong
glues, with the result, Roald Hoffmann has written, that under normal,
nonsolar conditions, "the atoms cohere, move as a group." They cohere
covalently as molecules, or ionically as salts, or ironically as metals. Be-
yond the coherent cliques are larger assemblages, gangling groups of
molecules or ionic compounds that adhere together through a couple
of bonds of their own. The two big-canvas bonds are weaker than those
that marry atoms into molecules, yet they have proved indispensable to
life, and ships, and sealing wax, and they give a pencil wings.
One of the critical cross-connectors is the hydrogen bond. The name
is unfortunate, not only because it sounds uncomfortably close to "hy-
drogen bomb," but because it suggests a bond that links hydrogen to
other atoms — to oxygen in H2O, for example, or chloride in hydrogen
chloride. The bonds in those cases are, however, covalent bonds, and
they are far more serious than a hydrogen bond. In fact, the hydrogen
bond is best exemplified by the stridently unserious image of Mickey
Mouse: a big round head with two round ears on top. Mickey Mouse
here is a molecule of water, with the head representing oxygen, the ears
the two hydrogen atoms covalently linked to it. Fortunately, we can dis-
pense with facial details and avoid the risk of copyright infringement.
It turns out that the electron pairs binding each hydrogen ear and the
oxygen skull are not quite fairly, squarely, and roundly shared. They
tend to spend a bit more time near the oxygen nucleus than near the
proton core of either hydrogen atom. As a result, the ears of the Mickey
molecule have a slight positive charge: their protons are not always fully
counterbalanced by a constant cloud of negative charge. At the same
time, because the oxygen atom is hogging a bit too much of the shared
electrons' attentions, the bottom half of the mouse face has a five
o'clock shadow of modest negative charge. The molecule is polarized;
its distribution of charges gives it a directionality, an upside and a
downside.
What happens when you put a whole lot of polarized Mickey Mouses
together in one place — like, say, Lake Michigan? The chins of one mol-
ecule are drawn gently toward the ears of another, lending water an

C H E M I S T R Y 
• 
1 3 1
overall shape and integrity that make Mickey quite mighty. Through
the puzzle-piece fusing of tops and bottoms, hydrogen bonds account
for water's exceptional clinginess, the tendency of droplets to stick to-
gether and trail one another loyally no matter where their scout leaders
may venture. Hydrogen bonds are only about one-tenth as strong as co-
valent bonds, but what they lack in strength they make up for with elas-
ticity. Because of hydrogen bonds, plants can drink water; even the
crowns of towering redwoods can be quenched. Slender threads of wa-
ter snake upward from the soil and through the plant's vasculature, to
escape as water vapor via pores in the leaves. And as the leading edge of
the water column evaporates into the air, hydrogen bonds pull up more
fluid from below.
Yet water's hydrogen bonds are slippery and will slide aside to stir
things up when something thicker this way comes. Water has been
called the universal solvent, for there are precious few substances that
will not dissolve in its embrace. Stir a spoonful of salt into water, and
water's mighty mice swiftly interpose themselves between the individ-
ual crystals, the positive ears tempting the negative chlorines, the nega-
tive jaws jockeying for sodium, until the salt grains have disintegrated
into a fine mist. Give polarized water molecules about 6 million years,
and they'll squeeze blood red beauty from stone, chipping 6,000 feet
deep and 277 miles wide into Arizona's northern plateau, through lime-
stone and sandstone and iron-rich shale, to scoop out a canyon the
whole world can call Grand.
Hydrogen bonding, though, is not unique to water. It arises in other
cases where hydrogen, the lightest of the elements, enters into a cova-
lent compact with a bulkier element, such as nitrogen, and the shared
electrons tip their allegiance toward the nucleus of hydrogen's partner.
From that asymmetry, a molecule that is electrically neutral in totality
assumes a Mickey-like fuzz of charge around the ears and chin.
Another intermolecular melder is the van der Waals force, christened
after the Dutch physicist who discovered and mathematically character-
ized it in the late nineteenth century. Despite the intimidating length of
its name, van der Waals is the weakest of the links, as anybody who has
ever left a pottery class streaked in enough clay for a solstice fete can at-
test; its strength is less than a quarter that of a hydrogen bond. Still, a
mild manner has its advantages, and van der Waals is essential to the in-
tegrity of many solids and liquids, and to the properties of a wide as-
sortment of substances on which we depend. Whereas in other bonds,
including the hydrogen bond, electrons tend to know their place and to
accord the resulting molecule or compound a fairly fixed arrangement

THE CANON 
• 
1 3 2
of negative and positive charges, the van der Waals force showcases the
electron's improvisational skills.
Electrons, of course, don't like the feel of other electrons, and that
antipathy explains why we can touch objects constructed of the near
nothingness of atoms and not go right through them. At the same time,
electrons are drawn toward protons — the positive particles of their
own nucleus or of any nucleus in the neighborhood. The same predis-
positions apply to electrons in the corporate environment of a liquid or
solid, when they are part of molecular or ionic teams. Nuclear protons,
good; other electrons, bad. The consequence of this fundamental pref-
erence is that, when atoms and molecules come into close proximity
with one another, their electrons tend to shift themselves to one side of
the home cloud or another, avoiding regions of ambient electron glut,
seeking out patches of heightened proton pull. The molecules hence be-
come ever so mildly polarized, or asymmetrically charged, and this gen-
tle layering of negative and positive charges helps bind many substances
together. It's a frail fraternity. Electrons are not formally shared between
atoms, as they are in molecules and ions, nor are they committed to
their unbalanced orbits, as they are in the Disney design of a water mol-
ecule.
Still, van der Waals is sometimes the only force holding big chunks of
matter together. Pottery clay, for example, consists of sheets of diverse
atoms — silicon, aluminum, oxygen, hydrogen, calcium, nitrogen, iron,
maybe a sprinkling of cobalt, copper, manganese, and zinc. Within each
sheet, the atoms are lashed together by persuasive covalent and ionic
bonds. But between the sheets, only the van der Waals force can be
found. That's why it's so easy to smear a bit of the putty onto your
fingertip; all you're doing with the pickup is interrupting the circum-
stantial attraction between sheets of mildly polarized clay particles. The
integrity of the molecular bonds themselves becomes obvious, though,
as you struggle to remove the fine clay slick from your fingertip and dis-
cover that it is very difficult to disengage or smoosh apart. Hours later,
you may still feel a greasy residue clinging to every whorl — the linger-
ing clay molecules that can be removed definitively only by fracturing
their covalent bonds with a serious detergent or chemical solvent.
Your ordinary, standardized test-taking pencil offers another in-
stance of the sound of a van der Waals snapping. The "lead" of the pen-
cil (graphite was long thought to be a soft form of lead, and by the time
chemists realized otherwise, the term "lead pencil" was already lodged
deep in the schoolhouse lexicon) is not lead at all, but graphite —
countless sheets of carbon atoms stacked one on top of another, rather

CHEMISTRY 
• 
133
like the tissue-fine layers of caramelized toffee inside a Butterfinger
candy bar. Within each graphite sheet, the carbon atoms lock elbows
covalently in repetitive, crystalline patterns, but van der Waals alone
joins one leaf to those above and below. Press the point of the pencil on
your paper to fill in your oval, and you shave a stratum or two of car-
bon crystals away from the larger deck.
From this versatile cast of bonds, all the stuff of life and site can be
staffed. Ionic bonds characterize much of the glittering landscape on
which we and our steel-belted radiais tread —the mountains, hills,
rocks, sand, the shattered seashells by the seashore, the bleaching coral
reefs beneath. Ionic solids tend to be rigid, their ions bound together so
stiffly they cannot easily be pushed aside. That rigidity makes ionic sol-
ids ideal for load-bearing tasks: what better way to begin a bridge than
with a few ionically bound concrete pylons, and what better batter for a
sidewalk than an ionic compound like cement? Our skeletons, too, are
made in part of ionic solids, tightly interdigitated concatenations of cal-
cium, phosphorus, and other atoms. Through bone, we clawed free of
the bog; we carry our steppingstones inside us.
Yet ionic solids will get you only so far, and their strength tends to be
brittle. You can push down on them and they'll hold up stoutly, but give
them a few good rotations, or maybe one swift blow with a hammer,
and their ionic bonds will rupture and the crystal palace crumble. For
that reason pylons are buried underground, to stabilize them; an uppity
tree root can buckle a sidewalk so badly the panel will crack in half; and
the twisting of an ankle may end up fracturing the bone. Luckily for us,
our bones are marbled through with a soft mortar of proteins, which
gives them far more flexibility and torque resistance than they'd have if
they were nothing but ionic columns. And lucky, too, that beneath the
most brittle outer sheath of our bones lies a network of regenerative tis-
sue that can give birth to new bone cells, sealing cracks and healing
breaks and doing for our vertebrate frames what could not be done for
the ionic solid of an eggshell: put us together again.
Most of our body tissue consists of covalently rather than ionically
bonded compounds — of molecules, not salts. We're abundantly hy-
drated, of course, and can blame at least 60 percent of our body weight
on water molecules, more if we're a pedestrian in Manhattan too em-
barrassed to try sneaking into a restaurant's FOR CUSTOMERS ONLY
bathroom when the maître d' isn't looking. Wring us out — finally! —
and the bulk of what's left explains the sci-fi canard about humans as
self-replicating carbon units: about two-thirds of our dry weight con-
sists of carbon. Water may be the solvent of the universe, but carbon is

THE 
CANON 
• 
1 3 4
the duct tape of life. Every cell, every component of the cell, is based on
carbon. If you're seated somewhere on the tree of life, or are the tree of
life, ipso facto you contain carbon, and that goes for bacteria, amoebas,
lichen, dust mites, pinworms, creationists. Even viruses, considered by
many to be less than certifiably alive, nonetheless contain carbon, as
part of the genetic backpack they tote around from host to host. Small
wonder that half of all chemists work in the field of organic chemistry,
which has nothing to do with the pure 'n' natural foods industry but in-
stead is the study of compounds that contain carbon.
We are "just" carbon-based units because carbon makes for a just-
right class of molecules. Carbon is strong, resourceful, flexible, sociable.
With its outer shell of four electrons and four electron slots for rent,
carbon is supremely suited to molecular bondage. It happily collabo-
rates with nearly every actor on the periodic table, save helium, neon,
and the four other noble elements,* so-called for their snobby refusal
to connect chemically to anything. Moreover, carbon is unparalleled
among elements in its ability to join with itself almost indefinitely,
forming carbon chains and carbon loops and branching carbon prongs
and broad carbon planes and bouncing carbon buckyballs. Whatever
shape you need to suit whatever cell part or enzyme you desire, chances
are it is best draped on a carbon frame. Moreover again, the bond be-
tween two carbon atoms is one of the strongest bonds known, far stron-
ger than that between two atoms of silicon, an element that otherwise
has much in common with carbon. The strength of the carbon bond
helps explain why it is the basis of life: we need molecular stability
now, and we really needed it when life was new and the world was a
considerably harsher place than it is today. At the same time, the carbon
bond under ordinary conditions can bend, spring, and curl, hence
the capacity of carbon molecules to array themselves as rings, cages,
and coils. Carbon is as good as Goldilocks for building the spiraling,
switchbacking molecule called DNA, and so the sugary spine of the
double helix, and the individual chemical letters of which its code is
composed, are carbonated through and through.
And while it may be mere coincidence, there's something gratifying
about which gem we carbon vessels seize on prior to making a few car-
bon copies of our own: the diamond. Perhaps nothing underscores car-
bon's chemical genius better than the breadth of its packaging options,
from the dark, slippery, shavable format of graphite on one extreme, to
fossilized starlight on the other — translucent, mesmeric, intransigent
* Argon, krypton, xenon, and radon.

CHEMISTRY 
• 
135
diamond, the hardest substance known, save for a human heart grown
cold.
What spells the difference here, between carbon as ductile lubricant,
a material you can spritz into balky locks, and carbon by De Beers? In
graphite, each carbon atom is covalently bonded to three other carbon
atoms, all of them lying in the same two-dimensional plane; there is no
upstairs-downstairs blending of electrons but only the wan charms of
van der Waals holding one floor to the next, so they slip-slide away.
In a diamond, by contrast, the bonds are fully fleshed out in every di-
rection. Now, each carbon is strapped covalently to four of its kind, the
maximum possible, and across three-dimensional space. To the left,
right, crownward, groundward; wherever a carbon looks, there's a car-
bon bound to it. They're packed together so tightly and with such crys-
talline homogeneity that light finds very little impediment to its pas-
sage, very few imperfections to bounce off of and muddy the view, and
the diamond gleams translucently. And because anywhere one might
want to slice, one encounters thickets of jealous carbon-carbon bonds,
a diamond feels like forever; to cut a diamond, a professional diamond
cutter uses another diamond.
This painstaking compaction and positioning of carbon atoms is ex-
tremely difficult to accomplish. Getting every atom just where it needs
to be to bond in a sororal three-dimensional mosaic, millions upon
millions of flawlessly arrayed rings of four-faceted tetrahedrons, takes
time and tremendous force. Until recently, the only place diamond fac-
tories could be found was hundreds of kilometers underground, in the
Earth's mantle, where carbon stores subjected to great heat and pressure
over millions or billions of years finally locked together in fixed con-
structs. Every so often, a volcanic eruption would spew a geyser of these
diamonds to the surface, and another monarch might have his diadem,
or Marilyn a pear-shaped friend. Industry also came to rely on dia-
monds for their unequaled ability to abrade metal machine parts into
shape, and semiconductor manufacturers sought diamond bits to in-
stall in their microchips, to help prevent the embedded circuits from
overheating. Diamonds happen to be excellent heat sinks, which is why
even a room-temperature gem will feel cool to the touch. Put your
fingertips or puckered lips against a diamond, and the jewel drains
warmth from you to it, a heat transfer that your brain interprets as a
brush with something cold; in fact, their high thermal conductivity,
rather than their crystal clarity, earned diamonds the alias "ice."
Whatever the argot, diamonds clearly were too useful to leave to
chance delivery through a magma pipeline. In the mid-twentieth cen-

THE CANON 
• 
136
tury, scientists figured out how to mimic conditions in the bowels of
the earth and began fabricating industrial-grade synthetic diamonds.
More recently, researchers have managed to gin up gem-quality dia-
monds as well, although the process is so expensive that the resulting
stone may cost a Tiffany customer more money than would a natural
diamond from a Namibian mine.
Carbon bonds less zealous than those in diamonds help tape us to-
gether, and carbon bonds keep us alive. Most of the food that we eat,
the carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and fiber, are carbon-centered com-
pounds, which works out to an average daily intake of three hundred
grams of pure carbon — about the weight of a pair of kidneys — per
belly per day. Some of that ingested carbon is put to use directly, to re-
pair damaged cells or assemble hormones, but more often the body
simply cracks open the carbon bonds to extract the energy stored
therein, and then tosses out the carbon atoms in the form of exhaled
carbon dioxide. One species' waste is another's preferred taste, however.
Plants blend the carbon dioxide together with water to synthesize sug-
ars — and generate as a lucky byproduct the oxygen we need. The car-
bon cycle is just one of the many mandalas of life on which we rely, of-
ten mindlessly, and which we monkey with slapdashedly. Carbon bonds
are strong, carbon bonds are dense packets of energy, and we can't get
enough of them. The bulk of the energy driving the engines of our
economy and our vehicles comes from sundering carbon bonds in coal,
natural gas, and oil. Our cars, like our bodies, take the bond energy and
dump the carbon, as carbon dioxide. Humans burn about 7 billion tons
of fossil fuels a year, and so carbon deposits that might otherwise have
hibernated underground for millennia instead combust into the atmo-
sphere, harrying a carbon cycle that is already spinning as fast as it can.
The supple power of the molecular bond that gives us edible carbon
fare and breathable oxygen pairs is crucial to life, but a covalent com-
mitment can still be too ham-fisted when life demands Nijinsky. Here
the secondary bonds come into play, and weakness becomes a source of
strength. The backbone of DNA may be held together by carbon bonds,
but the double helix is like a zipper, the "teeth" designed to fasten to-
gether or come apart as needed. If one of your body cells is about to
replicate, for example, the two halves of the DNA molecule must sepa-
rate to allow a copy, a carbon copy, to be made. If the cell isn't dividing,
but simply needs to generate a fresh supply of an essential protein like
hemoglobin or insulin, for example, the DNA must still zip apart, just a
bit, to expose the spot where the recipe for hemoglobin is written in nu-

CHEMI STRY • 
137
cleic script. Open, shut, unwind, tighten up. The molecule of life jiggles
viscously. Life was, after all, born in water, and DNA, the sentinel of he-
redity, doesn't forget its roots. The bond that holds the two halves of the
helix together, that joins each tooth, or chemical letter, of one strand to
the complementary tooth of the other strand, is the hydrogen bond, the
same bond that keeps water clinging in the lugubrious bulge of a tear-
drop. The attractive tippiness that a molecule gains when a hydrogen
atom shares electrons with a bigger, bolder, and more possessive ele-
ment like oxygen, nitrogen, or carbon is just right for the needs of our
genetic code. A hydrogen bond is strong enough to maintain the ser-
pentine shapeliness of DNA during its tranquil hours within the nu-
cleus, but it's an easy bond to interrupt for the sake of making new pro-
teins or a whole new set of chromosomes.
The same goes for the protein molecules themselves. Proteins must
have specific shapes to perform their tasks in the cell, but they must also
be nimble, sinuous, squashable. Hydrogen bonds help define the most
Gumbyish contours of a protein, allowing it to pleat out a bit on one
side or buckle inward on another. Through hydrogen bonding, a hemo-
globin protein can tangle itself until it looks like a plate of spaghetti and
meatballs, each ball a lump of iron for clasping the oxygen we crave. Or
an antibody protein of the immune system can array its four floppy
chains into a straitjacket to form-fit any microbe encountered.
Sometimes, when you irreparably rupture a hydrogen bond, you can
see life harden before your eyes. The dear liquid inside a freshly laid egg
is a delicate matrix of some forty proteins designed to cosset a fetal
chick through development, and those proteins owe their three-dimen-
sional contours to hydrogen bonds. Fry the egg, and you destroy the
bonds, freeing the protein components to rearrange themselves as hap-
hazardly as they please. The buoyant, forward-looking, transparent
syrup congeals into an opaque sedentary solid that now deserves the
designation of egg white.
And while the hydrogen bond is first among secondaries when talk-
ing about the microscopic side of life, we organics mustn't neglect our
van der Waals, the lumper and dumper and soft tissue wrangler. The
layers of our visceral organs, and the figgy pudding furrows of our
brain, are largely held together by van der Waals bonds. Our adipose
depots in particular owe their cohesion to this loosest of glues, which is
why it is easy to slice through fat with a steak knife or surgeon's scalpel
— easier than breaking down the constituent fat molecules with exer-
cise, for they are energy-rich stores of carbon bonds. Plants, too, rely on
the van der Waals magnetism of their cellulose walls to survive. The in-

THE CANON 
• 
138
ternal surfaces of a plant's roots and stem are slightly charged, attract-
ing water molecules from the soil and prompting them to begin crawl-
ing upward, as water will crawl up a paper towel if the corner of the
paper is dipped in a puddle. Hydrogen bonds then ensure that more
water molecules will follow their leaders along the cellulose road. The
name of life is bonds, all bonds, an ecumenical band of bonds, each
contributing what talent it can to uphold order, bolster morale, and re-
sist the cosmic drift toward rot, at least for one more day.
Chemistry is about molecules and bonds, and it is also about a match-
stick found, brandished, and at last ignited. "Chemistry is the science of
change, the study of transformation," said Rick Danheiser. Its roots lie
in alchemy, the ancient effort to turn lead into gold, the mundane into
the glamorous, the dead into the reborn; the word "alchemy," from the
Greek khemia, means "black sand," which the Greeks associated with
ancient Egypt and its elaborate devotion to ensuring the pharaonic
class a good life in the afterlife. The Chinese words for "chemistry" and
"change" share a common ideogram, which shows a simple but unmis-
takable postural transformation, from a person standing to a person
sitting.
The most unmistakable chemical transformation is that of a matter's
state — a solid liquefies, a liquid evaporates, a vapor condenses into
rain. For most of the furnishings of our everyday life, we associate a
particular substance with only one of those three states. Wood, steel,
and stone —solid. Oxygen and helium —gas. Alcoholic beverages —
liquid (you can keep a bottle of Bombay Sapphire in the freezer, and
somehow it remains an ever pourable starter to a gin and tonic). Water
again bucks convention and seems almost equally at home in all three
forms, as ice, steam, and liquid. In fact, Earth is exceptional in its pos-
session of tristate water. Mars has a lot of water, but it's frozen away un-
derground. Jupiter and Saturn have traces of water, too, but as orbiting
ice crystals or as a gas among miasmic gases. Only on Earth are there
ocean flows and Arctic floes and sputtering Yellowstone fumaroles; only
the Goldilocks planet has water to suit every bear.
What accounts for the differences among a solid, a liquid, and a gas?
And why are certain solids so reluctant to melt, while others begin to
ooze out of the bag if you even think about taking them on a picnic?
One obvious parameter you can fiddle with to induce a phase change in
your sample is heat. Fry an ice cube, and the ice cube melts. By adding
heat, you are amplifying molecular anxiety. Granted, molecules are
fidgety from the start. Every bit of matter, no matter how sober its ap-

C H E M I S T R Y 
• 
1 3 9
pearance, is constantly quivering at the base of itself; protons must spin,
electrons gotta fly. In a solid, however — that is, a material with a fairly
fixed shape and volume — the constituent molecules can only move
so much, the strength of their individual motions counterbalanced by
the firmness of their ties. As long as temperatures (and pressures) re-
main reasonably constant, the particles content themselves with Jack
LaLanne isometrics and jogging in place.
Add heat to the solid, though, and the molecular oscillations
quicken. The excited particles tug and strain against their bonds, and
snap at their personal trainer, until a scattering of tiny rips appears in
the three-dimensional array. Now the particles have some room to start
sliding over one another. More sliding here means more gapping there,
and more opportunity for the oscillating participants to shift out of
their frame. When the last of the hindrances to intermolecular glide has
disassociated, you're left with a liquid, a flowing substance that has a
measurable volume but no fixed shape. If the liquid is heated more, the
particles may gain enough kinetic dash to overcome any of the attrac-
tive forces that keep molecules clinging together and begin springing
free of the surface, as a gas. The components of a gas still have their mo-
lecular integrity; the individual water molecules streaming out of your
screaming teapot maintain their covalently bonded H2O formulation;
but they've shed all volume control and will diffuse out through what-
ever space you give them.
As a rule, ionic solids of rocks and bones are extremely resistant to
melting and boiling. The rigid bonds holding ion to ion defy being
loosened and pushed aside, the first step of liquefaction. Many a detec-
tive story converges on the telltale hearth, where the victim's skeletal re-
mains refused to be stewed into silence. An ordinary wood fire burns at
about 6500 Fahrenheit and will barely make a dimple in teeth or bones;
even the infernal 18000 of a professional crematorium needs two or
three hours to dissolve the bulk of a decedent's skeleton, and still there
can be bone fragments lingering in the ash. Metals, too, often have the
mettle of Mephistopheles, and melt only at very high temperatures. Not
only is the metallic bond that results from a sharing of electrons among
multiple atoms quite strong, but the bartering system encourages metal
atoms to pack themselves as densely as possible in three dimensions.
The degree of solidity and resistance to melting varies considerably
from metal to metal, though. Iron atoms have up to three electrons to
share with their peers, and they stack together so closely that each atom
touches twelve of its neighbors; iron won't melt until 28000 Fahrenheit,
or 15380 Celsius. Herring-soft sodium, on the other hand, can share only

THE CANON 
• 
1 4 0
one electron with its mates, and so a sodium-sodium federation is com-
paratively lax and will melt at 2o8°F. Silver, copper, and gold possess
similar orbital architecture and all thaw down at somewhat less than
2000°R
And then there is mercury, arguably the barmiest of all the elements.
Mercury is liquid at room temperature, and it conducts heat and elec-
tricity so poorly that it barely merits inclusion in metaldom. Behind
mercury's unusual behavior is its massive nucleus and the strong pull of
its eighty protons. The positive packet at mercury's core keeps such a
powerful lock on all the surrounding electrons that, even though the el-
ement theoretically has two negative particles to share in an electron
sea, those electrons prefer staying close to their nuclear family, leaving
the metallic bonds linking one mercury atom to another weak and eas-
ily disrupted.
Yet even as mercury's natal spirit is feckless and mercurial, the ele-
ment readily forms soft amalgams with other metals, including silver
and gold. The miners of ancient Egypt and Greece used mercury to ex-
tract gold from ore, and alchemists were convinced that if anything
could transform lead into gold, it was the bobbling, quasi-animated
metal they called chaotic water, or quicksilver. The magnificent Sir Isaac
Newton, a passionate if episodic alchemist, considered mercury less a
distinct element than a fundamental principle, the essence of all metals,
and he sought it in its noblest and most "philosophical" form. Working
in his Cambridge laboratory, Newton handled and sampled mercury
droplets and inhaled their volatilized fumes, until he became as mad as
a hatter or as flaky as a furrier — tradesmen that famously cured their
fabrics in mercury and infamously suffered from the metal's neurotoxic
effects. Preserved locks of Newton's hair reveal high concentrations of
mercury, and, according to contemporary accounts, he grew increas-
ingly hostile and choleric over time. Toward the end of his long life, the
man who earlier had discovered the universal laws of gravity, motion,
and optics and invented calculus, and whom James Gleick called the
"chief architect of the modern world," expressed little interest in any-
thing but that most fantastical of Gospels, the book of Revelation.
In contrast to ionic solids and the less mercurial metals, molecular
solids are often disturbingly easy to melt and boil. This is especially true
of solids that contain a mixture of different but closely related mole-
cules, as do the soft organs of the body. Such solids are likely to lean
heavily for their gross morphology on van der Waals, the promise most
easily broken. A stick of butter, for example, which is about 80 percent
fat and 20 percent protein, milk sugars, and other dairy components,

CHEMISTRY 
• 
141
melts at just about the temperature of the mouth — a concordance that
in no small way explains butter's rich "mouth feel" and its inclusion in
so many dishes we judge delicious.
Not every heated substance passes in orderly goosestep from solid to
liquid to gas. Take frozen carbon dioxide, or dry ice, the basis of so
many memorable children's birthday parties and forgettable stagings
of Macbeth. On being exposed to room temperature, a block of dry ice
bypasses the liquid stage altogether and evaporates directly into billow-
ing white boas of smoke, an act of phase-change denial called sublima-
tion. Dry ice owes its plumosity to both the relative frailty of the bonds
binding carbon dioxide molecules together and the paucity of carbon
dioxide in the lower atmosphere. At shirtsleeve conditions, the inter-
molecular links in dry ice quickly begin to dissolve, and the surround-
ing air essentially sucks the loosened rarities up wholesale and begs for
more. Regular H2O ice can also sublimate directly into vapor without
pausing at the aqueous phase, though it does so much less dramatically.
This is why ice cubes in a freezer tray gradually shrink despite the per-
sistence of ambient frigidity. The circulating air skims off occasional
water molecules from the top of the ice and eventually redeposits them
as a scrim of frost on the sides of the freezer — or, if the cubes are loose
in a container, as a kind of glue welding everything together into a
Gaudiesque hoodoo of ice.
Melting, freezing, boiling, condensing, all represent physical changes
in matter's state, but not in its composition. The molecular modules
may get anarchic or they may get military, but they maintain their mo-
lecular identity. A rose petal is a rose petal, whether velvety-limp on the
wedding room floor, or Popsicle-stiff in a liquid nitrogen bath. If you
want something truly novel, you must change the substance chemically.
You must break the extant molecules apart and reshuffle the subunits
into new molecular configurations. If you want your loaves to leaven
or your juice to ferment, neither boiling nor freezing nor squeezing
will do. You need the pith of that allegoric black khemia on which
the science of change is built. You need a chemical reaction. And what
better way to summon the spirit of change than by raising a toast to the
toadstool?
Fermentation may well be the oldest chemistry experiment in human
history. Nobody knows how or when the first alcoholic beverage was
made and sampled and declared "Satiny, supple, and exuberant, with
notes of black fruit compote, sassafras, cocoa, cinnamon, meat, min-
eral, forest floor, Tigris, Euphrates, T'ang, and Tang.® Best if drunk be-

THE CANON 
• 
1 4 2
fore construction of the first ziggurats." Very likely the event was a total
accident, the result of a few yeast spores blowing into a pot of mash that
a careless child or a clinically depressed slave had forgotten to clear
from the table. Whatever its origins, the vintner's art was domesticated
soon after the advent of the agricultural revolution. Chemical traces on
pottery shards from nine thousand years ago suggest that the citizens of
Jiahu, a village in the Henan province of northern China, brewed a
wine made from rice, grapes, and honey, a varietal that may explain
why the best thing to drink with Chinese food is beer. And while alco-
hol has its desolate side, and has killed or made killers of millions,
it also has kept millions alive. Through the many millennia before
the advent of public sanitation measures, when water was notoriously
nonpotable, people of all ages, at least in the West, often quenched their
thirst with alcohol instead; given its mild antiseptic properties and its
acidity, liquor was far less likely than water to carry parasites. The pop-
ulace may have been slightly intoxicated much of the time, but better
tipsy than typhoid.
Wine, beer, and other state-controlled spirits are the product of
yeast cells feasting, and eating always requires chemical transformation:
breaking apart molecules you find and using the parts and fuel to create
the molecules you need. Yeast is a type of fungus, and while the fungal
kingdom has an unusually catholic palate that may not always resonate
with ours, the yeast strain that brews happens to share our love for
sugar. If you add brewer's yeast cells to a vat of barley mash or well-
stomped grapes, the yeast will latch onto the so-called simple sugars in
the mix, "simple" meaning carbohydrate molecules that can't be broken
down into still simpler carbohydrates. Simple sugars are the ones that
taste sweet on the tongue and include glucose (which is the sugar that
flows in your blood and serves as fuel to every cell), and fructose, the
main sugar in fruit. (Put glucose and fructose together and you get su-
crose, the table sugar you stir into coffee.) The two simpletons have the
same chemical makeup, the same number of carbon, hydrogen, and ox-
ygen atoms, differing only in how the atoms are arranged in three-di-
mensional space. No matter. The yeast will imbibe either, and will wrest
energy from the sugar by breaking it down into two parts carbon diox-
ide and two parts ethyl alcohol, or ethanol. The carbon dioxide is the
derivative that puts a little froth in the beverage, or, if the yeast has been
added to bread dough rather than mash, that leavens its glutinous sub-
strate into a puffy, oven-ready food item. The ethanol, of course, is what
makes alcohol alcoholic, a leavener of mood and a lessener of sense.
Ethanol is only one member in a large class of organic compounds

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 4 3
called alcohols, colorless and flammable chemicals found in a wide va-
riety of settings. With no help from yeast, your own body cells generate
trace amounts of alcohol whenever they are forced to burn energy an-
aerobically, that is, without the benefit of oxygen, as they do during
strenuous exercise like weightlifting, which is why a locker room can
sometimes smell like a pub.
Regardless of source, all alcohols are accoutred with a hallmark
hydroxyl group, a chemically reactive knob of oxygen and hydrogen
that allows alcohol to wedge itself between comparatively bulkier mole-
cules and help split them apart. Alcohol thus is widely used as a solvent
in the manufacture of perfumes, dyes, pharmaceuticals, even children's
cough syrup, and it makes for a pretty decent cleanser, too. Alcohol has
low freezing and boiling points, allowing you to retrieve your designer
liquor from the freezer and pour a neat shot right away, and to feel
comfortable serving coq au vin to children or to Carrie Nation: by the
time you take the pot off the stove, the alcohol in the wine sauce will
have long since bubbled away.
Alcohol molecules can themselves be chemically transformed into
sobriety. If you expose a bottle of wine to air and to the appropriate
strain of aerobic bacteria — bacteria that need oxygen to feed and sur-
vive — the bacteria will pick up where yeast left off and break down the
alcohol to water and acetic acid, or vinegar. As a molecule that dresses
well with oil, vinegar has won its own measure of gastronomic fame at
the salad bar; but for all its tart taste, vinegar lacks the inebriating vim
of alcohol's hydroxyl accessory, and so could not addle a rabbit.
Fermentation is just a drop in the vast vat of reactive possibilities that
surround us. Some chemical reactions occur easily and spontaneously
while others won't bother unless you light a fire under their orbutts, or
bury their starter parts underground and forget about them for a half a
billion years. If you combine sodium and chlorine, poof, they'll react
instantaneously, heatedly: Sodom meets Gomorrah, and we're left with
a pillar of salt. And as the electrons of the participant ions assume their
position in the crystal, they give up a bit of their verve, of their kinetic
and potential energy. The total energy of the sodium chloride coalition
is slightly less than that possessed by the sodiums and chlorides before-
hand. Hence, the reaction that joins them is an exothermic one, a re-
leaser of energy, in this case as heat, light, and the thrilling boom of a
mini-explosion.
If, on the other hand, you stir together eggs, butter, flour, sugar, and
other ingredients for a birthday cake, put the batter in a pan, and then
realize halfway through the party that you never turned on the oven —

THE CANON 
• 
1 4 4
well, there's always Entenmann's. For the ingredients in the batter to re-
act chemically and rearrange their bonds into the light, firm, moist,
buoyant matrix of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins that we associate
with cake requires energy. Baking a cake is an endothermic reaction,
one that consumes heat rather than giving it out.
Then there are the chemical confrontations that start endother-
mically and end as a blast of hot air. The oxygen we breathe, the gas
that makes up a fifth of our atmosphere, may be a lifegiver, but what a
reactive zealot the molecule is. Oxygen combines with any substance it
can, and in the merging steals electrons from its partner, changing the
partner and singeing it and leaving it weaker than before. Oxygen is
such a brilliant thief that the very act of electron piracy is called oxida-
tion, even though other atoms and molecules can serve as oxidizers,
too. Oxidation may be slow and steady, as it is when an iron bridge reacts
with oxygen and starts to rust. Or it can be a matter of milliseconds: ox-
ygen greets gasoline in the cylinder of a car engine, the mixture ex-
plodes, and you're on your way. Oxidative reactions are largely exother-
mic. A rusting bridge will emit modest amounts of heat, while the heat
expelled by an internal combustion engine is great enough to warm a
cat on a car hood hours after the engine has been cut. Combustion,
though, generally requires an initial input of energy before it can turn
self-sustainingly exothermic. A spark plug must spark the cylindrical
courtship of oxygen and gasoline. A matchstick must be struck if it is to
light in any way but figuratively. By scraping the match head on the ap-
propriate surface, you heat it with friction. This heat is just what the
sulfur, phosphorus, and other ingredients in the match need to com-
bine in an unequivocally exothermic reaction. The heat from that sul-
fur-phosphorus collision in turn is enough to start oxidative combus-
tion, the chemical confrontation between oxygen and a carbon-based
substance — in this case, the wood shaft of the matchstick. Burning
transforms the substrate into heat, light, carbon dioxide, and water va-
por and will continue without further cajoling as long as there is carbon
feed and oxygen greed.
Life is also a mix of endothermic and exothermic reactions, of gath-
ering fuel and kindling, stacking the pieces with Boy Scout precision,
striking the match, and feeling the burn. The body, after all, cannot af-
ford to wait for the right chemistry to just happen. It doesn't have the
luxury of sitting around for several million years like aluminum oxide,
until the perfect confluence of geochemical events reinvents it as sap-
phire. Instead, the body must catalyze the reactions that it needs, push-
ing molecules together that might otherwise never find each other, and

CHEMISTRY 
• 
1 4 5
then bask in the energetic results of the chemical coupling. Our cells are
replete with enzymes, proteins that make reactions happen in pre-
dictable fashion, just as the spark plugs of an engine keep the gas in the
cylinders combusting. Digestive enzymes release the energy in food,
liver enzymes detoxify poisons, immune system enzymes neutralize mi-
crobes. We take in fuel to generate our catalysts: enzyme fabrication is
an endothermic enterprise. Many of those enzymes then catalyze exo-
thermic reactions, keep tens of thousands, tens of millions, of tiny
home fires burning each day, and in just the right way.
In life, as in love, timing is key, and even the wristless wear watches.
Plants that enlist faunal mobility to the cause of floral ubiquity must be
sure to maximize the sweetness and softness of their submissions just
when their seed is set to be spread. They want you, the frugivore, to
consume the fruit at that moment, slough off the packaging metaboli-
cally, and then amble away to void the indigestible seeds on some
distant patch of maiden soil. The strategic ripening of an apple, then,
tenders an excellent example of controlled carnal glee, the stepwise ig-
niting of tiny chemical blasts that blaze up as color and fragrance and
succulent roundness, all begging you to come have a bite.
Apples begin budding on a tree right after the blossoms of spring
have enticed insect pollinators to help fertilize a new crop of seeds. The
blossoms fall away, and, in a grand, endothermic production — paid for
by the tree's photosynthesizing leaves — a fruit bulges up around five
pockets, or carpels, of seeds. Those seeds need time to mature, however,
before they are capable of leaving the pod and sprouting new apple
trees. An unripe apple therefore is a forbidding fruit, its cell walls thick
and impermeable, its meat starchy, fibrous, and acidic, its outer skin
plasticine green — common fruit shorthand for CONSTRUCTION AREA:
KEEP OUT.
Give the apple and its seeds time, however, and they begin releasing
ripening hormones, most notably ethylene. Ethylene is a compact mo-
lecular bundle of hydrogen and carbon atoms — a hydrocarbon — but
its effects are large and fruitful. As ethylene molecules diffuse through
the apple in the manner of a gas, they stimulate the activity of other en-
zymes, a platoon of fruit gentrifiers, coaches, carpenters, copy edi-
tors, wardrobe consultants, attitude adjusters. Some enzymes clip the
starchy, complex carbohydrates into simple sugars, others help neutral-
ize the acids, while still others break down the pectin glue between fruit
cells and so help soften the fruit. As the cells become looser, sweeter,
and more permeable, the fruit adopts an almost animal-like respiratory
style, breathing in oxygen and exhaling carbon dioxide. The soaring

THE CANON 
• 
1 4 6
sugar content sucks in water from the stem, and the apple turns juicy.
Its degraded molecules are now small enough to volatilize into the air
and convey the distinctive aroma we perceive as apple. Enzymes in the
skin help whisk away the green chlorophyll and generate in its stead
bright, beguiling pigments of red or yellow, which can be seen from a
distance and which are to a fruit-eating bird or mammal the visual
equivalent of a dinner bell. Most of these chemical reactions are exo-
thermic: in feel as in looks, the ripening fruit nearly glows. At last the
apple can be plucked and sampled, and its warmth shared with some-
one you love.

Evolutionary Biology
The Theory of Every Body
A
s WE WERE about to enter his office at the University of Cali-
fornia's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology in Berkeley, Professor
David Wake glanced off to the side and stopped abruptly.
"Wait a minute," he said. "I have to show you something. You'll love
this. You'll absolutely love it." He darted over to a nearby shelf and re-
trieved from it a white plastic bucket with a lid on it. The lid had several
holes punched through it. Professor Wake took off the lid and allowed
me to peek.
"What the . . . ?" I sputtered in confusion as I stared into the bucket.
At the bottom was some sort of extraordinary, lizard-shaped doll, but
unlike anything I'd seen at a zoo gift shop, Toys "R" Us, or even the
Blarney Stone cocktail lounge near Penn Station. Its five-inch-long
body was light and shimmering, like semitransparent flan, and obvi-
ously molded from an advanced gel-solid polymer. Its head was tinted
teal, its dainty legs and the tip of its nose bore a hint of Necco pink, and
its back and fat tail were sprinkled with patches of copper and lilac. I
couldn't stop gawking. Was it a replica of an ancient reptile, driven ex-
tinct by its insupportable distribution of pastels? Was it a kind of visual
pun, created by an artistically gifted scientist as wry commentary on the
entire field of herpetology? Was it for sale, or should I just steal it when
Professor Wake wasn't looking? And, hey, how did he get the thing to
blink and flick its tail just now without pushing any buttons?
"Isn't it the most beautiful creature you've ever seen?" Wake said. "It's
a gecko. A colleague just brought it back from the Mideast."
"Wait a minute," I said, or maybe squeaked. "You mean this is a real,
live gecko?"

THE CANON 
• 
1 4 8
"Live and in color," Wake confirmed. "It does have an unearthly and
somewhat comical quality to it, doesn't it? Like something from Dr.
Seuss. Or don't you think it would be a perfect model for the computer
animators over there at, what's it called, Pixar Studios? They wouldn't
have to change a thing." He snapped the lid back in place and returned
the bucket to the shelf.
No, I thought to myself. The gecko is gorgeous. The gecko gets you
from the get-go. But the gecko that I later learned was appropriately,
colloquially, called the Wonder Lizard looks far too fake to make it in
cartoons.
The fake fakery is part of the take-home message here. In biology,
you should never believe your disbelief. There are so many species
that arouse one's suspicions, that look too-too: too stagy, too silly, too
gothic, too pastiched, too elegant, too composed, too momentous, too
perfect. Every time I see a toucan, I'm dubious. Its hulking yellow
bill seems out of all proportion to the rest of its body and just barely
attached to its face, as though the bird had stuck its beak into a giant
banana and decided it liked the effect. And speaking of improbable
schnozzes, let's not snub the star-nosed mole, a semiaquatic mole found
throughout eastern North America. Ringing its snout are twenty-two
fleshy, pinkish red, highly sensitive tentacles that, when fully extruded
and wriggling about in search of food, look like a pinwheel of earth-
worms, or children's fingers poking up from below in a cheap but sur-
prisingly effective horror movie. Surely the star-nosed mole didn't just
happen; surely there is a disgruntled employee in some dank basement
cubicle to blame.
In fact, when nineteenth-century European naturalists first encoun-
tered the duck-billed platypus of Australia and New Zealand — with
its shuffling, lizardlike gait, its beady little eyes and slits for ears, its
webbed feet and oar-shaped tail, and that outlandish, rubbery, bluish
black Marx Brother of a mouthpiece, which doesn't even have the
courtesy to quack — they were convinced the animal was a hoax. Not
until several platypuses had been killed and dissected were the skeptics
placated.
Amazing grace can also look fake: Two trumpeter swans facing each
other, heads bowed, foreheads touching, each balletic neck curved into
one half of a heart. You watch them move, and you could swear they're
aware of the power of their beauty, as though they live to make you
wistful, humble, and in awe of the divine. Or a male painted bunting,
red of rump and nape, blue of head, green of backside — a prince of

EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY • 
149
primaries, a fistful of Matisse. I once saw a painted bunting on a log,
and I couldn't believe how something so compact could fill my whole
horizon.
Seated at his desk amid the biologist's customary organic habitat
of rakishly piled printed matter and pantheistic bric-a-brac — a clock
with frogs instead of numbers, a lively collection of genuinely fake rep-
tile and amphibian statuettes, an old oven brick embossed with the
word SALAMANDER, pictures of Charles Darwin, Ernst Haeckel, Richard
Owen, and Homer Simpson — David Wake talked about his profes-
sional passions and his personal mission. He talked about tree frogs,
skinks and sticklebacks, salamanders and their slingshot tongues. He
described his atypical biography, a familial emulsion of two mindsets,
the theological and the scientific, which normally carp at each other like
Montagues and Capulets, red states and blue; and he talked of how his
hybrid background informs the rigorous zeal of his teaching. Wake re-
minded me of a Methodist minister I knew in grade school, the father
of one of my best friends — the same whitening hair and bespectacled,
gentle blue eyes, the same open, loving-kindness kind of charm. But
where Mr. Hill was an evangelist for revelation and the Gospel, David
Wake prefers evidence and a really good fossil.
"I was raised in a conservative Christian community," Wake told me.
"My grandfather was a Lutheran pastor, my parents were very religious.
I myself went to Pacific Lutheran College. Two of my cousins have doc-
torates in theology. One served as the president of a Lutheran college in
Alberta, and another was a bishop in Canada. So, you see, my family is
filled with religious people and theologians.
"At the same time, my family also has a lot of scientists to its credit.
One cousin was a curator at the Field Museum in Chicago. Another rel-
ative is a curator of the Natural History Museum in Oslo. My grandfa-
ther, the pastor, was an amateur naturalist. He lived in our home for a
while, and he lived to the age of ninety-nine, so I knew him well. And
he never, in his long, rich life, felt any conflict between his religion and
his scientific knowledge. Nobody in my family did. My grandfather was
the one who first taught me about evolution. He taught me to respect
evidence and to remember that religion must always accommodate re-
ality. We live in the real world, he said, and we must understand the
world on its own empirical terms."
Wake has a message to share, and it is one that virtually all the scien-
tists I spoke with, no matter their field, ranked at or near the top of
their list of things they wish the public understood about science. The
message is the alpha and omega, lox and bagels, of the life sciences.

THE CANON 
• 
15 O
Theodosius Dobzhansky, the great Russian geneticist, said it pithiest:
"Nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of evolution."
Evolution. Evolution. EVOLUTION! It doesn't matter whether you're
an atheist, a churchgoer, a craven Faust in a foxhole. You may be Catho-
lic, Muslim, Hindu, Jewish, Druid, a born-again Baptist, a born-again-
and-again Buddhist. It doesn't matter what you believe to be our pur-
pose here on Earth or hope to find in the hereafter, or whether you have
faith in a Supreme Being or prefer the Ronettes. It doesn't matter what
disk you insert in the mental module marked "God." None of it will suf-
fer if you see the principle underlying and interlocking all earthly life.
The life that we see around us, the life that we call our own, evolved
from previous life forms, and they in turn descended from ancestral
species before them. Newer species evolved from prior species through
the majestic might of natural selection, a force so nearly omnipotent in
its scope and skill that it needs no qualification, supplementation, bal-
last, or apologist. Evolution by natural selection, which also goes by the
name of Darwinian evolution or Darwinism (darwinism on "casual
Fridays"), explains life on Earth in its outrageous entirety, all the 30
million or 100 million species here today — many that have yet to be
counted and classified, let alone inspire the next blockbuster tie-in —
and all the many hundreds of millions of creatures that have arisen and
vanished in the several billion years since life first appeared. For many
biologists, evolution is part of the definition of life. "What is life?" one
researcher put it. "That which eats, that which breeds, that which is
squishy, and that which evolves."
Darwinism is so essential to understanding the slightest attogram of
biomass that even physicists agree it should be granted equal protection
in the eyes of the law. "People like to think of physics as being the
source of the fundamental laws of science," said the MIT physicist Rob-
ert Jaffe. "But there's one fundamental law that comes from the life sci-
ences, and it's just as deep and all-pervasive and universal as anything in
the pantheon of physics. Evolution by natural selection is an absolute
principle of nature, it operates everywhere, and it is astonishing. But
evolution is underappreciated, and, what hurts me far more, it is under
assault."
Darwinism is by no means universally despised or rejected. To the
contrary, evolutionary theory has a rather large fan base, and as David
Denby wrote in The New Yorker several years ago, evolutionary biology
has replaced Freudianism at dinner parties as a preferred source of
speculation for why this or that friend is behaving so badly. Charles
Darwin's distinctive profile, the long white beard, the Victorian frock

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 5 1
coat, may be second only to Einstein's as a scientific face recognizable to
a good chunk of the lay public. In many parts of Europe, Asia, and Latin
America, evolutionary science is a staple of science education, and has
no more currency as a source of sociocultural angst and spitting than
might Copernican ideas about heliocentricity. Nevertheless, in Amer-
ica, home to many of the greatest research universities in the world and
to more Nobel laureates of science than any other nation, the battle
against evolution madly, militantly, proptosically, soldiers on. It may be
wearing a moth-eaten uniform and carrying a musket, and its side may
have lost the evidentiary war more than a century ago, but drat it all to
hell, the gun still shoots: a guerrilla war against the monkey huggers!
Again and again, the opponents of evolution have managed to keep
evolution from being taught in our schools or have demanded that bi-
ology textbooks also present "alternative viewpoints" to evolutionary
theory, including nonscientific, data-deprived ideologies like creation-
ism and intelligent design. The campaign against Darwinism has been
successful enough to plant kernels of doubt in many minds. In one re-
cent poll, which echoed survey results from the last couple of decades,
only 35 percent of American adults agreed with the statement that
"evolution is a scientific theory well supported by the evidence." As years
of education mounted, so, too, did support for Darwin: 52 percent of col-
lege graduates and 65 percent of those with postgraduate training ex-
pressed acceptance of the theory of evolution. Still, that leaves 35 percent
of the most scholastically saturated Americans looking askance at one of
the bedrock concepts of modern science.
I'm always surprised at how often I encounter resistance toward or
doubts about Darwinism among otherwise rational people. When I was
thinking of writing a children's book about evolution, for example, and
I asked my cousin, an artist, if she might illustrate it for me, she said she
would — even though she didn't really believe the whole ape-to-human
storyline. Another time, while I was standing around talking to a per-
fectly pleasant couple at a friend's wedding near Sacramento — he a
lawyer, she a businesswoman — I mentioned evolution as a jumping-off
point to another subject I had in mind. My conversation partners
stopped me right there. "So," said the lawyer, "I take it this means you
have no doubt that evolution is for real?"
"Urn," I replied, staring into the crystal depths of my champagne
glass, which was, tragically, empty at the moment. "About as much
doubt as I have that, if I were to let go of this glass, gravity would pull it
to the floor, it would shatter to pieces, and the bride would be pretty
upset because it's a Waterford."

THE CANON 
• 
1 5 2
The couple chuckled weakly and then realized that a dear friend on
the other side of the room was either calling their names or should be.
So maybe I don't get invited to many parties. Nevertheless, among
scientists, the matter is as settled and straightforward as I made it
sound. You release your glass, it falls to the ground. You gaze out at na-
ture, evolution all around.
"The evidence for evolution?" said Tim White, a paleoanthropologist
at the University of California, Berkeley. "Overwhelming and incontro-
vertible."
David Wake, who for thirty years has taught a course at Berkeley in
advanced evolution, said, "The evidence is rock-solid, firm, and unas-
sailable." Whenever you take medicine, he pointed out, chances are it
was first tested on laboratory animals before being approved for use in
humans. You may believe the Earth to be only six thousand years old
and every creature installed as is by the Lord thereon; yet still you'd feel
a tad safer knowing your sacrificial guinea pig had been a rodent rather
than, say, a spider or a snail. "Why do experiments on mice more than
on spiders, if not for the reason, as we all innately understand it, that
mice are more like us than spiders are?" said Wake. "Hmm. Could that
have something to do with evolution?"
Richard Dawkins, an evolutionary scientist at Oxford University, in-
defatigable defender of Darwinism, and author of The Selfish Gene, The
Blind Watchmaker, and other lucid splendors, made the eloquent evolu-
tionary case yet again, in an interview with a reporter from Salon.com.
"It's often said that because evolution happened in the past, and we
didn't see it happen, there is no direct evidence for it," he said. "That, of
course, is nonsense. It's rather like a detective coming on the scene of a
crime, obviously after the crime has been committed, and working out
what must have happened by looking at the clues that remain. In the
story of evolution, the clues are a billionfold."
There are clues from the distribution of genes throughout the animal
and plant kingdoms, he said, and from detailed comparative analyses
of a broad sweep of physical and biochemical characteristics. "The dis-
tribution of species on islands and continents throughout the world
is exactly what you'd expect if evolution was a fact," he continued. "The
distribution of fossils in space and in time are exactly what you would
expect if evolution was a fact. There are millions of facts all pointing
in the same direction, and no facts pointing in the wrong direction.
The British scientist J.B.S. Haldane, when asked what would constitute
evidence against evolution, famously said, 'Fossil rabbits in the Pre-
cambrian.' They've never been found. Nothing like that has ever been

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 5 3
found. Evolution could be disproved by such facts. But all the fossils
that have been found are in the right place."
You can't pull Bugs Bunny from a billion-year-old hat, and pterodac-
tyls never tugged on Raquel Welch's thong. "You have to be diabolically
blinded," said Wake, "not to see evolution in everything that we do."
A good part of the problem stems from one little word: "theory."
That Darwinism is called "the theory of evolution by natural selection"
invites popular confusion and leaves the science vulnerable to deter-
mined adversaries. Will you look at that? say the critics. Scientists them-
selves call evolution a theory, rather than a fact. Obviously they must
have doubts. And if they have so many doubts, why shouldn't the rest of
us? For that matter, why should we believe their theory, their "creation
myth," rather than somebody else's? As a bumper sticker I saw recently
put it: THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION: A FAIRY TALE FOR GROWNUPS. In
some states, antievolutionists have demanded that stickers be put on
high school biology textbooks to point out that evolution is "just a the-
ory," not a "fact."
Fie, fie to scientists here, for using a word like "theory," which has
the common connotation of "conjecture," "speculation," or "guess." A
pretty good guess, maybe even an educated guess, but still, a theory is a
"could be" and not a "proven fact." Normally, I'm no promoter of tech-
nical jargon, but in this case, I wish scientists had a word of their own,
to mean what a theory means to them. A solid, pompous, unflinchingly
scientific term, in the style of "ribosome" or "igneous." A phrase resis-
tant to casual or calculated misapprehension and to the juggernaut of
justs.
Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar, and a trip to the moon on gossamer
wings can easily be just one of those things. But a scientific theory is
never just a Just So story. In science, an idea that has yet to be put to the
test or burnished by evidence is called a hypothesis. You notice some-
thing about the world, and you propose a possible mechanism to ex-
plain the observation. There's your hypothesis. The hypothesis could be
the result of simple reasoning by analogy, an extension of previous
findings onto your similar though not identical case study; or it could
be sheer heliospheric speculation. However sensible or sensational the
conjecture may be, it's not your theory, it's your hypothesis. It's just
your hypothesis. To test the hypothesis, you design an experiment, or
you gather a generous sample of data points from the field, and you be-
come a freak for control groups. You analyze your results and needle
them with statistics. Now you have a result. If the result vindicates your
initial hypothesis, go ahead and crow. If not, go ahead and dream up a

THE CANON 
4- 
1 5 4
new and improved hypothesis to explain retroactively the findings you
found; that's what the discussion section of a scientific paper is for. Ei-
ther way, the verifiable, irrefutable fact remains, you don't yet have a
theory to bear your name.
A scientific theory, like Einstein's theory of general relativity, like the
theory of plate tectonics, like Darwin's theory of evolution, is a coherent
set of principles or statements that explains a large set of observations
or findings. Those constituent findings are the product of scientific re-
search and experimentation; those findings, in other words, already
have been verified, often many times over, and are as close to being
"facts" as science cares to characterize them. To take a simple example:
entomologists are always discovering previously unknown species of
insects. You hike in the Adirondacks, they say, you poke around in the
Great Lawn of Central Park, and you, too, might unearth a new type
of beetle, which you can then offer to name after the police officer
threatening to fine you for defacing city property. There are tens of
millions of insects waiting to be discovered, of a staggering medley of
sizes, disguises, noises, and knacks. Yet for all the diversity, entomolo-
gists know that any new insect they stumble on will display the follow-
ing characteristics: three body segments — a head, thorax, and abdo-
men; three sets of legs; and a hard outer shell, or exoskeleton. These
facts of insecthood are so robustly established that they're part of a
Spanish song my daughter learned in kindergarten: "\Soy insecto, a veces
pequenito! ;Seis piernas para caminar, cabeza, torax, abdomen, abdomen,
abdomen!" The traits are the shared, taxonomically defining charac-
teristics of the insect class, and they are the result of all insects having
descended from a common ancestor. Here, then, is a modest factlet,
one among legions, that is best regarded and understood beneath the
vast climax canopy, the grand explanatory framework called the the-
ory of evolution. Why do so many of earth's creatures have six legs,
three body bays, and a stiff outer coat? Because the 30 million or so
insect species alive today descended from an ancestral specimen bear-
ing that winning combination, a real pequenito of a progenitor that
lived some time during the Devonian period, around 400 million years
ago. But why do crickets, dung beetles, dragonflies, head lice, hor-
nets, termites, praying mantises, and the rest of the teeming clade
look so different from one another? It's descent with modification. As
the insects radiated outward and began inhabiting a range of niches,
they evolved to suit their station. Natural selection stepped in, bran-
dishing a fly swatter, and, Whoa, it sure is a good thing I happen,
through random mutational change, to resemble the leaf I'm sitting on.

EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY • 
15 5
Either fact you focus on, the diversity among insects or the traits that
bind them, makes sense only in the light of evolution. The theory of
evolution.
Or compare the following foursome of forelimbs — a bat's wing, a
penguin's flipper, a lizard's leg, a human's arm. On the surface, the vari-
ous appendages look quite dissimilar from one another, and they per-
form distinct tasks: flying, swimming, darting, purchasing hands-free
electronic devices. Yet beneath the miscellany lies skeletal homogeneity,
for each forelimb houses the same set of four bones: humérus, radius,
ulna, and carpal. The bones are splayed in the bat's wing, converged to a
V-tip in the penguin's flipper, but they are readily seen on an X-ray as
anatomical homonyms. Embryonic development further confirms the
link. If you were to watch a time-lapsed video of how the respective fe-
tuses grow — the baby lizard and penguin in their eggs, the bat and hu-
man in their wombs — you would see the four forelimb bones budding
out from the same prefatory parts in the embryo. Such structural and
developmental cronyism tags us all as descendants of the first vertebrate
tetrapods, the valiant four-legged forebears that traded the seas for the
soil. Their basic skeletal structure proved so fit for the challenges of
terrestriality that all vertebrate forelimbs are modified meditations on
the humerus-radius-ulna-carpal theme; we wear the tetrapod coat of
arms up our sleeve.
Haldane's droll observation about the proper placement of petrified
rabbits is another firmly grounded finding, a fact that must be faced.
You won't find rabbit fossils in a bed of trilobite remains. Trilobites,
those familiar paleopetroglyphs that look variously like horseshoe
crabs, cockroaches, and Game Boy video icons, were for 300 million
years the dominant life form in Earth's oceans. There were more than
10,000 species of trilobite, ranging in size from a millimeter — the
comma you just passed — to creatures as long as your arm. Trilobites
were bottom feeders, seaweed grazers, trilobite biters. They breathed
through and swam with their gills, and they had eyes like no other.
Whereas the lens of a standard eye is constructed of protein molecules,
the trilobite lens was like a marble chip, made of the mineral calcite. Yet
by a quarter of a billion years ago, those sharp little eyes had had it. Tri-
lobites went extinct at the end of the Permian period, along with 90
percent of all other marine species then on Earth. The last trilobite
likely imprinted its image in perpetuity about 20 million years before
any remains of the earliest mammals can be spied in the fossil record,
let alone of the first rabbit, which dates from a mere 57 million years or
so ago. Paleontologists have seen it and shown it again and again. Fos-

T H E CANON 
• 
1 5 6
sils are found in the right place and from the right time, newer fossils
stacked in layers above older fossils. Trilobites abounded around the
world, and whether you're digging in Australia, Austria, or Cincinnati,
their fossils are always located in sedimentary beds at just the depth and
relative position you'd expect them to be for a creature that thrived a
half billion years ago. The same for dinosaur fossils, or the bones of
all the archaic, outrageous mammals from the Oligocène, circa 35 mil-
lion years B.C., like Indricotherium, or "giraffe rhinoceros," the most mas-
sive land mammal ever and a decent brontosaurus manqué; Archaeo-
therium, a boarlike beast the size of a bull and with scythes where
you'd think slicing canines would do; and Cainotherium, a distant
hoofed relation of the camel but with the face, ears, and forelegs of Hal-
dane's mascot, the rabbit. Wherever you find fossils, they fit. Giraffe-
rhino fossils are found in strata that can be dated to the Oligocène,
and those fossils are stacked above the Jurassics and the Triassics. The
consistency and sequential structure of the fossil record are all facts,
big fat faceable facts, and they've been backed up more often than the
freeways in L.A.
This is a scientific "theory": not a hunch, not even a bunch of
hunches, but a grand synthesis that gathers "facts" or robust findings
with petty p values, and infuses them with meaning. A scientific theory
also has predictive power. Under its rubric and tutelage, you can gener-
ate new ideas about how the world works, and then put those ideas to
the test. By using evolutionary reasoning, for example, you might come
to certain conclusions about the relationships among different organ-
isms. Long before scientists understood anything about our genetic
code, the swizzler stick of DNA that thinks it calls the shots, they had
classified organisms into kinship cliques based on their anatomy and
behavior. They determined that mice and humans were mammals, and
that mice had much more in common with us than did spiders: their
organs, brain, cardiovascular system, chemical composition, immune
system, reproductive habits, limb and eye count, all were closer to ours
than were those of a spider or a fly. Hence, geneticists could easily pre-
dict that the murine-human relatedness would extend right down to
the threads of our genes, to the individual bases, the chemical subunits,
of which our DNA is composed. Sure enough, as scientists began spell-
ing out the genetic codes of a variety of organisms, they found that the
closer a creature was to a human macroscopically, the closer it was al-
phabetically. Mouse DNA is about 70 percent identical to ours, while
that of a fruit fly is 47 percent.

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 5 7
Scientists could go further in their predictions about molecular ge-
nealogy. Sure, we're genetically closer to mice than to flies, but how can
it be that nearly half of our DNA still resembles the recipe for a creature
with compound eyes, backward-bending legs, and a persistent desire to
take up residence in a Porta-John? For that matter, we share one-fifth of
our genetic code with yeast, an organism that has neither cabeza, abdo-
men, nor anything else requiring multicellularity. What sorts of genes
could possibly be tying us to fungus?
As it happens, there are many basic chores that every cell must know
how to do. Whether of wildebeest, baker's yeast, human humérus, or fly
glomerulus, a cell must be able to take in nutrients, throw out the trash,
stay in shape, and divide when told. One would predict, then, that the
genes encrypting such fundamental tasks would be the genes least likely
to change over evolutionary time, no matter who inherits them — and
that is precisely what geneticists have found. The cell's maintenance and
division genes are among the most well preserved specimens nature has
to offer. We should all look, after half a billion years of evolutionary
heaving and hawing, as dewily unchanged as do the genetic instructions
that tell a cell to split in two. In fact, science has put the timelessness of
DNA's blue-collar codes to spectacular use. Through studying the genes
in yeast that oversee cell division, researchers have learned far more
about human cancer than the malignancies themselves would deign to
divulge. Tumor cells are ugly, messy, hard to handle. Yeast cells are pli-
able and generous (remember, they gave us wine). Should we ever de-
clare victory in the ragged "war on cancer," the theory of evolution can
claim credit for having sharpened the spears.
Another reason evolutionary theory may sometimes seem less
bedrock-solid than it is stems from some of the internecine haggling
among evolutionary biologists over details — the sort of squabbles that
for almost any other scientific discipline would be of interest only to the
contestants and their listservs; but with Darwinism as the national
blood sport, everybody wants to be cc'd. Evolutionary biologists do ar-
gue over the mechanics of evolutionary change, how fast it happens,
how to measure the rate of evolutionary change, whether transforma-
tions occur gradually and cumulatively, putter and futz, generation af-
ter generation, always working to stay ahead by a nose, until, whaddya
know, you're wearing a Chiquita on your beak; or whether long banks
of time will pass with nothing much happening, most species main-
taining themselves in a comfortable stasis until a crisis strikes — an as-
teroid hits the Earth, or volcanoes dress the skies in flannel pajamas of

THE CANON 
• 
I 5 8
sulfur and ash —at which point massive evolutionary changes may
arise very quickly.* They debate what constitutes a species, and where
you draw the line between two truly distinct species, each worthy of
formal codification through Linnaean nominalization, and two differ-
ent subpopulations of the same species. They scuffle over the nexus
between evolution and romance, and whether a female chooses to
mate with a male based on her careful assessment of his underlying ge-
netic quality; or because she noticed that every other female was chas-
ing after the guy and figured maybe they knew something she didn't; or
because his nose reminded her of a favorite food item, and she was
hungry.
Yet no matter how they swat the details, evolutionary scientists do
not dispute the fundamentals. They do not argue over the reality of
evolution, or that existing species evolved from previous species. And
they do not dispute the engine that drives evolutionary change, as eluci-
dated so brilliantly by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace 150 years ago:
natural selection. Natural selection is the force that transforms drift and
randomness into the gift of extravagance. It takes the doctrinaire sloth
of the second law of thermodynamics, the tendency of every system to
get frowzier over time, and hammers it into a magic, all-purpose, pur-
pose-making machine that turns around and breaks entropy at the
knees.
The basic premise of natural selection is simple. Parents give birth
to multiple offspring — more offspring, as a rule, than can be expected
to survive. Those offspring are like their parents, but not exactly like
them. Each child's DNA is a uniquely shuffled, braided, clipped, and
restated version of its elders' DNA. Genes that had lain dormant in
the mother find their spine in the young, while a dominant trait in Dad
is silenced come the son. And then, there may be a few total novelties
in the mix. A new mutation, a slight change in the chemical spelling of
a gene as it is bequeathed from parent to progeny: What do you ex-
pect, when you're copying out DNA, a sentence 3 billion letters long?
Life, like everybody else, makes mistakes, and mutations are part of
the fun. As Yogi Berra pricelessly put it, "If the world were perfect, it
wouldn't be." And if there weren't thermodynamically inevitable bugs
in the DNA copying program, we'd all still be bugs of a different sort:
* The late Stephen Jay Gould favored the latter scenario, which he called punctuated equilibrium:
evolutionary stability as the norm, punctuated every now and then by mass extinctions and evolu-
tionary overhauls; and because Gould, as a scientist, essayist, and best-selling author, did more
than anybody else to introduce Darwinism to a popular audience, his take on the subject accord-
ingly has been widely aired.

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 5 9
unicellular, genetically identical archaeobacteria happily burbling by a
hot spring, as the Old Ones did in the beginning.
Through mutations and DNA shuffling, discrepancies arise in the
gene pool that give nature something to select from. Now nature has
choices among the plethora of offspring; let the winnowing begin. A
microbe is born with a metabolic mutation that allows it to digest more
and grow bigger than can its compatriots on the stromatolite pro-
gram. The microbe greedily consumes whatever resources it can wrap
its fatty acid membrane around, including — hey! — the poor mother
bacterium that happened to spawn it. Soon the hyperphagic youth
begins spawning spores of its own, many outfitted with the advanta-
geous metabolic mutation, and the tribe drives the more sedate unicells
into oblivion. A few hundred or hundred thousand generations go
by, and another happy gaffe arises, this time in a gene that dictates
the performance of a component of the microbe's membrane. As a re-
sult, the microbe proves unusually sensitive to cues from its neigh-
bors, able to tell who's where, what they're doing, and how to profit
from their labor. Before you or anybody else knows it, this ances-
tral bugging device has bred an army of eavesdroppers, and the
world of unicellular, non-cooperative, asocial narcissism gives way to
multicellular, interactive, community-based narcissism. In the wake of
this sublime innovation, feudalism, monarchism, democracy, plutoc-
racy, the postmodern corporation, Monopoly, and Clue were sure to
follow.
Natural selection, then, is a two-step exercise of almost unlimited
potential. First, minor inherited variations arise in a population by
chance. A frog is born with a mutation that lends her head an odd,
rhomboid cast. Other frogs stare and make rude belching noises as she
hops past. The croak, of course, is wholly on them: little Braque girl
turns out to look just enough like a fallen leaf to blend into the forest
floor when an amphibivorous bird comes pecking, and so she outlives
her taunters. Additional mutations among her descendants fortuitously
enhance the camouflage effect, and every time a better cloaking device
arises, natural selection favors the bearer just enough that the mutation
soon becomes the species norm. Today, the renowned Solomon Island
leaf frog looks so much like a leaf that, again, you can't help but shake
your head in near disbelief. Ridiculous! How can a random mutation
just "happen" to carve a few corners into a frog's figure? How can a de-
viation of an ordinary amphibian gene whip up something so goofy
that also happens to be so useful? Let alone a string of random genetic
changes that just happen to improve on the masking effects of the mu-

T H E CANON 
• 
l 6 0
tations preceding them. What are the odds that a series of snafus would
shake out as the perfect disguise?
Quite high, in fact. Frogs are under relentless pressure from a broad
range of predators. Birds, snakes, turtles, mammals, other frogs, scor-
pions, tarantulas, Jacques Pépin — all seek the dense, crunchy energy
packets that frogs and their legs embody. A few industrious vipers can
wipe out more than a hundred frogs in a single twilight hunt.
But frogs compensate for their extreme vulnerability by breeding like
a certain other prey species that hops. Beyond ensuring that at least
some frogs will survive to reproductive age, fecundity breeds evolution-
ary opportunity. Given the great number of froglets produced in a sin-
gle generation, the episodic appearance of wonderful blunders is to be
expected; and every defensive leap forward will be quickly selected.
Soon the accidental has become foundational, the species standard
from which other revisions may or may not arise.
Insects, too, have both the incentive and the mechanism to evolve a
dazzling pageant of "Where's Waldo?" routines. Everybody in the world
eats insects, either willingly or between visits from the city health in-
spector. Insects blunt the sting of brevity with stunning fertility. Among
my favorite examples of prolificacy is Blatella germanica, the common
German cockroach. If left unchecked, a single female can, in her twelve
or so months of life, give rise to 40 million offspring. With insect odds,
all bets may as well be FDIC-guaranteed. The dun coloration of the
German roach suits its urban habitat, but whatever the occasion, an in-
sect can dress for it. The Javanese leaf insect not only sports the central
rib and radiating veins of a leaf, but also the appearance of little holes
and torn edges that you'd expect of a leaf partly eaten by . . . insects. A
stick insect looks like a stick and acts like a stick, which means not too
stuck-up or suspiciously static. Just as a real tree part twists in the wind,
so a seated stick insect will intermittently, woodenly, sway back and
forth — animal imitating vegetal imitating dryad at night. But my vote
for the dandiest drop-dead disguise goes to the swallowtail caterpillar,
which resembles freshly deposited guano.
In the vast clan of insects and their arthropodal relations, all conceiv-
able strategies have been sampled, all weapons amassed. Imitation, ob-
fuscation, threat of death or indigestion — name your poison, there's an
arthropod bartender ready to serve. The whip scorpion sprays a scorch-
ing one-two cocktail punch: oily caprylic acid to penetrate even the
toughest outer sheath of an attacker, and water-based acetic acid to
burn the tender tissues beneath. The devil's rider walkingstick backs up
its defensive camouflage with chemical artillery, shooting streams of

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
l 6 l
terpenes, potent chemicals similar to the active ingredient that makes
catnip detestable to everything except, inexplicably, cats; and to see a
blue jay get hit in the face with walkingstick spray is to see a blue jay
that will never again question a twig. Some millipedes contain high
doses of a progesterone-like compound that may serve as a long-term
defense strategy by crimping the fertility of millipede foes. That out-
come would not be of much use to the consumed specimen serving as
the sacrificial Pill, but, in reducing the number of future predators, it
would give a leg up to the millipede's surviving relations.
Insects have the means and motive to synthesize more defensive
chemicals than we humans have had time to tally or test. They also have
a flair for outwitting us when we turn our chemical arms against them.
When we think of the dismal history of DDT, we think of springs si-
lenced of birdsong and skies brushed free of bald eagles. Yet the real
failure of our insecticidal campaign against mosquitoes and the dis-
eases they carry was in how quickly the buzzing suckers came to shrug
off our sprays. By the time DDT was banned in the United States, in
1972, nineteen species of mosquitoes — about a third of the known
malarial vectors — were immune to the pesticide. Have your depend-
ent loved ones perchance encountered any head lice lately? If not, then
either you are a homeschooler, or your kids are very unpopular. In re-
cent years, Pediculus capitis, a bloodsucking parasite with a particular
fondness for the comparatively soft scalps of children, has joined the
schoolyard metal detector and the thirty-pound backpack as a staple of
modern childhood. The reason is simple: head lice have become mur-
derously hard to kill. They're virtually immune to soft-core toxins
like pyrethrins — the active ingredients in lice shampoos sold over the
counter —and pediatricians are understandably reluctant to recom-
mend that stronger poisons be applied within seepage range of im-
pressionable young brains. That leaves tedious and inefficient parental
nitpicking as the primary defense against lice, which pretty much guar-
antees that there will always be a parasite reservoir somewhere, ready
to infest fresh heads in Topeka today or reclaim seasoned ones in Des
Moines manana.
The pace at which insects become resistant to our poisons, and bacte-
ria to antibiotics, is often fast enough to observe. One year, baited traps
took care of our ant problem; the next year, I watched in horror as the
ants marched right through the little hockey puck disks without miss-
ing a ta-rah, en route to their main course at the cat food dish. Or the
crickets that populate and freely defecate in our basement: Every spring,
my husband sprinkles poison in all their favorite crannies and hatcher-

T H E 
CANON 
• 
l 6 2
ies. Up until last spring, the treatment worked, and the crickets crum-
bled. This year, either the treatment didn't work, or it worked the way
radiation did for ants in the 1950s sci-fi classic Them! If you have doubts
that evolution happens, I invite you to stop by our basement, where the
crickets now look like kangaroos.
Whatever the pest in question, the evolution of pesticide resistance
conforms to the Darwinian algorithm. Random genetic variations arise
all the time in a population, especially among fast breeders. Most of
those variations are either of little consequence or are decidedly inad-
visable, and they are accordingly ignored by selective pressures, or are
quickly swept from the gene pool. Every so often, however, a mutation
of enormous utility like toxin resistance springs up, and the novel trait
soon becomes the species norm.
Genetic quirkery can also sow biodiversity. If a mutation happens to
affect a key gene that controls an animal's basic development, the re-
sulting aesthetic or behavioral changes may be so profound that the
beneficiary of the mutation looks or acts like a whole new species. And
if that remastered organism and its progeny somehow become sepa-
rated from their unmutated peers — say, by rising sea levels that trans-
form a peninsula into an island — the odd stock may indeed evolve into
a distinct species that will no longer couple with its former fellows. Sci-
entists at Stanford University, for example, recently traced the evolution
of the stickleback fish family to a handful of comparatively simple ge-
netic changes. There are about fifty species of stickleback fish found
throughout the Northern Hemisphere. Some live in the ocean and are
protected against predators by a full-body armor of thirty-five bony
plates. Others swim through freshwater lakes and rivers, freed of their
cousins' cumbersome chain mail and thus able to dart about speedily
and feed competitively. The researchers have determined that a few mu-
tations in a single gene underlie this dramatic discrepancy in stickle-
back anatomy, specifying maximum plate growth in the marine fish,
more or less suppressing it among lake dwellers. The ease with which
major overhauls in stickleback format can be accomplished helps ex-
plain why the family managed to diversify its ranks so rapidly: freshwa-
ter sticklebacks diverged from their oceanic counterparts a mere 10,000
or so years ago, at the end of the last Ice Age, and they have further
speciated and specialized themselves in whatever body of water they
have colonized.
The evidence for evolution abounds, within us, beneath us, crowning
and surrounding us. Antievolutionists complain about the "gaps" in the

EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY 
• 
163
fossil record, and lacunae there are, by the chasm. Several hundred
thousand fossil species have been identified and named, but researchers
suspect that the known bones represent a mere one-thousandth of one
percent of all species that have lived. "Of course there are plenty of gaps
in the fossil record," said Dawkins. "There's nothing wrong with that.
Why shouldn't there be? We're lucky to have fossils at all." Think of all
the obstacles that a corpse must overleap en route to immortality. First,
it must avoid the fate that awaits most dead organisms: getting picked
apart and scattered by scavengers; decomposed by worms, mold, and
microbes; husked and battered by the elements; or any or all of the
above. The best defense against nature's multilateral recycling program
is a quick burial, which generally requires dying someplace where a
thick layer of sediment is likely to sweep over the carcass soon after it is
deposited: in or around lakes, rivers, swamps, and lagoons, for example,
or on the ocean floor close to shore and its sandy, silty runoff. The sedi-
mentary blanket helps to prevent decomposition, at least of the organ-
ism's toughest tissues — bones, teeth, shells, tusks, woody stems. Over
time, the sand and silt sedimentation turns to stone, and so, too, may
the bones and other bioremains within, as, bit by bit, mineral particles
come to replace the original organic molecules while maintaining their
positional integrity.
Yet even then, a fossil is not safe. Its sedimentary cemetery may end
up getting buried under so many subsequent layers of rock that bed and
fossils are melted beyond recognition, or are ripped apart by the con-
stant shuffling of the crust's plates, or blasted to ash in a volcanic snit.
Finally, there is the considerable problem of discovery. After spending
tens of thousands to millions of years patiently petrifying underground,
a fossil must fight its way to the surface again if its record is to be read.
It must hitch a ride on the edge of an uplifting plate, to emerge on the
exposed side of a hill or mountain. Or it must be on a sedimentary pla-
teau that has been painstakingly carved into by wind or water, revealing
a Dagwood-sandwich stack of rockmeats, a fossil feast. Paleontologists
do most of their hunting on hillsides and canyon gullies, where fortu-
itous collusions of geology and meteorology have served up samples of
archaic sediments, glimpses of long ago that, on most of the earth, are
stashed far below.
The ease with which paleontologists can affix an age to an outcrop
of rock and the fossils embedded therein varies from site to site, but it
can nearly always be done. Fossils younger than 55,000 years or so can
be dated with high accuracy by measuring the ratio of two forms of
carbon, carbon 14 and carbon 12, that still linger in the organism's re-

THE CANON 
• 
1 6 4
mains; the less carbon 14 there is relative to carbon 12, the older the
fossil. When it comes to appraising older fossils, scientists must look to
the stone that houses the bone. Rocks as they form often become in-
fused with a host of so-called radioactive isotopes, unstable versions
of atomic elements like uranium 238, potassium 40, and rubidium 87
that attempt to tranquilize themselves by periodically and methodically
spitting out excess particles from their unwieldy cores. Because scien-
tists have determined the rates at which these radioactive atoms decay
into stability — a pace known as the element's half-life — they can
use the changeling tracers as geological clocks. Their Geiger counters
clacking, researchers compare the proportion of still volatile to safely
spayed isotopes in their disinterred treasure, and so they can get a rea-
sonable grip on how long the rock and its entrenched fossils had been
festering underground, to time frames dating back hundreds of mil-
lions of years.
Yes, it's hard to be a fossil, harder still to be a found fossil with a de-
pendable isotopic birth certificate. Of course there are gaping gaps in a
record so reliant on a defiance of nature's tireless composting piety, and
on the blind luck of revealing uplifts a million years hence. Wouldn't
you be wary if the gaps were too few?
Besides, gaps are perpetually being at least partially plugged. In 2001,
researchers digging in the low hills of northern Pakistan, at a site once
submerged beneath the warm, shallow waters of the Tethys Sea, discov-
ered two superb caches of whale fossils that help trace the mammal's
brazen backward flip from terra firma to aqua primordia. Biologists
had long assumed that whales — which in their streamlined design and
fealty to water seem so piscine that Herman Melville deemed them fish,
but which breathe air, breastfeed, and bear hair follicles like any other
mammal — were descendants of land mammals that returned to the
oceans some 50 million years ago. The whale's fossil trail, though, was
so spotty that biologists could only guess at what the prenautical whale
might have looked like. Now they have compelling evidence that the
progenitor to Moby Dick looked and ran like a wolf but ate like a pig,
for it was closely related to ancient artiodactyls, the group of hoofed
ungulates that today includes pigs, camels, cows, and hippos. Even be-
fore venturing into the water, the new fossil trove shows, the proto-
cetacean had specialized ear bones that now are found only in whales
and dolphins, suggesting that the whale's impressive audio skills, its ca-
pacity to hear freed Willy keening half an ocean away, may have evolved
to track sound prints on land. Instead, it heeded the songs of the sirens
and followed them into the sea.

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 6 5
Moreover, there are some beautiful fossil series that show persua-
sive procession of one species into the next. Among the most famously
fleshed-out fossil record is that for the horse. According to the se-
quence disinterred to date, the first horselike genus was Eohippus, or
Hyracotherium, an agile, four-toed creature the size of a Labrador re-
triever, which daintily dined on shoots, berries, and leaves in the wood-
lands of Eocene North America, 53 million years ago. Eohippus gave rise
to several lineages, horses of different sizes, toe numbers, teeth ridges,
and, undoubtedly, colors, although fur does not fossilize well so we'll
probably never know. Some species were suited for life in the deep
woods, others for open grasslands. One successful savanna specialist,
Hipparion, migrated across the Bering land bridge to the Old World
about 10 million years ago, and soon spread across southern Eurasia
and Africa. Back in North America, all of Eohippus's descendants grad-
ually died off, and by the start of the Pliocene, 5 million years ago, only
the horse called Dinohippus remained. Large and rugged, Dinohippus
had long legs and single-toed, padless hooves ideal for galloping across
the open plains that proliferated as the climate grew cooler and drier.
It also had big, thickly enameled teeth designed for a lifetime of grind-
ing on tough scrub grass and the tougher silica that inevitably comes
up with it. Dinohippus begat a slightly more graceful version of itself,
Equus, the modern genus of horse. At some point, Equus crossed paths
with the comparably toothsome and leggy Hipparion, and for whatever
reason — greater fecundity, lucky horseshoes — managed to supplant it.
All of today's breeds of horse, from a grizzled Central Park carriage
horse to a thoroughbred, sparrow-boned stallion, are members of the
equine club. So, too, are existing species of zebra and wild ass. Their
evolutionary heritage is a canter cast in stone.
Another group for which the fossil record is surprisingly rich is . . .
our own. If you want to implicate a supreme being in the story of hu-
man evolution, you might consider inserting it here, as the mastermind
behind the fortuitous events that yielded a wealth of prehuman remains
in settings that normally are hostile to fossils. A supremely levelheaded
being who wants only to guarantee that those in a position to ponder
their roots have a look at the family tree. We have fossils of primogeni-
tor primates from 80 million years ago, shrewlike mammals that began
spending less time on the ground and more in bushes and trees, where
they evolved large, forward-facing eyes well suited for ferreting out in-
sects and dexterous fingers for plucking found insects off leaves. We
have fossils from 50 million years ago, when the archaic arborealists
started to diversify and give rise to early monkeys and apes, and these

T H E CANON 
• 
l 6 6
fossils formed in the semitropical forests of Africa, where humidity
and armies of mulchers generally reclaim all biodetritus before it has
a chance to be archived in sediment. We have souvenirs from ances-
tral apes like Dendropithecus, Proconsul, Kenyapithecus. "There actually
seem to have been more potential ancestors than we would have needed
prior to 12 million years ago," the Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich writes
in Human Natures. We have, he added, "an embarrassment of fossil
riches."
So, too, do we have a sturdy chain of "missing links," of fossils with
a variegated mix of traits we might call either "humanlike" or "ape-
like." There's lovely Lucy, the petite australopithecine female — named
after the Beatles song "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds," which was
playing in the tent the day Donald Johanson discovered her —who
clearly stood upright but whose skull was a quarter the size of ours; and
such early hominids as the semibrainy Homo habilis, presumed to be
one of the first users of stone tools, and the horse-toothed Homo
ergaster, and the lantern-jawed Homo rudolfensis, and Homo erectus,
skull swept back as though in a shower cap, and archaic Homo sapiens,
and early modern Homo sapiens, and fully modern Homo sapiens, and
that quintessential caveman, Homo neanderthalensis, which some re-
searchers call Neanderthal while others prefer to drop the h, but all
agree has been unfairly maligned in serving as shorthand for "ex-
tremely primitive, unhygienic, liable to grunt." Neanderthals coexisted
with Homo sapiens throughout Europe for at least 100,000 years before
dying out suddenly, even catastrophically, about 28,000 years ago. The
reasons for the Neanderthals' demise remain unclear. Their brains were
as large overall as those of their H. sapiens peers, although their skulls
were of a slightly different shape, flatter and more beetle-browed, sug-
gesting that they had a comparatively smaller frontal lobe, the part of
the cerebrum we prize as the seat of our intelligence. Neanderthals, like
Homo sapiens, fashioned fine stone tools with sharp, flaked edges, but
they seemed less interested in art and ornamentation, in painting cave
walls or carving pieces of ivory into female figurines with imprudent
body mass indexes. Some skeletal evidence suggests that Neanderthals
were far more prone to injury, arthritis, and other debilitating con-
ditions than were H. sapiens. Or maybe our ancestors couldn't stand
the sight of those lowbrows, and exterminated them. Genetic studies
strongly suggest that there was never any romantic intermingling of the
two hominid species, no evidence that we carry traces of Neanderthal
genes. Whatever the cause, when the Neanderthals departed the scene,
only one member of the Homo genus remained, we the self-designated

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 6 7
drivers and namer of names, with our high, proud foreheads and our
three-pound brains. Homo sapiens sapiens, so wise we had to say it
twise. How can a sentient sapiens look at a lineup of hominid and
prehominid skulls in a natural history museum and not be impressed at
the traits that bind us, and those that set us apart? Descent from a com-
mon ancestor, modification by natural selection.
The fossil record, as sketchy as it is in spots, is unerringly consistent
in sequence, no matter where in the world you dig. The molecular re-
cord, too, reveals the relatedness of all living beings, and also corre-
sponds as one predicts to the evolutionary branching patterns of the
major organismic tribes. Our genes are much more similar to those of a
mouse than to those of a fly, and they are more similar still to the genes
of a chimpanzee, our closest living relation. If you take one strand of a
double helix from a human cell, and line it up against a helical strand
from a chimpanzee cell, the two strands will stick together — will find
the chemical counterpart they expect — along all but 2 to 4 percent of
their spans. The 3 billion or so chemical letters that make up our DNA
are 96 percent identical to those of a chimpanzee. Looked at another
way, 120 million little genetic bases, just about enough to fill one of the
23 sausage-shaped chromosomes you see if you examine your fetus's
DNA through amniocentesis, is all that partitions tourist from tenant at
the San Diego Zoo. Which is what you'd expect for two species that
shared a common ancestor only 5 million years ago. A mere 250,000
generations back, a quarter of a million great-great-greats; a forebear so
far, yet so near, I can't help but call it Grandpa Silas.
Another big chunk of evidence for the theory of evolution can be
seen in the realm of biogeography, the distinctive distribution of species
around the world — at least until we humans started redistributing spe-
cies willy-nilly as we wandered. Darwin was deeply impressed by the
spatial clustering of what he called "closely allied" organisms — species
with similar body plans and characteristics. Latin America, for example,
is home to a magnificent, highly endangered, and inexplicably obscure
family of birds called cracids (rhymes with "acids"), fifty species of
large, meaty creatures notable for their vivid variety of headgear: the
piping guan's foppish Mohawk crest, the helmeted curassow's bright
pink knob bulging up like blown bubblegum between its eyes, the long
blue horn of the appropriately named Pauxi unicornis. Cracids can be
found as far north as the Texas-Mexico border and as far south as Bue-
nos Aires Province — although overhunting and habitat hacking have
drastically reduced their numbers — but because they don't fly well,
they haven't crossed any oceans. You won't spot a wattled guan in the

THE CANON 
• 
l 6 8
Laotian rainforest or a Mitu mitu mitu sunbathing on the Solomon Is-
lands. Neither would a wild penguin be caught dead in the jaws of a po-
lar bear. All eighteen species of penguin live in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, many of them around Antarctica, while the polar bear, like its
close cousin the grizzly bear, is strictly a resident of the north. In the
eyes of biologists from Darwin onward, the concordance between geog-
raphy and biology, the clustering of "closely allied" species on the same
landmasses and the discrepancies between the inhabitants of one conti-
nent and those of another, can be traced back to one elegant explana-
tory engine. "We see in these facts some deep organic bond, prevailing
throughout space and time," Darwin wrote. "This bond, on my theory,
is simple inheritance." The descendants of a common ancestor, sharing
common ground.
Yet another line of proof is best captured with a line of mnemonic
ditty: "Kings pour coffee on fairy god-sisters." This is my favorite way of
remembering the taxonomic system that we use to classify species. You
have your kingdom, then your phylum, your class, order, family, genus,
and species. It's a nested sequence of categories, from big-picture suzer-
ain to a specific little sister — the word "specific," conveniently enough,
being the etymological progeny of "species." The narrower the niche,
the more traits the pigeonholed will share; the broader the category,
the larger the number and the wilder the heterogeneity of its members.
No matter how hurly-burly any corraled crowd becomes, though, the
beings bunched together in one batch will have more in common with
one another than they do with those in any other like-tiered grouping.
Let's take a quick look at ourselves. We sapiens are the only living
species in our genus, Homo, although the fossil record shows there have
been other Homos, like Neanderthal and Erectus, before us. Our family
is Hominidae, and we share it with four living species of great apes —
chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans — as well as dozens
of extinct predecessors of varying apely or humanesque traits. We
hominid apes join with some 200 species of monkeys, lemurs, tarsiers,
lorises, and the like in the order Primate; and with another 4,600 or so
species in the class Mammalia, a cadre united by our hair, four-part
hearts, two-part ears, and motherly udders; even those egg-laying out-
liers of mammaldom, the duck-billed platypus and the anteating
echidna, dribble milk from their mammary glands that their hatchlings
lap up. Our phylum, Chordata, subphylum Vertebrata, celebrates our back-
bone, and brackets us together with more than 50,000 other verte-
brates, like reptiles, birds, fish, and amphibians. Our kingdom is Ani-
malia, and here we run into the great throngs of arthropods and other

EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY 
• 
169
spineless animals: insects, spiders, scorpions, millipedes, lobsters, cray-
fish, and crabs; and oysters, octopuses, gastropodal makers of dye; and
the worms and the sponges, corals, sea pens, sea cucumbers; many mil-
lions of animae with wide-open mouths or mouth pores, defined by
our need to feed on somebody, somehow. Not so for the 260,000 spe-
cies in the kingdom Plantae, those hidebound Rumpelstiltskins that
spin sun into gold; yes, even the Venus flytrap, should no insect come
calling, can rally its chlorophyll and get by eating light.
If we continue clambering up the tree of life, however, into a fairly re-
cent addition to the classification scheme that has yet to be incorpo-
rated mnemonically, we'll join with trees and other plants, as well as
with algae and yeast. Above kingdoms are two "empires," the eukaryotes
and prokaryotes — we eukaryotes being those whose cells are equipped
with a nucleus in which the double helix is cradled, and prokaryotes,
like bacteria, with their DNA floating unbounded in the viscous cell
belly, the better to divide if you just give it twenty minutes. And if you
rise higher still to view the code by which life carries on, eukaryote and
prokaryote become one. Inside every cell, and every viral parasite of a
cell, you will find the same chemical alphabet, the same nucleic acid let-
ters that tell a single epic story in a billion different ways. Above empire,
kings, and caffeine, we have the Gaia of genes.
As the writer and naturalist David Quammen has observed, this
phylogenetic sorting system, this nesting of category within category,
and the tiered pattern of resemblances that brings ever more species
into the fold and finally culminates in a single ancestral supertrait —
the shared chemistry of our genes — is not the ordinary way we orga-
nize collections of items. I, for instance, have a large collection of book-
marks from around the world, dating back to the early nineteenth cen-
tury. I've organized the antique ones by theme — the bookmarks that
advertise pianos, or Pear's soap, or chocolates, or tires, or Smokey the
Bear, or the Scottish Widows Fund — but there's no systematic way to
link the tire bookmarks to the perfume bookmarks to the Mr. Peanut
1939 World's Fair commemorative bookmarks. The same goes for my
daughter's collection of boxes. She likes to arrange them in aesthetically
pleasing configurations, but there's no obvious morphological hierar-
chy, no reason for saying the jeweled box is more like the painted wood
box than it is like the carved wood box. Why can't bookmarks and
boxes, or rocks, or earrings, be systematized like matryoshka dolls? Be-
cause, Quammen writes, "Rock types and styles of jewelry don't reflect
unbroken descent from common ancestors. Biological diversity does."
And the number of traits two species share, or the degree to which their

T H E 
C A N O N 
• 
1JO
DNA strands might happily, stickily, intertwine, is often a measure of
how recently the two species diverged from a common ancestor.
Yet not every case of similitude in nature is proof of a close blood-
line. Sometimes organisms on one continent will bear a startling re-
semblance to species located halfway across the globe, to which they are
only very distantly related. For example, the cacti of the Americas are
quite difficult to distinguish from a group of African succulent plants
called euphorbias. In both families, you have some species that are
shaped like slightly squashed dough balls and others that grow tall and
upright, like aspiring totem poles. Euphorbias and cacti display a simi-
lar preference for spines or thorns over leaves; are sheathed with a
thick, waxy skin; and store water in their hollow cores. If you bought a
euphorbia and nicknamed it Saguaro, your aunt from Tucson might
not see any cause to correct you. Yet the cactus and euphorbia families
are as scantily related as two plant groups can be, and each has much
nearer floral cousins without a spine to their frame.
The same with the anteating echidna of Australia, the anteating
pangolin of Africa, and the giant anteater of Latin America. The three
mammals share more than a fondness for ants and termites. Each has
an extenuated, depilated snout, wormlike tongue, bulging salivary glands,
a stomach as rugged as a cement mixer, vestigial teeth, and little scythes
on its feet. Yet the trio's last common ancestor probably darted among
dinosaurs. The echidna, remember, is still laying eggs, and its nearest
kin, the platypus, looks like a Muppet.
Importantly, the anteating trio, the bicontinental succulents, and a
plethora of other cases in which the anatomy matches but the taxon-
omy clashes only serve to underscore Darwin's sweeping authority. All
exemplify the phenomenon of convergent evolution, of widely dis-
persed lineages confronting similar problems, and, through the guiding
hand and cracking cat-o'-nine whip of natural selection, independently
devising the same basic solution, the same set of tools to get the taxing
job done. Both the euphorbias of sub-Saharan Africa and the cacti of
the Sonoran plateau of North America have evolved in some of the
harshest, parchest, and most sun-beaten habitats on earth, and there are
only so many ways for a plant to weather a life in extremis. You can
adopt a round conformation, which lends you the least amount of sur-
face area relative to your volume: that way, you have a minimum of cov-
ering exposed to the harsh sun and drying winds, but a relatively big
central holding tank to store whatever water may fall during a brief
desert shower. Alternatively, you can grow tall and upright, so that little
of your surface sits directly beneath the glare of the midday sun, while

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 7 1
again giving you internal space for a personal reservoir. Leaves increase
your total surface area and wick away moisture from within, so best to
dispense with them entirely and let your stem do the photosynthesiz-
ing. Thick waxy skin inhibits evaporation and deters the sharp incisors
of thirsty desert rodents, while thorns not only add to the defense
against hydrotheft, but also help channel dewdrops and rainwater down
to the plant's shallow roots. Yes, if you plan to succeed under fire, you'd
better have a tough hide and plenty of big pricklers on your side.
Another risky profession is myrmecophagy, the consumption of ants,
and it doesn't help if you plan on ordering a side of termites. Ants and
termites are among the most successful of all arthropods, such a domi-
nant presence in whatever habitat they choose to colonize that other
insects like beetles or cockroaches are consigned to puddling around
their outskirts. Edward O. Wilson has estimated that ants alone make
up at least half of the world's insect biomass. Much of the success of
ants and termites lies in their social skills, their ability to work together
seamlessly as highly specialized but de-individualized members of their
collective — to behave as a ruthless "superorganism" and model for the
Red Menace of McCarthyism and the spandexed Borg of Star Trek. No-
where is the insects' militant nationalism more evident than in their
commitment to homeland security. When attacked, ants and termites
reply en masse, stinging, biting, shooting out streams of formic acid,
swarming into eyes, ears, nostrils, pants. Hence, while an ant colony or
termite mound of millions of individuals would seem to present an ir-
resistible target to nearly every passing food pipe, in fact for many crea-
tures resistance is prudent. If you have designs on this refractory form
of sustenance, you can't be an amateur or do it part-time. A hammer
won't work; you need specialized gear.
In taking up the challenge to exploit a vigorously fortified resource,
the echidna, pangolin, and giant anteater have converged on the same
safecracking utensils: large, sickle-shaped claws for digging into nests; a
long, sticky ribbon of a tongue for poking deep into the dugouts and
lapping up hundreds of insects per probe; an elongated muzzle for pre-
cision firing of the tongue; a denuded muzzle so that ants and termites
have no fur to grab on to for a counterattack; enlarged salivary glands
to keep the tongue gummy and to help wash the ants down; and an
ironclad stomach to withstand all the sand that accompanies every ant
sampler. Horses have big teeth to endure the silica contaminants in
grass roots. But with no need to chew their tiny prey before swallowing,
anteaters opted to preempt dental angst and have forgone tooth erup-
tion completely. Kent Redford, a biologist with the Wildlife Conservation

THE CANON 
• 
\~J 1
Society in the Bronx who has studied anteating animals, admits that
theirs is a "weird bioplan," but one with box office legs. When you see
multiple lineages independently evolving a similar morphology, he said,
you've got to figure the recurrent design is the obvious choice, the most
natural selection.
Convergence, camouflage, Donald Duckbill and Toucan Scam.
Wherever you rummage through the emperor's phyletic cabinet of cu-
riosities, you'll see how nonrandom, how purposeful, Darwinian evolu-
tion can seem. If much of nature looks designed, that's because it is de-
signed. Not from the outside in, but from the inside throughout, on the
fly, by life striving to fulfill the prophecy of itself, and to remain, at all
costs and by any pathway or laugh track, here on Earth, among itself,
alive. Critics of evolution complain that a purely Darwinian or "mecha-
nistic" explanation of life consigns us to a life stripped of meaning, to a
world driven by random forces, exigencies, and pointless amoralities.
Gregg Easterbrook, a writer who has been described as a "liberal Chris-
tian," has posited that "the ultimate argument will be between people
who believe in something larger than themselves," that is, those of deep
religious faith, "and people who believe it's all an accident of chemis-
try." Yet this binary formulation is needlessly inflammatory and far too
penurious. What is the "all" that is to be explained as "an accident of
chemistry"? The all of biological diversity with which the world over-
brims? To characterize life as embodying accident is highly misleading,
no matter what your spiritual leanings may be. Life is the anti-accident,
the most thermodynamically profligate heave-ho ever instigated and
subsequently amplified, annotated, explicated, expurgated, renovated
. . . well, you get the idea. We don't know how life began, but even that
first replication of an unknown molecule was not really an accident. It
was lucky that the conditions were right for the replication to occur,
perhaps, but the very act of self-copying was, in its way, a deliberative
act. The inherent tautology of the definition of life — that which lives
and seeks to perpetuate itself—already removes accident from the
equation. Indeed, there are some origin-of-life researchers who insist
that, under certain conditions, life is virtually inevitable. Are these con-
ditions rare enough to qualify as genuine accidents of chemistry? Or do
they abound throughout the universe, a consequence of hydrogen and
oxygen being among the commonest of all elements, and therefore wa-
ter, the fount of life, being one of the commonest of molecules? We
don't know yet, but I can say that the great majority of astrophysicists
are convinced that we earthlings are far from alone, a subject I'll return
to in the book's final chapter.

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 7 3
However incidental or inevitable were life's beginnings, its efflores-
cence into the "all" we see around us has not been at all accidental or
random. "Natural selection is about as nonrandom a force as you can
imagine," said Richard Dawkins. This is not to say that natural selection
has specific goals in mind, or that it has proceeded in stately forward
march to engineer progressively more complex and intelligent organ-
isms, an effort of which we, of course, are the crème flambé. Natural
selection seeks only to select that life which knows best how to live,
and sometimes, as the archmodernist Adolf Loos said, ornament is
crime. For example, the tunicate, or sea squirt, is a mobile hunter in its
larval stage and thus has a little brain to help it find prey. But on reach-
ing maturity and attaching itself permanently to a safe niche from
which it can filter-feed on whatever passes by, the sea squirt jettisons
the brain it no longer requires. "Brains are great consumers of energy,"
writes Peter Atkins, a professor of chemistry at Oxford University, "and
it is a good idea to get rid of your brain when you discover you have no
further need of it."
Evolution is neither organized nor farsighted, and you wouldn't want
to put it in charge of planning your company's annual board meeting,
or even your kid's birthday party at Chuck E. Cheese. As biologists like
to point out, evolution is a tinkerer, an ad-hocker, and a jury-rigger. It
works with what it has on hand, not with what it has in mind. Some of
its inventions prove elegant, while in others you can see the seams and
dried glue. "The assumption often is that organisms are optimal," said
Bob Full, a materials scientist at the University of California, Berkeley.
"They are not. Organisms carry with them the baggage of their history,
and natural selection is constrained to work with the preexisting mate-
rials inherited from an ancestor. Dolphins have not reevolved gills, no
titanium has been found in tortoise shells, and you would never design
a bat from scratch."
Why are posters of the Heimlich maneuver hung in every restaurant,
and why is it so easy to choke on a pretzel? The evolution of human lan-
guage was made possible by our larynx dropping down from its previ-
ous primate position, thereby opening up a larger air space to facilitate
elaborate sound production. In addition, the position of the tongue
changed. Whereas a chimpanzee's tongue is contained entirely within
the mouth, the back of a human tongue forms the upper edge of the vo-
cal tract, giving it flexibility in shaping and articulating sounds. Those
twin modifications incidentally brought our food and air pathways
much closer together than they had been in our prehuman ancestors,
or than they are in our latter-day ape kin, with a concomitant rise in

THE 
CANON 
• 
1J 4
the risk of an embarrassing and potentially fatal episode of a bite of
pickle dropping into the trachea rather than the esophagus, where it be-
longs. By themselves, the laryngeal mutations would have been swiftly
whisked from the gene pool, but throw in the novel capacity for orating,
educating, obfuscating, browbeating, backstabbing, filibustering, and
singing jingles in the shower for products you don't even like, and now
you're talking.
Moreover, not every feature on a creature is the product of natural
selection. Some may be residual traits that are no longer needed or
functional, but that are harmless and so are not under selective pressure
to be tossed off like so much tunicate cerebrum. When we are cold or
alarmed, for example, we get goose bumps, which may look cute on
children emerging from a pool but which don't do them nearly the
good they might if the children still had fur. The reaction harks back to
our pelted past, when the raising of serious body hair helped to lock in
heat during the cold, or made one look bigger in confronting a foe.
Other traits arise in one sex not for direct utilitarian purposes, but be-
cause they're crucial in the other sex, and the basic body plan of mam-
malian embryonic development happens to be bisexual. Witness the
male mammal's compact, dairy-free nipples, generally the same num-
ber on him as will be found on his lactationally competent counterpart
— two on a man, a male chimpanzee, a male bat; ten on a male dog and
eight on a male cat.
A still greater engine of pomp, camp, and comedy, of conspicuous
traits that may do nothing to increase an individual's life span and in
some cases help clip it short, is the evolutionary force called sexual se-
lection. Darwin himself described this impressive complement to natu-
ral selection and offered extensive evidence of how the need to attract a
mate and thwart one's rivals can have a radical impact on an animal's
profile and behavior. Even traits that seem to impede a species' capacity
to escape from a predator or to fade securely into the background — the
standard bequests of natural selection — will find evolutionary favor,
Darwin said, if they so enhance their bearer's sexual appeal that they
end up swamping the competition in the gene pool. After all, if you sur-
vive long enough to breed, and if you score handsomely, even orgiasti-
cally, in a single spring spree, who cares if you're a feather duster come
summer? Your seed will do your future struttings for you. The classic il-
lustration of sexual selection at work is the peacock's tail. A peahen is a
dowdy, mostly beige bit of bird-dom, but she clearly has lurid appetites.
Over many generations of peahens preferring males with ostentatious
posterior plumage, peacocks have evolved tails so cumbersome that

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
•
they can scarcely flap up to the lowermost branches of a tree — presum-
ably a potential handicap for a bird native to the land of the leopard, a
famously agile climber. Nobody knows why peahens like the male tails
they do. Is it something about the depth and purity of the iridescent
colors that signal the male's underlying genetic worthiness? Or do the
peahens attend more closely to the quantity and symmetry of dark
eyespots on the plumage, spots made especially prominent against a
shimmering emerald and turquoise backdrop? Could it be the capacity
and willingness of the male to carry the weight and to fan it wide when-
ever they pass that the females find so fetching? Whatever message the
tail conveys, it is one no proud peacock can afford to forgo.
The ferocious struggle not only to attract a mate but to fend off rival
suitors can also leave an evolutionary cross hair to bear. Each mating
season, male deer do little beyond butting their racks together, until
finally the lesser racks roll, and the triumphant stacks become studs.
The annual intermale joustings have placed a high premium on the
possession of large, sturdy antlers that can take a beating without crack-
ing and on multiple forking prongs for latching into a rival's rack
and flipping him over. The elaboration of the stag headdress has ac-
cordingly mounted over time — and is sometimes mounted over a hu-
man hunter's mantelpiece, too. Conversely, the males of many spider
species are tiny, a fraction of the size of the female. She has pressing
need of her heft: to catch prey, to spin silk, to lay eggs. The he-spider has
need only of speed, to reach a receptive mate in advance of all those
other eight-legged wallets of sperm. But the male's slight size leaves him
defenseless against the female if she's in the mood for a postnuptial
snack. As ever, love hurts.
William Saletan once wryly observed in the online magazine Slate that
evolution doubters, like any other group of organisms, can be orga-
nized taxonomically. The ancestral members of the lineage are the
straight-up creationists, those who interpret Genesis literally, believe
the Earth to be only 6,000 years old, and insist that all species, including
people, were built by God as is, in toto — and that goes for Dorothy and
her little dog, too. No Darwinism, no natural selection, no Eohippus
meets Dinohippus and talks to Mr. Ed, no cockamamie picky peahens,
no Permian period. No evolution, period.
This founding credo of hard-core creationism has been around for
many, many decades — it was the stimulus for the famed Scopes mon-
key trial of 1925 — and it shows no signs of going extinct. In recent
years, biblical literalists have managed to persuade the U.S. Park Service

THE CANON 
• 
176
gift shop at the Grand Canyon to carry their coffee table book, Grand
Canyon: A Different View, which alternates gorgeous sunset photo-
graphs with the argument that the canyon is the handiwork of Noah's
flood. A lavish new Museum of Earth History in Eureka Springs, Ar-
kansas, displays fastidiously detailed models cast from genuine fossils of
Tyrannosaurus, Thescelosaurus, and other dinosaurs, but positions them
side by side with Adam and Eve and attributes the dinosaurs' demise
largely to that explanatory Zelig, the Flood.
Nevertheless, the pressures of contending with the mountains and
arroyos of evidence that attest to Earth's great antiquity, and to the evo-
lution of species through the eons, have resulted in their own speciation
event. Strict creationism has given rise to new species, new attempts to
undercut the reach of Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection.
Perhaps the most notorious of the derivations is intelligent design, and
though the phrase is meant as a tip of the hat to a presumably divine
designer, it never hurts, if you're going to start a fight, to claim the word
"intelligent" for your side.
Creationists, as a rule, reject the evolutionary account of when spe-
cies arose and how to understand the great galloping biological diver-
sity on which human health and all future Sierra Club calendars de-
pend. Creationists see nothing implausible about a museum diorama
depicting dinosaurs grazing alongside woolly mammoths because they
are unpersuaded by the stratification of the fossil record that would
separate the animals by at least 60 million years — a figure that in any
event exceeds their estimate of Earth's age by a factor of 10,000.
Advocates for the idea of intelligent design, on the other hand, are
quite willing to accept the geological evidence that our planet is about
4.5 billion years old, and they concur with the mainstream view of a bi-
ological timeline that dates back several billion years. They have no
quarrel with the proposition that humans arose from apelike progeni-
tors, nor with the general capacity of whole organisms to change over
time and give rise to new species. A number of the ID heavyweights are
scientists, most vocally Michael J. Behe, a professor of biological sci-
ences at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. "Intelligent de-
sign proponents," he wrote in an op-ed piece for the New York Times,
"do not doubt that evolution occurred."
Where the ID ideologists part company with the preponderance of
scientists is on the origin of the smallest components of life — our cells
and the enzyme and protein "machines" that keep our cells and selves
thumping. As Behe and his sympathizers see it, cells and their microcir-
cuitry are almost too good, too well composed, too perfect, to be be-

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 7 7
lieved. Many of the protein complexes essential to life, they say, work
only if all the parts are present and pulling their weight. Should one
participant in these molecular assemblages fail, should one spring go
sproing, then the entire structure collapses. In other words, when you
go below the gross scale of the body, below the squishy, messy organs of
the body, and get down to the fundamental units of a body, you start to
encounter elegance, beauty, something they call "irreducible complex-
ity." The protein partnerships that run the show could not have arisen
gradually, they say, through random mutations and modifications of
preexisting structures. The molecular components of the cell are too
interdependent, too carefully arrayed, to be the product of ordinary
Darwinian natural selection. Natural selection requires that intermedi-
ary stages in an evolving structure lend an advantage to their recipient
over the structures that preceded them. If you're a frog that looks a tiny
bit like a leaf, you'll have a tiny survival advantage over another frog
that looks purely frog, and so a leafy camouflage can evolve in stepwise
fashion. A slight widening of the skin on the front legs that allows an
arboreal mammal to get a bit of lift as it leaps from a branch may help it
escape prédation, and therefore you can imagine the gradual triceps ex-
tension that leads to the winged bat. But with these molecular assem-
blages, the IDers insist, there's no in between. The pieces must all be in
place, watches synchronized, or you get system failure. Natural selection
doesn't work on complex, interdependent assemblages, they say. If draft
versions of a product flop completely, they won't be selected, and you'll
still be stuck up a tree.
Among the examples that advocates often cite to illustrate the irre-
ducible complexity of life's foundational widgetry are the tiny hairlike
cilia by which paramecia and bacteria propel themselves through the
water; the daisy-chain pathway of proteins that conveys light signals
from the eye to the brain; and the intricate blood-clotting mechanism
that keeps us from hemorrhaging uncontrollably with every nick of an
envelope edge. In each case, multiple proteins cohere into unity and act
with patriotic fealty, one nation, indivisible. If you destroy any one of
the sixty or so proteins of which a paramecium's cilium is constructed,
the hair doesn't beat more weakly or slowly than before. It cannot beat
at all, and the protozoan isn't goin'. The clotting response that comes to
our rescue when we fumble a morning shave is a tightly choreographed
cascade of ten distinct protein "factors." If only one of those factors is
defused by an inherited genetic mutation, you can end up with hemo-
philia, or "bleeder's disease," whereby the slightest injury can kill you.
How can something as complex and essential to survival as the clotting

THE 
CANON 
•
reaction possibly have evolved through clunky, mincing Darwinian
mechanisms, Behe wonders, and the gradual plunking of one Lego
piece onto another, when a defect in just a single step brings the entire
business to a standstill — or, in the case of blood, to not stand still?
If the fundamental modules of the cell and of our biochemistry are
irreducibly complex, Behe continues, and if they cannot be explained as
the fruit of conventional evolutionary forces as we understand them,
and if in fact they look to be the miniature set pieces of an immortal ge-
nius, an infinitely scientifically notated Leonardo, why rule out the pos-
sibility that... they just might be? Why not leave room, at the very base
of life, for the contributions of an intelligent designer? If ordinary sci-
ence fails to account for something as extraordinary as the sensation
of light on the eye, how scientific is it to shut one's eyes to alternative
views and deeper truths, and the chance that not everything shakes out
right just because? "The contemporary argument for intelligent design
is based on physical evidence and a straightforward application of
logic," Behe insists. "In the absence of any convincing nondesign expla-
nation, we are justified in thinking that real intelligent design was in-
volved in life."
ID promoters are careful not to say who or what their posited de-
signer may be, nor whether it's a he or a she or a S/He or an anonymous
corporation in Delaware. "Intelligent design itself says nothing about
the religious concept of a creator," Behe writes. For many scientists, the
disavowal rings disingenuous. Behe's appeal is not really for greater
fairness and open-mindedness, or a request that scientists delve more
deeply and rigorously into the molecular basis of life than they have to
date, conceiving more imaginative experiments, redoubling their ef-
forts to find the perfect controls. The basic message of the designer
school is, Sorry, folks, there's nothing more to be done. In the biology
of molecules and cells, we've reached the limits of what science can tell
us. We've reached a point of irreducible complexity, and if you can't re-
duce a complex object to simpler and more manageable parts, well,
then, you can't do much with it, can you. Science requires some degree
of reductionism, some picking apart and focusing on one or two vari-
ables at a time. But if natural selection supposedly couldn't concoct a
clotting cascade piece by piece, what hope is there for science to trace it
methodically back to the start?
Not only are molecular scientists unwilling to throw up their hands
at any problem, and say, "Oy, it's too complicated! I've never seen any-
thing so irreducibly complicated! How about if we just toss our lab
notebooks in the autoclave, invoke the 'supernatural intervention'

EVOLUTIONARY 
BIOLOGY 
• 
179
clause, and duck out for some fajitas and beer?" Scientists, as a group,
are far too competitive and hardworking to say they can't do more
when there obviously is so much more to be done. They also argue that
the specific molecular assemblages and protein cascades cited by intelli-
gent design advocates as being irreducibly complex and resistant to
a Darwinian analysis can, with only moderate exertion, be disassem-
bled into manageable subunits and those components explained as
the products of natural selection. In Finding Darwin's God: A Scien-
tist's Search for Common Ground Between God and Evolution, Kenneth
Miller, a professor of biology at Brown University in Rhode Island, de-
constructs many of ID's oft proffered instances of irreducible complex-
ity. Among the most vivid is his vivisection of the choreography of
blood clotting. He describes the step-by-step reactions that culminate
in a clot: how trauma to the body's surface stimulates a succession of
enzymes, or factors, circulating in the blood, each of them designated
by a Roman numeral — for example, factor VIII, factor IX, factor X; and
how the activation of one factor is contingent on the arousal of all
the Roman soldiers preceding it; and how, at each node of the cascade,
the strength of the biochemical signal is ramped up a millionfold; and
how, finally, factor X bugles out a riotous reveille to an enzyme called
thrombin, which clips little protective side chains off a ropy protein
called fibrinogen, making the protein sticky. The newly gluey fibrin-
ogens quickly ball together, and you've got your clot.
Miller admits that the scheme is intricate, a "Rube Goldberg ma-
chine," and that "if we take away any part of this system, we're in trou-
ble." Medical geneticists have identified diseases stemming from muta-
tions in just about every one of the factors in the clotting pathway, and
they are all severe disorders. "No doubt about it. Clotting is an essential
function, and it's not something to be messed with," Miller writes. "But
does this also mean that it could not have evolved? Not at all."
As far as we know, Miller explains, the only animals that rely on a
network of protein reactions to clot blood are vertebrates — we back-
boned mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish — and some ar-
thropods, particularly big, hard-shelled species like lobsters and crabs.
But that doesn't mean a worm or a starfish will simply bleed to death if
a blood vessel is severed. Creatures without clotting proteins rely in-
stead on "sticky" white cells circulating in their bloodstream to patch
them up. In the event of an injury, the sticky cells will cling to any pro-
teins, like collagens, that jut out from the surface of the exposed skin;
over a few minutes' time, enough white cells will have accreted at the
gash site to form a plug that blocks further blood loss. Compared to the

T H E CANON 
• 
l 8 0
speed and elegance with which our clotting proteins operate, the sticky-
cell Band-Aid approach is crude and slow. It can work only in creatures
with relatively low blood pressure, which is what most invertebrates
happen to have. Nevertheless, Miller argues, "It's exactly the kind of
'imperfect and simple' system that Darwin regarded as a starting point
for evolution."
Lest you think even the invertebrate's simple system is too intricate to
ascribe to evolutionary forces, Miller again demurs. Those white cells
serve a variety of purposes other than clotting, including nutrient deliv-
ery. Imagine a blood vessel springing a leak, Miller suggests, and imag-
ine that a few of these white cells have randomly acquired a mutation
that make them sticky when exposed to the ragged, fibrous matrix of
ruptured dermis. "Any change . . . in the white cells that made them
stick, even just a little bit, to that foreign matrix of tissue proteins," he
writes, "would be favored by natural selection because it would help to
seal leaks." In other words, a random mutation that happened to lend
the white cells of some ancestral worm or sea urchin a touch of Velcro
would help turn current bleeder into future breeder, and so the muta-
tion would be selected for and spread through the population, and,
'sblood! The rudiments of a clotting system are born.
Our vertebrate clotting mechanism relies on blood proteins rather
than on whole cells to make clots, but still, the same sanguine logic ap-
plies. The protein factors that thicken our blood are very similar to pro-
teins found in the pancreas and other organs that have nothing to do
with clotting but instead clip and splice a variety of biochemical signals.
Clipping and splicing, though, is precisely the sort of seamstressing skill
needed to cross-link blood at a crisis point and bar its hasty departure.
By all appearances, our clotting proteins were recruited from preexist-
ing ranks of more generalized processing enzymes, and the genes en-
coding the processing proteins duplicated to enlarge the talent pool.
Gradually, a number of these processors, these so-called serine pro-
teases, were committed to the task of clotting, their reflexes honed, their
internal signaling network tightened and amplified and made mutually,
obligately symbiotic, the fate and force of each bound up with the rest.
Today, clotting is like professional baseball. Just as the Yankees can't play
with an eight-person team, so the loss of just one clotting factor can
threaten your life, knock you out of the game. The current interdepen-
dency of our clotting network accounts for its extraordinary speed and
vigor, but that doesn't mean it was ever thus, or can be only thus.
"Blood clotting is not an all-or-none phenomenon," writes Miller. "Like
any complex system, it can begin to evolve, imperfect and simple, from

E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
l 8 l
the basic materials of blood and tissue." A sea urchin makes do with its
simple white cells, and two kids with a ball can play catch in the park.
We don't know how life began. We don't know if it was physically in-
evitable, given Earth's geochemistry and the sun's generosity, and we
certainly don't know if it was in any way spiritually inspired — an ex-
pression of divine love, or of cosmic curiosity, the universe's desire to
understand itself. We don't know what the first life forms looked like
or how they behaved. They might have been made of ribonucleic
acid, RNA, or of proteins, or of molecules as yet undiscovered and
unaccused. We don't know exactly when, after the formation of Earth
4.5 billion years ago, life first arose. It might well have been quite early
in our planet's history. Harold Urey and Stanley Miller of the University
of Chicago won international fame in the 1950s when they sought to re-
capitulate in the laboratory the conditions of early Earth and managed
to generate amino acids, the building blocks of proteins. Miller was
once asked to speculate on how long it might have taken life to origi-
nate. "A decade is probably too short, and so is a century," he replied.
"But ten or a hundred thousand years seems OK, and if you can't do it
in a million years, you probably can't do it at all." The operative verb in
the above passage, however, is "speculate." The fossil evidence for early
life is woefully, chasmically gapped. Whatever the biochemical nature
of the matriarchal molecules that first managed to replicate themselves,
they certainly had no hard parts, nothing for the sedimentary archives.
Even after the self-copying chemicals succeeded in sealing themselves
off from their surroundings, each one mapping out the boundary be-
tween me and not-me with a springy, lipidic membrane slicker and de-
claring itself a cell, still the young life gave no thought to tomorrow.
However life got started, one thing is clear. Life so loved being alive
that it has never, since its sputtering start, for a moment ceased to live.
Through the billions of years since the first cells arose, chubby bubbles
enclosing the code for budding off more bubbles, life has carried on.
The cipher of life, the text written in the nucleic phrases of DNA and
RNA, is a universal code. Every living creature owns a piece of it. Every
parasitic, periliving, propagandizing virus owns a piece of it. There is
no other way of saying I'm alive but through the phonemes of nucleic
acids. Had life arisen more than once, had its origins been polyphyletic
rather than monophyletic, we'd see a multiplicity of codes, a selection
of biochemical instructions for growth and maintenance. Yet we do
not. We look at cells from creatures living on the ocean floor, 8,000 feet
below the ocean surface, basking in the boiling plumes that seethe

THE CANON 
• 
l 8 2
up through hydrothermal vents, and we see DNA. We pry open bacteria
trapped in polar ice for more than a million years, and we see DNA.
Species arise, multiply, diversify, and die, but DNA survives — if not
in the spiny Hallucigenia of the Cambrian era, with its seven sets of
clawed tentacles fit for scavenging the ocean floor, then in the predatory
lungfish, Dipterus, of the Devonian age; if not in trilobites, then in
pterodactyls; if not in dodos, then in Lewis Carroll. The timeline of life
is segmented by major mass extinctions and minor mass extinctions,
and in the worst of the die-offs, huge phyletic hanks were yanked off
Earth, and the ranks of the vanquished outnumbered the hangers-on
by a ratio of nine-plus to under one. No matter. DNA just kept repeat-
ing itself, over and under, somersaulting somewhere, in some cell, read-
ing itself backward — AND never running dry.
Gunter Blobel, a cell biologist at Rockefeller University, Nobel laure-
ate, and fair grist for a limerick, sees the plain splendor in life's unbro-
ken tenure. "When it comes right down to it, you are not twenty or
thirty or forty years old," he said. "You are 3.5 billion years old. Some
people may say how terrible it is, this idea that we come from monkeys.
Well, it's worse than that — or better, depending on your perspective.
We come from cells from 3.5 billion years ago.
"There is this tremendous thread of life that goes back to when the
first cells arose, and that will continue on after any of us die as individu-
als," he said. "It's continuous life, and continuous cell division, and
we are all an extension of that continuity. Reincarnation and similar
themes are poetic representations of biological reality."
If you want to see yourself as you really are, or as your ancestors were,
or as your descendants will be, Blobel said, forget about the mirror.
Crack open the cell and take a look inside.

Molecular Biology
Cells and Whistles
E
VERY NIGHT BEFORE I go to bed, I grimly wage war in my
mouth. First I floss, using three distinct products: normal slip-
pery floss for most of the teeth, extrafine "floss on a stick" to get
at the cramped back teeth, and the creepy concatenation of stiff and
fluffy segments called "superfloss" for digging under the crowns and
bridges. Then I deploy my plaque-removing, gum-massaging, erotically
styled electronic toothbrush and brush for two minutes, longer if I de-
cide to start folding laundry with my spare hand. Finally I rinse with a
generous jigger of Listerine, swishing it cheek to cheek, round and
round, the Bronx is up and the Battery's down, until all buccal and
gingival decks have been swabbed with firewater, and I am free to spit.
Whenever I'm feeling glum or lazy and start thinking, Maybe tonight
I'll skip a step or two, I rouse myself by recalling the vile day at age ten
when my dentist told me that I had twenty-two new cavities and that
he'd be spending every Saturday for the next six months with his dis-
tressingly furry forearms in my mouth; or my more recent realization,
while gazing at my dental X-rays, that I'd had — Holy Novocain! can
this be right? — nine root canals to date. Or I think of what I learned
from Bonnie Bassler, the microbiologist at Princeton University, whose
own thick pelt happens to reside on her head, about the floral story of
tooth decay.
You probably know that cavities are caused by bacteria, she said. But
what you may not appreciate is how sophisticated, resourceful, and re-
lentlessly disciplined those bacteria can be. It turns out that, my tragic
dental history notwithstanding, it isn't easy for the agents of decay to
sink their teeth into ours, to remain in place long enough to drill holes

THE CANON 
• 
1 8 4
through the tooth's protective enamel and thence to dine on the soft tis-
sue beneath. For one thing, the mouth salivates constantly and pur-
posefully: saliva is part of the body's defense system, a mildly antiseptic
fluid designed to help sweep bacteria from the teeth and down into the
gastric mulcher below. For another, tooth enamel is the hardest sub-
stance in the body. It is harder than bone, harder than an undipped toe-
nail on a camping trip. Enamel has enabled many a tooth to last post-
humously into posterity; teeth are so abundantly represented in the
fossil record, Michael Novacek of the American Museum of Natural
History joked to me, that one might think the history of life on Earth
consisted of teeth mating with teeth to beget other teeth.
So how do mouth bacteria manage to hang on and hammer through
the enamel of live teeth, and in less than a single lifetime? We give them
a head start by making poor dietary choices — chewing sugary bubble-
gum, for instance, or inexplicably reaching for one of those cellophane-
wrapped hard candies that your grandmother has kept on her coffee ta-
ble since the Ford administration. Not only does sugar attract bacteria,
it helps them to cling to your teeth and begin their attack on your per-
sonal Pearly Harbor. The military analogy is a fitting one. Just as in a
full-scale assault you bring out your bombers, your helicopters, your
tanks, your Seabees and SEALs, so it is that six hundred distinct species
of bacteria take part in the chop op. I'm not talking about six hundred
individual bacteria. I'm talking about six hundred different species —
or strains, as some microbiologists call them — each of them as geneti-
cally different from the other, said Bassler, "as Martians might be from
humans." Hundreds of species, and hundreds of thousands or millions
of members of those species, all cooperating to beat your teeth to a
pulp. One species might be able to metabolize the sugar residues on the
teeth, Bassler said, while another might be good at clinging to the
enamel, and the next might release abrasive chemicals to begin scraping
at the enamel. You can't see any of these wretched little grunts, of
course. Like most bacterial cells, our oral flora are ridiculously small, a
fraction the size of our body cells. Our pinhead, recall, could carry 3
million. But you can feel your cariel bacteria, oh yes, you can feel the
thin coat of slime they leave on your teeth, the slime we call plaque.
This plaque is Rasputin, or Mr. Johnson's cat. Do what you will, the
plaque will always come back. "You can brush your teeth at night, but
the bacteria will be back again by morning," said Bassler. "They'll be
back, and not willy-nilly either. They will be back with the same highly
structured order every time."
And so every day I hack right back, with floss and brush and minty

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 8 5
rinse. I know the enemy. I admire the enemy. I may not keep the enemy
away, but by systematically minimizing its impact on my teeth, I at least
have a shot with the dentist.
You can't sterilize your mouth, or your hands or face, no matter
how many bottles of Purell sanitizing gel you go through in a week. You
are covered with bacteria. Maybe a half billion of them blanket your
skin, a teeming microtropolis of several thousand different strains.
Billions more happily fill the moist orifices of your body — the mouth
of course, and nose, ears, vagina, urethra, anus, and lower intestines.
When you breathe, you breathe in happenstance vortices of airborne
bacteria, the great majority of which are harmless, are incapable of col-
onizing your lungs and making you sick. When you walk, you walk
through and upon a drifting tulle of bacteria, like a Christo confabula-
tion in Central Park but less saffrony. Rub your index finger across this
page, and, poof, a million microbes ruffled or displaced. We galumph
through all this life heedlessly, like giants in a Gary Larson cartoon, at-
tending to it only when we seek to kill it — kill the plaque, the strep, the
bearers of your tuba-toned bronchitis. Yet most bacteria are benign,
want no more from us than we do from them, and many of them are
quite useful, and some of them are essential to our survival. They feed
us, they cook for us, they clean up our messes. By "fixing" nitrogen into
a form fit for plants, root-dwelling bacteria help give plants leave to
grow, and plants in turn give us all that we eat — our daily bread, our
lettuce and tomato, our sliced roast beast. Once ingested, our meals are
digested with the help of intestinal bacteria. Something like ninety-nine
out of a hundred cells in our small intestine are bacterial cells, which
flourish in the warmth and plenty of our plumbing and in return syn-
thesize vitamins for us and help extract from our food essential nutri-
ents that otherwise would pass through unclaimed.
Wherever you go, there they are, doughtily doing the world's dirty
work. Dig up a gram of soil, a loamy pinch that can fit easily in a thim-
ble, and you're looking at thousands of different species of bacteria,
many of them detritus recyclers, breaking up the dumped and the dead
and making them fit for new life. Or consider termites, the primary
groundskeepers of tropical rainforests. They gnaw through dead or rot-
ting trees and return much of the woody wealth back to the forest floor.
What is a termite but a set of jaws joined to a petri dish, its gut a dense
microecosystem of many hundreds of strains of microbes. Bacteria al-
low termites to wrest sustenance from sawdust and, like Geppetto, give
dead wood a voice.
Some bacteria glitter, graced with the same incandescent chemicals

THE CANON 
• 
l 8 6
that make a firefly glow; and just as a firefly flashes for love, so these
luminiferous microbes will light up only when surrounded by others of
their kind. Some bacteria play Jackson Pollock, spattering the stacked
calcium outflows of Yellowstone National Park in streaks of pink, blue,
green, amber, and brick — each color the signature of a distinct bacte-
rial clan afeast on chalk soufflé.
Bacteria live everywhere, and in the most hellforsaken nowheres.
They live on the summit of Mount Everest, and at the bottom of the sea;
they live in polar icecaps and by boiling hydrothermal vents. They sur-
vive deep within rocks buried deep underground; they suck up heavy
metals and oil spills and do laps in Love Canal. One bacterial species
aptly named Deinococcus radiodurans can withstand a blast of radiation
1,500 times greater than the dose that would kill us, and 15 times greater
than what would stir-fry that canonical survivor, the cockroach.
Yet as admirable as bacteria may be for their panplanetary powers
and boundless vim, that brilliance ultimately redounds to a brilliance
even grander, handier, and more foundational than theirs, the supreme
brilliance of the entity of which bacteria and every other being on Earth
is built: the cell. The cell is surely the greatest invention in the history of
life on this planet, and ever since the first cell arose, as Gunter Blobel
said, it has been all cell, all the time, a never-ending splitting of cells to
make more cells, to keep life alive in the only way it knows how: in the
context of the cell, by the bauplan of the cell. Bacteria exemplify the cel-
lular nature of life because they are single-celled organisms. Each bacte-
rium is a living being. It holds within itself the chemicals, components,
and conditions required to sustain life, and it encapsulates the tremen-
dous success story that is the cellular calling, the permanent nonpareil
cellular vocation, which has never taken a vacation, never been out to
lunch or out of line, or outgrown, outdone, outfoxed, outmoded, or
rubbed out since the first cell arose some 3 billion years ago. This is the
amazing thing, one of the most profound basic principles that biology
offers: that once the first cell had pulled itself together, had assembled
itself into a serviceable self-serving self, there was no turning back, and
there has never been a cell-free moment since. Through ungodly long
temporal caravans, stultifying passages of duffel bags stuffed with ep-
ochs, through ice ages and asteroid crashes, volcanic revolts, oceanic
tantrums, and mass extinctions that destroyed 90 percent of life on
Earth, still, not for a single day, a single nano- or pico- or atto-girl,
yocto-boy second, has the world been without some scrim of cells
somewhere, some thread of life, however threadbare, defiantly clinging
to life. For the substrate stone, the stubborn cells may be so much

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 8 7
plaque, the scum of the earth, and who knows but that the stone doesn't
pine for a foolproof decellerator, a perfect Purell. Happily, it was not to
be, in the history of our Earth; and aren't you glad the plaque always
came back?
We know that all cells on Earth are monophyletic, are all descendants
of a single founder cell, rather than being polyphyletic, of multiple, in-
dependent origins, because the unity of the genetic code tells us so. We
also can see it in the structure of the cell, any cell, the cell of a bacte-
rium, a corn plant, a fruit fly, a barfly. The cell, wherever it is stationed,
has an unmistakable geography, a set of shared features that explain
why it is the universal unit of life, and why it works so outrageously
well. Think again about the Putumayo catalogue of bacteria we dis-
cussed: the ones in your mouth, the ones in your gut, the mountaineers,
the thermophiles. In one sense, they're all very different from one an-
other, every strain endowed with a subset of specialty genes that allows
it to exploit weird resources like benzene or mercury and to weather the
specific withering conditions of its niche. On the other hand, if you
were to crack open any of these bacterial cells, you'd realize that they all
look and feel very like-minded inside: similar chemical conditions, sim-
ilar balance of acid and base. And the internal milieu of a bacterial cell
is much like that of one of our liver or heart cells, or of any other cell of
any other organism on Earth. This is the beauty and power of the cell,
and one of the core insights to emerge from modern biology: A cell
confronts the harshness and instability of the outside world by making
itself a haven. A cell contains all the tools it needs to preserve order and
stability within its borders, to keep its interior recesses warm and wet
and chemically balanced. In this equilibrated, levelheaded setting, the
cell's vast labor force of proteins and enzymes will operate at peak per-
formance, and so sustain the cell in its state of mild grace. There is
nothing more natural than a cell; the natural world, after all, is full of
them. At the same time, a cell is the ultimate act of artifice, a climate-
controlled limousine with cushioned seats and a private bar, cruising
through a mad desert storm.
A cell is the basic unit of life, and the smallest unit of matter that can,
by anyone's book, be considered alive. A virus is also a unit of matter
that displays a few lifelike properties, most notably a zealous drive to
replicate itself and the capacity to mutate and evolve; and a virus, being
nothing more than a packet of genes wrapped in a jacket of protein and
sugar molecules, is much smaller than even the smallest cells — bacte-
rial cells. Nevertheless, most scientists argue that because a virus doesn't
engage in such essential rituals of life as eating and excreting, and is en-

T H E CANON 
• 
l 8 8
tirely reliant on the apparatus of the host cell it infects to create new vi-
ral particles for it, a virus isn't a true life but a protolife, a wannabeing, a
parasitic paralife as told on Post-it notes. They reserve their certificate
of animate authenticity for the cell, as the smallest package of life on
Earth and bearer of all the best gifts.
The cell lives, breathes, tastes, and makes waste, and when called
upon will replicate. The cell is self-sufficient, and that is its concep-
tual beauty and power. But what, in a more practical, biomechanical,
predilectional sense, is a cell? How does a cell work, what are its prime
parts, and why is all life built on its spine? What does a cell look like,
and why does it insist on being too small for the naked eye to see? First,
I must point out that not every cell is microscopic. A cell has three basic
parts to it: a greasy, waterproof outer membrane, the plasma mem-
brane, which serves as the border between cell and setting, self and
nonself; a gooey inner part, the cytoplasm, where most of the work of
the cell is performed; and a cache of DNA, the cell's genetic content, its
operating manual and ticket to tomorrow. In our cells, and the cells of
any multicellular being and quite a few unicellular ones as well, the
DNA is enclosed in a nucleus, a snug compartment surrounded by a
smaller but double-layered version of the plasma membrane that moats
the whole cell. In bacterial cells, the DNA floats free in the cytoplasm.
Not surprisingly, the labels we assign to the two basic cell types lionize
the DNA housing option we happen to possess. Cells with a nucleus are
called eukaryotic cells, "eu" meaning "good" or "true," and "karyote"
meaning "kernel" or "nucleus." Bacterial cells and other single-celled
organisms lacking a nucleus we deride as "prokaryotic" — that's "pro"
as in "pre," not "pro" as in "fan of" and certainly not as in "profes-
sional." Prokaryotic cells are "prenuclear" cells, the poor sods that kept
the world busy for a billion years or so before the "good" cells, the
ones with a nucleus, showed up. Bacteria have repaid the compliment
through occasional displays of very professional pathogenicity — viz.,
bacterial diseases such as bubonic plague, anthrax, syphilis, childbed fe-
ver, and, of course, tooth decay.
Nucleated or not, cells consist of these three defining ingredients,
and it so happens that one type of bioentity that fulfills the criteria of
cellhood is the egg. An egg has an outer membrane, a viscous cytoplasm
that in the edible egg we call the yolk, and a set of genes — only half the
number of genes needed to spawn an offspring, and half the number of
genes found in other body cells of the egg bearer, but a gene set none-
theless. An egg, then, before it merges its DNA with a gene set supplied
by a sperm and starts developing into an embryo, is a single cell, and

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 8 9
that goes for the egg you can see well enough to scramble. Yes, believe it
or not, an unfertilized chicken egg of the kind you buy at the grocery
store is a single cell, although strictly speaking it's the cheery, marma-
lade-colored yolk of the egg that is bounded by the plasma membrane
and thus qualifies as the cell proper. The translucent, whippable, pro-
tein-rich "egg white," the hard outer shell of calcium chloride, and the
thin, slippery membrane lining the shell are all bonus coats added on
later, as the yolk makes its way down the mother's cloaca. Still, chicken
yolks are no joke, and they keep getting ever more jumbo even as we
fret over the wisdom of eating any eggs at all. The largest egg in the
world, and thus the largest cell in the world, is the ostrich egg, which
measures about eight by five inches and weighs three pounds with its
extracellular shell, two pounds without. (Interestingly, the ostrich egg is
also the smallest bird egg relative to the size of its mother, amounting to
only 1 percent of the female ostrich's body mass. The she-birds most de-
serving of every mother's pity are the kiwis and hummingbirds, which
lay eggs that are 25 percent as big as they are — the equivalent of a
woman giving birth to a thirty-pound baby.)
There are other cells in this world that can be sized up by the bald
eyeball. Most bacterial strains are decidedly microbial, in the range of a
millionth of a meter across, but Thiomargarita namibiensis, a sulfur-
loving bacterium first discovered off the coast of Namibia, is a defiant
millimeter wide, as big as the period you're about to reach. Among the
so-called protozoa, a ragtag phylum of single-celled and usually invisi-
ble creatures which includes such laboratory staples as the amoeba and
the paramecium, we can also find a handful of outlying colossi. Largest
by far are the foraminifers, ocean-dwelling protozoa that may grow to a
length of two inches; like bird eggs, these overachieving unicells are en-
cased in hard outer shells, a mothering matrix of crystalline calcite that
each foramin forms for itself.
Yet such macrobial cells are the exception, and the vast bulk of the
world's biomass is built of motes. Our cells, an elephant's cells, the cells
of the largest animal that has ever lived — a female blue whale — are
tiny, an average of /2>500 of an inch across. What's so great about being so
small? I asked many of the biologists I interviewed. Why cells? Why
build bodies, no matter how big they're destined to be, of parts too tiny
to see? Why shouldn't we be made of what we seem to be made of —
large sheets of unified matter, of tissue layers slathered one on top of
another?
To be small is to have control, Cynthia Wolberger of Johns Hopkins
University told me. Small is manageable. Small is flexible. The cell is

THE CANON 
• 
190
shielded from its environment and so can control what happens inside
in a way it cannot control the world outside. And the smaller the space
in need of oversight, the tighter and sharper and more dynamic that
control can be.
Companies have learned this lesson again and again, of the inherent
verve and elasticity of the small, close-knit, semiautonomous team. So
long as your individual fiefdoms remain compact and denned, your
corporation can retain the cunning of David even as it assumes the
multinational grasp of Goliath. We multicellular beings can obviously
grow huge as well, all the while remaining biochemically nimble and
shielded from the vagaries of our volatile world, because we are con-
structed of manageably modest parts.
The best way to understand the benefits of smallness to a cell,
Wolberger said, is by taking a quick look inside. And here, it must be
said, is where the picture gets a little bit ugly. I asked Wolberger what
the cell would look like if it were blown up to the dimension of a desk-
top accessory.
Without a moment's hesitation, she replied gaily, "It would look
like snot."
Snot?
"Yes, cells are very gooey and viscous," she said. "We do a lot of ex-
periments in vitro, in a test tube, isolating elements of a cell in what is
essentially a glass of water with salt and a chemical buffer. I like to re-
mind my students that in vivo, in the real conditions of the cell, things
are much thicker and more syrupy than that. They're more like snot."
On top of this unappetizing imagery, we have the ofrputting thick-
ness of cellular nomenclature. You may be the proud possessor of
74 trillion cells, but the jargon of cell biology can make you feel like
an alien without a green card or city map. Breach the border of the
plasma membrane, and, whoops, you're smack up against the rough
endoplasmic reticulum, a series of flattened sacs where proteins are
made; or scraping along the Golgi apparatus, another stack of flattened
sacs, where proteins are stored or chemically adjusted as needed; or
whap, whap, whapping across the vesicles, the lysosomes, the ribo-
somes, the mitochondria. Even the umbrella term for the many little
structures of the cell, "organelles," seems unnecessarily officious.
Never mind. Do not be deterred by either the in vivo viscosity or the
verbal pomposity. The world of the cell is really not so different from
our own. Cells may be small, roughly halfway between the size of an
adult human and the size of an atom, but they behave more along the
lines of classical, Newtonian, pushmi-pullyu everyday physics than by

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
I 9 I
the foggy, probabilistic rules of quantum mechanics, where electrons
vanish from one orbital lane and pop back up in another. Even the tini-
est cells are shapely and fully 3-D, and though the basic cell morph may
tend toward, shall we say, lava lamp droppings, specialized cells may as-
sume specialized, elegant forms. Seen through a microscope, skin cells
look like dinner plates fit for stacking, red blood cells like New York
bialys, liver cells like shoeboxes lined up on their sides. Cells of the body
normally stay put and obey the rules conveyed by the ambient chemical
signals of the organ they're part of, but all cells at bottom are as fierce
and twitchy as cats. Cut a few cells away from, say, a kidney, heart, or
tongue, place them in a petri dish with a slick of broth and the right nu-
trients, and the cells will begin crawling like sovereign zootica, creatures
of the Precambrian seabed. Watch the cells through a microscope and
see how they thrust their edges out wide, like the wings of a bat or the
fins of a manta ray, and how they drag themselves forward in search of
more food, and cringe and rear back at the touch of another wandering
cell. Cells are so strong that you wonder their owners can ever feel weak.
Ants are famously heavy lifters, able to carry loads ten, twenty times
their size; but cells, declares Scott Fraser, a bioengineer at Caltech, are at
least one step up from the ants. In studies that use laser tweezers and
plastic beads to explore how cells signal each other, a cell in a culture
dish will grab at the beads by wrapping a bit of its plasma membrane
around them, and then yank them free of the tweezers, an act not unlike
a human uprooting a tree.
Cells are the unit of life, and they preen about it, throb with it, in
every pore and ruffle. And the units of uppermost note in the unit of
life, the molecules that do all the work of the cell, the moving, the shak-
ing, the yanking, the eating and excreting, and the making of new mov-
ers and shakers of every make, are the proteins. Understanding the cell
means understanding proteins, and this brings us to a minor point that
many biologists admitted they find persistently frustrating: the public's
narrow idea of what a protein is. Stephen Mayo is a professor at Caltech
who runs a laboratory at the Broad Center for Biological Sciences, one
of the newer buildings on campus and one of the few with an elaborate
security system to prevent the theft of one or another $100,000 piece of
equipment. He is young, tall, trim, dressed in crisp chinos and a striped
tailored shirt rolled up at the sleeves. Mayo's office is spacious and
sunny and understatedly luxurious, a reflection of the vast economic
potential that his biomédical research is thought to hold. Mayo is trying
to design new proteins that might in turn be incorporated into new
drugs. Sometimes he attends or hosts social events with his wife, who is

THE CANON 
• 
1 9 2
a volunteer with the Junior League, and he meets people in all sorts of
professions. "When they ask me, 'What do you do for a living?' I take a
deep breath," he said. "I tell them that I run a lab at a university and that
we work on proteins. 'Oh,' they say. 'So you're a nutritionist?' People
hear the word 'protein,' and the first thing they think of is hamburger."
He'll explain to them that, no, he's trying to develop computer technol-
ogy to design new proteins, new biological molecules for use in medical
and pharmaceutical products. "But all the time I can see that in the
back of their mind, they're still thinking about hamburgers," Mayo said.
"They're wondering, What's wrong with the hamburger I'm about to be
served?"
There is, of course, a connection between the protein in hamburgers,
and the proteins to which the Mayo team is devoted. When you eat
meat, you are eating cells, and cells are full of proteins. When you eat
broccoli, you're also eating cells that are full of proteins. Our bodies
need a steady supply of dietary protein to build new cells, repair dam-
aged ones, replenish the immune system, and otherwise keep all the
parts powered. The reason why hamburger is so much more readily
linked to the categorical term "protein" than is steamed broccoli is that
animal meat, which is made of muscle cells, is a denser source of pro-
tein and because those proteins more closely resemble our own. Hence,
it's quicker and easier to obtain the protein components essential to our
fleshly upkeep by devouring the flesh of another animal than by reach-
ing for a peach, although as any vegetarian can attest, the plant king-
dom is vast and varied and, with reasonable attention to dietary details,
you can accrue all the protein you need from somewhere beneath its
verdant canopy.
Whatever their source, dietary proteins are dull and lifeless things,
and a sad, blinkered way to view the proteins of which Mayo and other
biologists speak. What does the stomach do, after all, but tear any pro-
teins encountered into the smallest possible bits, deactivating, desecrat-
ing, and denaturing them, as a protein chemist might put it. That is the
stomach's job, to flatten a meal so it can be scavenged for spare parts.
Let's chuck the steak as synecdoche for the molecule. Proteins are so
much more than dead meat.
What then is a protein, in its natural state, on its rightful cellular
stage? Technically, a protein is a string of amino acids, distinctive clus-
ters made primarily of the elements most strongly associated with life
— carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen — arrayed in a style that
lends each amino acid a little knob of positive charge and a little knob
of negative charge. That characteristic of molecular bipolarism, of car-

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 9 3
rying a duality of charges, makes amino acids ideal for linking together
into a great diversity of structures, just as the holes and pegs of Lego
pieces allow them to be snapped into model drawbridges, Ferris wheels,
dinosaurs, and other marvels displayed on the cover of the Lego box, if
not on your living room floor. Cells either synthesize amino acids from
scratch or extract them from food, and then link the chemical subunits
together to fashion a fresh protein supply. Those proteins differ consid-
erably in size, from trinkets called peptides that are a couple of dozen
amino acids long, to tumbling, operatic chains of several thousand
amino acids. Keep in mind that "small" and "large" are relative terms
here, and even the bulkiest proteins are still maybe a hundred-thou-
sandth the size of a sesame seed.
Far more important than a protein's size is its shape, how its chain of
amino acids folds, curls, puckers, and zags in three-dimensional space.
Proteins are often described as being little "machines" in the cell, but
that industrial, boxy term belies their Jean Arp curviness and Breck girl
bounce. If you could watch proteins tumbling across your desk, they
might look like an exceptionally stylish collection of Nerf balls, or ori-
gami animals made of butter and clay. And though proteins come in
many textures, if you could touch a typical one, press down on it with
an index finger, it would feel, in keeping with its cellular locale, viscous
and mucousy on top, but with a decided firmness underneath. There is
nothing silly about this protein putty, nothing slapdash about a pro-
tein's form, for from a protein's form its function follows. The specifics
of a protein's shape, and the way its positive and negative electric
charges are distributed along its contours, are what allow each protein
to carry out its allotted tasks. A single cell might have 50,000 different
proteins in its borders, some with deep notches, others with fingerlings
thrust out in victorious V's, still others bearing confettilike streamers
designed to wrap around a target molecule in a helical hug, or a combi-
nation of these and other recurring protein motifs. Most proteins have
their stiff parts and their flexible parts, regions that remain relatively
fixed throughout the life of the protein, and portions that respond to
prodding from neighboring molecules and will shape-shift and switch
tasks accordingly. Turn, turn, turn. Proteins live to work, and they live
in a place much like Manhattan, a teeming city that never sleeps, where
all that counts is how you look, and what you do.
What is it that proteins so busily, prodigiously do? Most of them are
enzymes, proteins that help activate or accelerate chemical reactions in
the cell by bringing together ingredients that might otherwise remain
separate, or that change the shape of other proteins and hence prompt

THE CANON 
• 
1 9 4
them to venture forth and ignite a chemical reaction. The distinctive
structure of an enzyme is designed to fit smartly with only one or a
handful of target molecules in the cell, the way your cell phone will
snap only into its official recharging device but not the one of your par-
ents, spouse, or anybody else in your immediate zip code. Once the en-
zyme has coupled with its target, its substrate, it can fulfill its special-
ized transformative mission. For example, there are enzymes in liver
cells that are shaped to recognize rings of cholesterol, and once they
have latched onto the greasy circlets, they help suture them into neces-
sary sex hormones like testosterone and estrogen. Other liver enzymes
conjoin salts, acids, cholesterol, fats, and pigments into the bitter yel-
low-brown digestive brew called bile. Then there is the face-saving liver
enzyme, alcohol dehydrogenase, which helps break down the alcohol
molecules in your blender drink into smaller, nonintoxicating pieces
before you have a chance to pass out, throw up, or begin impersonating
Peggy Lee.
And that's not all there is, my friend, that keeps us dancing. Enzymes
in white blood cells can dissolve away viral shells, enzymes in our pan-
creatic cells help police how much sugar thickens our blood, enzymes
in nerve cells make the chemical signals that stream through our brain
and allow us to think, feel, do things, regret doing those things instead
of other things, and fill prescriptions for Effexor.
Apart from the straightforward enzymes, there are the structural
proteins that form the cell's filamentous supportive matrix called the
cytoskeleton, "cyto" being the Latin word for "cell." Like bones, struc-
tural proteins give the cell its shape and integrity, and like bone tissue
they are not at all inert, are in fact so feisty and eager to flaunt their
powers that one might think they belonged to the metaphoric skeletons
that one tries to keep in one's closet. Most renowned among the struc-
tural proteins is actin, found in all eukaryotic cells, a versatile molecule
that not only serves as material for the cell's beams and girders, but also
operates in a transportation capacity, shuttling other cell proteins from
place to place, or helping to haul the trash out of the cell and dump it
into the bloodstream, or putting everything into position during that
most delicate and complex of cellular maneuvers, the splitting of one
cell into two. In muscle cells, actin cooperates with another structural
protein, myosin, to pull muscle cells in during a contractile motion,
like the flexing of biceps or the squeezing of a bolus of food down
the throat, and to relax the muscle fiber when the curl or swallow is
through.

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 9 5
Because structural proteins can be as bustling and busybodied as any
of the body's textbook pyrotechnic enzymes, some scientists argue that
all proteins are enzymes, are engines of change, and life, and levity. The
word "enzyme" means "to leaven," an etymological tip of the hat to the
yeasty proteins that leaven bread, and wine, and thou. "L'chaim," too, is
thought to share etymological roots with "zyme." It is the Hebrew toast
to be spoken at a feast, over an alcoholic beverage of the toaster's choos-
ing, and it means, quite simply, "To life."
The cell, then, bristles with proteins, with enzymes, with life. If you
could peel the top off the cell for an insider's view, said Tom Maniatis, a
biologist at Harvard University, it would be like looking into an ant pile
or beehive, but at fast-forward speed. "There would be frantic activity,
with things moving in every direction, and molecules being trans-
ported from place to place at a lightning pace." Picture as well a lot of
darting through doorways and giant silent suckings, and vanishings
into thick air. The membranes that girdle the cell and the nucleus are
pocked with pores and channels that open and shut, and molecules en-
ter and molecules escape; and everywhere in the cytoplasm there are
bubblelike baggies called vesicles that bobble along the cell's railway
tracks of actin and approach molecules and tackle them with the strait-
jacket of themselves, and take them to a new locale and then spit them
back out; and there are other, ghastlier sacks, the lysosomes, the little
stomachs of the cell, filled with blistering acids that destroy whatever
cytotrash they suck inside. And in this panting antsy atelier, this hive
in hyperdrive, many protein players travel as gangs, as bulbous pro-
tein complexes of three, six, a dozen diverse enzyme talents locked to-
gether through their structural complementarity, the happy meshing
of knobs and clefts, positives and negatives. Until very recently, biolo-
gists tended to think of proteins in isolation, as rugged individualists, a
set of singletons or monomers in the cell single-mindedly doing their
jobs. One of the major insights of the last few years, whose magnitude
continues to mount the more we study the in vivo vales of the cell, is
that most proteins operate in teams, as polyproteins, and that the re-
sult of their pooled talents may be radically different from what one
might have predicted by considering their enzymatic properties inde-
pendently. What's more, the protein-protein allegiances are fluid and
fungible. A protein may insinuate itself into one polypod one moment,
and then break away and join forces with another protein set the next,
and then another a few seconds or minutes or days later — fulfilling a
different enzymatic mandate with each collégial union. And nowhere is

THE CANON 
• 
196
protein clubbiness more evident than in matters of the family business:
the procreation of proteins and of the busy, indefatigable, sometimes
divisible republic on which they stand.
Tom Maniatis said that if you could strip the top off a eukaryotic cell,
you'd see a tumult of activity; it's time to walk through the nuclear
door, to the most rambunctious rumpus hall of all.
By popular reputation, DNA is a colossus among molecules, and cer-
tainly the bearer of many aliases. Our DNA is our genes, the things we
inherit half from Mother, half from Dad, and that we offhandedly
blame for our bad teeth, or our inability to separate light laundry from
dark. Our DNA is our chromosomes, or our baby's chromosomes, the
twenty-three pairs of little sausage-shaped bodies, as crimped and bent
and acrobatic as Keith Haring cartoons, that are isolated in a prenatal
amniocentesis test, stained, and finally scanned for signs of troubling
breaks, imperfections, or duplications. Human DNA is also known as
the human genome, star of the eponymous Human Genome Project,
the multinational, multibillion-dollar effort to "map and sequence" the
entire human genetic code, to specify every one of the 3 billion chemi-
cal letters of which human DNA is composed. DNA has been exalted to
an almost idolatrous degree, the Holy Grail turned golden calf, and it
now has the opposite problem of protein. Whereas a protein is seen as
just another ingredient in meat, DNA feels far too storied for everyday
bodies, and too big or too dangerous to eat. How else to explain the
common misconception that the only grocery products with any genes
in them are "genetically modified" foods, and the effort of some restau-
rateurs to advertise their refusal to use genetically modified foods in
their kitchens by displaying on their menus a little picture of a double
helix with a red slash drawn across it?
Of course, while you likely never give it a thought, you eat DNA all
the time, even if your food is certified organic, the product solely of tra-
ditional means of genetic modification — i.e., the selective plant breed-
ing, cross-hybridization, and animal husbandry techniques that hu-
mans have employed over the last 10,000 years — and guaranteed free
of the contemporary "Frankenfood" finaglings that might have in-
stalled specific genes to confer on the crop resistance to, say, frost or
fungus. Even then, while eating organic food, you swallow billions of
genes arrayed along millions of DNA molecules every day. Every time
you eat steak, you're eating a slab of cow muscle, composed of millions
of cow cells, and those cells are full of protein, myosin and actin aplenty
and more; and the plasma membrane around each cell and the smaller
nuclear membrane within each cell are bubbles of cholesterol, and in

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 9 7
the middle of each cow nucleus is cow DNA, the complete set of cow
genes distributed on the thirty pairs of cow chromosomes that consti-
tute the cow genome. From each cow genome enthroned in each cow
cell, an entirely new cow, a Dolly-like clone of the donor cow, can be
grown, giving fresh meaning to the claim that you are so hungry you
could "eat a cow." You eat potato DNA, bean genomes, tomato chromo-
somes; if your diet is healthfully varied, you've devoured the source
codes for thousands of species in your lifetime. Genomes are not just
the stuff of high-concept, high-priced projects. They are stuffed into all
our body cells, unabridged copies of the DNA molecule that each of our
parents had bequeathed to us in demipart at the moment of our con-
ception, and that the briskly proliferating cells during fetal develop-
ment had replicated and bequeathed to every daughter cell, and that
our adult cells still hold and still solemnly copy every time they divide.
The only cells without DNA are our circulating red blood cells, the spe-
cialized cells that carry oxygen throughout the body. Red blood cells de-
velop in our bone marrow from precursor cells that do have DNA in
them, but in the last stage of their maturation, when they are ready to
serve as our breath of life, as the emissaries from the lungs to every far-
flung cell we own, the red blood cells spit out their nucleus and its DNA
molecule to leave plenty of room for the activities of their resident he-
moglobin proteins, the molecules that capture oxygen.
This is perhaps the premier point in the story of DNA: that in almost
every cell of our body can be found a personal copy of the complete
DNA molecule, with all our genetic information, all twenty-three pairs
of our chromosomes, all our genes, and all the lengthy filler between
genes, all 3 billion bits that constitute our very own human genome. It
may not be the Human Genome, the one that scientists have largely fin-
ished mapping and sequencing; that official map is based on a compen-
dium of genetic samples extracted from a handful of people, including
patients in long-standing, important genetics studies and a couple of
scientists with a long-standing sense of self-importance. Our own hu-
man genomes, though, the humble ones tucked into the nuclei of
nearly all of our cells, are very similar to the great Human Genome
spelled out in the databanks of the National Institutes of Health and
other research centers. We human beings are, genetically, 99.9 percent
identical one to another. Those few places where our genomes differ —
from the archived archetype and from one another — help explain the
individual differences that our eyes easily seize on, and too easily mag-
nify. If only we could see the genomes we carry within us; then we
might appreciate the homogeneous depths of our common humanity.

THE CANON 
• 
198
Still, nothing can be as familiar to us as the genome we carry, for it is
photocopied in toto into every nucleated cell of the body. Our liver cells
may make enzymes to detoxify alcohol, and our white blood cells spe-
cialize in decapitating microbes, but at their core is the same DNA mol-
ecule, same genome, same chromosomes, same set of genes. Where the
DNA of a liver cell differs from that found in kidney or bone is in how
the molecule is mollycoddled by the protein company that it keeps.
To understand the dynamics between DNA clonality and protein
heterodoxy, we must look closer at the pampered colossus on its nu-
clear divan. DNA is a molecule that, if stretched out, would be as tall
as a kindergarten child; but even in its supercompressed state inside
the microscopic nucleus, still DNA is hundreds of times the size of an
average protein. Yet for all its bulk, DNA is ultimately a simple mole-
cule, far simpler, in fact, than many of the proteins that surround it.
Whereas proteins are constructed from twenty different types of sub-
units, twenty different amino acids from which to pick, mix, and patch,
DNA, amazingly enough, makes do with just four different chemical
modules, called bases, underlying its frame. Formally, the four are cyto-
sine, guanine, adenine, and thymine, but, as with presidents and fash-
ion designers, their initials — C, G, A, and T — usually suffice. Each of
the four bases is a distinctive but also relatively simple construct of ni-
trogen and carbon rings, which are tacked onto a spiraling backbone of
sugar and phosphate molecules. The nitrogen and carbon ringlings
project outward from their backbone and search for companionship.
DNA is a double helix, after all, which means it consists of two strands
of bases attached to two sugar-phosphate spinal columns. The Cs, Gs,
As, and Ts on one strand face their counterpart bases on the other
strand, and are held face to face by the gentle tugging of a hydrogen
bond. But the pairing of bases across the strands is not arbitrary: A is
always partnered with T, and G with C. This is the complementary
match that feels right, that allows the DNA molecule to settle down and
maintain structural integrity and uniformity up and down its span.
Adenines and guanines are both relatively large bases, while thymine
and cytosine are relatively small. You match husky partners with petite
partners, and you get a nice clean vertical lineup. Isn't that sweet? Big
like a male, little like a female. You might as well usher these comple-
mentary couples, these base pairs, right up the plank of Noah's ark.
DNA, then, is a two-faced molecule, two corkscrewing chemical
chains loosely but lovingly locked in comfortable complementarity. On
one side, a strand of 3 billion bases, millions upon millions of Cs, Gs,
As, and Ts, arrayed in varying patterns, with a plethora of CATs and

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
1 9 9
TAGs and ACTs and TATAs! and long, long stuttering stretches of Ts or
As or GCs repeating themselves until you're ready to GAG. And on the
facing strand, the complementary lineup of 3 billion bases, so that
where there's a CAT on one strand you'll find GTA on the other. The
aim of the Human Genome Project was to determine the precise chem-
ical sequence of all 3 billion base pairs of human DNA, and let me tell
you it was a grueling and often tedious task, for much of the genome
proved to be dauntingly repetitive, a drab, seemingly pointless waste-
land within us. Specifically, large regions of the human genome turn
out to consist of what is often referred to as "junk DNA," filler bases
that seem to play little role in the molecule's primary assignment, of en-
coding the rules for making new proteins and new strands of DNA. We
still don't know whether the apparent junk is truly junk, and persists in
the bosom of our DNA because it does no harm and therefore the cell is
under no pressure to eject it, or whether the junk plays still hidden but
nonetheless essential roles, for example, by helping DNA to bend in all
the right places, or as fodder for future evolutionary gambits. What we
do know is that only a tiny fraction of the 3 billion base pairs, some-
thing like 5 to 10 percent, is devoted to the pressing biobusiness of pro-
tein production. Only 10 percent of our DNA, in other words, is the
stuff that we designate as genes.
Here, then, is what it comes down to, the genomic mystique, the
"genes" that we say it's all in the: maybe 300 million bases, scattered
among a cast of 3 billion. These key chemical sequences encode our
body's proteins; they are the recipes, the formulas, the runes for those
proteins. At its simplest, this is what a gene is: a recipe for a protein,
written in the script of DNA, in a lineup of As, Cs, Ts, and Gs. The code
works in triplets: three bases signify one amino acid. If the stretch of
DNA says CAT, you are looking at the code for the amino acid histidine,
which is felicitously abbreviated as the feline "his." If you see GTT, then
you know, aha, the amino acid valine wanted here.* And there are
punctuation marks, too, triplets that mean "protein recipe starts here"
and triplets that, like a square bullet or a ###, tell you you've reached the
recipe's end. Other codes are like the dynamics notations in a musical
* Because the set of possible three-part combinations of DNA (64) exceeds that of amino acids in
need of encoding (20 standard ones), most amino acids are specified by several different triplets of
As, Ts, Gs, and Cs. The amino acids arginine, leucine, and serine all claim the uppermost number
of six descriptors apiece, while poor tryptophan and methionine are accorded just one monogram
each. Not surprisingly, tryptophan ends up being a relatively rare subunit in the protein commu-
nity, though nevertheless essential to human health and happiness. From tryptophan the body
makes serotonin, the familiar brain chemical that drugs like Prozac seek to enhance.

THE 
CANON 
• 
200
score, saying, juice it up here, make lots of that protein, or soft-pedal
there, just a couple will do.
But these protein playbooks are not at all straightforward or linearly
organized. Different parts of a gene, different steps in the recipe, may be
inscribed in very different parts of the DNA macromolecule, and only
get "read" as a coherent narrative at the moment the protein is fash-
ioned. Junk and nonsense abound, not just between genes, but within
the genes, too.* Scientists may have largely completed the spelling out
of the human genome, but the sequence is a bare-bones beginning, the
opening ACT, and there's so much left to be divined from this gnostic
epic poem. We're not even sure how many genes there are in human
DNA; every time we scan the code more closely, the total drops. As re-
cently as the late 1990s, the accepted figure for the approximate number
of human genes was 100,000. By the turn of the millennium, it had
fallen to 80,000. A couple of years later that number was slashed in half.
The latest tally has us in the low- to mid-2o,ooos.
Yet the body has considerably more than 25,000 different proteins
to its credit; by some estimates, there may be 200,000 at work in our
cells. Obviously the dandy old rule of thumb that one gene equals
one protein no longer stands: instead, genes are like the sentences
"Eats shoots turkeys and ducks" or "Is there in truth no beauty?" or
"Hereallyearnedforher." Change the spacing or punctuation of the sen-
tence, and you upend its sense. Similarly, the body's genes obviously can
be read many ways by the cell's sharp-eyed foremen — the proteins that
sense the cell's need for new proteins and have the structural flair to
latch onto the DNA molecule and jump-start the protein-making ma-
chine.
Let's say you are a pancreatic cell, and you have the misfortune of be-
ing hitched to an irrational organism who is angling for her ninth root
canal by dipping repeatedly into her grandmother's candy dish. She un-
wraps and swallows three caramels in less than a minute. Her blood
spikes with glucose. She needs a fresh batch of insulin — a protein that
acts as a signal between cells and so is called a hormone — to stimulate
her liver and muscle cells to mop up some of that excess blood sugar.
The pancreas is the body's designated source of insulin, you are a work-
ing member of the pancreatic community, and you can't suddenly
phone in diabetic; chances are you'll be expected to produce insulin.
* This is not true of the DNA in bacteria and other prokaryotes, which divide early and often and
thus cannot afford to carry around the genetic equivalent of likes and urns and twiddling thumbs.
Bacterial genomes are much cleaner and terser than our own.

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY • 
201
How in the world do you do it? Luckily, you are a cell, the beneficiary of
more than 3 billion years of evolutionary experience, and you know
inherently what we Homo sapiens do not yet sapiens explicitly: every
step needed to transmit a signal faithfully from the outside world,
the extracellular environment, to the deepest tabernacle within, and to
turn the signal into new protein. In rough sketch, though, this is what
happens.
A pancreatic cell senses a need for its services when sugar molecules
in the blood begin agitating and dimpling the cell's membrane. The dis-
tress signal is relayed down through the cytoplasm by squadrons of
quickstepping, shape-shifting proteins. It's like a heartwarming Holly-
wood movie, in which a child writes a pleading letter to the president of
the United States of America, and we see the envelope passing from the
local postal clerk through the central post office along to the minions
in the White House secretarial pool up to the assistants to the assistants
and over to the president's outer ring of advisers, picking up a sense
of flurried excitement at each stage, until finally, Should we show this
letter to the president? Oh, yes, absolutely, the president must see this
at once! The advisers burst into the suitably cellularly shaped Oval
Office to find the president, as ever, surrounded on all sides — by body-
guards, legislators, lobbyists, dignitaries, indignitaries, the presidential
physician, the presidential astrologer/personal trainer/hairstylist, and
Ed Tatum from Omaha, Nebraska, who wandered in while looking
for the bathroom. No matter the crowds. The letter bearers don't need
the chief's undivided attention; like everyone else, they just want one
little piece — a piece that they will, before conquering, quite expertly
untangle.
DNA, as it sits in the nucleus, is a dense, matted hairball of nucleic
acid strands cloaked in proteins and coiled and coiled and supercoiled
again. Only when one cell is on the verge of splitting into two — as cells
do with some frequency in high-turnover tissues like skin and blood,
but only rarely in fairly stable organs like the brain — does the DNA
then separate into the discernible bodies we call chromosomes. Other-
wise, all the chromosomal pieces of the genome are fused and bunched
together. In addition to being supercoiled, the DNA in an ordinary,
nondividing cell, like our pancreatic cell with its epistolary subplot, is,
of course, a double helix. It is a corkscrew configuration with one
strand of bases matched up to a strand of complementary bases, and
very chemically stable as a result. The relative toughness of the mole-
cule explains why on rare occasions we can fish out samples of DNA
from ancient sources, such as insects trapped in amber, and why the

THE 
CANON 
• 
202
premise of Jurassic Park — that dinosaurs might be regrown from rem-
nants of dinosaur genes found in fossils — is not terribly far-fetched.
Stability and utility, however, are two different matters. Just as a book
must be opened to be read, so the relevant region of the double helix
must be cleaved apart for its instructions to be understood. In that pan-
creatic cell, then, there are proteins that know where on the massive,
twisted body of their resident DNA can be found the step-by-step rec-
ipe for piecing together more insulin. We can't yet say quite how the
proteins know where to look amid the nuclear haystack of 3 billion base
pairs, but we know they know, we know there are recognition proteins
that are needle-nosed for the insulin code, because the pancreas, as a
rule, makes insulin every day. On attaching to the proper position on
the DNA, the proteins, the teams of proteins, gently unwind that region
of the genome and separate the two strands of the helix, revealing two
rows of bases bared like teeth in an open jaw. Now other proteins can
glean from the exposed code the knowledge needed to create new insu-
lin protein, and so give those archival teeth a voice. Of course, you don't
want to start puttering around on the prized original document any
more than you'd want to lend the original Declaration of Independence
to a fifth-grade student for show-and-tell, or to a member of the House
Ethics Committee for any reason whatsoever. Working too long and too
vigorously with the exposed, dehelixed DNA risks introducing a muta-
tion into the molecule, a structural defect that could lead to a few prob-
lems later on, like, say, cancer. As the first order of business, then, tran-
scription proteins make a working chemical copy of the insulin gene,
an RNA message of the gene — or messenger RNA, as scientists call
it. They flutter along one fiber of the gaping DNA, and they read it
tactilely, as a blind person reads Braille. They gather spare bases from
elsewhere in the cell, and they piece together the RNA message, which
looks a lot like the original gene, with one small exception: wherever the
DNA code holds a thymine base, the transcription crew will install into
their message a very close chemical cousin of thymine, the base uracil.
Nice job! A fine first draft! Before the message is worthy of publication
as protein, though, it must be revised by editing proteins, which deftly
delete all the bits of filler code in the transcript and splice together the
serious passages into a working formula for insulin.
That cleaned-up message is then delivered to one or more of the cell's
many ribosomes, the spherical bundles of protein and RNA that syn-
thesize all new protein merchandise. The ribosomes glide over the mes-
sage and they, too, interpret it by touch. They scan the bases as triplets,
every threesome the call letters for an amino acid, though here, in the

M O L E C U L A R B I O L O G Y 
• 
2 0 3
argot of the cell's protein-making guild, it is not a CAT that yowls for
histidine, but a CAU, not TGG that means the amino acid tryptophan,
but UGG. The ribosomes read, scrounging for the requisite amino ac-
ids. Your cells are flea markets and yard sales filled with the building
blocks for proteins and RNA and more proteins and new DNA. In the
case of cobbling together insulin, the ribosomes need no amino acids.
And when the pieces have all been stacked in a row, the artisans stand
back, and let the new protein go. Sproing! Self-propelled, governed by
an internal sense of proportion and purpose, the linear chain of amino
acids folds and squirms and chases its tail and does the rumba and
the ay, caramba, and, with very little help from the proteinous crowd
around it, attains its three-dimensional Nerf ball origami form. This
theatric transformation, from flat stack of amino acids to robust in-the-
round protein, may happen with near spontaneity, driven by a thou-
sand tiny pushes and pulls inherent in its constituent parts, but that
doesn't mean it is child's play. Scientists remain baffled by the nuances
of protein folding. They have become quite skillful at isolating and se-
quencing genes, and they have sequenced the entire genomes of many
species beyond our own — of the mouse, fly, roundworm, rat, dog,
horse, chimpanzee, a grim gallery of deadly pathogens. And with the
DNA sequence of a gene in hand, they can say immediately what the
amino acid chits of its protein "product" will be. Still, researchers can't
predict from a genetic sequence or an amino acid sequence what the
final, fully folded protein will look like, or what powers its contours will
claim. That ignorance brings to mind Lewis Thomas's amusing medita-
tion on how "deeply depressed" he'd be if he were told to do the job of
his liver, and how he'd sooner take over the piloting of a 747 jet 40,000
feet over Denver. "Nothing would save me and my liver, if I were in
charge," he wrote, "for I am, to face facts squarely, considerably less in-
telligent than my liver." Fortunately, the liver delivers without the good
doctor's advice, and a newborn insulin protein needs neither under-
standing nor applause to find and fold on its own dotted lines and
ready itself for duty in a wine-dark sea.
Every body is smarter than we are. For all the daunting complexity of
protein synthesis, cells do it effortlessly, quickly, munificently. Often a
single RNA message will be read by many ribosomes simultaneously,
each reeling out its own copy of the protein. In the average human cell,
some 2,000 new proteins are created every second, for a daily per-cell
total of almost 173 million neonate proteins. Multiply that figure by the
roughly 74 trillion cells in the human body, and you get a corpuswide
quota of, egads, 1.28 X 1021 proteins manufactured each day. In light of

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 0 4
this astonishing cellular productivity, why aren't we all just getting big-
ger and bigger? OK, we are, but this is no place to discuss the interna-
tional obesity epidemic; besides, even the cells of hunter-gatherers whip
up millions of trillions of new proteins a day, and look at how thin they
are. The reason why our cells don't all swell and burst apart is that pro-
ceeding right in step with prodigious protein construction is ruthless
protein destruction. Cells build proteins up, cells tear them back down
again. A sizable number of a cell's proteins are enzymes devoted to the
degradation of other proteins, including other degradative enzymes.
There are enzymes that destroy collagen fibers, enzymes that destroy
bone proteins, enzymes that destroy the enzymes that destroy collagen
fibers and bone proteins. The average cellular protein survives only a
day or two, and some perfectly good specimens emerge from their ribo-
somal birthing chamber and are instantly demolished.
All this protein turnover may seem terribly inefficient and wasteful.
Why spend so much time eating the flesh and fiber of others only to
have our cells spend so much time eating the flesh and fiber of them-
selves? Is the cell absurdly sloppy, absurdly perfectionist, or a contractor
for the Pentagon? In truth, the constant protein churning illustrates a
deep tenet of biology and brings us back to the question posed earlier
of why cells are so small. Mary Kennedy, a neurobiologist at Caltech, ex-
plained it to me as the principle of "dynamic equilibrium," the idea that
in a highly complex biological system like a cell, the pieces must fit to-
gether both precisely and loosely. An enzyme must fit the knobs and
grooves of its intended target, but not the somewhat similar knobs
and grooves of another molecule nearby. If the enzyme is supposed to
attach to the section of the DNA molecule where the insulin gene is
inscribed, for example, you don't want it attaching to the genetic se-
quence that holds the code for making thyroid hormone.
At the same time, you don't want the enzyme to stick to the DNA
molecule at the insulin address and stay there as though bolted in place.
You want the binding to be finicky but flexible, said Kennedy. Moreover,
you want varying degrees of flexibility. Sometimes a protein will attach
very firmly to its target, sometimes moderately so, sometimes barely so.
And the relative commitment of the attachment itself conveys impor-
tant information: I'm really holding on tight here, I'm serious about
my assignment. I need a maximal output of insulin hormone. Or, I'm
really just poking around here, window-shopping — there's no call for
insulin output at the moment, but who knows what may happen to-
night, after dessert. Maintaining a state of dynamic equilibrium, of

M O L E C U L A R B I O L O G Y 
• 
2 0 5
looseness crossed with precision, said Kennedy, "allows you to have a
huge amount of control and feedback at every level of the system." One
way to sustain that specific squishiness is by crowding the cell's occu-
pants but keeping them moving at the same time —having lots of
proteins and RNA messages and the great cramped chromosomes all
pressed shoulder to shoulder, but stirring and shifting position and in
constant communication. It's rather like a subway car at rush hour. Pas-
sengers get in, passengers get off, some push their way to the middle of
the car, others cluster around the doorways, people mutter, Excuse me,
excuse me, as they elbow their way to the door and disembark before
the ding-dong knells and the doors shut again. A couple of seats open
up, and passengers standing nearby eye the opportunity and glance at
each other to see who's in greatest need. Go ahead, you take it. No, no,
please have a seat. I'm getting off in a couple of stops anyway, and be-
sides, I'm younger and in much better shape. And though the system al-
ways seems on the verge of anarchy, I can tell you, as somebody who
grew up riding the New York City subways, that in fact it's a miracle of
frenzied efficiency, delivering millions of people to and from work each
day over hundreds of miles of tracks, and rarely breaking down, and no
matter how suffocatingly stuffed into a subway car I've been, I have al-
ways managed to wiggle my way doorward and have never missed my
stop. The analogy is highly inexact, and I'm glad the subway isn't a cell,
for a lot of the "passengers" getting off aren't headed to home or the of-
fice, but to the wrecking ball. This is the cell's way of maintaining lubri-
cated, edgy motion: headily spooling out new RNA transcripts and pro-
teins, steadily shredding the old.
Constant protein turnover also happens to be an excellent way of
controlling protein behavior. Many proteins debut with a contingent
expiration date stamped on their forehead: they are designed to fall
apart rapidly unless a chemical signal from the outside intervenes and
instructs them to do otherwise. This trick is particularly useful for
keeping the cell's most powerful proteins in line, like those that prompt
the cell to begin dividing. The idea here, said Susan Lindquist, a cell bi-
ologist and former director of the Whitehead Institute, is that you want
growth-prone proteins on hand and ready to respond at a moment's
notice, especially if you're an immune cell that might need to start rep-
licating at the earliest viral provocation. At the same time, you don't
want replication proteins loitering around the cell indefinitely, lest they
start acting of their own accord and fomenting unwanted cell division.
The solution: synthesize the proteins constantly, but make them unsta-

T H E CANON 
• 
2 0 6
ble. Only when the appropriate growth hormones or other molecular
envoys enter the cell and bind to the proteins are the proteins stabilized
and put to work.
And so again we can see why a cell sets its sights beneath ours. The
cell excels through micromanagement, and high protein density and
perpetual protein flux are best accomplished aboard a tight, compact
ship. With its waterproof membrane and modest dimensions, a cell can
keep its proteins hemmed in, salts sorted out, pH optimized, dynamism
equilibrated. Every cell is a stable community afeast on intrinsic insta-
bility, a living island like Manhattan, unto itself, but with all ears tuned
to the world beyond.
The DNA inside your liver cells is identical to that inside the cells of
your brain, tongue, pancreas, or bladder, and the DNA of every cell
holds the instructions to do the work of any cell. Much of that work is
routine and nonspecific, performed by every cell regardless of where it
sits. All cells of the body must tap into their DNA codebook to make
proteins that will crank the wheels of the Krebs cycle, for example, the
stepwise transformation of food into usable cell fuel. All cells must also
consult their DNA for making proteins to repair it whenever it gets bro-
ken or mutated; and sturdy though the molecule is, it needs upkeep
every day.
But then there are the specialist codes, the protein formulas pos-
sessed by all cells, yet consulted by few. The genome within a bladder
cell has the code for making insulin, and yet your bladder doesn't se-
crete insulin no matter how badly you need to pee. Your pancreas cells
in theory can hammer out taste receptors to tell the bitter from the
sweet, but the pancreas is a large, hammer-shaped gland hanging to-
ward the rear of your abdominal cavity, and it has better things to do.
Different cells of the body, then, differ somewhat in how their DNA be-
haves, in which genes are active, and which kept mum. Proteins are the
laborers that do the fancy switchwork. They arouse genes, they stifle
genes. Proteins in a brain cell will latch onto the DNA molecule and
scan the code for making dopamine or serotonin, neurotransmitters
that convey signals across our crinkled cortex. Why do brain cells have
these proteins in their borders, while skin cells do not? How do brain
cells know to make the proteins that home in on DNA and access the
code for other brainy chemicals like serotonin and dopamine? If the
DNA of your head cells is the same as the DNA of your toe cells, why
can't you think with your feet, even when you try to vote with them?
Much of the answer to how cells differentiate and assume their
tissue-specific identity remains hidden in the abiding mystery that is

M O L E C U L A R B I O L O G Y 
• 
2 0 7
embryonic development. You started out as a single cell, a fertilized
egg, and that potentate cell knew everything and saw to the farthest ho-
rizon and had the potential to give rise to all organs of the body. But as
your embryo grew, its rapidly proliferating population of cells began
budding off into discrete colonies, layers, sectors, primordial organs;
and the greater the number of cells, the less freedom of motion and
possibility each cell retained, the more committed to its location and
vocation as a member of a limb or kidney or lung. In the course of dif-
ferentiating, the genome within each cell underwent a series of subtle
modifications. If the cell was destined to become part of the liver, ge-
netic codes necessary for the production of bile and sex hormones
would have been gently pressed into an active configuration, perhaps
with the kinks of the DNA on which they sit being turned slightly out-
ward, made accessible to the transcription proteins that give the codes
voice. At the same time, genetic sequences of no use to a liver cell were
muffled, tucked under and inward or slapped over with a few chemical
"methyl groups," the cell's version of duct tape on the mouth. We un-
derstand little about embryonic development and the balletic genetics
behind it, although extensive research on the subject is well under
way, including on the much feted and politically freighted class of cells
called stem cells — founder cells from which more specialized cell types
then stem.
Yet even after our cells have assumed their basic identity, have been
programmed in the art of acting like a smooth muscle cell or a hairy
follicle cell, they continue to hone their skills and refresh their memo-
ries by listening to the voices around them. A liver cell knows it is a liver
cell by dint of priming during embryogenesis, and because all the
cells around it remind it of its liverishness every moment of every day.
Cells are gossips, scolds, eavesdroppers, and sheep. They attend to their
neighbors and hector their neighbors and keep one another in line.
About half of the proteins in a cell are devoted to communications — to
receiving signals from other cells and conveying advice and counsel
back again. Cell membranes bristle with hundreds or thousands of re-
ceptor proteins, which protrude from the cell like outstretched arms or
woven baskets or egg whisks. Each receptor type is shaped to embrace a
particular molecule, a hormone, a growth factor, a song for the cell; and
on meeting its designated match, the receptor protein shifts its shape
in no uncertain terms to ensure that the entire viscous village beneath
it hears. Cells send molecular missives across the tiny spaces of the
extracellular matrix, and across the body buoyed in the blood or lymph.
The cells of the pituitary gland at the base of the brain secrete sex hor-

THE 
CANON 
• 
208
mones that persuade ovary cells to help ripen an egg, or testes cells to
supply fresh sperm. The mast cells of the immune system, on encoun-
tering an invading allergen that they deem dangerous — mildew spore,
cheap eye shadow dust, red alert! — will flood the surrounding tissue
with the chemical histamine; and any cells in the vicinity blessed with
histamine receptors will gamely react, yielding the swollen eyes, drip-
ping sinuses, serial sneezing, and asthmatic wheezing that can make the
body's inflammatory response so much nastier than the pathetic threat
that spurred it.
Beyond chemical diplomacy, there is good old brute force. Cells are
strong, as we've seen, stronger than ants, and they can tug and yank at
the cells adjacent to them, or extrude from their surface their thin, long
streamers, called philopodia, to deliver a few pointed pokes. That me-
chanical stimulation acts on the recipient cells much as a powerful hor-
mone would, rearranging the cell's internal protein furniture and set-
ting off a signaling cascade that tumbles right down to the nucleus.
Through the medium of massage, a group of uncoordinated, intro-
verted cells, each minding its own business at its preferred pace, in a
flash can be rallied and synchronized and swayed to behave as one.
When you cut yourself, it is the sensation of being yanked and stretched
that spurs surrounding cells to begin dividing and heal the gap. Con-
versely, if a cell infected with a virus initiates its suicide program for the
sake of the greater good, the urgent membrane ruffling that is a hall-
mark of programmed cell death can induce neighboring healthy cells to
kill themselves, too, just in case.
Again and again scientists have seen cellular groupthink in action
and eavesdropped on its propaganda machine. If you extract stem cells
from an early mouse embryo and inject them into the bloodstream of
an adult mouse, the fate of those ingénue cells will depend on where
they land. Stem cells that lodge in the liver become liver cells, those
trapped in a muscle get muscular, those caught in the kidney learn to go
with the flow. Obviously the injected stem cells didn't have a chance to
experience the hazing of normal embryonic development and whatever
stepwise genetic changes it entails. Instead, each cell had to learn on
the job, by osmosis, imitation, indoctrination. If the elder cells around
it talked of nothing but a liver's lot — of secreting bile, regulating the
blood supply, storing fats and sugars, detox duties — the stem cell ab-
sorbed the ambient information, imbibed hormones and other mole-
cules designed to stimulate liver cells, and began responding as a liver
cell would. Inside the nucleus of the stem cell, the DNA molecule would

M O L E C U L A R B I O L O G Y 
• 
2 0 9
adapt itself to the specific demands of liver tissue. The pursuit of mas-
tery never ends, and cell specialization requires lifelong education.
Cells must pay particular attention to their community when it
comes to the monumental matter of division. Many cells of the body,
as it happens, are primed to divide. Growth is their default position,
the thing they will do unless told to do otherwise, and a lot of the chem-
ical signals that cells send to one another are exactly that — signals of
growth repression. Only on the removal of these inhibitory signals,
coupled with the reception of positive signals that encourage growth,
will a cell enter the tightly choreographed ballet d'action of division, a
task carried out by a vast protein corps. The DNA molecule is pried
apart, just as it is when its genes must be read, but this time the entire
long-winded masterpiece is scanned, and a complementary copy made
of all 3 billion exposed bases; and the copy is spell-checked for accuracy,
and most of the mishaps repaired, at which point a matching strand
can be made, and the newborn pair then entwined; and the two heavy-
weight molecules, mother DNA and her dutiful, duplicate daughter, are
pulled over to opposite corners of the nucleus, and the nucleus is
pinched down the middle into two little bubbles, each with its own
copy of DNA, and the entire cell soon follows suit. Yes, just as cells love
making protein, they love splitting up, and they do it quite well, in their
well-controlled fashion. Millions of your body cells divide each day, and
so your upper epidermis sloughs off and is replaced by new skin under-
neath, and your head hair grows half a foot a year, and your immune
system can meet almost any pathogen it faces through the explosive ex-
pansion of suitable warrior cells.
Yet we live in the world, which may be the best of all possible worlds,
but still it's not perfect. Every time a cell divides and its DNA is repli-
cated, mistakes are made: a thymine is inserted where a guanine be-
longs, or a C base is inserted instead of the proper A; and really, what
else would you expect in the course of copying a chemical text 3 billion
nucleic letters long, which, if they were printed letters, would fill maybe
5,000 books the size of this one? Most of the mistakes in DNA replica-
tion are spotted by proofreading proteins and corrected before cell divi-
sion is through; and of those few that slip through, most don't matter,
for they fall into a harmless region of the genome. Once in a while,
though, a serious mutation is overlooked and ends up in the final DNA
script of the daughter cell, a change in the code that will yield a rotten,
dysfunctional protein product somewhere down the line. And by far
the rottenest proteins are those that "liberate" a cell from the con-

THE CANON 
• 
2 1 0
straints of its community, for they are the proteins that turn a cell can-
cerous. A cancer cell is a cell that is deaf to the chemical tutelage around
it and indifferent to the slings and ruffles of its neighbors. It no longer
needs hormonal inspiration from the outside to stabilize its stash of
replication proteins but will make a set of the proteins and stabilize
them of its own accord, and then make more and more and keep those,
too. The receptors protruding from the surface of a cancer cell may be
empty-handed above, but still their lower stalks shake and bend in the
cytoplasm below and send shock waves through to the nucleus, with the
order to grow, grow, grow. The sticky daubs on the outer membrane
that keep healthy cells tethered together soften up until the cancer cell
comes unglued, allowing it to travel where it pleases; and when the re-
bel cell settles down in new ground, still it hears nothing of the tissue
around it, but listens only to its inner malignant hiss, telling it, You are a
cell, and you must survive, and to survive, you must divide. But it is a
false message, for in unhampered division, in its state of solipsistic ge-
netic determinism, the cell kills the body and, with the body, itself.
The normal cells that we live with, the cells that abide by the laws
and harmonics of multicellular existence, exemplify the dynamic equi-
librium ever at work between a cell and its setting, or, zeroing in still
further, between DNA and the proteins around it. Many biologists
grumble about how DNA has been seriously misunderstood, stripped
from its cellular context and petitioned for answers to everything —
cancer, heart disease, bad moods, choice of mate. People talk about the
nature-versus-nurture debate, and they want to know how much of
who and what they are can be attributed to "nature," which is generally
viewed as synonymous with their DNA, the specifics of their genetic
code; and how much to "nurture" or "the environment," which com-
monly signifies the amorphous "world outside" and is characterized by
variables like the childrearing practices and prejudices of their parents,
or whether they attended an expensive, highly selective preschool or
spent their formative years at the knee of Nanny Nickelodeon. Scien-
tists have struggled mightily to impress on the public that the nature-
nurture "debate" is dead, that it was an unscientific nonissue from the
start, something pumped up and sustained by a media ever in love with
conflict and horseraces. "It's unfortunate that there's a linguistic simi-
larity between the words 'nature' and 'nurture,'" Stephen Jay Gould
once lamented to me, for the euphonia alone "has helped keep this ill-
formulated and misguided debate alive." You can't uncouple nature
from nurture, he and other scientists insist, any more than you can un-
couple a rectangle's length from its width. "It is a true union of influ-

M O L E C U L A R 
B I O L O G Y 
• 
2 1 1
ence," said Gould. "It's logically, mathematically, and philosophically
impossible to pull them apart."
The result of all this assertive promotion of an interactionist rather
than a dialectical perspective when it comes to dissecting the roots of
human nature is the undoubtedly accurate but not terribly profound
impression that, gee, maybe one's DNA and one's upbringing together
help shape one's personality. In truth, the indivisible link between the
two, between the instructions encoded in your genomic particulars, in
your DNA, and the execution and interpretation of those instructions
in real time, is profound, is embedded in the deep chemistry of every
cell in your body. DNA may be called the master molecule, but it can do
nothing on its own and must live through the proteins that subserve it;
and those proteins attend closely and continuously to one another, and
to the world around them, for clues to what they should make of their
master. And on attending to external signals and looping back to the
DNA, the proteins may sometimes change the very character of the ge-
nome, by subtly shifting which genes they activate, and how strongly, at
any given time. Nature needs nurture, nurture kneads nature, and the
codependent conversation never ends. It is ongoing everywhere within
you. People often have the impression that if something is "encoded in
their DNA," it must be static and unreachable. The environment, by
contrast, is thought to be easily changed. Yet this impression is mislead-
ing. Your genome is not walled off from its setting. Every cell is a mad
Manhattan microhabitat, and every genome a player in it. Genomes are
responsive, open to change and modification.
Indeed, the pharmaceutical industry would love to tap into that
genomic flexibility, to design drugs that would go right to the source
code in a patient's cells, and fix a problem by fine-tuning gene ex-
pression — persuading the liver to make more of the high-density, or
"good," form of cholesterol and less of the "bad" low-density lipopro-
tein, or bone tissue to remodel itself and heal a broken hip, or the brain
to supply an optimized cocktail of neurochemicals to conquer depres-
sion, despair, a chronic sense of inadequacy, which may or may not be
warranted but which is always unpleasant. And why not get rid of the
recurrent nightmares, too, like the one in which you're onstage, dressed
as the Scarecrow in The Wizard ofOz, and you can't remember the line
that comes after "I would dance and be merry..."
Oh, for the day when we can have a heart-to-heart with our neurons
and tailor our drugs to form-fit our genomes. Oh, to have the wits of a
liver, the shrewdness of a single cell. Yes, my friend, life would be a . . .
ding-a-derry! If we only had the brains.

8
Geology
Imagining World Pieces
W
HEN YOU LIVE in the nation's capital, where every glorious
monument to liberty is ringed with Jersey barriers and status
is measured by the size not of one's paycheck or limousine
but of one's Secret Service detail, you get used to imagining all sorts of
disasters. A child's kite looks like a perfectly plausible anthrax distribu-
tion device. The van that screeches to a halt at an intersection when the
light is still yellow surely houses a dirty bomb. A man dressed in a
bulky, ill-fitting Brooks Brothers raincoat looks suspicious. A man not
dressed in a bulky, ill-fitting Brooks Brothers raincoat looks suspicious.
Yes, in Washington, D.C., and its environs, you learn to think the un-
thinkable and to prepare for a wide range of emergencies, primarily by
stockpiling duct tape, canned soup, and extra cat litter. One thing you
almost never worry about, however, is an earthquake. Which is why,
when I was working up in my office on a spring afternoon, and I felt the
house start to jiggle and sway, I thought about everything other than an
earthquake: a terrorist attack, a passing Abrams tank, my neighbor
with the big dog and the Vin Diesel line of lawn tools, who runs his leaf
blower at night, in the rain, just because, he's kindly explained to me,
he can.
But as the shaking continued, I realized I'd felt the exact same sensa-
tion once before, when I lived in San Francisco, and that it could only
be an earthquake. For nearly half a minute, the house shook, while I
stayed stock-still in my chair, safely positioned beneath a large ceiling
fan. I tried not to panic. I tried not to think about Carole King singing,
"I Feel the Earth. Move. Under My Feet," but it was too late, and now
maybe it is for you, too. Sorry! Finally, when I was sure at least the sway-

GEOLOGY 
• 
2 1 3
ing part of the crisis had passed, I called my husband, whose office was
in downtown Washington, some six miles away.
"Did you feel that?" I gasped.
"Feel what?"
"Well, you're not going to believe this," I said, "but I'm pretty sure we
just had an earthquake."
"On some new medication, are we, dear?"
I muttered an imprecation, or maybe it was an oath, hung up the
phone, and basked briefly in the warmth of righteous indignation. A
moment later, my husband called back. "You're right," he said. He'd just
seen a wire story go by, reporting an earthquake extending from parts
of Virginia through to Maryland, where we live, and measuring 4.5 on
the Richter scale. Venturing out into the hall, I saw that all the pictures
on the wall were askew, and that one of them — a drawing of a woman
who, come to think of it, looks a lot like Carole King — was on the verge
of crashing to the floor.
The capital is not a seismically flamboyant region. It lacks Califor-
nia's tic-tac-toe of active fault lines, the lava luaus of Hawaii, the cap-
tious powder-point volcanoes found in that other place called Wash-
ington. Yet every now and again, even a sedate location with no known
geological risk factors will give a sharp little shrug and demand that
earth scientists pay it some mind. The intermittent jolts and tremors of-
fer unambiguous evidence of a geological principle that truly merits the
designation "bedrock": The planet we inhabit, the bedrock base on
which we build our lives, is in a profound sense alive as well, animate
from end to end and core to skin. Earth, as I said earlier, is often called
the Goldilocks planet, where conditions are just right for life and it is
neither too hot nor too cold, where atoms are free to form molecules
and water droplets to pool into seas. There is something else about
Goldilocks, beyond her exacting tastes, that makes her a noteworthy
character, a fitting focus for our attentions. The girl cannot sit still. She's
restless and impulsive and surprisingly rude. She wanders off into the
woods without saying where she's headed or when she'll be home. She
barges through doors uninvited, helps herself to everybody else's food,
and breaks the furniture. But don't blame her. She can't help herself.
Goldilocks is so raw and brilliant that she just has to let off some steam.
Like Goldilocks the protagonist, Goldilocks the planet is a born dy-
namo, and without her constant twitching, humming, and seat bounc-
ing, her intrinsic animation, Earth would not have any oceans, or skies,
or buffers against the sun's full electromagnetic fury; and we animate
beings, we DNA bearers, would never have picked ourselves up off the

THE CANON 
• 
2 1 4
floor. The transaction was not one-sided, though. The restless, heave-
hoing motions of the planet helped give rise to life, and restless life, in
turn, reshaped Earth.
"We now understand that it isn't simply a matter of life accommo-
dating to the buffets of physical change, but that life is a participant in
the evolution of environments," said Andrew Knoll of Harvard Univer-
sity. "A grand theme of the history of our planet is how physical and bi-
ological Earth have coevolved through time."
When the whole world is your subject, it pays to be well-rounded,
and geologists consider themselves the ultimate interdisciplinarians.
They do fieldwork and lab work and crib from chemistry, physics, ecol-
ogy, microbiology, botany, paleontology, complexity theory, mechanics,
and, of course, computer modeling; geologists compete with protein
chemists for their production of colorful computer-generated schemat-
ics that can be manipulated multifactorially in three-dimensional space
and also make very nice screen savers. They love being outdoors, chip-
ping away at rocks, leaping blithely from one sheer precipice to the
next, and slowly acquiring the complexion of a Slim Jim. Geologists are
often drawn to regions of great natural beauty and spotty safety re-
cords: active volcanoes, active fault lines, mountainous borders between
sporadically warring nations. Unnatural eyesores can also have their
appeal. When a new tunnel is blasted through a hillside, geologists will
descend on the site for a chance to study the vast spans of geohistory
that are fleetingly exposed, and if necessary may stall for time by throw-
ing their graduate students in front of any oncoming cement mixers.
For geologists, every stone is a potential Rosetta stone, a key to a
milestone moment in Earth's history, and to accompany a geologist
through a park is to leave no stone unturned or outcrop unlearned.
While strolling in the Arnold Arboretum on an unusually cold summer
afternoon, Professor Kip Hodges, then at MIT, stopped at a thigh-high
boulder that looked like a big lump of hardened cookie dough, and he
took me through its résumé. "This is the kind of rock we commonly re-
fer to as a conglomerate, which is just a rock that has blocks of different
materials in it," Hodges said, pointing at the embedded chunks of what
looked like nuts, or grayish white chocolate chips. "Notice that in this
case you have blocks of many different sizes, and they're surrounded by
a lot of fine-grained material, as though the blocks were just dumped
and then locked into place." He ran his hand across the surface, and I
followed suit. Very knobby, and chilly to the touch. When you see a mix
of fine-grained and big material like this, Hodges explained, it's a good
bet that the rock is of glacial origin. He took a seat on the boulder, and

GEOLOGY 
• 
2 1 5
I, less eagerly, followed suit. Very, very knobby, and most decidedly of
glacial origin. The blocks that are now embedded in our exemplary
boulder may have been rafted in by a creeping sheet of ice; the ice
melted out, and the rocks became incorporated in the underlying sedi-
ment. "So the next question," Hodges said, "is when did all this hap-
pen?"
He then explained to me the considerable challenge of fixing an age
to the boulder, a task that required, among other steps, sampling each
embedded blockette for its relative concentration of radioactive tracers
like uranium and thorium. But the effort proved exceptionally fruitful.
The boulder on which we were perched turned out to be 570 to 590 mil-
lion years old and just one of many like it discovered at sites around the
world. Taken together with related research, the age and distribution of
these rocks suggested that there had been a heretofore unknown ice age
of great antiquity and scope, a hypothesis that many geologists are now
pursuing. All of which demonstrates the geologist's first principle of
fieldwork, Hodges said, as he gave the boulder an affectionate pat —
that the real gems of the landscape are often the plainest-looking stones.
It was a lesson I learned by the seat of my thin cotton pants.
"We live on a planet that records its own history," said Andrew Knoll.
"I'm always amazed, when I drive across Utah, that I see this wonderful
history unfolding before me, and you don't have to be a scientist to ex-
perience it. If you keep your eyes open as you go through the Grand
Canyon, you'll see fossils. If you stop at almost any roadcut in the Mid-
west or look at the floors of almost any cathedral in Europe, you'll see
fossils. It was hard to be a medieval penitent on one's knees without
running into an ammonite every step of the way."
Yet for all the texts scratched onto its surface, Earth can also be a taci-
turn mule of a research subject, close to the vest and physically just
about impenetrable. The deepest hole ever drilled got 7.6 miles down, a
mere two-thousandths of the distance to the planet's searing inner
core. Most of what geologists know about the inner earth they have
gleaned indirectly. In the laboratory, they heat rocks and squeeze rocks
and wring them into stone soup, charting the changes in the rocks' be-
havior and conductance properties with each new form of abuse. So
armed, geologists can make the best of everyone else's bad day. When
an earthquake strikes, they observe with the greatest possible precision
how the waves of energy ripple outward from the quake's epicenter —
their speed and direction, the relative decline of magnitude over dis-
tance, any harmonic overlays and reverberations they may have. The re-
searchers can then compare the characteristics of those seismic waves

T H E CANON 
• 
2 l 6
with what they have learned about the conductance properties of dif-
ferent types of rock in their solid and molten states. Earthquakes, in
other words, are like sonograms, the waveforms of seismic energy offer-
ing a portal into the imperial organs below.
Geologists sometimes complain that we have devoted more time and
effort to exploring other planets than we have to our own, and they've
been driven to propose extreme remedies for the knowledge gap. David
Stevenson of Caltech, for example, has suggested that we make a slender
crack right down to the earth's midpoint and then send in probes to
sample the core directly, an idea he published in the scientific journal
Nature under the Swiftian title "A Modest Proposal."
"I was being somewhat tongue-in-cheek, but I wanted people to real-
ize that the idea may not be completely ridiculous," he said to me.
"Making the crack in the first place could be difficult, but once you got
it started, it would propagate under the effect of gravity."
Whatever technical limitations they may chafe under, geologists have
come a long way since Jules Verne imagined the center of the earth as
a kind of daffy reliquarium filled with mastodons, icthyosaurs, plesio-
saurs, "Ape Gigans," and other members of nature's backlist. They've
made their way around to something like the fifteenth-century fantasies
of the good fire-breathing friar Savonarola.
We're all familiar with the idea that the earth's surface is broken into
pieces, or tectonic plates, and that the movements of these plates has
something to do with earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and the pumice
stone now gathering fungal spores in the corner of your shower stall. A
simple glance at a desktop globe reveals that the plates have been slum-
ming about for some time: South America and Africa look like matched
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle that once fit together but have since been scat-
tered across the floor, just like what happened when you didn't put
away the 1,000-piece puzzle of the signing of the Declaration of Inde-
pendence, and now John Hancock's quill and John Adams's right thigh
are gone forever. What is less widely known is the reason for these
chronic continental perambulations, these bumps and rasps of plate
against plate. At which point, I must say it's a shame that respectable
Christian theologians dispensed long ago with the idea of hell as a spe-
cific, corporeal, very hot and nasty place located deep underground
and have replaced it with a flaccid metaphor along the lines of "hell is
the spiritual desert in which one dwells if one turns away from God."
As it happens, there is a raging inferno buried some 1,800 miles un-
derground, an authentic hell in Earth, and it is none other than our
planet's core. This pyred pit, this devils' spa and nail salon, is a ball of

GEOLOGY 
• 
2 1 7
blazing metal roughly the size of Mars, 90 percent iron and the rest
mostly nickel, and it burns at a temperature of 10,000 degrees Fahren-
heit, nearly as hot as the surface of the sun. The core has been seething
continuously since Earth coalesced, and with almost unmitigated brim-
stone, cooling by only 300 degrees over the past 4 billion years. Most of
that heat is left over from the cauldron conditions of the early solar sys-
tem, and from the inevitable transformation of potential energy into
thermal energy that comes when gravity pulls a lot of scattered matter
into a compact planetary ball. The rest is supplied by rich stores of un-
stable radioactive elements like uranium, thorium, and potassium,
which in decaying release energy into their milieu, their terrestrial stew,
and so keep stirring the pot. Earth is exceptionally blessed with radioac-
tive material, and the feverish click, click, clickings of decomposing
heavy atoms, along with the core's primal heat, explain why our planet
is such a changeling, displaying more geologic verve and greater turn-
over of its dermal layer, its surface anatomy, than all the other planets of
the solar system combined. Mars used to have a similar geologic profile,
a blistering core driving large-scale upheaval — crackling crust, volca-
noes spewing ash and gas. But Mars, being significantly smaller than
Earth, had far less internalized heat and fissionable goods to begin with,
and its furnace went cold a billion years ago, leaving the planet a rela-
tively indolent world, its worn, pitted face pretty much set in its ways.
The Earth, by contrast, is a mad master of plastic surgery, recurrent pa-
tient and outré doctor bundled as one. Do you think India looks good
down here, cheek by jowl with Madagascar? No? Then how about su-
tured to China? And Australia: Better down here, blended together with
Antarctica, or as a standalone flower of the Indian Ocean? Or maybe
you'd prefer if we slid it northward and into Japan?
The surgery won't stop because Earth is a giant heat engine, and hot
things are forever struggling to cool themselves down. This is the most
telling way to think about our planet, said David Bercovici, a professor
of geophysics at Yale University: as a great hot ball trying to shed ther-
mal energy into space. After all, the second law of thermodynamics de-
mands the transfer. Heat must travel from a spot of relative warmth to
one of relative cold. The core of Earth is almost 6000 degrees Celsius.
The space through which Earth is hurtling is about —270 Celsius. Ergo,
the core keeps shrugging off its heat, Get out of here already, out into
the frigid sinkhole of space, where you belong. Ah, but it's not always
easy to play by the rules. Not only do the subterranean supplies of ura-
nium and thorium keep pumping heat into the mix, but as thermal
currents travel from the core through the thicket of inner earth, they

THE CANON 
• 
2 l 8
must pass through thousands of miles of densely packed rock and
metal and putty and pudding, and up through the thin, brittle, insulat-
ing crust, and all the while never knowing how the substrate they're
seeking to penetrate will react — will it shrink, collapse, crack, balloon
outward? It's a real challenge. Yet this is what our world is about: there
is heat inside, and it wants to get out.
"It's the same as with your cup of coffee," said Bercovici. "Everything
is trying to get into equilibrium with the great, cold, vacuous space.
And in the process of cooling off and becoming cold and undrinkable,
it does all kinds of cool things."
What sort of cool things might heat transfer bring? Let's slit the
world open and look from within.
As I'll discuss more fully in the next chapter, on astronomy, Earth
condensed about 4.5 billion years ago from the ring of rock and dirt
that remained after the formation of the sun, itself the result of a large
gaseous cloud heeding the gravitational call to compaction. Earth and
the other planets formed quickly by celestial standards, accreting their
mass and assuming their spheroid shape (the expected geometry when
every part of an object's surface is pulled evenly toward the center by
gravity) in as little as 10 million to 35 million years. Those early days
were hard days, lawless days. The interplanetary skies were littered with
comets, asteroids, and other extrastellar trash, and orbital paths were
still in violent dispute. Some 50 million years after the birth of the solar
system, Earth collided with a planet approximately half its size, to spec-
tacular, double-barreled effect. A portion of that doomed planet's mass
was absorbed into our own, for a net weight gain of 10 percent. At the
same time, a chunk of the original Earth was knocked free in the crash,
a prize piece that became our incidental, parthenogenic daughter and
sole satellite, the moon.
The newly enlarged edition of Earth then began to assume its current
configuration. Denser materials like iron and nickel were tugged at
most strongly by the planet's gravitational field and gradually migrated
toward the center. Lighter elements, including oxygen and silicon, felt
less of a pull and formed intermediate and outer layers. And this, in
rough cut, is the Earth we have today: an orb composed of a ridicu-
lously dense metal pit surrounded by comparatively lighter, fluffier lay-
ers and topped off with a crispy outer crust. But this is no finished des-
sert. This is not the end of the meal. Great pressure and radioactivity
keep the fires burning; and when the chef is disgruntled, everyone else
feels the heat.
For those of us who live at or around ground level — and that in-

GEOLOGY 
• 
2 1 9
eludes all known life forms, for even the deep-ocean dwellers puddling
around hydrothermal vents subsist well within the confines of the crust
— it's hard to appreciate the power of pressure. Humans put up with at-
mospheric pressures; but though Earth's atmosphere is thick, as these
things go, extending upward for 50 miles and more, and though we at
sea level navigate through its bottommost, heaviest stratum, still it is a
relatively flimsy load: only 14.7 pounds of air bear down on any square
inch of us. But inside Earth, things get weighty fast. Each layer is a solid,
or some equivalent of a solid, and every successive layer has to hold up
under the weight of all the solid layers above it. Penetrate eighteen miles
down, and you're talking about an average pressure of 150,000 pounds
per square inch. Go two hundred miles in, and it's up to 1.5 million
pounds per square inch. By the time you reach the innermost core, you
encounter crushing loads of 50 million pounds per square inch, or
some 3.5 million times the pressure of air.
Earth's core, its compacted ball of iron, nickel, and other chunky ele-
ments, is really a ball within a ball, an inner zone the size of the moon —
about 2,600 kilometers across — surrounded by an outer core as wide as
Mars. The inner core is where we have our 10,000-degree-Fahrenheit
Hadean heat. That would be more than hot enough to melt iron under
most circumstances, including on the similarly searing face of the sun.
But great pressure makes hay of ordinary chemical change and packs
iron atoms into such tight rows that they can't get up and flow. As a re-
sult, the inner core is a solid, something akin to a huge crystal ball of
iron.
In the outer core, pressures are a bit more relaxed, and so, too, are the
resident ingredients. The outer core, like the inner, consists primarily of
iron, but here it slips around as a liquid. That fluidity has one particu-
larly welcome spinoff effect, which helps make Earth hospitable to life.
As the molten metal of the outer core glides around the solid iron of the
inner, the motions generate Earth's magnetic fields, which could well be
called magnetic shields. Extending outward into space for thousands of
miles, the magnetic fields help to deflect much of the solar wind, the
crackling cataract of high-energy particles that streams nonstop from
the surface of the sun, and that would, if left unchecked, strip away at
our atmosphere as surely as turpentine does paint. Terrestrial magne-
tism then colludes with the cosseted atmosphere to defend the planet's
surface against the sun's most dangerous light. Together air and mag-
netic fields scatter most solar X-rays, cosmic rays, and gamma rays be-
fore the radiation can reach us and tatter our cells and genes.
Magnetic fields also infuse the world with a sense of place, an inher-

THE 
CANON 
• 
220
ent cartography of north and south, and many creatures are thought to
navigate by tapping into terrestrial magnetism: pigeons, sparrows, bob-
olinks, humpback whales, salmon, spiny lobsters, loggerhead turtles,
monarch butterflies, newts, the Central Australian Bushwalking Club.
Then there are those of us with absolutely no sense of direction, whose
idea of using a compass amounts to handing it over to a park ranger in
exchange for a helicopter lift.
The core, inner and outer together, accounts for only about a sixth of
the volume of Earth, but a third of its mass. It is defined by its heavi-
ness, the density of its components. The most formidable atoms of
which Earth is formed, those with the greatest number of protons and
neutrons, have been lured inward by gravity, and in their pigheaded
procession toward the midpoint have pushed aside slimmer players that
stood in their way. The concentration of iron, nickel, and their atomic
ilk in the core, to the near exclusion of lighter elements, makes for an
unmistakable boundary between core and noncore. When you move
outward from the core and into the adjacent layer of Earth-meat, the
mantle, the difference in density is as extreme as it is between that of the
ground we stand on and the sky above it.
Most of Earth's girth is taken up by the mantle, a word that comes
from the German term for "cloak," as the mantle cloaks the core. And
though the cloak is much less dense than the core, do not mistake it for
gossamer. It is solid, rock-solid, a vast and varied mosaic of metals and
silicates — materials built mainly of chains of silicon and oxygen, which
pretty much covers the whole terrain we call stone. One of the miscon-
ceptions that people have about the mantle is that it is molten, a big vat
of melted rock sloshing around underground like the molten lava bub-
bling from the mouth of a Hawaiian volcano. In fact, while much of
the mantle is close to its melting point, particularly in the regions clos-
est to the core, very little is truly liquid. Instead, the mantle is more like
Silly Putty, a toy that more than one geologist keeps on hand for dem-
onstration purposes, and to make funny imprints from the newspaper
when they're bored. Like Silly Putty, the mantle is solid but springy, al-
most squishy, and it can move, and it does all the time. "Think of gla-
ciers," David Bercovici suggests. "They are solid ice, and they move.
They go very slowly, but they go." The mantle, too, is a very slow goer. It
flows like a great sheet of rubbery rock around Earth's central core, at a
rate of up to ten centimeters a year, slower than the speed of growing
hair.
Above the mantle is the planet's outermost layer, the real cloak of
Earth and the place we know best — the crust. On the one hand, "crust"

GEOLOGY 
• 
221
seems like an unnecessarily lackluster and dismissive word for some-
thing that has fed and housed us so well. The entirety of life on Earth
lives on or in the crust. The seven continents and 100,000-plus inhab-
ited islands of the world are part of the crust. The oceans and the floors
they lie on are part of the crust. The beds from which we extract oil,
natural gas, and coal are part of the crust. In crust we trust, and it has
ever been thus.
On the other hand, the crust is very thin. It is a measly, miserly
submorsel of Earth, accounting for less than one-half of 1 percent of
Earth's mass and 1 percent of its volume. If you were in prison and
somebody threw you a crust of bread with the same proportion of the
original loaf as the earth's crust is of Earth, its breadth would be half a
millimeter, barely thicker than a couple of eyelashes. The planetary
crust is of such insignificant width compared to the entire sphere that if
you reduced Earth to the size of a basketball, the skin on it would be
much smoother than that of a basketball, closer to that on a bowling
ball. All the nervy peaks and plunging vales we take such pride in con-
quering would vanish, leveled by force of contrast with the bulk of the
mantle and core.
One fair way to think about the crust is as a layer of ice on a lake. The
ice floats because it is lighter and less dense than the water below it, and
it is crispily crystallized because it has been chilled by the winter air
above. So, too, is the crust composed of relatively light rocks buoyed
atop the condensed superputty of the mantle. The crust is also the cool-
est part of Earth, and thus is brittle and prone to fracturing. And just as
the ice on a lake is thicker in some parts than others, which is why it's a
very stupid thing to try driving your Volkswagen Beetle across it no
matter what your cousin Jeb tells you, so the width of the crust varies
considerably, from a thin point of three miles for the ocean floor be-
neath Hawaii, to a thickness of about forty-three miles for the crust of
the Himalayan plateau. In general, continental crust is about six or
seven times thicker than oceanic crust; and though the benthic realms
of the ocean floor have a spooky, primordial mystique about them, the
place where you might expect to find a few surviving trilobites, the lost
island of Atlantis, or at least the original cast and crew of The Love Boat,
in fact much of the seabed is quite young, hundreds of millions to bil-
lions of years younger than the dry land on which we stand. Which
brings us to the sublime theory of plate tectonics, a fundamental orga-
nizing principle of geology and one of the grand discoveries of the
twentieth century. It also returns us to the image of the very hot object
that wants to cool down — a cup of coffee, a bowl of porridge, a planet

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 2 2
with an iron smelter of a core. No matter: the patterns that arise when
heat bubbles up from below will resemble one another through what-
ever substrate they flow.
The idea that landmasses migrate slowly around the planet is not a new
one. As maps improved, scientists and others couldn't help but puzzle
over the puzzle-piece appearance of the continents. Incisively fusing ev-
idence from fossils, rock deposits, and glacial striation patterns around
the world, the German geologist and meteorologist Alfred Wegener in
1912 published his visionary "continental drift" hypothesis. Wegener
proposed that 200 million years ago all the continents were lumped to-
gether in a giant landmass he called Pangaea, meaning "All Earth," and
that somehow Pangaea had broken into pieces and the shards had
drifted apart. Incidentally fusing the name of a fictional detective with
that of the character's creator, the English geologist Arthur Holmes
soon afterward suggested a possible mechanism for Wegener's conti-
nental peregrinations. Holmes, who studied physics and geology at
what is now the Imperial College in London, conjectured that ongoing
radioactive decay in the earth could be helping to generate giant heat
currents that would convect up to the surface like soup cooking on a
stove. Not until after World War II, however, did scientists gather em-
pirical evidence that a steady spreading of the sea floors, fueled by
chthonic radioactivity, was driving continental drift; and not until the
1960s did geologists pull all the pieces together into a grand unified the-
ory of how the earth churns. The theory of plate tectonics is a bona fide
theory, too, a comfortably capacious conceptual framework that ex-
plains an array of disparate findings, that grows stronger and sturdier
with the steady accretion of new data, and that can be used to formulate
and test all sorts of novel, unobvious hypotheses about how Earth be-
haves. Scientists may not yet be able to predict earthquakes or volcanic
eruptions with anything near the precision that they, we, and the insur-
ance industry would like, but they can make actuarial predictions about
where and over what time period the bigger quakes are bound to happen.
The term "tectonic shift" has filtered into popular usage and com-
petes with "quantum leap" to suggest a really big, generally construc-
tive, but possibly risky change, all of which are appropriate nuances:
"tectonic" comes from "tekton," the Greek word for "builder." Plate tec-
tonics is the theory of how the shifting plates of the earth build the
great bulk of our surroundings. And construction sites can be danger-
ous places — why do you think the workers wear hardhats, carry metal
lunch boxes, and know how to whistle? Earth's tectonic plates build,

GEOLOGY 
• 
223
wrench apart, gerrymander entire nations on a lark, but they are not
what they seem. You can't look at the globe and know where the plates
are. They aren't defined by the shapes of the continents or where land
meets sea. In fact, tracing the borders of the earth's plates is a tricky,
sometimes fractious task. By general consensus, there are seven to ten
large or "major" plates, and twenty-five to thirty minor ones. The pre-
cise head count counts far less than how the plates move, where they are
headed, and what happens when two collide.
What, then, are the tectonic plates? Contrary to common misunder-
standing, they are not simply broken pieces of the earth's crust, al-
though the crustal rock is usually fractured along the boundary line be-
tween one plate and the next. But the plates extend deeper than the
crust, into the upper part of the mantle. Each is about fifty miles thick,
although, like the crust itself, the plates vary in width and in density,
too. The plates bearing the continents are relatively thick and light,
while those scalloped with ocean basins are thin and dense. The plates
are defined as much by their motions as anything else. They are the seg-
ments of the outer earth that glide around as reasonably cohesive units.
The upper part of each mobile plate, the crusty part, is brittle and prone
to cracking and crumpling. The nether portion, in the mantle, is hotter
and more plastic, more likely to yield when pressed. All the plates are
sliding over, or in some cases with, the more viscous lower mantle be-
neath, at an average clip of one to ten centimeters per year — about the
rate at which your fingernails grow. That may be snail-paced by human
standards, but truly nail-biting by geologic ones. In a million years, a
plate migrates some 30 miles. Give a plate 100 million years, and it will
have globetrotted 3,000 miles, nearly the distance between New York
and London.
Animating the plates is Earth's ceaseless effort to dispel its suffocat-
ing heat. The planet has a few cooling techniques at its disposal. It radi-
ates a small amount through conduction, in which fast-moving atoms
and molecules pawn some of their excess energy off onto slower-
moving atoms and molecules that abut them — the same process that
quickly heats your metal spoon when you stick it in a hot cup of coffee.
Earth expels another modest degree of thermal energy by straightfor-
ward mechanical venting — volcanic explosions, geysers, and related
geo-belches. Mostly, however, Earth relies on the conveyor belt method
of heat dispersal, convection. Convection has the benefit of cooling not
only by pushing hot things outward, but by pulling cooler items closer.
The convective currents that course through our world are complicated
and difficult to track, rather like large-scale weather patterns in the at-

THE 
CANON • 
2 2 4
mosphere, but here in crude cut is what happens. Heat flows from the
iron core and into the rock of the lower mantle. As that boundary rock
heats up, it expands and becomes less dense, and, just as hot air rises, so
the heated, expanded rock starts to rise through the cooler mantle rock
above it. The higher it manages to climb, the less pressure bears down
upon it, and the softer it can become; and the more buttery it grows, the
better it flows, which further eases its crustward cruise. At some point,
however, another little technicality of physics intervenes, the flip side of
the principle that sent the rocky mass bubbling upward to begin with.
In rising, the rock dispenses its heat into its environs, and as it cools it
gradually reverts to its former state of density. Finally, the bleb of stone
has no choice, it is too heavy relative to the matrix around it, and it be-
gins to sink, as stones predictably, platitudinously do. Down, down,
back toward the hotter core, where the rocky mass can pick up more
heat and start its yearning journey once more. This, then, is the basic
convective cycle at work inside Earth. Hot rocks expand, rise, cool, con-
tract, and descend; let's take a deep breath, and try that again. Some of
these convective currents may eddy around near the border of the core,
others convulse in larger swags across vast swaths of the mantle. And a
few manage to fight their way to the surface and gurgle into the oceans,
right where the crust is thin and the Earth's seams ever so slatternly gap.
Among the many lines of research that culminated in the theory of
plate tectonics, some of the most important came from studies of the
sea floor in the 1950s. That enterprise supplied a braided array of sur-
prises. For one thing, there were long ridges of undersea mountains, the
most prominent running down the middle of the Atlantic and Indian
oceans and rising 3,000 meters or more above the sea floor; and there
were undersea trenches, plunging 2,000 meters or more below that
floor. For another, the rocks on the sea floor were outrageously youth-
ful, 180 million years old at most, compared to terrestrial rock samples
that date back billions of years. The youngest of those spritely seabed
rocks were found closest to the midocean mountain ridges, with the
ages steadily mounting as you moved farther from the mountains and
up to the rim of the midocean trenches. Finally, the sea floor proved
to be remarkably tidy and light on sediment, considering how long it
had been subject to a steady drizzle of debris from the land above —
posthumous plant and animal parts, sand, pebbles, mud, bones, shells,
Naugahyde barstools, and 3,000 copies of Grand Funk Railroad's Were
an American Band, still in their unopened jewel cases. It was as if the
ocean bottom were being continuously scrubbed, vacuumed, and mer-
cifully auctioned off on eBay.

GEOLOGY 
• 
225
Plate tectonics helped solve the riddle of the callow deep. The con-
vecting loops carry roasted rock upward toward the carapace. Some of
that hot young rock penetrates to the surface by welling up through the
ocean ridges, where it emerges in the semisolid rock format called
magma. That magma pushes the ocean floor apart, hobbling the oce-
anic plates on either side and plowing cooler, less young rock outward.
Eventually, the cold leading edge of the spreading sea floor runs into
other fissures in the crust, the deep ocean trenches, where it is sucked
back, or subducted, into the mantle. In the mantle's mulching maw, the
rock is smashed, pulverized, refitted, and pasteurized, so that whatever
part of it might manage to emerge through a crustal ridge, to see the
sea floor by the seashore once more, will do so as brand-new rock. Po-
seidon's conveyor belt never stops rattling along, and in Earth's hoary
history the ocean basins, our crustal low points, have been recycled doz-
ens of times. Not so the continents. Because continental rock is rela-
tively light, it floats above the subduction zone of the trenches, getting
pushed and pulled and battered without being routinely sucked into
the mantle. Continental landmasses have changed their contours and
allegiances repeatedly, as we said, but many of their rocks have re-
mained above the molten fray for a billion years or more.
Everywhere the upwelling of hot rock keeps the plates in constant
motion, and the moving plates in turn recast the crustal playhouse on
which life gamely mouths its lines. The spreading of the sea floor at the
midocean ridges drives some plates and the cargo they bear away from
one another: such tectonic divergence is pushing North America and
Eurasia in opposite directions, and widening the Atlantic Ocean by
some five centimeters per year. Other plates are ramming into each
other, as awkwardly and irritably as two pedestrians colliding on the
sidewalk: You go this way, no, I'll go that way, whoops, now we're both
going the same way again, that won't work. Maybe I'll just try to duck
under your legs and get this farce over with. When a thick continental
plate rubs up against a thin oceanic plate, the thinner plate does indeed
start diving under the higher plate, making one of those subduction
zones that return old sea floor to the mantle and seriously unsettling
whatever landforms lie above it in the process: raising a string of volca-
noes and outfitting them with explosive magma chambers, for example,
or crumpling coastlines into high-altitude peaks best suited for llamas,
kings with lots of slaves, and tourists with lots of medical insurance.
The Cascade Mountains of the Northwest — home to Mount Saint Hel-
ens — and the Andes Mountains of South America both exemplify what
happens when oceanic and continental plates collide.

THE 
CANON 
• 
226
If the converging plates both carry continents, the landmasses will
be smashed together in slow motion, the leading edges buckling up-
ward as the continents are forced into uneasy, captious alliance. Mid-
continent mountain chains often reveal where once separate landforms
were compressed together by converging continental plates. The Hima-
layas, for example, began clawing their way upward about 45 million
years ago, when the plate bearing the Indian subcontinent collided
with the rest of Asia. In Europe, the Alps delineate where the Italian
peninsula, riding on the African plate, slammed into what are today
Germany and France at about the same time, a churlish merger that
two world wars, a common currency, and the frequent consumption of
each other's pastries have not entirely placated.
Tectonic encounters are not always head-on collisions. Sometimes a
pair of plates traveling in opposite directions merely scrape past each
other, or try to. If the glancing encounter turns out to be a tight
squeeze, parts of the plates will stick together, especially at their crispy
ragged upper crusts. The plates underneath may insist on continuing
in their respective, contradictory directions, but the rocks along the
tacky upper boundaries are trapped in place. They become stressed and
strained and resort to all sorts of tricks — therapy, yoga, renaming
themselves "Gibraltar." But the pressure keeps building, and finally the
strained rock surfaces snap, lurching away from each other in a seismic
spasm. "Seismic" comes from the Greek word for "shaking," and sud-
den slippages along Earth's fault lines — fissures in the crust where un-
derlying plate motions force rock to scrape against rock — are what
shake and break the ground in a quake, as the pent-up energy stored in
the long-suffering rocks is freed to spread outward in waves.
The most famous of these parlous plate boundaries is the San
Andreas Fault in California, where the Pacific plate is crawling north-
ward relative to the North American plate, and their stony interfaces
alternately grip and slip, usually in incremental jerks, occasionally by
harrowing heaves of several meters at once. In the catastrophic San
Francisco earthquake of 1906, peak displacement was almost twenty
feet near Olema, California. The chronic grinding and sliding of plates
tend to fracture boundary rocks in many directions and along multiple
planes, down an estimated six miles deep in the case of the 1906 quake.
As a result, major fault lines like the San Andreas are not single slashes
in the crust but crisscrossing thickets of cracked rock slabs, which
sometimes absorb the querulous motions of the plates and sometimes
recoil from the effort and splinter some more. The difficulty of deter-
mining the relative resilience of any strand in a fault line's sticky thicket

GEOLOGY 
• 
227
explains the considerable challenge of predicting when the next earth-
quake will strike, and exactly how bad it will be.
The prodigious upwelling of the mantle has done more for Earth's
crust than hammering it ad infinitum with magmatic rancor. In addi-
tion to making the world's seabeds, the convecting forces of inner earth
supplied the water that lies on them. Earth, of course, is awash in water.
There are 326 million trillion gallons of it, enough to cover three-quar-
ters of the planet's surface with flowing oceans that average 2.5 miles
deep. Liquid water is essential to life as we know it, and none of our sib-
ling planets can claim anything like our aqueous bounty. The precise
sequence of events that pinned the bright blue rippling ribbon on
Earth's lapel is still open to debate, but most scientists concur that it was
likely a mix of the astral and the retentive. Liquid water may be rare in
the solar system (and, as far as we can tell, in the universe generally),
but H2O in its other states is not. Comets abound at the fringes of our
solar system, and we can in clean conscience refer to them as "dirty
snowballs." A comet is nothing but an orbiting chunk of ice and dust
maybe ten miles across; and the dramatic tail that cries "comet" so
clearly that we recognize its image in the thousand-year-old Bayeux
tapestry is a humble puff of steam, the surface ice boiling off as the
speckled projectile careens close to the sun. Early in the evolution of the
solar system, it seems, wild swarms of comets were drawn in from the
exurbs by the highly credible gravitational pull of Jupiter, the giant of
the planetary litter. A sizable number of those comets either forgot to
bring their portable GPS device, or found it wasn't working because it
hadn't been invented yet, but in any case they ended up overshooting
their target by a few hundred million miles and crashing into Earth in-
stead. Earth was still young, and so hot to the touch that much of the
cometary water rapidly vaporized back into space; but some seeped
into the depths of the young Earth, where it was bound up into the
rock, greatly amplifying whatever water stores our world had from the
start. Beginning about 4 billion years ago, volcanic eruptions steadily
loosened the subterranean water from its mineral crypt and spewed it
back out as steam, up to a planetary surface grown clement enough for
the water to rally its forces, seize the initiative, and initiate the seas.
Earth's crust had cooled down, and the swirling molten iron at its core
had begun generating the magnetic fields that help deflect the searing
solar wind. So shielded, the vast clouds of volcanic reflux were not
peeled off into space, but instead hovered above the ground, gathering
and glowering portentously, as storm clouds do. They gathered until
there was no room for more. The skies were supersaturated out to the

THE 
CANON 
• 
228
limits of gravity's grip, in a nimbus of high humidity, and the water va-
por had no choice but to condense out and fall to Earth as rain. The
rains fell in relentless torrents of Noachian proportions, only bigger and
longer, and there were no giraffes and zebras huddled on a wood boat,
wishing they were back at the circus. For tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands of years, the antediluvian deluge fell, filling the dimples in
Earth's newly caramelized silicate skin, filling them to the brim. Yet
while this downpour may sound like an excessive rainy season, even for
Seattle, by the timetable of Earth's history the building of our naval re-
sources barely lasted a sneeze. "The geological record of sedimentary
rocks, formed in the presence of liquid water," the geologist Robert
Kandel has written, "proves that the oceans have existed for three bil-
lion years, maybe even four," and at a volume pretty much like what we
have today. In other words, no sooner had Earth's crust managed to
cool enough for discernible depressions to form than the skies had de-
posited in them the maximum allowable in liquid assets, our storied
galleons of 326 million trillion gallons, enough water to fill a string of
bathtubs that would reach from here to the sun and back again 5 mil-
lion times. Just be sure to bring your own towel, shampoo, and a
breathable atmosphere, too.
Oh, yes, a breathable atmosphere. How easily we overlook what we
need the most. You can live without water for three days, even a week to
ten days if you're well hydrated at the start and you stay in a cool, shady
spot. But if you stop breathing, you can die within minutes. Our oblig-
ingly inspirable air may seem simpler and less substantive than water,
more insipid and inadvertent and with a more pronounced tendency to
stare vacantly into space, yet appearances can be deceiving, especially
the ones that you can't see. In fact, Earth's atmosphere is a richer and
more complex resource than is our water, and it has taken compara-
tively longer to evolve into the specific mix that we inhale at a rate of 2
gallons every minute or so, for a total of about 3,000 gallons per day —
enough to fill 100 bathtubs not currently en route to the sun. Because
gas has mass, a pound for every 100 gallons, we pull in and blow off
about 30 pounds of personal space daily.
The atmosphere is really an extension of Earth, a geopolitical
player right up there with the core, mantle, and crust. Like so much else
about our planet, the air was born on the inside and then brusquely
turned inside out. From the moment Earth managed to cohere into a
reputable sphere, it began outgassing the rudiments of an atmosphere,
releasing plumes of hot vapors that had gotten trapped in its rocks dur-
ing the natal melee. The first atmosphere was mostly hydrogen and he-

GEOLOGY 
• 
229
lium, and it wasn't long for this world. Earth lacked sufficient gravita-
tional mass to hold on to such lightweight gases, and its young core had
yet to settle into the two-part inventor of a magnetic buffer against
the solar wind. Before Earth had reached the half-billion-year mark, its
primordial atmosphere had drifted or been abraded away. And while
there are traces of helium in our skies today — a tiny fraction of 1 per-
cent of the total atmosphere — there is virtually no free hydrogen gas to
be found. Terrestrial hydrogen is in bondage with other elements —
with oxygen in water, with carbon and nitrogen in the chains of our
genes and proteins. If you want hydrogen straight up to put to work in
some way, say as hydrogen fuel to power high-concept hydrogen cars,
you must wrest it away from its molecular setting, and that takes en-
ergy, too.
Earth's second atmosphere would not be so easily spooked as the
first. The crust cooled, and pertussive volcanoes loosened other volatiles
from subterranean stone, outgassing water vapor, nitrogen, carbon di-
oxide, and ammonia at a furious pace, until the skies held one hundred
times more gas than they do today. From this toxic, lofted broth, water
vapor condensed as rain, and that was the start of the seas we see,
and the earliest inklings of the air we need. Once poured, the oceans be-
gan absorbing some of the other gases in the atmosphere, dissolving
with particular relish the carbon dioxide at its surface and transform-
ing it into a seltzered froth. Ocean currents stirred carbon dioxide
microbubbles wide and deep, until fully half the carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere had been sucked into the sea. Bubbles: Everybody loves
bubbles! Blowing them, drinking them, bathing in them, bursting
someone else's. Bubbles are like puppies, always bouncy and happy and
ready to play. What a shame if there were nobody around to grab the
leash and take all those lively carbon-based bubbles out for a romp,
running and running until somebody, somewhere, stops and takes a
deep breath.
We don't know how life began on this planet. We don't know where it
started — in surface waters littered with sunlight, or on the black ocean
bottom by a piping hot vent, sheltered in a calm crescent of clay or
slapped sentient by intertidal spray. We don't know when life started;
estimates range from 3.2 billion to 3.8 billion years ago. We don't know
what the very earliest life forms were like. But we do know that once
life got started on this restless, bibulous Goldilocks planet, it did as
Goldilocks would, upending everything in sight until the place looked
and felt and smelled like home.
The impact of life on Earth was dramatic, a tectonic shift of its own,

T H E CANON 
• 
2 3 O
and nothing illustrates that impact better than the things life did to the
air. The atmosphere in which life arose, that special blend of next-gen-
eration outgassings from our generously ulcerous underground, was
wondrous for its time, and likely offered the ideal setting for the chem-
istry of life to get its first hesitant footing, but it was not the sort of air
the vast majority of modern organisms would describe as "fresh." Most
notably, the atmosphere had no free oxygen in it. Yes, there were oxygen
atoms bobbing about with their hydrogen earpieces, in the ambient wa-
ter vapor, but of the paired, pure oxygen, the O2 gas we need to breathe,
the air was almost entirely bare. Today, the atmosphere is about 20 per-
cent O2. Who put the pairs there? Our self-sacrificing ancestors, the
cyanobacteria: large, floating mats of sun-eating microbes, ur-solar
cells that made sweetness from light. Cyanobacteria, also called blue-
green algae, were among the earliest known life forms, and a great suc-
cess story. They were probably the first to master the art of photosyn-
thesis, the stepwise transformation of solar energy, water, and carbon
into sugar, the all-purpose cell food. Sunlight fell in abundance, and
water — well, they were aquatic. And for the carbon source, they had the
bubbles, the carbon dioxide that fizzled into the water from the air, and
the matted flats of cyanobacteria greedily gulped it in. From the CO2,
they took the Cs they needed to bake their carbohydrates, their daily
bread, and excreted the parts they couldn't use, the oxygen couplets, the
mighty O2s. Yet the air remained long unruffled, as all the oxygen waste
spilling from Earth's booming archaeobacterial farms went instead,
quite literally, to rust. The oceans were rich in iron — dissolved in the
water or veining submerged rocks — and iron has a great affinity for ox-
ygen. For the first billion-plus years of photosynthetic activity, oceanic
iron handily sopped up the oxygen, and to this day most of the free O2
ever made in Earth's history remains locked up in ancient reservoirs of
red, rusted rock.
Still, life kept up the pace, and the bacterial mats spread, until, begin-
ning about 2 billion years ago, the sea's supply of exposed iron was oxi-
dized, pig-sick of O2, and the excess oxygen started filtering into the at-
mosphere. As it built up, some of it occasionally reacted with itself to
form O3, an ozone layer, which in turn helped block out ultraviolet
waves from the sun. Life below was growing steadily better for growing,
in number, in kind, and in setting. The ozone shield would allow life to
colonize the land without fear of frying, while the mounting count of
oxygen duets in the air would spark the great aerobic revolution.
Cyanobacteria are still around today, numbering some 7,500 species,
and many of those strains are, as their ancestors were, anaerobic, per-

GEOLOGY 
• 
231
forming all their daily tasks with no need of oxygen. Indeed, exposure
to oxygen will kill them, as it does other exclusively anaerobic microbes,
including some of the symbiotic bacteria that live in our intestines, and
other, less genial germs that cause tetanus and botulism. An anaerobi-
cally styled metabolism has its uses: it allows microbes to survive where
nothing else can, and in our own bodies it gives muscle cells a chance to
flex for short bursts of intense activity when our blood can't deliver the
requisite oxygen in a timely fashion. Yet oxygen is an excellent fuel if
you know how to burn it, and aerobically powered cells run far longer
and more efficiently than their anaerobic counterparts. Aerobic strains
of bacteria can divide thirty to fifty times more quickly than anaerobic
ones. And while you can sprint for just a minute or two on the fruits of
anaerobic metabolism alone, if you slow to a measured pace that gives
your circulatory system a chance to supply oxygen as needed you can
keep running for hours, the whole day if you're training for the Olym-
pics, or owe a lot of money to an unofficial lending source in New
Jersey.
Some time around 1.5 to 2 billion years ago, as oxygen concentrations
climbed toward 1 percent of the atmosphere's gaseous mix, the first aer-
obic microbes arose, the first unicellular organisms that could exploit
free-floating oxygen to power their internal operations. Dividing at a
quickened pace, the oxygenic microbes began their sometimes rocky
climb to dominance. They'd crowd out the anaerobes or subsume them
beneath their more busily bulging blankets, only to begin exhausting
the oxygen that their blue-green rivals supplied. The aerobics would
crash, and the anaerobics revive, and oxygen levels rise again. The bene-
fits of a dual survival plan, of burning oxygen when possible and
switching to an alternative, oxygen-free strategy when necessary, must
have occurred to one of these ancestral life forms, occurred in the sense
of, yes, it happened, it occurred, and it was good. The first eukaryotic
cells, the first cells to have their genetic material cloaked in a nucleus
and to be otherwise well organized and compartmentalized compared
to bacterial cells, are thought to be the result of an archaic merger be-
tween the distinct cell types. It may have been an accident, it may have
been wolfish engulfment with a fairy-tale ending, we don't know, but
the molecular and metabolic makeup of our cells, of all eukaryotic cells,
suggests that early on some sort of large anaerobic cell — not a blue-
green algae but an anaerobe that ate other cells rather than synthesizing
its food from scratch — either fused with, swallowed, or was infected by
a smaller aerobic cell. Rather than be digested down for spare parts, the
smaller cell survived in the cytoplasmic sanctuary of the larger cell, and

T H E CANON 
• 
2 3 2
therein arose one of the world's first great symbiotic partnerships. The
larger cell protected the smaller cell and fed it anaerobically whenever
oxygen proved scarce, while the smaller cell powered its patron through
aerobic respiration whenever oxygen molecules diffused into the amal-
gamated microbe's gelatinous interior and aroused the aerobe's interest.
These early switch-hitting cells were a bit clumsy, and they must have
stumbled down a number of dead ends and blind alleys as they strug-
gled to sort out the business of cell division complicated by the need to
replicate and properly parse two cellular species rather than one. But
their newfound metabolic plasticity and chemical deftness lent them
sufficient advantage that they thrived despite taking longer to divide
than purely aerobic microbes.
Today we see the purest expression of this ancient alliance in yeast
cells, considered the most "primitive" of eukaryotic cells but no less
worth toasting for that. Yeast cells have their distinctive aerobic and an-
aerobic phases: the first phase begins to bubble your beer, the second
ferments it. But all eukaryotic cells carry living proof of the primal alli-
ance. Look at any one of your body cells under a powerful microscope,
and find the mitochondria, the striped, sausage-shaped bodies where
oxygen is burned and food molecules are transformed into energy
packets, to be stored or spent as needed. Those mitochondria are the
descendants of formerly free-swimming cells; and though they have
long since forsaken the means to survive on their own, mitochondria
keep pieces of past freedom in their small stash of genes. Mitochondrial
DNA is distinct from the much larger cell genome stored in the nucleus,
and its limited number of genes encode proteins devoted mostly to aer-
obic affairs and energy production. No other component of our large,
crowded cells has even this modest measure of genomic autonomy. The
mitochondrial exception was written into the original eukaryotic com-
promise, and through more than a billion years of evolution it has
never been broken.
There were other early instances of a cellular pooling of talents. To-
day's plant cells are thought to be the result of an ancient encounter be-
tween a cyanobacterial cell, with its priceless sun-eating chemistry set,
and an aerobic cell that could make good on the oxygen wealth in
the air. True to the terms of that paleocoupling, modern plants live a
Jekyll-and-Hyde sort of life. During the day, when solar energy galva-
nizes their photosynthetic machinery, plants breathe in carbon dioxide,
make their sugars, and exhale oxygen gas, in a manner reminiscent of
cyanobacteria. But at night, plants take small amounts of that oxygen

GEOLOGY 
• 
233
back, reabsorbing the gas through diffusion and using it to help trans-
port their homemade food plantwide.
For all the seesaw cycling between aerobic and anaerobic life, the
level of atmospheric oxygen gradually mounted until about 400 million
years ago, when it reached a concentration much like what we see to-
day, a fifth of the total ether — though there have been fluctuations up
and down ever since. Scientists have cited the surging supply of oxy-
gen as a likely stimulant for a number of evolutionary seismic shakes.
One was the advent of multicellular life around 700 million years
ago, when heretofore separate eukaryotic cells began banding together
into interdependent clans and taking up specialties — I'll be the mouth-
parts if you'll serve as the gut tube. Another was the so-called Cambrian
explosion of 530 million years ago, the dramatic diversification of
multicellular life into a bona fide bestiary, the fete of faunal body plans
that included the ancestors of all the major animal groups alive today.
Some researchers also attribute the formidably proportioned arthro-
pods of the Carboniferous period, roughly 300 million years ago, when
dragonflies had wings like falcons and scorpions were the size of skunks,
to a sharp spike in atmospheric oxygen, the result of an exponential
growth of vascular plants. Even today, regions of comparatively high
oxygen concentrations are often home to unusually large invertebrate
species. The biggest jellyfish and marine worms are found in the cold-
est, most oxygen-rich waters of the ocean. The correlation between
giantism and oxygen is not absolute, however; and, as far as I can tell,
urban insects that inhabit poorly ventilated spaces like cupboards and
basements seem perfectly capable of turning Goliath on the spice of
spite alone.
The ceaseless give and take between bio and geo doesn't stop at oxy-
gen. Carbon is cycled in great, intersecting loops through water, air,
mud, body plans living and dead, now drifting into the atmosphere
as carbon dioxide gas, now sinking into sediment as rotting gymno-
sperm forests. Calcium snakes through rocks, water, seashells, our cells.
Iron and other trace metals play pivotal roles in both the private bio-
chemistry of the body and the public geochemistry of the oceans, and
the amount monopolized by one party at a given moment affects the
rhythms and possibilities of the other.
We live on a Goldilocks world, taking the jackpot trail through the
solar system. Go one planet closer in, to Venus, and temperatures aver-
age 900 degrees Fahrenheit. Jump out a groove, to Mars, and it's —75
degrees. Earth is just right for life, and life has clung to its skin for more

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 3 4
than 3 billion years, if sometimes just by the skin of life's teeth: 99 per-
cent of all species that have ever lived have gone extinct. We humans
may be exceptionally highhanded and ham-fisted in our Earthly trans-
actions, but Earth and its life are much bigger than we, and they'll carry
on whether we do or not. Maybe we need to get away from it all, take
the ultimate off-road vacation to a celestial location. It's time for the
populist stage of the Space Age, and the family-budget space flights
we've been expecting since NASA gave us Tang. Everybody deserves a
chance to experience the great awakening that clearly comes with extra-
territoriality. Astronauts have attested to it time and again, the
transformative moment when they first looked down on the oneness of
bright blue marble Earth, their only home, and Earth looked back and
said, I know.

Astronomy
Heavenly Creatures
F
OR MANY OF us, the most memorable books, poems, and cau-
tionary doggerel of childhood all had something to do with as-
tronomy. We learned to wish on the star light, star bright, of the
first star we saw that night, and we were incidentally saddled with last-
ing confusion over the precise semantic distinction between "I wish I
may" and "I wish I might." We were asked whether we'd like to "swing
on a star" and be better off than we are, or would we settle for life as
a dirty, illiterate farm animal with disgraceful shoes. In the proxy of a
rabbit wearing striped pajamas, we bade, "Goodnight, Moon," and
goodnight, cow jumping over the moon, and goodnight, bears and
chairs, stars and air, brush and mush, and, you, too, old lady, whisper-
ing "hush," and who are you, anyway, and how did you get into my
great green room?
Even growing up in the Bronx, where any twinkling lights one might
see overhead most likely belonged to a police helicopter, I had celestially
themed dreams. In my favorite, I dreamed at age five that my family was
vacationing in the country, and somebody called me to come look at
the Milky Way; and when I ran outside and gazed upward, the heavens
burst into tinkly music like that of a Mister Softee truck and drizzled
me with milk. What a simple, joyful dream it was, and what luck that I
wasn't a bed wetter!
We are all of us starstruck from the start, mesmerized by the span-
gled velvet of the nighttime sky, now longing to pull it close, like
a mother, now shrinking beneath its inviolate diamond detachment.
Soon we are able to pick out at least a few of the easier constellations —
certainly the Big Dipper, maybe the Little Dipper, too, and boxy Orion

T H E CANON 
• 
2 3 6
with his bright belt and sword, and the five-star zigzag of Cassiopeia.
We learn to distinguish between stars and planets by whether they
twinkle or shine, for stars are so distant that they appear as mere points
of light in the sky, and that light is easily bent and bobbled by turbu-
lence in our atmosphere, while the planets are close enough that their
radiance passes through air with scarcely a diversion or refraction, and
so planets will bluntly, unwinkingly shine. Indeed, with an ordinary
backyard telescope and under the right conditions, you can see the
cheeky spheroid faces of our siblings in the solar system — Jupiter and
its red spot, which is really a giant gaseous hurricane big enough to en-
gulf three Earths and which has lasted for at least four hundred years;
Saturn and its hallmark Hula-Hoops of ice, dust, and rock; tangerine
Mars and moon-white Venus. But even our most powerful telescopes
cannot resolve the disk of an extrasolar star, no matter how massive the
star may be; all stars are too far away to be sized and analyzed as any-
thing but points of light.
We stare and stare at the night, looking for something, anything, to
make sense of the thundering silence — voiceover, pantomime, ana-
gram, Vulcan mind-meld. Can't you just say something? Don't you hear
us? Here we are! And as we stare, we see a streak of light, a wild plati-
num cat scratch piercing the mute tuxedo screen, and we're thrilled,
each time, and filled again with goofy hope. A shooting star! I saw a
shooting star! Did you? Well, just keep looking. You'll see one, too. Oh,
we know they're not stars. They are meteoroids, space debris, the bits of
interplanetary rock with which our solar system is littered; and though
most of them are quite small, no bigger than a marble, they careen
parabolically through space at such high speeds that when one of them
hits Earth's atmosphere, the force of friction sets the rock ablaze, and
Earth-bound viewers for thousands of miles around can watch the
combusting rock bid us all a bright good-night.
With their tragicomic displays delivered in live-stream feed, meteors
are especially easy for us modern humans to love and humanize, yet
as Earth makes its squashed circle pilgrimage around the sun, the other
stars and planets also appear to march across the nighttime sky. And the
moon, as it wheels around Earth, swells and shrinks and swells again,
not randomly, not like a yo-yo dieter, but in meticulous clockwork
slices. The ancients missed not a trick or a tock. Like our nursery jin-
gles and semiotic bunny board books, the earliest artifacts of civili-
zation highlight our long-held fascination with the lights on high.
Some 35,000 years ago, a sculptor-skywatcher living in what is now the
Lebombo Mountains of southern Africa carved twenty-nine evenly

ASTRONOMY 
• 
237
spaced notches into a baboon bone, each groove likely representing
a phase of the moon. Other artisans of the Pleistocene left behind
similarly tooled eagle bones in sites not far from the famed Lascaux
cave paintings in France. Ancient Chinese scholars engraved astronomy
charts in bones and turtle shells, recording the paths of stars and plan-
ets and identifying hundreds of constellations. The dour megalithic
monument of Stonehenge and the Mayan city of Palenque are thought
to have served as astronomical observatories, their structures aligned to
make dramatic use of the sun's light on the summer solstice, a sacred
day in many cultures. For our seven-day week we can thank the ancient
Babylonians and Greeks, who carefully observed the behavior of the
sun, moon, and five quirky "stars" that we now know to be planets —
the five planets that can be seen with the naked eye and that are so com-
paratively close to us they fairly glide across the sky, noticeably shifting
their position against the stellar backdrop from one night to the next.
(The word "planet," in fact, stems from the Greek word for "wanderer")
The seven heavenly standouts were named for the reigning deities of
the era, and since every god must have its day, the names of the days
followed suit. The Roman Empire and its Germanic outposts changed
the names of the Greek gods while leaving the basic tenets of the pan-
theon intact; and though the Anglo-Saxon renderings of the deities can
obscure some of the connections in English between the names of
the days and of their heavenly projections, if you have even a smatter-
ing of familiarity with a Latinate language like Spanish or French, you
can piece the little celestial-seminal puzzle together. Sunday is Sun-
day. Monday is Moonday. Tuesday in Spanish is martes, so Marsday.
Wednesday, miércoles, or Mercuryday. Thursday is jueves, which, by
Jove, is Jupiterday. Friday, or viernes, is Venusday. Saturday is Saturnday,
my favorite day, a day for the unrestrained revelry of a saturnalia, or the
protracted gloom of the hopelessly saturnine.
Throughout the ages, those who were wise in the ways of the skies
were regarded as high priests and sages, petitioned for guidance on
when to plant crops, woo a lover, launch a voyage, invade a country. In
the predictable procession of the stars across the cosmic dais, people
saw signs of divine intent, of a structure and certainty otherwise absent
from their lives. Down on Earth, who could say if tomorrow would
bring feast or famine, lockjaw or locusts? Up above, you knew that
come the next spring, Virgo the Maid would appear in the southeastern
sky. Humanity's fate was seen as bound up with the stars, a conviction
yielding both the fantastical nostrums of astrology and the birth of the
global economy. By setting their sights on the steady wink of Polaris,

THE 
CANON 
• 
238
the star of the north, early traders could traverse the most pokerfaced
seas and still find their way home in the dark.
Astronomers today may no longer be counted among the cultural
clergy, and sometimes they complain about being comically misunder-
stood. "I don't do horoscopes, and I am not a failed astronaut," said
Alex Filippenko, an astronomer at the University of California. Yet in
the main, astronomers are among the most admired and beloved of sci-
entists, and they know it and they like it. "We enjoy considerable public
appreciation, and we get more than our fair share of press," said Chuck
Steidel, a professor of astronomy at Caltech. "I'm always amazed at how
I can go to my doctor or dentist, and they'll have a long list of questions
for me when I arrive.
"Compared to something like high-energy physics," he added, "I'd
say we have it really easy."
Astronomy is so easy to love. It is filled with outrageous magic that
also happens to be true: novas and supernovas and pulsar stars that
spin and click and are as thick as an atomic heart, as thick as Joyce's
Muster Mark; and those thicker, darker collapsed star carcasses we
call black holes, which are so dense that even light cannot escape their
gravitational grip; and quasars, celestial furnaces at the edge of the
known universe that are the size of stars but as luminous as entire gal-
axies; and theoretical plausibilities like extra dimensions beyond the
four we know, or the creasing of space-time into shortcut "wormholes,"
which, if they exist, would be the equivalent of time-travel machines.
Astronomy is about the heavens, the divinest of final frontiers and the
presumed zip code of Ra, Vishnu, Zeus, Odin, Tezcatlipoca, Yahweh,
Our Father Who Art In, and a host of other holy hosts; and that reli-
gious resonance markedly broadens the discipline's appeal, making it
feel both cozier and more profound than it might otherwise. Astronomy
also seems chaster than other sciences, purer of heart and freer of im-
purities, mutagens, teratogens, animal testing. Fairly or not, physics is
associated with nuclear bombs and nuclear waste, chemistry with pes-
ticides, biology with Frankenfood and designer-gene superbabies. But
astronomers are like responsible ecotourists, squinting at the scenery
through high-quality optical devices, taking nothing but images that
may be computer-enhanced for public distribution, leaving nothing
but a few Land Rover footprints on faraway Martian soil, and OK, OK,
maybe the Land Rover, too. Astronomers are pure of heart and appeal-
ingly puerile. They look into the midnight sky and ask big questions,
just as we did when we were in college: Who are we? Where do we come
from? And why are we standing around outside on the night before

ASTRONOMY 
• 
239
finals, do we want to end up making elevator parts for a living like our
father or what? Astronomers no longer have to worry about finals,
although they do have to worry about getting their grants financed
and their new telescopes built or at least not have the budgetary plug
pulled on their old telescopes. In any event they are professional
philosopeepers, and they ask the big questions about where we come
from and what we are, and, much to their amazement, they have found
answers to those questions swinging from the stars. Of the many ex-
traordinary findings in astronomy over the past half century or so,
space scientists cite two as cosmic standouts: the discovery and elucida-
tion of the Big Bang that rang in our universe and the surprising cen-
trality of ancient stars to the rise of life on Earth.
We may associate astronomy with the night and darkness, but one of
the core truths of the discipline is its near complete dependence on
light. "For astronomers, the universe is our laboratory, and the way we
analyze what's going on in that laboratory is by analyzing light," said
William Blair, a professor of astronomy at Johns Hopkins. "With rare
exceptions, like the occasional asteroid or meteorite, we can't get our
hands on the stuff we're studying, but we can learn a tremendous
amount about the objects that are out there by examining the different
types of light waves those objects emit, across the electromagnetic spec-
trum. This is one of the little details about the field that I don't think
most people are aware of: that almost everything we've come to under-
stand about the universe we have learned by studying light." Recall that
optical light, the light waves that fall in the so-called visible range of the
electromagnetic spectrum — the light that blinks back at us when we
gape at the sky — represents a tiny segment of the light waves that as-
tronomers study. They have designed a battery of bionic eyes capable of
detecting virtually every radiant signal the firmament has to offer, from
ultraviolet light through X-rays and out to the histrionics of high-en-
ergy gamma rays on the short end of the scale; and from infrared radia-
tion, down into the misleadingly named microwaves, and over to the
really lo-o-ong energy humps of radio waves. If you happened to see
the 1997 movie Contact, in which Jodie Foster played a brave young as-
tronomer battling genuinely astronomical odds and a generically asi-
nine bureaucracy in her search for signs of extraterrestrial civilizations,
you would have caught a few glimpses of the legendary Arecibo radio
telescope built right into the mountainside of Puerto Rico. It's a huge
telescope, 305 meters, or roughly 1,000 feet, across, and the diameter of
the dish is a measure of just how wide are the radio waves it is set to
sample.

THE 
CANON 
• 
24O
By surveying the skies with instruments tuned to every possible
wavelength of light, astronomers get a sense of what sort of cosmic bes-
tiary we live in. Infrared telescopes can peer through the thick dust
clouds that serve as a galaxy's stellar nursery and detect signals from
embryonic stars within. Ultraviolet studies illuminate the nature of hot
young massive stars, cool old dwarf stars, active galaxies, and hyperac-
tive quasars. With X-ray and gamma-ray scans, scientists have probed
black holes, pulsars, supernovas, and the mysterious gamma-ray burst-
ers, thought to be an unusually violent class of exploding stars. Radio
waves murmur hoarsely of the Big Bang from which all else sprang.
Beyond revealing its roots, each light beam speaks of the journey it
had en route to its telescopic rendezvous: the relative desolation, dusti-
ness, violence, or sedateness of the terrain it traversed, the masses it
passed, the time it has been in transit, the likely fate of the radiant body
that gave birth to it so very long ago. Another extraordinary ordinary
truth of astronomy is that a look outward into space is also a look back-
ward in time. Light is mighty light on its feet, and nothing in the
universe is known to outrun it; but light is not infinitely fast, which
means it needs time to get from point a to point b. And because space
is so expansive, and the gaps between any two items so chasmic, the
light we detect from the stars is old news. Even the light leaping off the
surface of our nearest star, the sun, needs eight minutes to stream
across 93 million vacuum-packed miles before it can strike your sensi-
bly sunscreened skin. The image of Jupiter you see in your backyard
telescope is how the planet looked half an hour ago, while that of Sat-
urn is some seventy minutes old. Peer beyond our solar system, and you
start digging into the lumen archives. In the constellation of Canis Ma-
jor, for example, you'll find Sirius, the Dog Star, gleaming twice as
brightly as any other star in the sky; those sequins left home nearly nine
years ago. Or skip to the Little Dipper and mark the showpiece spot at
the handle's tip; that light belongs to Polaris, the North Star, as it was
back when Will Shakespeare was still wearing shorts.
Granted, nearly everything that you can perceive in the nighttime sky
with the unaided eye very likely hasn't changed much between the time
the radiant energy was dispensed and the time it reached Earth. On a
really excellent night of stargazing, you can distinguish maybe 2,500
stars from any single location, and all of those stars, nearly all of the
dots that the ancients connected on their charts into the named con-
stellations, are located in our galaxy, most of them quite close, within a
few hundred light-years of the sun. If it is dark enough and the right
time of year, you can also see the fuzzy band of light that is colloquially

ASTRONOMY 
• 
241
referred to as the Milky Way, as though it had nothing to do with us, or
the major and minor Dogs, or the double Dippers, or any of the other
standbys of the night sky. Of course, once again you are navel-gazing,
looking right at our home galaxy, this time toward the bulging central
disk where most of the Milky Way's 300 billion stars reside. Thick
plumes of interstellar gas and dust lying between the sun and the bulge
obscure the view, but even if you could stare straight into the galactic
heart, you wouldn't be looking terribly far: from our earthly perch, lo-
cated about two-thirds of the way down one of the four major spiral
arms of our pinwheeling Milky Way, it's only a distance of 26,000 light-
years to the hub. There are a couple of other galaxies right at the edge of
the bare eyeball's ability, most notably the Andromeda galaxy, located
just to the south of Cassiopeia. Andromeda is much farther away than
any of the visible stars, but still, it is the nearest big neighbor to the
Milky Way, a mere 2.5 million light-years away. On a cosmic scale,
where the average star manages to radiate more or less stably for several
billion years, 2.5 million years is but a twink of an eye. So, yes, the star
light you see tonight may be hundreds, thousands, a million years old,
but with few exceptions the stars themselves are still out there, burning
bright.
Spend some time with a serious telescope, however, and all bets are
off, and so, too, are many of the lights. The stronger the telescope, the
more distant the objects that astronomers can view. They can see far
beyond the Milky Way, Andromeda, and the other members of our so-
called Local Group of galaxies, to millions of other galaxies, tens of mil-
lions, hundreds of millions, billions of light-years away. They can see
flocks and flocks of spiral galaxies shaped much like our own, whirls of
cream aswirl in the black coffee of space; and elliptical galaxies that
look like giant scoops of rice, with stars for grains; and riffs on the basic
ellipse and spiral themes, along with rumpled deviants called irregulars
— galaxies shaped like cartwheels, beer barrels, pork chops, and pencils,
or those flat plastic monkeys that you hook into chains. Astronomers
can also peer inside those distant galaxies and descry and tally their
parts — their stars, their nebulae of dust and gas, even some evidence
of planets and comets. They have found elfin galaxies of 100,000 stars,
and colossi of 3 trillion. Whatever their shape and census, galaxies dis-
play an unmistakable coherence, their components clearly bound to-
gether by gravity into distinct communities, shining states of shared
stellar fates. The word "galaxy" means "Milky Way," and fittingly so, for
every one of the 100 billion known galaxies is, like ours, a place that
stars call home — or used to. Remember that the more distant the gal-

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 4 2
axy glimpsed, the more archaic the image, and the more mind-teasing
the implications. If you go to a good science museum or planetarium,
you'll likely find some of the gorgeous "ultradeep field" surveys cap-
tured by the Hubble Space Telescope, of hundreds of extremely distant
galaxies. With few exceptions, the stars in those galaxies pictured have
long since died — sputtered and collapsed into dull brown dwarves, or
spattered their outer sheaths into their surroundings, as supernovas. In
some cases, hot new stars have taken the place of the ancestral lights
captured by our telescopes. In others, the galaxies are likely cooler and
darker and more sedate than they appear to our necessarily time-lagged
eyes. Some of the galaxies are thought to have been swallowed up by
surrounding galaxies, or by a giant black hole that lurks at their core, as
black holes are thought to exist in the center of many galaxies, includ-
ing our own.
In so many ways, deep-space scans can outspook a séance. For exam-
ple, astronomers perpetually monitor the skies in search of supernovas
and the abundance of data that such big light shows can offer. On aver-
age, a star explodes somewhere in a galaxy about once a century. To find
these rare events, astronomers take weekly pictures of the same 8,000 or
so galaxies, over and over again, Tuesday in, Marsday out. "We look for
what's different," said Alex Filippenko. "Usually there's nothing, but
every so often, we find a new, exploding star. Last year, we found eighty-
two." One week, it's the same old barred spiral, with all the pizzazz of a
Boise potato. The next, a blinding bombshell shatters the calm, swamp-
ing the rest of the galaxy's photonic sum. Can anything seem more
instantaneous, more here and now and in your face, than a mam-
moth sun that goes kablooey? Yet once again, time bides its time and
abides by the lawful, awful limits of light. The cataclysmic event that
"suddenly" appeared on an astronomer's scan occurred, oh, half a bil-
lion years ago, and the "new" exploding star has long since dispersed
into the void, and who knows that it didn't, in dying, seed the birth
of another sun, with satellite Saturns and Jupiters and gazing Gaias of
its own. On a cosmic scale, at least, there is always new hope from
the dead.
The universe that we live in and are inextricably of was born nearly
14 billion years ago —13.7 billion years ago, to be a bit more exact about
it, and scientists are confident that this figure fits well with a welter of
findings. The universe and everything it enfolds — all known and sus-
pected matter and energy, all space and time, all broken dreams, lost
loves, and inside-out umbrellas — began in the momentous moment
we call the Big Bang. If the name sounds both a little smutty and a little

ASTRONOMY 
• 
243
Barney, it should. When the great Sir Fred Hoyle coined the term dur-
ing a radio interview some sixty years ago, he meant it as a glib put-
down. An adamant atheist as well as a prominent cosmologist, Sir Fred
disliked the idea then gaining currency of a universe with a denned ori-
gin, viewing it as the equivalent of a cosmic nativity scene open to any
number of religious tie-ins; he and his like-minded peers favored a
"steady-state" model of a static universe that had always existed in
pretty much its current contours. Hoyle's heckle proved so catchy, how-
ever, that soon proponents as well as critics were referring to the hy-
pothesized birth of the universe as the Big Bang. Even as an ever
accreting body of evidence has transformed a plausible conjecture into
a bedrock premise of contemporary space science, still the lighthearted
tag line holds. True, there wasn't really a bang. A bang is a sound, and
sound waves need air molecules to propagate, and in the beginning not
only was there no air there, there were no molecules, either, or atoms,
just pure energy.
And "big"? In the beginning, there was really the smallest small of all,
the entire universe contained in something less than a billionth of a tril-
lionth the size of an atomic nucleus. But let's be serious. An event like
the birth of the universe is a very big deal, and it was a bang in the sense
of being an explosion. A tremendous amount of stuff, of energy, the be-
ginnings of matter and, importantly, of space itself, of somethingness
rather than the unnerving utter nothingness that might have been, or
not have been, broke free of its confinement, of an infinitesimally small
and circumscribed borderline called a singularity, and began balloon-
ing outward in all directions with unthinkable force and at relativistic
speed — that is, close to the speed of light. So, yes, it was a Big Bang, and
we can be glad that Hoyle chose to poke fun at the concept long enough
to capture its dispositional humor in a phrase.
We don't know why there was a Big Bang — what preceded it, what
triggered it, or what was going on at the moment of truth, moment oh-
point . . . whoa. Using mathematical models, scientists have chased
the universe back to a point hootingly close to the Big Bang — "to io~35
seconds after time zero," according to Alan Guth, a physicist at MIT.
But filling in that last little tittle, that niggling hundred-billionth of a
yoctosecond, now that's tough. To resolve that, scientists will have to
settle some difficult questions, like whether the laws of physics were
born with the Big Bang and therefore collapse into meaninglessness
when you metaphorically enter the singularity of the Big Bang; or
whether the laws predated the Bang and perhaps gave rise to it. What-
ever the cause, we know the consequences. Our universe began with the

THE 
CANON 
• 
2 4 4
Big Bang, and it has been expanding, and cooling, ever since; and every-
thing about the structure, shape, and makeup of the cosmos — its
silky homogeneity on a large scale, its lumpy clotting into stars and gal-
axies when you take a closer look —traces back to that moment of
infinitesimally huge and splendidly, blessedly adulterated unity. Simon
Singh, a physicist and science writer, has described the detection of
the Big Bang as "the most important discovery of all time," and he may
be right. But whereas other important advances like sliced bread and
Teflon prove their case with French toast, what are we to make of this
contender for science's ultimate laurel? We can't touch it, taste it, see it,
or butter it. Why should we believe that the Big Bang is true?
The formulation of the Big Bang model of the universe was an exer-
cise in reverse psychology. First, astronomers realized that the universe
was expanding outward in all directions, like an inflating balloon, or a
loaf of yeasty bread baking, or one of those Japanese paper flowers that
unfurls in water; then they began working backward. Run a movie of
those everyday analogies in reverse, and what would you see? A buoy-
ant, globular party favor collapsing into a flat cat-tongue of rubber, or a
hydrangea-sized blossom being sucked back into a slight, suspect pill.
So, too, it seemed, would a backward film of the universe bring the scat-
tered cosmic characters ever closer, until everything condensed into a
very small speck of starter dough — if not quite as small as a single
point, then at least a single point of view.
The man generally credited with discovering the expansion of the
universe was Edwin P. Hubble, a legendary Missouri-born, pipe-smok-
ing astronomer considered as comely as he was brilliant. He was "an
Olympian," his wife declared, "tall, strong, and beautiful, with the shoul-
ders of Hermes of Praxiteles." Hubble also managed the impressive trick
of luxuriating in his considerable celebrity and hobnobbing with such
nonastronomical luminaries as Douglas Fairbanks, Cole Porter, and
Igor Stravinsky, all the while retaining his lofty scientific reputation.
Fifty years after his death, Hubble's crossover appeal lives on, for not
only do astronomers still apply "Hubble's law" and the "Hubble con-
stant" to their workaday investigations, but NASA's decision to christen
its multibillion-dollar space-based telescope the Hubble has helped to
keep his name alive in the wider public eye, at least until the slowly de-
caying instrument itself winks off for good.
Hubble first won renown for his persuasive demonstration that our
galaxy was not the be-all and after-all of the universe, and that many of
the mysterious splotches on astronomers' photographic plates that had

ASTRONOMY 
• 
245
been dubbed nebulae, for their cloudlike appearance, were not constit-
uents of the Milky Way, as the mainstream view had it, but were inde-
pendent celestial bodies lying at staggering distances from our galaxy —
bodies that were soon determined to be whole other galaxies. On char-
acterizing these autonomous, shimmering star prefectures in greater
detail, Hubble found evidence that not only were they really far away,
but they were getting farther away all the time. Whichever galaxies in
whatever quadrant of the cosmic landscape he examined, they all ap-
peared to be fleeing from our poor little galaxy, as though the Milky
Way had broken out in buboes, or asked for help with the dishes. More-
over, the farther the galaxy, the faster it seemed to be beating its retreat.
This could be seen because in sprinting away each galaxy turned a bit
red in the face, and the greater the distance, the deeper the beet.
Here we have one of astronomy's fundamentals, an essential food
group of the field and a powerful piece of evidence in favor of the Big
Bang model of the birth and evolution of the universe: the light waves
coming from galaxies undergo what is called a redshift before present-
ing themselves at our door. If you compare telltale atomic fingerprints,
or spectra, of the light from a distant galaxy with equivalent spectra of
known light sources here on Earth, you'll see that the patterns of dark
and bright lines on both sets of spectra are identical bar for bar, indicat-
ing that the same mix of atomic elements must be generating the radia-
tion both out there and down here. On the galactic spectra, however,
the entire array of lines looks as though it had been shoved over toward
the redder, longer-wavelength end of the electromagnetic spectrum and
away from the bluer, shorter-wavelength side, compared to the terres-
trial benchmark lights. What does this redshifting mean? It means that
the pulsating waves of star light, as they traverse the gulf between their
natal galaxies and our vigilant scopes, are being stretched and pulled
and lengthened, the distances between the crest and trough of each
light wave gradually widened, the peaks softened, the pique assuaged.
To get a grip on why redshifting occurs, it might help to briefly train
your sights on the sound of one train passing. As vigorously as the
United States Congress has sought to eviscerate America's passenger rail
system, you undoubtedly have had the pleasure of listening to the pro-
longed, poignant wail of a train whistle. If so, you surely noticed that
the sound changed pitch as it rushed by. On approaching, the whistle
had the high, grating pitch of a piccolo. At the moment of alignment
between you and the whistling engine car, the sound dropped down to
the midlevel root-a-toot-hoot of a conventional train whistle. And as

THE 
CANON 
• 
246
the train left you in its rust-flecked dust, the whistle pitch dipped even
deeper, finally assuming the mournful lowing of so long, take care,
good-night to noises . . . everywhere.
To a pair of station-bound ears, the whistle's sonic profile changes so
dramatically from processional to recessional that it's easy to forget how
the whistle pitch sounds if you're on the train rather than missing it:
pretty much the same from beginning to end. Only to a target in rela-
tive motion compared to the source of the sound does the famed
Doppler effect come into play. The effect, named for the nineteenth-
century Austrian mathematician and physicist who formulated it, says
the waves generated by a moving object will shift in size depending on
whether the object is headed toward or away from you. If the object is a
noisemaker, the sound waves will compress into a higher pitch on ap-
proach and relax into a lower pitch on retreat. If the object is a floating
leaf, the ripples spreading on water will appear more closely spaced if
the leaf is drifting toward you than away from you. The redshifting of
light detected in the study of distant galaxies, then, is just another in-
stance of the Doppler effect at work.
Importantly, however, the light from distant galaxies is always dis-
placed in one direction. In our immediate Local Cluster of galaxies,
there is some give and take. The Andromeda galaxy, for example, is
blueshifted, a persuasive sign that it is headed toward us and we toward
it, and that in about 6 billion years the two galaxies will, as a result of
our mutual gravitational attraction, merge into one. But step outside
the neighborhood, and you'll see only red. As revealed by the unwaver-
ing augmentation of their light waves, the remote galaxies must all be
racing away from us. What's more, the greater the distance of the galaxy,
the more extreme its redshifting, and in a roughly proportional man-
ner. That is, if Galaxy Wibbleton lies at twice the distance from Earth as
Galaxy Wobbleton, the light from Wibbleton will be twice as redshifted,
twice as elongated, as the light from Wobbleton; if three times as far, it
will look three times as red. How to explain this link between galactic
distance and redshift radicalism? According to Doppler's equations, the
velocity of any wave-making body affects the relative spreading or nar-
rowing of its waves. The whistle of a fast train will, to an outside lis-
tener, squeal higher as it approaches and moan lower as it recedes than
that of a slow train. In fact, the correlation between velocity and degree
of Doppler shiftiness is precisely what allows a police officer to gauge
your driving speed by bouncing radar signals off your vehicle and see-
ing how severely the car's speed distorts the wavelengths of the incident
radiation; the greater the Doppler shift observed, the bigger the ticket

ASTRONOMY 
• 
247
you'll be served. Those distant galaxies, in other words, must be retreat-
ing from us at a greater velocity than are the closer galaxies.
Or maybe we're just paranoid. As it turns out, the sense of being
uniquely repulsive to almost everything in the universe is an illusion. If
we were located in the Andromeda or Sombrero or M63 galaxy, the
redshift profile of the cosmos would look the same as it does here in the
Milky Way: as though other galaxies are all moving away from us, and
at a velocity more or less proportional to their distance. How can this
be, that each of us is cast in the role of mortician at a bridal shower? To
understand the phenomenon, try this simple experiment, which re-
quires nothing more than a balloon, a felt-tipped pen, and a second
pair of lips. First, decorate the flaccid balloon with polka dots, spacing
them out as evenly as you can. Then, ask your assistant lips to take up
the newly freckled balloon and slowly blow. Put your finger on any of
the dots, and study the dots that surround it. Note that as the balloon
expands, the neighboring dots are all moving away from your finger.
Note as well that the dots nearest your finger are retreating from you at
a slower pace than are those farther away. The reason is that there is less
expanding rubber between you and a neighboring dot than you and a
far dot, less relative surface area to tug adjacent points from your vicin-
ity. Now place your digit on one of those far-off dots and again look at
the points around it. Same thing. The inflation of the landscape is
pushing all spots out and away, out and away, and the far dots are reced-
ing from your finger more briskly than those close at hand. OK, that's
enough blowing for now, Grandma, can I get you a cup of tea, seltzer,
oxygen tent?
The expanding universe is not that different from an expanding bal-
loon, except that the universe is bigger, colder, and darker, and it won't
pop even if you put it in a cage with a pair of mating ferrets. Still, the
balloon analogy shows how every vantage point on its swelling terrain
appears to be the center of the universe without really being the center
of the universe, and how distant objects will recede from one's vantage
point at a faster velocity than near points not because they're sailing
faster in any "real" or absolute sense but merely relative to the reces-
sion rate of sites nearby. The galaxies at greatest distance from Earth
are not Olympian sprinters, not Hermes of Praxiteles to the local Yertles
of Sala-ma-Sond. Their spectacular velocity is spectacular only to us,
while to one another they are cruising along at unremarkable speeds. As
Albert Einstein demonstrated in his special theory of relativity, it is
meaningless to speak of an object's absolute speed or motion through
space, for there is no final arbiter, no unchanging, eternal grid against

THE 
CANON 
• 
248
which that speed can be clocked. All you can ask is "fast compared to
what?" From our perspective, we and our nearby galaxies are moving
through space at about 370 miles, or 590 kilometers, per second, which
is only slightly faster than a tractor-trailer headed down a Montana
freeway at 2:00 in the morning. By contrast, the most distant galaxies
seem to be receding from us at velocities of thousands or tens of thou-
sands of miles per second, uncomfortably close to the speed of light and
illegal even on the Autobahn. To their local highway patrolmen, how-
ever, those far-off galaxies are tooling along at disappointingly licit
speeds of roughly 590 kilometers per second.
Another way in which the balloon exercise can illuminate the nature
of our expanding universe is this: the dots are not really taking the
initiative and moving away from one another, as they might if they
were ants on the surface rather than pen markings embedded in the
surface. Rather, the skin between the dots is stretching wider. Similarly,
the galaxies of our universe are not really rushing away from one an-
other. They're not traveling through space, they're traveling with space.
They are more or less staying put, while the space between them just
keeps expanding. This distinguishes large-scale galactic motions from
other celestial pilgrimages. Under the spur of gravity, the Earth and its
sibling planets orbit the sun. Our solar system in turn is gradually mak-
ing its way around the dense and gravitationally convincing hub of the
Milky Way, completing a galactic circumgyration once every 230 mil-
lion years. But while there are some regional exceptions (like the gravi-
tational attraction that is slowly drawing us and Andromeda closer to-
gether), galaxies are distributed through the cosmos with sufficient
homogeneity that they end up being gravitationally neutral with re-
spect to one another. The galaxies themselves are neither wandering nor
widening. It is the space in between that can't stop loosening its belt.
I fear that, on a visceral level, this idea is almost impossible to accept,
no matter how many packages of balloons your loyal, rapidly blue-
shifting Nana inflates — that the expansion of the universe is not a
tangible matter of galaxies exploding outward into space like shrapnel
from a bomb, but of space itself exploding outward, the shrapnel
trapped in its hide. For one thing, space is not supposed to do anything
except sit there waiting to be crossed or filled. For another, what is it ex-
panding into? More space? If so, why doesn't all the space just smear to-
gether in the first place? How could we have an expanding universe if
space is expanding into space? Wouldn't that be like trying to blow up a
balloon full of holes? Well, you may derive some comfort in knowing
that astronomers don't have an intuitive grasp of the subject either.

ASTRONOMY 
• 
249
"The expansion of space is a concept that I understand mathematically,
but on a personal level, no, I can't do it," said Mario Mateo, a professor
of astronomy at the University of Michigan.
In fact, when Raman Sundrum, a professor of physics and astronomy
at Johns Hopkins, gives public talks about universal expansion "and
where all the galaxies are going," he has his audience do a modest math-
ematical exercise. Think about simple, whole numbers, he says — one,
two, three, four, five, and so on. How far apart are these numbers from
one another? One, his listeners reply. The distance between them is one.
And how many such numbers are there? Well, they keep going, the au-
dience responds. There's an infinité number. "Now I tell people to dou-
ble every number, so that one becomes two, two becomes four, three
becomes six, and on and on," said Sundrum. "For every original num-
ber, I've given you a new number, but the distance between them has
gotten bigger. Now I tell you to double the numbers again, to four,
eight, twelve, sixteen, twenty. And again, to eight, sixteen, twenty-four,
thirty-two. I'm always giving you a new number for the old number, so
that it's the same number of numbers, but the distance between the
numbers is getting further and further apart. In a sense, the numbers
are receding from each other faster and faster, and what we're seeing
with galaxies is something like that. As far as we know, the cosmos can
extend forever, just like the numbers can go on forever. What are the
cosmos expanding into? Well, what are our numbers expanding into?
There's no running out of space, and there's no running up against an
edge, and yet, the distance between the galaxies, as with our integers,
keeps increasing."
Perhaps easier on the mind's eye than the unseemly uppitiness of
expanding space is to do as cosmologists have and run the tape in re-
verse. If you systematically rein in all those receding galaxies, at speeds
counterproportional to the velocities with which they are disappearing
into the distance, you eventually reach a point where they're piled one
on top of the other: the equivalent of some 100 billion galaxies of hun-
dreds of billions of stars apiece, all cohabiting the same pre-place, ante-
space patch of proto-real estate. The lights, and the plasma, and the in-
ferno come free.
After discovering galactic redshifts and connecting and reconverging
the dots backward toward an event that, for all the hubristic ring of it,
could be thought of only as the birth date of the cosmos, scientists be-
gan sketching out what conditions must have been like when the uni-
verse was new. Their computational conjurings proved materially as
well as aesthetically fruitful, for they eventually yielded the second ma-

THE CANON 
• 
2 5 O
jor piece of evidence in support of the Big Bang, as we'll discuss in a
moment. So what might our big fat bouncing pistol of a neonate have
looked like? First of all, cosmologists plead, bear in mind that the birth
of the universe didn't take place in a specific location in space because
the space and matter of our universe came into being simultaneously,
essentially bubbled up out of . . . well, we don't know what. The void?
Another bubble in a larger burbling crockpot of cosmic chowder, of
universes within universes? We don't know, and we may never know, for
what is beyond our universe may remain forever inaccessible to any
sensors or instruments within our universe; and without evidence, we
are trading not in the science of astrophysics, but in idle metaphysics,
sophomoric philosophistry, and a few too many boxes of Milk Duds.
In any event, what we do have evidence for is this: In the beginning,
there was light all right, an overwhelmingly bright, hot light like noth-
ing you've seen or felt or could see or feel, for, as Alan Guth so gaily put
it, "The photosensors in your eyes would evaporate instantly." The
light! the light! exploded into being, a radiant seed of pure energy, tinier
than the proton of an atom yet almost infinitely dense, with a tempera-
ture in the trillions of degrees, and it instantaneously began swelling
outward. Almost immediately after the expansion had begun, some of
the energy managed to condense into matter, into elementary particles,
like electrons and the subparts of protons and neutrons, the quarks;
and their countercharged, counterspinning antimatter counterparts,
the positrons and the antiquarks.
Still the mat of matter and energy expanded mightily. In a fraction
of a trillionth of a second, the universe had inflated from its sub-
atomic birth girth to something on par with a cantaloupe; before a
thousandth of a second had passed, the cosmos had cast itself across
two-thirds of a mile. It grew and it glowed with a light not only blind-
ingly, deretinizingly bright, but of a purity and uniformity not seen in
our quotidian lights, our lamps or our suns or our bombs. There were,
in fact, tiny ripples in this dawn's early light, minute irregularities in the
radiant paste of the universe that eventually would prove our salvation,
but these gradations, these flickering slubs, were of quantum ampli-
tudes, and so the light at first seemed unimpeachably pure, fittingly
ethereal.
For the firstborn particles, the swelling belly of the baby was pure
hellion, and they were smashed and rattled and ashed into radiation
and reparticulated back out again, over and over. Nevertheless, with the
expansion came a deruffling of tempers, a sufficient cooling for the
condensation of matter to continue beyond the most elementary phase.

ASTRONOMY 
• 
251
Quarks teamed up as triplets into reasonably sturdy protons and neu-
trons, while nearly equal numbers of triumvirates of antiquarks formed
into antiprotons; and through the archaeostew flew electrons and posi-
trons, too. Still the material surl was not through, for matter and
antimatter cannot share the same province and survive. Protons and
antiprotons sprang into being, only to collide into mutual annihilation;
electrons and positrons were tossed together and lost together. Luckily,
for reasons that remain mysterious, the early universe had been salted
with a slight excess of matter over antimatter: for every billion or
so antiprotons and positrons aswirl in the starter stew, there were a bil-
lion and one protons and electrons. The result? When the great matter-
antimatter hissing match had finally played itself out, there were just
enough protons and electrons left to start building atoms, stars, galax-
ies, cats, hats, pianos, piano tuners, physicists, and atom smashers to re-
capitulate conditions of the early universe.
Even with antimatter effectively neutered, the universe would need
close to another half a million years before it was fit to be seen. Until
then, all was a fog. The universe was still so hot and dense that matter
could exist only as a plasma, a sea of nuclear particles and footloose
electrons that scattered the light every which way, as do the water mole-
cules of a fog or cloud. "A plasma is very nontransparent to electromag-
netic radiation," explained Alan Guth. "In our early universe, photons
of light were constantly colliding with the free electrons and bouncing
off in different directions, so the radiation didn't get anywhere in this
period." And just as it is practically impossible to peer into the heart of
a thick cloud, so astronomers suspect that the plasmic conditions of the
early universe rule out any hope of detecting the electromagnetic sig-
nals of the Big Bang proper.
After 300,000 years, however, the fog began to lift. The universe had
expanded to a diameter about X,5oo its current size, and it dropped to
a temperature of a mere 3000 degrees, cool enough for electrons and
protons to begin expressing their innate compatibility, their electro-
magnetic complementarity, and to form electrically neutral atoms —
simple atoms like hydrogen and helium, but full-fledged, thoroughly
modern atoms nonetheless. The opacity of plasma finally gave way to
the transparency of a gas. At last the universe's radiant energy could be-
gin traveling outward in a straight line, rather than being restirred back
into the pitiless plasmic paste, and it has been flying freely ever since.
Adherents of the Big Bang model of the universe proposed in the
1940s that it should be possible to detect the boundary between the
opaque early universe and the transparent universe that has reigned

THE CANON 
• 
2 5 2
ever since, just as we can look through a clear sky over to the edge of a
giant cloud formation. This boundary is what they call the "surface of
last scattering," or "the wall of light" — the last time in the history of the
universe that matter managed to smear the astral radiance into a milky
blur. The wall of light should be all around us, they said, because it is
the relic glow of the whole universe as it was when it was much smaller,
but that universe has since puffed out about us, as it has about all the
other dots on the balloon, raisins in the cake, and the like. Or picture
being aboard a raisin in the middle of a thick puff of smoke, which then
expands outward from us like a spherical, shimmering smoke ring.
Wider and wider it billows. Time passes, and now we're standing down
here in the clear, contentedly fruit-bound, peering through a large vol-
ume of transparent space, looking outward for the halo of fuzz that
once upon a time was all that was.
Yes, the fuzz has to be out there, Big Bang theorists suggested. It's part
of the universe; where else could it go? They also calculated that the ra-
diation billowing off this 3000-degree surface of last scattering would
have started out as extremely high energy, which means of an extremely
shortwave variety. In the intervening billions of years, however, the
light, as it is wont to do with lengthy travels, would have redshifted
down, down, down to long, cool wavelengths, in the long, ruddy end of
the microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum — down to
wavelengths you'd expect to be emitted by a radiant body not of 3,000
degrees, but of 3 degrees. In the mid-1960s, astronomers at Bell Labs in
New Jersey detected the ambient blush, the remnants of the plasmic
early universe, at the predicted 3-degree wavelength, an achievement for
which they were awarded the Nobel Prize. The sense-a-round radiation
is known formally as the cosmic microwave background, and you can
detect it yourself, in the comfort of your home, especially if you don't
have a decent cable connection: the snowy interference that appears on
your untuned TV is partly the result of the cosmic microwave back-
ground, the cold crackling leftover light from the universe in circa
300,000 A.B.B. It is the first fossil, the earliest snapshot, and, if not quite
music to one's ears, the closest thing we have to the music of the
spheres. Together, the cosmic background radiation and the redshifting
of distant galaxies sing softly but surely of a very Big Bang, and of an ex-
pansion that began 14 billion years back and just keeps Beguining along.
The cosmic microwave background is ubiquitous, and impressively
uniform. The night sky might look different when you're in the outback
of Australia from the way it does when you're in Halifax, Nova Scotia,
with a different arrangement of constellations, but the cosmic micro-

ASTRONOMY 
• 
253
wave signal you'd pick up in either location would be almost identical
in strength and wavelength. That sameness attests to how much more
uniform in temperature the universe was in its smaller and more com-
pact past than it is in its current state of middle-aged spread and diffu-
sion, and logically so: Think of how much easier it is to heat a small
room evenly than a large, drafty Victorian house. The uniformity of the
microwave signal also underscores the uniformity with which the uni-
verse has expanded since the Bang, or at least in the eons since the
plasma age ended. The smoke ring has been pushed out the same
amount in all directions, and so we perceive the same sort of cool, radi-
ant signal from all directions.
It turns out, however, that microwave radiation is not completely ho-
mogeneous. Probing the celestial lightscape with sensitive instruments
borne aloft by satellite and — how appropriate — balloon, astronomers
have found minute fluctuations in the background microwave radia-
tion, spots where the signal is comparatively stronger or its wavelength
longer. To cosmologists, such flickerings in the wall of light indicate
that the mass of the early universe — the stuff that was bouncing the
universe's radiation into a plasmic haze — was not perfectly, smoothly
distributed. From the moment that matter materialized, they said, it
had a little dumpiness to it, the result of so-called quantum fluctua-
tions arising from the natural jitteriness of subatomic particles. In other
words, cosmologists argue, the basal canvas had no choice but to ripple;
the laws of physics, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, de-
manded it. And those tiny ripples that we see today as trifling trembles
in an otherwise standardized background glow were likely the source of
all cosmic diversity and opportunity. "Those ripples were responsible
for the formation of galaxies, stars, of universal structure generally,"
said Guth. "Without them, the universe would have been a giant cloud
of hydrogen gas, and a very dull place indeed."
Our universe was certainly no idle gasbag. From the start, it had a
kind of cytoskeletal integrity to it, filaments of comparative density that
only gained in strength and intensity as the universe grew. Over the
next few hundred million years, the first stars and galaxies began to con-
dense out of those pockets of comparative density in the expanding
plume of atoms and energy. And though galaxies today are the only
known homes for stars, the only place where stars are born and die, and
you won't find any hermit stars wandering through the gravitationally
barren wilderness of intergalactic space, that doesn't mean the galaxies
got there first. After all, who better to know how to build a warm home,
a thriving community, a stellar society, than the residents themselves?

T H E CANON 
• 
2 5 4
Astronomers have much to learn about the evolution of cosmic struc-
ture, but they now suspect that stars may well have preceded galaxies as
the earliest celestial bodies to form out of the spidery gaseous mass of
the young universe. Not just any stars, though. Not stars like our sun,
much as we love it and are lucky to have it exactly as it is. Rather, the
first stars were likely to have been massive, thousands of times bigger
than ours. Giant stars alone have the power of which Isaac Newton
dreamed before a falling apple so rudely, apocryphally awoke him —
the power of alchemy. Giant stars alone can start with the simplest,
lightest atoms, like hydrogen and helium, and forge them into the
whole periodic palette of the elements, into all the Rubenesque beauties
with their thickset nuclei — nickel, copper, zinc and krypton, silver,
platinum and gold, and tungsten and tantalum and, yes, mercury and
lead. We humans are not unique in our greed for all that glitters. Once
seeded with traces of heavy metals, the gift of those founding stellar
magi, the wider gaseous terrain of the early universe began taking on
shape, and, in very short order, the skies were ablaze with millions of
stars living in distinct Milky Ways.
Which brings us to another of the great discoveries of modern as-
tronomy: Joni Mitchell was right about us all being Stardust. Our lives
depend now on a single, living sun, but other suns before this one have
died to give us life.
The observable universe may be more than a shapeless cloud of hy-
drogen gas, but nevertheless this least frilly of all elements is by far the
most common. Nearly three-quarters of ordinary matter consists of hy-
drogen, the atom with one proton and one electron to claim. Helium,
the second character on Mendeleev's table and possessor of two protons
and two neutrons at its core, accounts for about 24 percent of known
matter. All the hydrogen and much of the helium in existence today,
along with a sprinkling of the universal stock of lithium, boron, and be-
ryllium atoms, are the direct product of the Big Bang, generated when
the universe was new. The next time a family member brings home one
of those unsightly Mylar balloons that remains stubbornly, desultorily
afloat for so long that you decide to shred it when the balloon's owner
isn't looking, consider that at least a few of the helium atoms you are
about to blithely disperse into the atmosphere may have been around in
their current configuration for 13.7 billion years. Now hurry up and get
rid of that thing before the kid comes back.
Ambitious though the Big Bang was, its inventive capacity was lim-
ited and short-lived. The laws of physics, which either preceded the
Great Explosion or were born with it, dictate that the electromagnetic

A S T R O N O M Y 
• 
2 5 5
force will keep the positively charged protons of discrete hydrogen nu-
clei as far as possible from one another, unless something pushes them
so close together that the strong force can take over. As the mightiest
known force in the universe, the strong force can strong-arm the in-
nately xenophobic hydrogen nuclei until they agree to fuse into some-
thing new — into atoms of helium. Or it can fuse together helium and
hydrogen atoms into an even bigger nuclear commonwealth, a state
called "being lithium." Yet each ratcheting up in the size of the atomic
polity requires that much more heat and density to manage, that much
more ambient extremity to overcome electromagnetic repulsion and al-
low the strong force to work its diplomacy. The Big Bang got as far as
impelling packets of five protons into meaningful proximity — into a
scattering of beryllium atoms — before its mass had dispersed and its
initial pressure-cooker conditions had dipped below those needed to
drive fusion's fancies. In the wake of the natal stabs at nation-building,
the bulk of the universe's atoms remained in the same parochial hydro-
gen format in which they'd begun.
Yet all atom-making was not through. There were those quantum-
borne quivers, those clumps in the cloud, and there was gravity, gra-
cious, warm-hearted gravity, with its sensible shoes and its feet on the
ground. Gravity is the weakest of nature's four forces, but it works well
on large masses, and it has the added advantage of always attracting,
never driving away. After a million or so years of breathless expansion
driven by the Bang's phenomenal outward-bound pressure, gravity be-
gan to exert a moderating counterforce. The pace of wholesale, whole-
scale growth slowed ever so slightly, allowing the denser pockets of mat-
ter in the universe a chance to dawdle, churn, swirl, and circumnavi-
gate. And once a sufficiently dense exemplar of these hydrogen re-
doubts started twisting around on itself, gravity got a really firm grip,
and pulled the gaseous pocket inward, into a ball. As it condensed, the
gas grew hotter, its atoms more agitated. Soon it grew so hot that the
electrons were again stripped away from their nuclear partners, return-
ing the gas to the plasmic state of the small, early universe. In the center
of the gaseous orb, where the heat and pressure were at maximum ex-
hortation, not only were the electrons torn free from their protons, but
the protons of the individual hydrogen atoms were squeezed closer and
closer together, until finally their mutual electromagnetic repulsion
could be overcome and the business of nuclear fusion could begin anew
— on a bolder and more ambitious scale than anything seen in the
Bang's early pangs.
As we all know from years of hearing the energy industry pine for the

THE 
CANON • 
256
power to tame it, nuclear fusion is a wondrous thing, a Rumpelstiltskin
on stilts. Not only does it transform the light and the simple into the
weighty and complex, but the very act of fusing atomic nuclei together
releases a big jolt of electromagnetic radiation — of energy. We humans
have succeeded in fusing together hydrogen atoms and unleashing a
tremendous blast of energy in the process: that is the source of a hydro-
gen bomb's apocalyptic power. Far trickier is figuring out how to fuse
atoms in a controlled, orderly, and, of course, cost-effective manner. It's
a daunting task, but one that our sun and the billion trillion or so other
stars in the universe accomplish every day. The source of a star's energy,
its shine, its heat, its guiding wishworthy light, is thermonuclear fusion,
the perpetual merging at the dense stellar core of large numbers of
small atoms into a smaller number of larger atoms. The power of nu-
clear fusion is the denning hallmark of a star, and it takes a certain heft
and density to pull it off. Jupiter is a very big ball of gas, but it's not
quite big enough. The atoms at its core are not under sufficient pressure
to change their elemental identity. Only at a mass about eighty times
greater than Jupiter's will a ball of gas have the stoutness of heart to ac-
complish thermonuclear fusion, the squeezing together of reluctant
singleton nuclei into the radiance of atomic matrimony.
The first stars to condense out of the primal nebula, though, were
likely much bigger than eighty Jupiters, or even eight hundred suns, for
as they began their collapse, the compaction through gravity of a thick
slub of gas into a tidier and more coherent sphere, the increasingly
dense object would attract ever more matter from its dusty surround-
ings and so grow huge rapidly by accretion. The early universe was a
cramped, cluttered, dusty, gaseous place compared to today, and so a
condensing ball had no choice but to pull in huge hanks of extra mat-
ter as it tightened in on itself— to augment its mass even as its volume
diminished. That hugeness exacted a high personal cost: giant stars
die young and violently. Yet if their lives were brief, their art would
long survive them, and it is well worth a look at the docudrama of stel-
lar genius.
For simplicity's sake, let us assume that our model founder star is
made of pure hydrogen, with none of the other elemental efforts of
the Big Bang adulterating it. Our exemplar star is an enormous conden-
sation of hydrogen, hundreds of times more massive than the sun,
and the electrons have been stripped from their protons, and all is a
plasmic bisque. Gravity is tugging everything inward, toward an imagi-
nary point at the center, and so the pileup of hydrogen particles is
greater the more deeply you delve. At the superhot, high-pressure con-

A S T R O N O M Y 
• 
2 5 7
fines of the core, the hydrogen nuclei are swirled and squeezed, swirled
and squeezed, until a critical threshold is surmounted, electromagnetic
repulsion is defeated, and discrete hydrogen particles are fused into he-
lium nuclei. The energy liberated by this thermonuclear fusion be-
gins radiating outward, from the core toward the surface, and the bil-
lowing up of heat and light offers a counterbalance to the inward pull
of gravity. In fact, the pulsing radiation, the bounty of fusion, is what
keeps the star intact, keeps its inner layers from collapsing under the
weight of those on top. But the effort is energy-intensive and cannibal-
istic.
As the Oxford chemist Peter Atkins has written, a star's appetite for
hydrogen is "truly prodigious." Our sun, for example, fuses 700 million
tons of hydrogen into helium every second, and in so doing radiates
away pieces of itself each day, splashing warmth and light across the so-
lar system, and My Very Educated Mother and her Nine (or eight) Pies,
and their retinue of moons, and the asteroid belt, and Hale-Bopp, and
Comet Kohoutek, too. Yet even though the sun has burned for 5 billion
years, and even as it grows gaunter with every passing moment, it has
enough hydrogen, packaged with just the right degree of density, to stay
lit for another 5 billion years.
No such longevity for our voluptuous stellar forebear. Here, the great
weight of its mountains of accreted matter heats up the core layers with
staggering rapidity, accelerating the pace of fusion and quickly deplet-
ing the star's hydrogen stores, perhaps in as little as a couple of million
years after the star first formed. Its hydrogen fuel exhausted and the sta-
bilizing counterpressure of fusion energy momentarily cut off, the star
again falls prey to gravity and sharply contracts. That downsizing in
turn raises the temperature and density of the core, until the next ther-
monuclear threshold is crossed. Now the helium particles, the fruit of
the previous act of fusion cuisine, start merging into carbon, infusing
the star with a fresh burst of radiant energy that thwarts gravitational
collapse. That is, until the helium, too, is spent, at which point another
round of contraction ensues, followed by a new fusion event, and the
creation, the so-called nucleosynthesis, of still heavier atoms at the stel-
lar core. Onward through the periodic table of the elements the star
marches in its struggle to stave off total collapse, hammering smaller
nuclei into nitrogen, oxygen, sodium, phosphorus, potassium, calcium,
silicon, yes, the familiar ingredients listed on nutrition labels or kicked
up by bullies on the beach; onward through to the nucleosynthesis of
iron and nickel, the elements with the most stable nuclear configura-
tions of all. We're only about a quarter of the way through the atomic

T H E CANON 
• 
2 5 8
table, and there are many other, heavier elements yet to be synthesized,
but iron and nickel mark the end of the line for fusion power. If you
fuse an iron nucleus with another nucleus, you won't release any energy.
To the contrary, this heavy-handed union requires an input of energy.
And the fluttering outward of liberated, radiant energy is what keeps a
star from caving in on itself. The last good-bye is nigh.
At this stage, the star is a like a great ball of baklava, with a dense cen-
ter of nickel and iron nuclei surrounded by thin shells of successively
lighter elements that it had baked up through the ages but hadn't gotten
around to cannibalizing. Lacking any radiant bulwark against gravity,
the whole construct again condenses, and the core temperature soars to
8 billion degrees, hot enough to synthesize elements a bit beyond iron
and nickel, yes, but to no avail for the star: its engine of thermonuclear
stability, the release of radiant energy through fusion, is dead. The core
begins to lose structure, and upper layers dive in toward lower layers.
Violent photons of light ricochet in all directions, splitting apart any
heavy nuclear particles that stand in their way. The star's interior goes
into free fall, the stippled, plasmic strata of itself streaming helplessly
toward that imaginary point at the center of the orb. In less than a sec-
ond, a core the width of many suns is squeezed down to something
the size of North America. The catastrophic contraction sends shock
waves through the entire celestial body and blows out a halo of stellar
matter "like a great spherical tsunami," as Peter Atkins puts it. Our star
explodes as a supernova, and in those furious closing moments of
its life, the real heavyweights of the elemental table are forged — plati-
num, thallium, bismuth, lead, tungsten, gold. The newborn particles are
scattered into space, along with the many other, comparatively lighter
elements that the star belly had built up before the whole star went
belly-up.
For this sequined shrapnel, we can thank our lucky stars. By salting
the young universe with heavy elements, particularly metals, the first
few meganovas helped touch off a boom in stellar construction. The
background gas was hot, Chuck Steidel explained, and it's difficult to
get stars started from masses of overheated, overexcited gas. The metal
particles bequeathed by the progenitor stars cooled the gaseous land-
scape enough for a multitude of nebulous eddies to begin condensing
into stars, into clusters of stars, into bustling, burgeoning barrios of
stars. "We think it went from massive stars to small galaxies relatively
quickly, during the first billion or so years of the universe," said Steidel.
Larger galaxies would then have formed through mergers and acquisi-
tions, by collisions between galaxies or by one comparatively dense gal-

A S T R O N O M Y 
• 
2 5 9
axy gravitationally sucking in the contents of a smaller galaxy. By 12 bil-
lion or so years ago —1.7 billion years after the Big Bang — the majority
of the universe's galaxies had formed, including our Milky Way, al-
though they would continue to sail ever outward and away from one
another, buoyed on the expanding silk of space; and each galaxy would
continue to evolve, its gathered goods to rotate around the midpoint of
its mass, its stellar citizens to live out their lives at varying tempos and
temperatures, depending on their mass and their proximity to other
stars. In many galaxies, particularly spiral ones, we find flourishing stel-
lar nurseries, comparatively thick patches of gas and dust from which
new stars perpetually are condensing, the natal event often driven by
the obliging and violent death of a massive older star that lived next
door.
So it likely was with our solar system. Some 5 billion years ago, the
shock waves of an exploding supernova and the concomitant expulsion
of the star's salubrious heavy elements into interstellar space spurred a
ragged cloud of gas and dust in one of the Milky Way's arms to begin
condensing. As it contracted, the nebula began to spin (just as a figure
skater spins by pulling in her arms) and to flatten into a disk (as a figure
skater happily does not). Through several million gyrating years, the
bulk of the mass was drawn by gravity toward the center of the pancake,
forming a bulge of ever escalating heat and density, which finally burst
into thermonuclear splendor. Still some discus matter remained around
our newborn sun, a petticoat of gas, dust, and all the hundred-odd ele-
ments that Dmitri Mendeleev would later seat around his table. That
matter formed clumps: the protoplanets and their protomoons. Closer
in to the central orb, only aggregates of rock and metal could withstand
the heat, and so the four inner planets — Mercury, Venus, Earth, and
Mars — are balls of rock and metal and are designated the terrestrial
planets, firma to their core. Farther out on the disk, it was frigid enough
for water to freeze, and once the ice particles had formed they collided
and gathered gas and dust in a veritable snowball effect, yielding the
four outer planets, the so-called gas giants — Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune. As for Pluto and Sedna and others of their subcompact
class, whether you consider them planets, dwarf planets, planetisimals,
planet parodies, or Planters party mix, they were formed in the Kuiper
belt, one of the coldest, flimsiest nethermost rims of the solar disk,
where there was not enough there to make much of them. Pluto and
Sedna are among the behemoths of the icy, rocky bodies in the belt, and
still you could hide nearly 10 Plutos inside tiny Mercury, and maybe 150
inside the Earth.

THE 
CANON 
• 
260
Our sun is a good star, a stalwart star, and its life span is only halfway
through. But when its hydrogen store starts running low, the sun will
have just a few ploys for keeping its plasma aflame. In 5 billion years,
having depleted the hydrogen at its dense core, the sun will start burn-
ing the hydrogen in its comparatively thin outer layers, puffing up as it
does so to thirty times its current girth. That swollen sun will be a
cooler sun, its radiance ruddier than today. Our sun will be a red giant,
and woe to any earthlings who may be around to witness its bloated
blush, for the planet on which they stand will likely be vaporized in the
expansion. Our distant descendants would do best to abandon Earth
well ahead of time, relocating to, say, one of the bigger moons of Jupiter
or Saturn. Come the sun's expansion, places like Jupiter's Ganymede
and the saturnine Titan will be transformed into far more clement
places than they are today —their skies brightened, their ice stores
thawed into liquid oceans and rivers. Titan even has a gas atmosphere
that, while not currently breathable, in theory could be reconfigured to
suit human respiration, and its scenic views of Saturn's rings are an ob-
vious plus. Wherever the space farers alight, they may as well kick off
their boots and settle into a comfortable chair. The sun will radiate as a
red giant for another 2 billion years.
And then? Then it's time to decamp and head for a whole new solar
system. Our star lacks sufficient mass to explode, and instead it will
simply sputter into barren obscurity. After the hydrogen shell has been
exhausted, the core will contract sharply, and its upper layers will start
sloughing off into space. In the end, all that will remain is a dense,
smoldering ember of carbon and oxygen barely bigger than Earth. The
once mighty Ra and plucky pro tern red giant will have become a white
dwarf; and though it can no longer generate fusion power, by sheer heat
it still glows, and it will glow in this guise for the rest of all time.
The sun and other midsize stars can build from the Bang basics a
handful of the elements we bio-Legos demand, notably carbon, oxygen,
and nitrogen. The frequency with which ordinary stars concoct oxygen
partly explains why oxygen is the third commonest element in the uni-
verse, after hydrogen and helium; and the combined commonness of
hydrogen and oxygen explains why there is water, water everywhere,
though only on Earth in abundant drops to drink. But stars of modest
means and restrained temperaments keep most of what they make to
themselves and supply only trace quantities to the universal inventory
of post-helium parts, the weighty elements from which animate matter
is made. The overwhelming bulk of our mortal cargo — the carbon in
our cells, the calcium in our bones, the iron in our blood, the electro-

A S T R O N O M Y 
• 
2 6 l
lytes of sodium and potassium that allow our hearts to beat and our
brain cells to fire — was stoked in the furnaces of far larger stars than
ours and splattered into the cosmic compost when those stars ex-
ploded. "We are star stuff, a part of the cosmos," said Alex Filippenko.
"I'm not just speaking generically or metaphorically here. The specific
atoms in every cell of your body, my body, my son's body, the body of
your pet cat, were cooked up inside massive stars. To me, that is one of
the most amazing conclusions in the history of science, and I want
everybody to know about it."
The gaseous nebula from which our solar system formed very likely
had been enriched several times over with star stuff, with the luxurious
carnage of multiple supernovas that had exploded nearby over the
course of the last 10 billion years. Each round of enrichment had en-
hanced the chance that the cloud at last would cool, and swirl, and con-
dense into a skirted star, and the skirt would prove elementally weighty
enough to yield the rocky, complex inner planets on which life could
make a deal. Not on eenie or meenie, and Moe, I don't think so. But be-
hind curtain number three, the full monty, it's mine.
We know that there is life on Earth, and that at least one species
among its phylogenetic plentitude is, if not always sensible or reliable,
certainly very clever at inventing tools, especially tools that allow us to
engage in animated, disembodied forms of communication while si-
multaneously driving, jaywalking, or attending our daughter's piano re-
cital. We are such indefatigable telecommunicators that the world and
its 6.5 billion content providers don't feel like enough, and we can't help
but wonder, Who else can we call? Are there other beings, on other
worlds, and will we ever be able to contact them, or they us? Are we
alone, or one of millions of habited planets in the galaxy, or billions in
the universe? Will it ever stop feeling so hard and so hollow to ask and
to ask and to ask again? Is there any evidence one way or the other for
extraterrestrial life? What do astronomers think, and does their think-
ing on this most cosmic of all questions have any more moment than a
five-year-old's musical Milky Way dream?
The answers to these questions are a mix of bad news, no news, and
good news. The bad news is, no, we can't yet contact any extraterrestrial
beings, not even with the sort of miraculous long-distance connections
by which presidents ring up astronauts to banter about space food and
mountaineers trapped in a storm on the top of Everest call their loved
ones to discuss the slim odds of their being home for dinner. If we
could, don't you think they'd already be working as customer service
representatives under suspiciously bland names like Hank or Sherry?

THE 
CANON 
• 
262
Most of the news from the space-alien front is, alas, no news, or
rather we-don't-know news. We have no evidence one way or another
about whether there is life on other worlds. None. After the initial flurry
of excitement in the 1990s over the possibility that we had detected
signs of past or current microbial life on Mars, the evidence fell apart.
There is no credible evidence that extraterrestrials have ever visited
Earth or abducted any earthlings or searched any earthly body cavities
for their inscrutable, nefarious purposes. Aliens have yet to respond to
the recordings we included aboard the first two Voyager spacecraft,
launched in 1977 — of wistful greetings in fifty-five languages; the music
of Bach, Beethoven, Louis Armstrong, Peruvian pan pipers, Azerbaijani
balaban players; and whales singing, chimpanzees grunting, and a train
whistle passing in exemplary Doppler form. Is there life on other plan-
ets? We don't know yay or nay, there's no proof either way, so on this
topic scientists can have nothing to say — can they?
No they can't. And yet, they do. The good news, such as it is, and I
warn you it isn't much, is that the great majority of astronomers I inter-
viewed believe there is life on other planets. Some think that life is com-
mon, that the universe is flooded with star stuff stuffed into self-repli-
cating organisms of more or less cellularly based structures. Others say
that life is likely to be rare, but that nonetheless it's probably not limited
to Earth. Their conviction comes down to sheer statistics, and the rule
of large numbers. "Are we alone?" said Neta Bahcall of Princeton Uni-
versity. "To me the answer is easy and obvious. Our sun is one star out
of hundreds of billions of stars in our galaxy, and the Milky Way is just
one out of billions and billions of galaxies. It's just impossible that we
are the only life in the universe."
"I'm inclined to think that life is very common in the universe," said
David Stevenson of Caltech. "I may turn out to be wrong, of course, but
that's my working hypothesis."
In an interview conducted not long before his death, John Bahcall of
Princeton said, "I am absolutely certain there is more life out there. It's
one of the very few things for which I don't have any proof but on
which I would bet a lot of money. The odds are so overwhelmingly in
my favor."
Not only are there billions of stars, astronomers say, billions of solar
ovens radiating photonic comestibles that practically beg to be eaten,
but there are likely to be billions of planets circling those stars, billions
of possible tables where one might find organisms that take in nutri-
ents, excrete waste, replicate, and actually use the fondue set they got as
a wedding present. Planetary formation, it seems, is a frequent byprod-

ASTRONOMY 
• 
263
uct of stellar condensation, the planetary disk forming as a result of
the angular momentum of a collapsing, spinning star; anywhere from
10 to 50 percent of stars may have their share of circumstantial circum-
navigators. Many astronomers are now searching for signs of extrasolar
planets by checking for wobbles or irregularities in a star's motions,
which may signal that it has gravitational companions, or the intermit-
tent dimming of a star's light that would result whenever an orbiting
planet passed between the star and us. And though for a while the only
extrasolar planets astronomers could find were of the uninhabitable
gas-giant category, more recently they have detected signs of smaller
and possibly earthier worlds, tracing orbits at sensibly temperate dis-
tances from their parent suns.
Astronomers also find comfort in how relatively quickly life arose on
Earth after the crust had cooled, and the unshakable conviction with
which life has stood its ground ever since. They point to recent work in
the field of nanotechnology, the chemistry of materials constructed on
extremely small scales, showing that carbon molecules spontaneously
form rings, tubes, and spheres, the very sort of skeletal structures on
which life is draped. Carbon is a common constituent of supernova
shrapnel, they say, and if carbon so readily self-assembles into the pre-
cursors of biomolecules, the rise of life may be virtually inevitable if
carbon finds itself self-assembling in certain settings — for example, on
a planet with liquid water to its credit. Again, not an outrageous de-
mand. Water, like carbon, is commonplace, and though most of the
cosmic quotient of water looks to be in gaseous or frozen form, there
are sure to be other liquid oases in the vast sample space that is outer
space. "Here on Earth, anywhere you find liquid water, you find life,"
said Andy Ingersoll of Caltech. "Life is remarkably robust when it
comes to adapting to extremely cold or hot water, or very acidic water.
It's hard to imagine, given the robustness of microbial life, that if there's
liquid water somewhere else, life hasn't found a way to take advantage
of it."
On the question of how complex any of that extraterrestrial life
may be, and whether there are other technologically sophisticated civi-
lizations with whom we in theory could communicate, astronomers
become far more reserved. "When you start asking, what is the proba-
bility that life, once it has developed, will evolve something sufficiently
intelligent that it tries to communicate and travel around, well, I don't
think we're in a position to make a useful estimate of that," said Dave
Stevenson of Caltech.
Nevertheless, a few resilient souls have sought to do exactly that.

T H E CANON 
• 
2 6 4
Most famously, Frank Drake, then a Cornell astronomer and a founder
of the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence initiative, or SETI, in the
1960s offered his methodical approach to calculating how many "com-
municative societies" may be out there in the Milky Way, a formulation
now known as the Drake equation. Drake's take consists of seven vari-
ables to consider, proceeding from such comparatively straightforward
factors as the rate of new star formation and the number of stars likely
to have planets, and progressing into ever softer and more subjective
terrain, including: the odds that a particular life-bearing locale will
give rise to intelligent life; that the intelligence will be of a tinkering,
toolmaking type; and, finally, that the technologically adroit civiliza-
tion, having reached the point where it is capable of sending its halloos
our way, will persist long enough to hear our reply.
Stevenson observes that the most uncertain and potentially deflating
parameter of the Drake equation is the last one. "If the life span of an
advanced civilization is only a few thousand years, then the probability
of another intelligent civilization coexisting with us becomes low," said
Stevenson. "Other civilizations might have come and gone before us,
and new ones may be in the process of forming, but by the time they do
we'll have destroyed ourselves. Either way, we could well be the only one
in the galaxy at present."
But take heart! Remember that, while our naked night vision is lim-
ited mostly to the Milky Way, our sample space is not. Even if there
were only one communicative society per galaxy, that still leaves us with
billions of hypothetical entries on the Rolodex of hope. Admittedly, the
terrible distances between galaxies could well preclude any communi-
cation beyond the science fictional, but it's good to think they're out
there, those probabilistic star-flecked partners in space-time. And who
knows? They may be better off than we are and have found the perfect
intergalactic wormhole and are steadily heading our way. Please, please,
stop by, any time, any stardate. We can't promise, but we will try, with
all our heart and hemoglobin and every one of our 90 trillion body cells
and our bacterial symbionts, too, to hang on, and dodge our own bul-
lets, and be here when you arrive.

R E F E R E N C E S
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
I N D E X


References
i. Thinking Scientifically: An Out-of-Body Experience
Altschuler, Daniel R. Children of the Stars: Our Origin, Evolution and Destiny. Cam-
bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Atkins, Peter. Galileo's Finger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Ben-Shahar, Y., A. Robichon, M. B. Sokolowski, and G. E. Robinson. "Influence of Gene
Action Across Different Time Scales on Behavior." Science 296 (2002): 741-44.
Bryson, Bill. A Short History of Nearly Everything. New York: Broadway Books, 2003.
Donald, Janet. Learning to Think. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002.
Eisner, Thomas. "Making the Microscope Loom Large in a Child's Life." New York
Times, August 10,2004. June 23,2006 <www.nytimes.com>.
Emiliani, Cesare. The Scientific Companion. New York: Wiley, 1995.
Hazen, Robert M., and James Trefil. Achieving Science Literacy. New York: Double-
day, 1990.
Krauss, Lawrence M. Fear of Physics. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
Lustig, Cindy, Alex Konkel, and Larry L. Jacoby. "Which Route to Recovery?" Psy-
chological Science 15 (2004): 729-35.
National Science Foundation. "Science and Engineering Labor Force." Science and
Engineering Indicators 2006. September 6,2006 <http://www.nsf.gov/statistics
/seindo6/c3/c3S2.htm#c3S2i2 >.
Piel, Gerard. The Age of Science. New York: Basic Books, 2001.
Pollack, Henry N. Uncertain Science . . . Uncertain World. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
Remnick, David, ed. Life Stories: Profiles from The New Yorker. New York: Modern
Library, 2001.
"Science Dull and Hard, Students Say." BBC News. September 6, 2006 <http://
news.bbc.co.Uk/1/hi/education/4100936.stm>.
Tallack, Peter, ed. The Science Book. London: Cassell, 2001.
Trefil, James. The Nature of Science. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Trefil, James, and Robert M. Hazen. The Sciences: An Integrated Approach. New
York: Wiley, 2001.
Weinberg, Steven. "Can Science Explain Everything? Anything?" The New York Re-
view of Books. May 31,2001. January 31,2002 <http://www.nybooks.com/artides>.

REFERENCES 
• 
268
2. Probabilities: For Whom the Bell Curves
American Academy of Dermatology. "Melanoma Fact Sheet." AAD Public Resource
Center. September 6, 2006 <http://www.aad.org/public/News/DermInfo/
MelanomaFAQ.htm >.
Belkin, Lisa. "The Odds of That." New York Times. August 11,2002.
Cohen, Jack, and Ian Stewart. "That's Amazing, Isn't It?" New Scientist. January 17,1998.
Cohn, Victor. News and Numbers. Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1989.
Gonick, Larry, and Woollcott Smith. The Cartoon Guide to Statistics. New York:
Harper Perennial, 1993.
"HIV Infection and AIDS." National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
September 6,2006 
<http://www.niaid.nih.gov/factsheets/hivinf.htm>.
Huff, Darrell. How to Lie with Statistics. New York: W. W. Norton, 1954.
Koehler, Jonathan J. "One in Millions, Billions, and Trillions." Journal of Legal Edu-
cation 47 (1997): 214-23.
Kolata, Gina. "i-in-a-Trillion Coincidence, You Say? Not Really, Experts Find." New
York Times. February 27,1990.
Lee, Jennifer 8. "Who Needs Giacomo? Bet on the Fortune Cookie." New York
Times. May 11, 2005.
Muller, Richard A. Physics for Future Presidents. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2004.
Palo Alto Medical Foundation. "The Darker Side of the Sun: Facts about Skin Can-
cer." September 6,2006 <http://www.pamf.org/skincancer/>.
Paulos, John Allen. Innumeracy. New York: Vintage, 1990.
. A Mathematician Reads the Newspaper. New York: Anchor, 1996.
Phillips, John L. How to Think about Statistics. New York: W. H. Freeman, 2000.
Pollack, Henry N. Uncertain Science . . . Uncertain World. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the
Twentieth Century. New York: W. H. Freeman, 2001.
Slovic, Paul. "Perception of Risk Posed by Extreme Events." Risk Management
Strategies in an Uncertain World. Palisades, N.Y. April 12, 2002.
Taleb, Nassim N. "Learning to Expect the Unexpected." Edge. June 23,2006 <http:
//www.edge.org/3rd_culture/talebo4/taleb_indexx.html >.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Results from the 2004 National
Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings." Office of Applied Studies.
<http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/NSDUH/2k4NSDUH/2k4results/2k4results.htm
#ch4>.
Weiss, Rick. "Dazzled by 'Tortured Data.'" Washington Post. November 23, 1993.
June 23,2006 <http://www.nexis.com/research>.
Willett, Martin. "Bell Curves." Debate Unlimited. June 23, 2006 <http://mwillett
.org/bell.htm>.
3. Calibration: Playing with Scales
American Society for Microbiology. "Monsters Among the Microbes." Microbes.
September 1,2005.
Ash, Russell. The Top Ten of Everything 2004. London and New York: Dorling
Kindersley, 2003.

REFERENCES 
• 
2 6 9
Calder, Nigel. TimeScale. New York: Viking, 1983.
Carpi, Anthony. "The Cell." The Natural Sciences. City University of New York.
June 23, 2006 <http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~acarpi/NSC/13-cells.htm>.
"Day." Wikipedia. September 6,2006 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Day>.
Ford, Kenneth W. The Quantum World. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2004.
Haldane, J.B.S. On Being the Right Size. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Jaffe, Robert L. The Time of Your Life— and Other Times. Manuscript. 2005.
Lieberman, Abraham N. "What You Should Know about the Cell, DNA, and
Genes." National Parkinson Foundation. October 6, 2005 <http://www.par-
kinson.org >.
Morrison, Philip, and Phylis Morrison. Powers of Ten. San Francisco: Scientific
American Library, 1982.
NASA. "Solar History Timeline." Solar-B. September 6, 2006 <http://solarb.msfc
.nasa.gov/science/timeline/index.html >.
"The Nervous System." ThinkQuest. September 6, 2006 < http://library.thmk
quest.org/4371/About%20the%20Brain.htm >.
Pollock, Steven. Particle Physics for Non-Physicists. Chantilly, Va.: The Teaching
Company, 2003.
Rensberger, Boyce. Instant Biology. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1996.
Rigden, John S. Hydrogen: The Essential Element. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2002.
Sandow, Stuart A., Chrissie Bamber, and J. W. Rioux. Durations: The Encyclopedia
of How Long Things Take. New York: Times Books, 1977.
"Speed of a Bullet." Science Education Partnerships. August 1, 2003. Oregon State
University, January 4, 2005 <http://www.seps.org/orade/oracle.archive/Phys-
ical_Science.Physics >.
Sullivan, Jim. "How Big Is a . . . ?" Cells Alive! September 8, 2006 <http://www
.cellsalive.com/howbig.htm >.
Tully, Brent. "How Big Is the Universe?" NOVA Online. University of Hawaii. June
23,2006 <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/universe/howbig.html>.
"What Is the Average Speed of a Bullet Leaving the Muzzle of a Handgun?"
Answerbag. January 4,2005 <http://www.answerbag.com/>.
4. Physics: And Nothing's Plenty for Me
Altschuler, Daniel R. Children of the Stars: Our Origin, Evolution and Destiny. Cam-
bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Atkins, Peter. Galileo's Finger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Atkins, P. W. The Periodic Kingdom. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Beaty, William J. "What Is 'Electricity'?" Bill B's Science Hobbyist. 1996. June 23,
2006 <http://www.amasci.com/miscon/whatis.html>.
Charap, John M. Explaining the Universe. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2002.
Emsley, John. Nature's Building Blocks. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
European Space Agency. "Creation of Light Elements." ESA High School Education.
April 9,2003. December 1,2005 <http://www.esa.int/esaED>.
Ferris, Timothy. The Whole Shebang. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.

REFERENCES • 
270
Feynman, Richard P. The Pleasure of Finding Things Out. Cambridge, Mass.:
Perseus, 1999.
Ford, Kenneth W. The Quantum World. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2004.
Freudenrich, Craig. "How Light Works." How Stuff Works. June 23, 2006 <http://
www.howstufrworks.com/light.htm >.
Gamow, George. Mr Tompkins in Paperback. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1993.
Gleick, James. Isaac Newton. New York: Pantheon, 2003.
Gonick, Larry, and Art Huffman. The Cartoon Guide to Physics. New York: Harper
Perennial, 1990.
Hazen, Robert M., and James Trefil. Achieving Science Literacy. New York:
Doubleday, 1990.
Krauss, Lawrence M. Fear of Physics. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
Muller, Richard A. Physics for Future Presidents. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2004.
Murphy, Pat, and Paul Doherty. The Color of Nature. San Francisco: Chronicle,
1996.
NASA. "The Electromagnetic Spectrum." November 4, 2005 <http://imagers
.gsfc.nasa.gov>.
Nave, Rod. "Quarks." Hyperphysics. George State University. September 8, 2006
< http://hyperphysics.phy- astr.gsu.edu/hbase/particles/quark.html#c6 >.
"Observing Across the Spectrum." Cool Cosmos: Multiwavelength Astronomy. No-
vember 23,2005 <http://www.coolcosmos.ipac.caltech.edu/cosmic_classroom>.
Overbye, Dennis. "The Universe Seems So Simple, Until You Have to Explain It."
New York Times. October 22,2002 <www.nytimes.com>.
Pollock, Steven. Particle Physics for Non-Physicists. Chantilly, Va.: The Teaching
Company, 2003.
Rigden, John S. Hydrogen: The Essential Element. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2002.
Schneider, Eric D., and Dorion Sagan. Into the Cool: Energy Flow, Thermodynamics
and Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Senese, Fred. "Why Is Mercury a Liquid at STP?" General Chemistry Online. June
23,2006 < http://antoine.frostburg.edu/chem/senese/101/periodic/faq/why-is-
mercury-liquid.shtml>.
Trefil, James, and Robert M. Hazen. The Sciences: An Integrated Approach. New
York: Wiley, 2001.
Weinberg, Steven. Dreams of a Final Theory. New York: Vintage, 1993.
Whittle, Mark. "A Brief History of Matter." Prof. Mark Whittle's Home Page. Univer-
sity of Virginia Department of Astronomy. September 8, 2006 <http://
www.astro.virginia.edu/class/whittle/astri24/matter/matter_three.html>.
5. Chemistry: Fire, Ice, Spies, and Life
Angier, Natalie. "Free Radicals: The Price We Pay for Breathing." New York Times.
April 25,1993.
. "Nonfinicky Vulture Wears Its Toxic Feast All Over Its Face." New York
Times. April 30, 2002, Section F: 3.

REFERENCES 
• 
2J1
—. "Serenade of Color Woos Pollinators to Flowers." New York Times. Novem-
ber 26,1991, Section C: 4.
-. "Some Blend In, Others Dazzle: The Mysteries of Animal Colors." New York
Times. July 20, 2004.
Ash, Russell. The Top Ten of Everything 2004. New York: Dorling Kindersley,
2003.
Atkins, Peter. Galileo's Finger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Atkins, P. W. The Periodic Kingdom. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Ball, Philip. Life's Matrix. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999.
. Molecules: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Brain, Marshall. "How Food Works." How Stuff Works. June 23, 2006 <http://
home.howstufrworks.com/food.htm >.
California Academy of Sciences. "Plants That Kill." Science Now. May 13, 2001.
May 30, 2005 <http://www.calacademy.org/science_now/archive/wildr_lives/
california_carnivores_o513o1.htm >.
"Chinese Characters." China Online. September 6, 2006 <http://chineseculture
.about.com/library/symbol/blcc_chemistry.htm >.
Coenders, A. The Chemistry of Cooking. Park Ridge, N.J.: Parthenon, 1992.
De Duve, Christian. Vital Dust. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Eisner, Thomas. For Love of Insects. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Emsley, John. Nature's Building Blocks. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Garfield, Simon. Mauve: How One Man Invented a Color That Changed the World.
New York: W. W. Norton, 2000.
Hoffmann, Roald. The Same and Not the Same. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1995.
Hoffmann, Roald, and Vivian Torrence. Chemistry Imagined. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, 1993.
Horgan, John. The End of Science. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
McGovern, Patrick E., Juzhong Zhang, Jigen Tang, et al. "Fermented Beverages of
Pre- and Proto-Historic China." PNAS101 (2004): 17593-98.
"Molecular Structures." Chemistry Guide. April 6, 2005 <http://www.chemguide
.co.uk/atoms/>.
Moore, John T. Chemistry for Dummies. New York: Wiley, 2003.
"Online Etymology Dictionary" September 6, 2006 <http://www.etymonline
.com/index.php >.
Sacks, Oliver. Uncle Tungsten: Memories of a Chemical Boyhood. New York: Knopf,
2001.
6. Evolutionary Biology: The Theory of Every Body
Brumfiel, Geoff. "Who Has Designs on Your Students' Minds?" Nature 434 (2005):
1062-65.
Calder, Nigel. TimeScale. New York: Viking, 1983.
California Academy of Sciences. "Plants That Kill." Science Now. May 13, 2001.
May 30, 2005 <http://www.calacademy.org/science_now/archive/wild_lives/
california_carnivores_051301.htm >.
Campbell, Neil A., Lawrence G. Mitchell, and Jane B. Reece. Biology: Concepts and
Connections. 3rd ed. San Francisco: Addison Wesley Longman, 2000.

REFERENCES • 
272
Canadian Museum of Nature. "Star-Nosed Mole." Nature.Ca. April 29, 2005
< http://www.nature.ca >.
"Ceratobatrachus Guentheri; Solomons Leaf Frog." Digital Library Project. Berke-
ley: University of California. May 10,2005 <http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu>.
Cornish, Jim. "Penguins: General Information." General Resources. Classroom Con-
nect. May 18,2006 <http://www.cdli.ca/CITE/penguins_general.htm>.
Cracid Specialist Group. "What Is a Cracid?" May 18, 2005 <http://www.cracids
.org/what_is_a_cracid.html>.
Dean, Cornelia. "Challenged by Creationists, Museums Answer Back." New York
Times. September 20,2005.
De Duve, Christian. Vital Dust. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Delacour, Jean. Curassows and Related Birds. New York: American Museum of Nat-
ural History, 1973.
Delong, Edward R "A Plentitude of Ocean Life." Natural History. May 2003.
"The Duck-Billed Platypus." The Duck-Billed Platypus. April 29, 2005 <http://
www.genevaschools.org>.
Ehrlich, Paul R. Human Natures. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000.
Eisner, Thomas. For Love of Insects. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2003.
Fortey, Richard. Life: A Natural History of the First Four Billion Years of Life on
Earth. New York: Vintage, 1997.
Fortey, Richard A. Trilobite! London: HarperCollins, 2000.
"General Characteristics of Primates." The Primates: Overview. April 1, 2005. May
19,2005 <http://anthro.palomar.edu/primate/prim_i.htm>.
Gore, Pamela J. "The PreCambrian." Georgia Perimeter College. June 24, 2006
< http://www.gpc.edu/~pgore/geology/geo1o2/precamb.htm >.
"Hallucigenia." Answers. Com. September 6,2006 <http://www.answers.com/topic/
hallucigenia>.
Harris, Paul. "Mixing Science with Creationism." Salon. May 24, 2005 <http://
www.salon.com/news/feature >.
Keller, Bill. "God and George W. Bush." New York Times. May 17,2003, Section A: 17.
Knoll, Andrew H. Life on a Young Planet. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2003.
Knoll, Andrew H., and Sean B. Carroll. "Early Animal Evolution: Emerging Views
from Comparative Biology and Geology." Ecology 284 (1999): 2129—37. June 24,
2006 < http://cas.beUarmine.edu/tietjen/Ecology/early_animal_evolution.htm >.
Miller, Kenneth R. Finding Darwin's God. New York: Cliff Street Books, 1999.
Miller, Kenneth R., and Joseph S. Levine. Biology: Discovering Life. 2nd ed.
Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath, 1994.
Minkoff, Eli C, and Pamela J. Baker. Biology Today. 2nd ed. New York: Garland,
2001.
Patuxent Bird Population Studies. "Painted Bunting Passerina Ciris." Painted
Bunting Identification Tips. April 29,2005 <http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov>.
Quammen, David. "Was Darwin Wrong?" National Geographic. November 2004:
4-31-
Raven, Peter, et al. Biology. 7th ed. Boston: McGraw Hill, 2005.
Saletan, William. "Creationism Evolves." Slate. September 1, 1999. May 25, 2005
< http://www.slate.com >.

REFERENCES 
• 
273
. "What Matters in Kansas." Slate. May u, 2005. May 25, 2005 <http://www
.slate.com >.
Sever, Megan. "Creationism in a National Park." Geotimes. March 2004. May 5,2005
< http://www.geotimes.org/maro4/NN_grandcanyoncreation.html >.
Smithsonian Institution. "Genus: Hallucigenia Sparsa." National Museum of Natu-
ral History Department of Paleobiology. September 6, 2006 <http://www.nmnh
.si.edu/paleo/shale/phallu.htm >.
Southwood, Richard. The Story of Life. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Sze, Emily Lei Pi. "Theodosius Dobzhansky." May 16, 2005 <http://www.mnsu
.edu/emuseum/information/biography>.
"Tiger Swallow Butterfly." Enchanted Learning. September 6, 2006 <http://
www.enchantedlearning.com/subjects/butterfly/species/Tigersw.shtml>.
Tobin, Allan J., and Jennie Dusheck. Asking About Life. 2nd ed. Orlando and Phila-
delphia: Harcourt, 2001.
University of Manitoba. "Star-Nosed Mole." The Mole Tunnel. April 29, 2005
<http://home.cc.umanitoba.ca>.
University of Michigan Museum of Zoology. "Family Hominidae." Animal Diver-
sity Web. September 6, 2006 <http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/site/
accounts/information/Hominidae.html >.
Weinberg, Steven. "Can Science Explain Everything? Anything?" New York Review
of Books. May 31,2001. January 31,2002 <http://www.nybooks.com/articles>.
7. Molecular Biology: Cells and Whistles
American Society for Microbiology. "Monsters Among the Microbes." Microbes.
September 1,2005 <http://www.microbe.org/microbes/biggest.asp>.
Angier, Natalie. "Free Radicals: The Price We Pay for Breathing." New York Times.
April 25,1993.
Atkins, Peter. Galileo's Finger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Atkins, P. W. The Periodic Kingdom. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
"Bacteria in the Human Body." Wikipedia. August 24, 2005 <http://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Bacteria_in_the_human_body>.
Ball, Philip. Life's Matrix. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999.
Carey, Bjorn. "Wild Things: The Most Extreme Creatures." Live Science Animal
World. February 7, 2005. August 26, 2005 <http://www.livescience.com/
animalworld/050207_extremophiles.html >.
Carpi, Anthony. "The Cell." The Natural Sciences. City University of New York.
June 23,2006 <http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~acarpi/NSC/13-cells.htm>.
"The Cell: Down to Basics." Beyond Books: Life Science. September 1,2005 <http://
www.beyondbooks.com >.
"Cells." Biosciences: Science About Life. September 1, 2005 <http://www.saasta.ac
.za/ biosciences/cells.html>.
Conniff, Richard. "Body Beasts." National Geographic. December 1998. August 24,
2005 < http://www.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/9812/fhgm/ >.
"The DNA Codons." The Genetic Code. September 21,2005 <http://users.rcn.com/
jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/C/Codons.html >.
Emsley, John. Nature's Building Blocks. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Lieberman, Abraham N. "What You Should Know about the Cell, DNA, and

REFERENCES 
• 
274
Genes." National Parkinson Foundation. October 6, 2005 <http://www.par-
kinson.org >.
Madanecki, Piotr. "Luminescent Bacteria." August 26, 2005 <http://www.biol-
ogy.pl/bakterie_sw>.
"My Favorite Protein: Insulin." My Favorite Protein. Davidson College. September
28, 2005 <http://www.bio.davidson.edu/Courses/Mobio>.
"Questions and Answers about Biology." Ken Miller and Joe Levine. October 7,2005
< http://www.millerandlevine.com/ques/eggs.html>.
Raven, Peter, et al. Biology. 7th ed. Boston: McGraw Hill, 2005.
Rensberger, Boyce. Instant Biology. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1996.
Rigden, John S. Hydrogen: The Essential Element. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2002.
Sullivan, Jim. "How Big Is a . . . ?" Cells Alive! September 8, 2006 <http://www
.cellsalive.com/howbig.htm >.
"The Theory of Differential Gene Expression." Developmental Genetics. October 6,
2005 < http://www.emunix.emich.edu >.
8. Geology: Imagining World Pieces
"Aerobic/Anaerobic Systems." Book Rags Biology Study Guide. February 10, 2006
< http://www.BookRags.com >.
Altschuler, Daniel R. Children of the Stars: Our Origin, Evolution and Destiny. Cam-
bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
American Society for Microbiology. "Monsters Among the Microbes." Microbes.
September 1,2005 <http://www.microbe.org/microbes/biggest.asp>.
"Asteroids, Comets, and Meteoroids." BBC-Higi. November 4, 2005 <www.bbc.co.uk/
dna/h2g2>.
Bercovici, David, Yanick Ricard, and Mark A. Richards. "The Relation Between
Mantle Dynamics and Plate Tectonics: A Primer." Geophysical Monograph 121
(2000): 5-46.
Buffett, Bruce A. "Geophysics: The Thermal State of Earth's Core." Science 299
(2003): 1675-77.
Calder, Nigel. TimeScale. New York: Viking Press, 1983.
"The Changing Earth and Cyanobacteria: The Oxygen Revolution." Carleton Mu-
seum. June 24, 2006 <www.carleton.ca/Museum/stromatolites/OXYGEN
.htm>.
"Clostridium."Medic.Uth. February 10,2006 <http://medic.uth.tmc.edu/path>.
Darling, David. "Ocean's Origin." The Worlds of David Darling. June 23, 2006
< http://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/O/oceansorigin.html >.
"The Different Plates; Sea Floor Spreading; Subduction." ThinkQuest. January 26,
2006.
"Earth's Structure." ThinkQuest Team. February 17, 2006 <http://mediatheek
.thinkquest.nl >.
"Feeding in Green Plants." The Open Door Web Site. May 4, 2005. May 30, 2005
<http://www.saburchill.com/chapters/chap0027.html>.
Fortey, Richard. Life: A Natural History of the First Four Billion Years of Life on
Earth. New York: Vintage, 1997.
Fortey, Richard A. Trilobite! London: HarperCollins, 2000.

REFERENCES • 
275
Fountain, Henry. "When Giants Had Wings and 6 Legs." New York Times. February
3> 2004.
"Geothermal Energy." Kansas Energy Education Foundation. June 23,2006.
Gilman, Larry, and K. Lee Lerner. "Ocean-Floor Bathymetry." Water Encyclopedia.
September 14, 2006 
<http://www.waterencyclopedia.com/Oc-Po/Ocean-
Floor-Bathymetry.html >.
Gore, Pamela J. "The PreCambrian." Georgia Perimeter College. June 24, 2006
< http://www.gpc.edu/~pgore/geology/geo102/precamb.htm >.
Hinshaw, Dorothy P. Shaping the Earth. New York: Clarion, 2000.
Jeffares, Daniel C, and Anthony M. Poole. "Were Bacteria the First Forms of Life
on Earth?" ActionBioscience. December 2000. American Institute of Biological
Sciences. October 10, 2005 <http://www.ActionBioscience.org>.
"Journey to the Center of the Earth Synopsis." Wikipedia. February 22, 2006
< http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Journey_to_the_Center_of_the_Earth >.
Kandel, Robert. Water from Heaven. New York: Columbia University Press, 2003.
Knoll, Andrew H. Life on a Young Planet. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2003.
Knoll, Andrew H., and Sean B. Carroll. "Early Animal Evolution: Emerging Views
from Comparative Biology and Geology." Ecology 284 (1999): 2129-37. June 24,
2006 < http://cas.beUarmine.edu/tietjen/Ecology/early_animal_evolution.htm >.
Levy, Sharon. "Navigating with a Built-in Compass." National Wildlife Magazine.
October-November 1999. National Wildlife Federation. October 10, 2005
< http://www.org/nationalwildlife >.
Louie, J. "Earth's Interior." Seismological Laboratory. October 10,1996. University of
Nevada, Reno. January 19,2006 <http://www.seismo.unr.edu>.
Martin, William, and Miklos Mueller. "The Hydrogen Hypothesis for the First
Eukaryote." Nature 392 (1998): 37-41.
Mathez, Edmond A., ed. Earth: Inside and Out. New York: American Museum of
Natural History, 2001.
Minarik, William. "The Multi-Anvil Press at Work." Studying the Earth's Formation.
September 18, 2006 <http://www.llnl.gov/str/Minarik.html>.
Monastersky, Richard. "Ancient Animals Got a Rise Out of Oxygen." Science News.
May 13,1995.
Moores, Eldridge, ed. Shaping the Earth: Tectonics of Continents and Oceans. New
York: W. H. Freeman, 1990.
NASA. "Evidence Supporting Continental Drift." NASA: On the Move — Continen-
tal Drift and Plate Tectonics. January 10,2006 <http://www.earth.nasa.gov>.
NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center. "The Water Cycle." September 14, 2006 <http:
//neptune.gsfc.nasa.gov/education/pdf/Water_Cycle_Litho.pdf#search=
%22total%2owater%2oearth%2onasa%20326%20trillion%22 >.
Pendick, Daniel. "Earth: All Stressed Out." Savage Earth. PBS. January 5, 2006
< http://www.pbs.org/wnet/savageearth >.
Robertson, Eugene C. "The Interior of the Earth." USGS. June 23, 2006 <http://
pubs.usgs.gov/gip/interior/ >.
"Structure of the Earth." Fundamentals of Physical Geography. February 17, 2006
< http://www.physicalgeography.net/fundamentals >.
Svitil, Kathy. "The Earth at Work." Savage Earth. PBS. January 5, 2006 <http://
www.pbs.org/wnet/savageearth >.

REFERENCES 
• 
276
UK National HPC Service. University of Manchester. "Turing Probes the Earth's
Core." September 14, 2006 <http://www.csar.cfs.ac.uk/about/csarfocus/
focus4/core.pdf#search=%22pressures%2oEarth's%2ocore%22 >.
University College, London. "The Development of Life on Earth." UCL Diploma
Course. August 26,2005 <http://www.star.ucl.ac.uk>.
"USGS Science for a Changing World." USGS Publications. September 14, 2006
< http://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/ >.
Vaiden, Robert C. "Plate Tectonics: Mysteries Solved!" ISGS Geobitio. Illinois State
Geological Survey. January 26, 2006 <http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/servs/pubs/
geobits-pub>.
Valley, John W. "A Cool Early Earth?" Scientificamerican.com. September 26, 2005.
February 10, 2006 <www.sciam.com>.
Verne, Jules. "A Journey to the Center of the Earth Chapter XXXVI." Jules Verne
Collection. February 23, 2006 <http://jv.gilead.org.il/vt/c_earth/36.html>.
Washington State University. "The Big Questions — Photosynthesis." Ask Dr. Uni-
verse. February 13,2006 <http://www.wsu.edu/DrUniverse/>.
"What Do We Know about the Origins of the Earth's Oceans?" Scientific American.
June 23, 2006 
<http://www.sciam.com/askexpert_question.cfm?articleID=
ooo85H9-C6Fi-iC7i-9EB78o9EC588F2D7&catID=3&topicID=22 >.
Winchester, Simon. A Crack in the Edge of the World. New York: HarperCollins,
2005.
9. Astronomy: Heavenly Creatures
Altschuler, Daniel R. Children of the Stars: Our Origin, Evolution and Destiny. Cam-
bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
"Asteroids, Comets, and Meteoroids." BBC-H2g2. November 4, 2005 < www.bbc.co
.uk/dna/h2g2>.
"Beginnings: Space and Time." Science and Nature: Space. October 7, 2005 <bbc
.co.uk>.
"Big Bang." Wikipedia. November 10, 2005 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_
Bang>.
"Big Bang Theory." Creation of a Cosmology. November 23,2005 <http://ssscott.tri-
pod.com/BigBang.html >.
"Biography of a Star: Our Sun's Birth, Life, and Death." The Universe in a Classroom.
December 20,2005 <http://www.astrosociety.org/education/publications>.
"Birth of Stars and Galaxies." PBS: Mysteries of Deep Space. November 10, 2005
< www.pbs.org>.
"Blast from the Past: Farthest Supernova Ever Seen Sheds Light on Dark Universe."
HubbleSite. April 2, 2001. November 10, 2005 <http://hubblesite.org/news
center/newsdesk/archive >.
Boughn, Stephen, and Robert Crittenden. "A Correlation Between the Cosmic Mi-
crowave Background and Large-Scale Structure in the Universe." Nature 427
(2004): 45-48.
Britt, Robert R. "Freeze, Fry or Dry: How Long Has the Earth Got?" Space. Febru-
ary 25, 2000. November 24, 2005 <http://www.space.com>.
. "Most Distant Galaxy Hints at Dark Ages." Space. February 16, 2004. No-
vember 10, 2005 <http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy>.

REFERENCES • 
277
—. "Our Tiny Universe: What's Really Visible at Night." Space. December 29,
2003. November 20, 2005 <http://www.space.com>.
-. "The Reality of Antimatter." Space. September 29, 2003. November 28, 2005
< http://www.space.com >.
Chang, Kenneth. "Dying Star Flares Up, Briefly Outshining Rest of Galaxy." New
York Times. February 20,2005, Section 1: 26.
. "Tiny, Plentiful and Really Hard to Catch." New York Times. April 26,2005.
Charap, John M. Explaining the Universe. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2002.
"Colonization of the Outer Solar System." Wikipedia. November 23, 2005 <http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colonization_of_the_outer_solar_system >.
"Discovery of the Cosmic Background Radiation." Footprints of Creation. Novem-
ber 2i, 2005 <http://archive.ncsa.uiuc.edu>.
European Space Agency. "Creation of Light Elements." ESA High School Education.
April 9,2003. December 1, 2005 <http://www.esa.int/esaED>.
"Evolution of Stars." The Milky Way. December 20, 2005 <http://www.milky-
way.com/gb/sevol.htm >.
Ferris, Timothy. The Whole Shebang. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.
"Formation of the Solar System." Search for Planets. European Space Agency. De-
cember 19, 2005 <http://sci2.esa.1nt/interactive/media/>.
Freudenrich, Craig. "How Light Works." How Stuff Works. June 23, 2006 <http://
www.howstuffworks.com/light.htm >.
Grinspoon, David. Lonely Planets. New York: Ecco, 2003.
Hakim, Joy. The Story of Science. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Books, 2004.
Hamilton, Calvin J. "Star Formation, Life, and Death." View of the Solar System. De-
cember 20, 2005 <http://www.solarviews.com/eng/starformation.htm>.
Hawley, John F. "Is There Extraterrestrial Life in the Universe?" John F. Hawley.
University of Virginia. November 23, 2005 <http://www.astro.virginia.edu>.
Hazen, Robert M., and Maxine Singer. Why Aren't Black Holes Black? New York:
Anchor Books, 1997.
Kong, Patricia. "Speed of the Milky Way in Space." The Physics Factbook. November
18,2005 <http://hypertextbook.com/facts>.
LaRocco, Chris, and Blair Rothstein. "The Big Bang." Chris LaRocco and Blair
Rothstein Present. University of Michigan. Nov. 10, 2005 <http://www.umich
.edu/>.
"Milky Way." Wikipedia. November 18, 2005 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Milky_Way>.
Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy. "Why Do Stars Twinkle?" MIRA.
February 16,1999. May 10,2005 <http://www.mira.org>.
NASA. "Discovery of the Cosmic Microwave Background." WMAP Cosmology 101.
November 21,2005 <http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov>.
. "The Electromagnetic Spectrum." November 4, 2005 <http://imagers
.gsfc.nasa.gov>.
. "How Did the Solar System Form?" Science@Nasa. November 28, 2005. De-
cember 19, 2005 <http://science.hg.nasa.gov/solar_system/science/formation
.html>.
. "Nucleosynthesis." Cosmicopia. December 21, 2005 <http://helios.gsfc
.nasa.gov>.

REFERENCES • 
278
. "Solar History Timeline." Solar-B. September 6, 2006. <http://solarb.msfc
.nasa.gov/science/timeline/index.html >.
"Observing Across the Spectrum." Cool Cosmos: Multiwavelength Astronomy. No-
vember 23, 2005 
<http://www.coolcosmos.ipac.caltech.edu/cosmic_class
room>.
"The Odds Against ET." Popular Mechanics. November 1, 2000. October 10, 2005
<http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/space/1282586.html>.
"Odds of Complex Life: Great Debates." Astrobiology Magazine. October 19, 2005
< http://www.astrobio.net/news >.
"Origins of the Days of the Week." Aerospaceweb. October 28, 2005 <http://
www.aerospaceweb.org/question/astronomy>.
Overbye, Dennis. "The Universe Seems So Simple, Until You Have to Explain It."
New York Times. October 22,2002 <www.nytimes.com>.
"Physical Environment: Red Giant." December 20, 2005 <http://www.historyof
theuniverse.com/starold.html >.
Pine, Ronald C. "Introduction: Our Cosmological Roots." Science and the Human
Prospect. University of Hawaii. June 23, 2006 <http://www.hcc.hawaii.edu/
~pine/bookiqts/chapteriqts.htm >.
Preuss, Paul. "A Supernova Named Albinoni Is the Oldest and Farthest Ever
Found." Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. December 17, 1998. November 10,
2005 <http://www.lbl.gov/supernova/albinoni.html>.
"Quasars." Raindrop Laboratories. November 4, 2005 <http://www.rdrop.com/us-
ers/green/school >.
"Redshift." Wikipedia. November 10, 2005 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red
shift >.
"The Seven-Day Week and the Meaning of the Names of the Days." October 28,
2005 < http://www.crowl.org/Lawrence/time/days.html >.
"The Shape of the Milky Way." November 4, 2005 <http://homepage.mac.com/
rarendt/Galaxy/mw.html >.
Shostak, Seth. "The Holy Grail: Small, Rocky Worlds." SETI Institute. February 2,
2006. February 10, 2006 <http://www.seti.org>.
Singh, Simon. Big Bang. New York: HarperCollins, 2004.
Sloan Digital Sky Survey/SkyServer. "The Expanding Universe." Astronomy. No-
vember 20, 2005 <http://cas.sdss.org>.
"Stars." BBC-H2g2. November 4, 2005 <www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2>.
"Stellar Nucleosynthesis." Lives and Deaths of Stars. December 1, 2005 <http://
www.astronomynotes.com >.
"Sun, the Solar System's Only Star." Astronomy Today. September 6, 2006 <http://
www.astronomytoday.com/astronomy/sun.html >.
"The 305 Meter Radio Telescope." National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center
Arecibo Observatory. November 16, 2005 <http://www.naic.edu/public>.
Tully, Brent. "How Big Is the Universe?" NOVA Online. University of Hawaii. June
23, 2006 <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/universe/howbig.html>.
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. "Solar System Formation."
Windows to the Universe. December 19, 2005 <http://www.windows.ucar
.edu>.
Webster, Guy. "Howdy, Strangers." Jet Propulsion Laboratory. August 19, 2002. June
24, 2006 < http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfrrrffeature=555 >.

REFERENCES 
• 
279
Weinberg, Steven. "Can Science Explain Everything? Anything?" New York Review
of Books. May 31,2001. January 31,2002 <http://www.nybooks.com/articles>.
. Dreams of a Final Theory. New York: Vintage, 1993.
Whittle, Mark. "A Brief History of Matter." Prof. Mark Whittle's Home Page. Univer-
sity of Virginia Department of Astronomy. September 8, 2006 <http://
www.astro.virginia.edu/class/whittle/astri24/matter/matter_three.html>.
Yarris, Lynn. "Discovery of Most Distant Supernovas." Discovery of Distant Super-
novas. January 16,1996. Lawrence Berkeley Lab. November 10, 2005 <http://
www-supernova.lbl.gov >.

Acknowledgments
I know I'm not the only writer who, at some point halfway through a major book
project, devotes several days to a single, urgent task: searching for the perfect ex-
cuse to give up. A persuasive, shame-retardant excuse that would allow me to re-
turn the advance, recycle the spiral notebooks, and reformat the hard drive without
also having to abandon my family and move to Niles, Michigan.
As with midpoint panics past, however, I could find no graceful way out. I
couldn't bear to disappoint my daughter ("Book? You were writing a book?") and I
really couldn't tolerate the idea of having wasted the time of so many smart, gener-
ous, overtaxed people.
I therefore would like to thank first and most fervently all the scientists who
contributed to this book. I thank them for their in-depth knowledge, their succinct
explanations of the most daunting concepts, their blue-sky but always scrupulous
musings, their colorful comparisons, and their collégial wisecracks. Even the many
researchers whom I interviewed but did not end up quoting by name informed the
narrative in letter and spirit alike. The Canon obviously would not exist without
the legions of scientific minds from which I freely plundered. My gratitude to them
knows no bounds.
I owe particular thanks to the scientists who reviewed parts of the manuscript
prior to publication: Jackie Barton, Brian Greene, Alan Guth, Jo Handelsman, Kip
Hodges, Jonathan Koehler, Gene Robinson, Donald Sadoway, Meg Urry, and David
Wake. They set me straight in places where I'd gone factually, logically, conceptu-
ally, or aesthetically astray; they suggested crucial additions and sensible subtrac-
tions; and they generally spared me the lasting consequences of multiple self-in-
flicted wounds.
In addition to their expert input, the book was fact-checked line by line as thor-
oughly as possible. Nevertheless, flubs and fatuities undoubtedly remain, for which
I alone should be flogged.
I must also thank the many yeomanly press officers at the universities I visited,
for their help in arranging and scheduling interviews, rearranging and reschedul-
ing interviews, soothing professorial tempers when one prolonged interview made
me late for the next, and even, during a particularly harried trip, setting my daugh-
ter up with a local day camp so that I could work uninterrupted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS • 
2 8 l
Thanks to my editors, Amanda and Jayne, and my agent, Anne, for helping to
hammer the book into shape, and being patient, and laughing at my jokes, and
making me feel just a little less lost and alone. But because writing requires a
clausura, a calm and solitary space, I am indebted to Bruce Martin and the Library
of Congress for granting me a writer's office where I found focus and grace.
Thanks to Dennis for his cosmic expertise, and to Nancy for not once asking me
"How's the book coming along?"
And then there's Rick. My trying to express my gratitude here is a bit like the cit-
izens of Heorot, once Beowulf had slain their nemesis, Grendel, saying thank you
with a gift card for Starbucks. Rick is a fellow writer and lover of science, and he
contributed immeasurably to every phase of the project. He interviewed scientists
and he helped shape the book's structure and identify its major and minor themes.
He gathered string, ropes, lifelines. He sacrificed nights, weekends, and vacation
days to the enterprise, but he never sacrificed the rigor of his judgment or the clar-
ity of his mind. Time and again he beat back my demons and Grendels. Good thing
I make decent coffee at home.

Index
actin, 194
acupuncture, 32-33
adenine, 198
aerobic bacteria, 143, 231
aerobic metabolism, 230-233
alchemy, 138
alcohols, 141-43
alternative medicine, 65-66
amazing results, problem of, 69
American Museum of Natural History, 3
American scientific eminence, 8-11
amino acids, 192-93, i99n
Ampère, André Marie, 103
anaerobic bacteria, 230-233
anaerobic metabolism, 232
Andes Mountains, 225
Andromeda galaxy, 82, 241,246,248
Angier, Silas, 74
anteaters, 170,171-72
antimatter, 251
apples, 145-46
Arecibo radio telescope (Puerto Rico), 3,
239
Aristotle, 89-90
aspirin, 67-68
astrology, 68,90
astronomy
Big Bang theory, 242-49
conditions at origin of universe, 249-
59
dark energy, 25-26
as discipline, 238-39
extraterrestrial life and, 261-64
formation of solar system, 259-61
light, 239-40
night sky, 235-38,240-41
telescopes, 3,239-40, 241-42
Atkins, Peter, 173,257,258
Atlantic (magazine), 5
atmosphere
formation of, 228-33
life and, 230,233
nitrogen in, 127
oxygen in, 232-33
atom
atomic hypothesis and, 87,89-92
electric charge in, 93-94
models of, 90-91
size of, 85-86
types of, 92-93
atomic hypothesis, 87,89-92
attosecond, 78
"average," meaning of, 62-66
Axel, Richard, 45
bacteria
intelligent design and, 177
life on Earth and, 229-31
as single-celled organisms, 186-87,
188,189
size of, 84-85
symbiotic, 185,231
tooth decay and, 183-85
Bahcall, John, 26,262
Bahcall, Neta, 262
balloon exercise, 248-49

INDEX 
• 
2 8 3
Baltimore, David, 10,19,34,38
Barton, Jacqueline, 5
Bassler, Bonnie, 28,183,184
Beaty, William J., 101,102
beauty, 23,24-25
bedrock, 213-14
bee behavior, 33-34
Behe, Michael J., 176-78
bell curve, 63-66
Bercovici, David, 217-18,220
Berra, Yogi, 158
Berthellot, Claude, 124
bias, as problem in science, 31-33
Big Bang, 25,34,239
beginning of, 249-59
conservation of energy and, 114-15
expansion of universe and, 244-49
as idea, 242-43
laws of physics and, 254-55
as model, 243-44,245
biodiversity, and evolution, 147-49,154-
56,162,233
birthday game, 51-52
black holes, 242
Blair, William, 239
Blake, William, 81
Blatella germanica (cockroach), 160
Blobel, Gunter, 182,186
blood, clotting of, 176-81
in invertebrates, 179-80
blue-green algae, 230
Bohr, Niels, 89
bond length, 126
bonds
atoms and, 90-91,123-30
covalent, 125-28,130
hydrogen, 130-131
intermolecular, 130-33
ionic, 128-29,130
metallic, 130,139-40
molecules and, 123-30
organic chemistry and, 133-36
bones, 133,139
Botstein, David, 12,21
Broad Center for Biological Sciences at
Caltech, 191-92
Brown, Michael, 23,82
Buck, Linda, 45,85-86
Buenos Aires Province, 167
butter, 140-41
cacti, 170-71
Calder, Nigel, 80
calibration. See scale
Cambrian explosion, 233
cancer, 37,58,157,210
carbon, and life, 263
carbon bond, 133-35
carbon cycle, 233
carbon dioxide, 141,142
Carey, Susan, 42-43
Cascade Range, 225
causation vs. correlation, 66-68
cell
bacterium as, 186-87
basic parts of, 188
as basic unit of life, 186-88
carbon and, 133-34
death of, 208
intelligent design and, 176-78
persistance of life and, 182
proteins and, 192-95,203-6
size of, 75,188-89
strength of, 208
cell division, 209
chaos, 118
charge
conservation of, 113
subatomic, 93-94,98
chemical reactions, 141-46
endothermic, 143-44,145
exothermic, 143,144,146
fermentation and, 141-43
life processes and, 144-46
oxidation and, 144
chemistry
bonds and, 123-38
chemical transformations, 141-46
insect defenses and, 160-61
states of matter and, 138-41
chronon (Planck time), 78-79
civilizations, life span of, 264
Clausius, Rudolf, 118
closed system, 113-15,119
clumping, in statistics, 48-49
coin-tossing exercise, 48-49, 63

INDEX 
• 
284
collagen, 85
Columbus, Christopher, 72
comets, 227
common ancestor, 168—70
communication
cells and, 207-9
extraterrestrial life and, 263-64
compounds, 125-29
conservation, laws of, 113-20
constellations, 235-36,240
controls, scientific 32-33
convergent evolution, 170-72
correlation vs. causation, 66-68
cosmic microwave background, 252-53
Coulomb, Charles Augustin de,
103
covalent bond, 125-28,130
cracids (bird family), 167-68
Creationism, 20,79,175-78
Creston Avenue (Bronx), 62
Crick, Francis, 35,38
crickets, 161-62
critical thinking, 38-41. See also quanti-
tative reasoning; thinking scien-
tifically
crust, 220-22, 225. See also plate
tectonics
crystals, 129,134-36
cyanobacteria, 230-31
cynicism, 38-41
cytosine, 198
cytoskeleton, 194-95
Danheiser, Rick, 122,138
dark energy, 25-26
Darwin, Charles, 150-51,158,168,174
Darwinism. See natural selection
Dawkins, Richard, 152,163,173
days, naming of, 237
DDT, 161
deer antlers, 175
Democritus, 89
Denby, David, 150
devil's rider walkingstick, 160-61
diamonds, 134-35
digestion, 185
Dillard, Annie, 73
DiSalvo, Frank, 124-25,238-39
DNA
cell structure and, 188,196-97,198-
200
chemical base pairs in, 198-200
cross-species similarities in, 167
discovery of, 35-36,38
evolution and, 156-57
human genome and, 196,197-200
mitochondrial, 232
molecular bonding and, 134,136-37
proteins and, 198-200
size of, 85
stability of, 201-2,206
structure of, 35-36,198-200
as universal code, 181-82,187
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 150
Doppler effect, 245-46
double helix, 35-36,198. See also DNA
Drake, Frank, 264
dry ice, 141
duck-billed platypus, 148
Duff, Michael, 20
dynamic equilibrium, 204-5, 210-11
Earth
age of, 79-80
atmosphere of, 228
center of, 215-18
core of, 218-20
crust of, 218,220-21
geologic profile of, 213-22
mantle of, 220,225,227
ocean formation and, 227-28
origin of, 218
plate tectonics and, 216,222-27
water and, 138,227-28
earthquakes
myths about, 8
prediction of, 222,227
research on, 215-16
Washington, D.C., and, 212-13
Easterbrook, Gregg, 172
E. coli bacteria, 84-85
egg, as cell, 188-89
Ehrlich, Paul, 166
Einstein, Albert, 35,89,104,154,247-48

INDEX 
• 
285
Eisner, Tom, 24
elasticity, 131
electric current, 102,106-9
electricity, as term, 101-2
electromagnetic spectrum, 109-12,
251
electromagnetism, 94,95,98
Big Bang and, 254-55
chemical bonds and, 124
electric current and, 106-9
as fundamental force, 28-29
as term, 107
electrons
atomic bonds and, 90-91,131-32
charge and, 93-94,98
hostility among, 96-99
mass and, 103
mobility of, 99-102,104
size of atom and, 86
"spin" and, 108
van der Waals force and, 131-32
elements, origin of, 257-58,259
empty space
atoms and, 82,86,91,92,97-98,125
covalent bonds and, 125
in universe, 81-83
energy, 104-6
conservation of, 113-15
kinetic (moving), 105-6,108-9
origin of universe and, 250-51
potential (stored), 105-6
thermonuclear fusion and, 256
entomology, 154
entropy, 118-20
enzymes, 145-46,193-95,204
ethanol, 142-43
ethylene, 145
Euclid, 27
eukaryotes, 169,188,194
euphorbias, 170-71
evidence
bias and, 31-33
diverse threads of, 33-34
revolutionary ideas and, 35-36
skepticism and, 34-35
evolution. See natural selection
explosives, 128
extinctions, mass, 158,182
exponential growth, 77
false positives, 53-59,62
Faraday, Michael, 107
farmers, as scientists, 21-22
fat molecules, 137
fault lines, 226. See also plate tectonics
Fear of Physics (Krauss), 59-60
Feinberg, Andy, 10-11
Feinstein, Alvan, 61
fermentation, 141-43
Fermi, Enrico, 59
Fermi flex (exercise), 59-61
Ferris, Timothy, 104
Feynman, Richard, 87,89,91-92
Field Museum of Natural History (Chi-
cago), 149
fields, and light, 110-11
Filippenko, Alexei, 35, 238,242,261
Finding Darwin's God (Miller), 179-81
Fink, Gerald, 30,33
forces, four fundamental, 28-29,94~96.
See also electromagnetism; fields;
gravity
fossil fuels, 109
fossils
dinosaur, 165-66
formation, 163-64
gaps in record, 162-67,181
Franklin, Benjamin, 26
Fraser, Scott, 191
fruit, 145-46
Full, Bob, 173
fusion, 255-58
galaxies
distances between, 82,246-49
formation of, 258-59
irregular, 241
stars and, 253-54
types of, 240-42
Galileo spacecraft, 82
Galison, Peter, 12-13
Galvani, Luigi, 103
gamma rays, 112
gas state, 138-39

I N D E X 
• 
2 8 6
gecko, 147-48
Gell-Mann, Murray, 88n
gene, defined, 199-200
genetics. See DNA
geology, 212-34. See also fossils
geologic time and, 79-80
interdisciplinary nature of, 214
nature of research in, 214-16
Gleick, James, 140
global warming, 37
gold, 97
Goldilocks planet, 122-23,213> 229
goose bumps, 174
Gould, Stephen Jay, 2,39,158,210-11
Grand Canyon, 131,176,215
graphite, 132-33,135
gravity, 94-95
core of Earth and, 218-19,22o
force fields and, 107
formation of universe and, 255-58
inertia and, 42-43
solar system and, 248
time and, 73
Great Lawn (Central Park), 154
Greene, Brian, 7,90-91,98
on thinking scientifically, 22,24-25,
26-27,28
guanine, 198
Guth, Alan, 49-50, 243,251
Haeckel, Ernst, 149
Haldane, J.B.S., 152,155
Harper's (magazine), 5
Hazen, Robert, 115
heat
center of Earth and, 216-19
chemical reactions and, 143-44
Earth convection and, 223-24
flow of, 116-17
molecular states and, 138-41
thermal conductivity and, 135
Heisenberg, Werner, 16,96
helium, 229, 254,257
hemoglobin, 85
Herrnstein, Richard, 63
Hiaasen, Carl, 13
Himalayas, 226
Hockfield, Susan, 17
Hodges, Kip, 28,79,80,214-15
Hoffmann, Roald, 121,123,124,125-26
Holmes, Arthur, 222
Homo sapiens, 165-67,168-70. See also
human body
hormone replacement therapy, 69-70
horse evolution, 165
How to Lie with Statistics (Huff), 61,
67
Hoyle, Sir Fred, 243
Hubble, Edwin P., 244-45
Hubble Space Telescope, 242,244
Huff, Darrell, 61,67
human body
bacteria in, 185
blood clotting in, 180-81
cells and, 189-92,205-7
evolution of language and, 173-74
molecular structure of, 133-34
proteins in, 199-204
stellar composition of, 260-61
Human Genome Project, 196,197-200
human life span, 73-74
hydrogen,254
atomic structure of, 92
compounds and, 125,126
free, 228-29
fusion and, 256-57
hydrogen bond, 130-31,137-38
hypotheses, 153-54
hypothesis testing, 37-38
ID. See intelligent design
immune system, 208
Imperial College London, 222
impetus theory, 42-43
Indricotherium ("giraffe rhinoceros"), 156
inertia, law of, 42-43
Ingersoll, Andy, 36-37,263
insects, evolution of, 160-62,154-55
"instincts," 53
insulation, 103-4
insulin production, 200-204
intelligent design (ID), 176-78
responses to, 178-81
intuitive concepts
scale and, 71-72
scientific thinking and, 41-46

I N D E X 
• 
2 8 7
investment decisions, 54-55
ionic bond, 128-29, !33> 139-40
isotopes, 92,164
Jaffe, Robert, 26,75-76,78,150
Javanese leaf insect, 160
Jefferson, Thomas, 22
Johanson, Donald, 166
Jones, Lucy, 8,9,34,36
Joule, James Prescott, 103,115
Joyce, James, 88n
Kandel, Robert, 228
Kant, Immanuel, 26
Kelley, Darcy, 30,37-38
Kennedy, Mary, 204-5
kinetic energy, 105-6,108-9
Knoll, Andrew, 22,30-31,214,215
Koehler, Jonathan, 29,53-56
Krauss, Lawrence, 59-60
Krebs cycle, 206
Lancet (journal), 67-68
language
evolution of, 173-74
mathematics as, 27-29
large numbers, law of, 29
laughing gas (nitrous oxide), 126,127
Lebombo Mountains (South Africa),
236-37
Lederman, Leon, 88-89
Lewin, Walter, 43-44
life
cell as basic unit of, 186-91
chemical bonds and, 127-28,133-34,
136,137-38
chemical reactions and, 144-46
cosmic composition of, 239
definition of, 150
extraterrestrial, 172,261-64
geological impact of, 229-34
intelligent design and, 176-78
multicellular, advent of, 233
mutation and, 158-59
as no accident, 172-73
origin on Earth, 181-82,229-32
persistence of, 181-82,186-87,
263
light
astronomy and, 239-40,245-46,250
beginning of universe and, 250-52
electromagnetic spectrum and, 109-
12,239
speed of, 110,240
wall of, 252-53
wavelength and, 111-12
lightning, 101,102
light waves, 98,110-12
astronomy and, 239-40,245-46
Linda Problem, 55-56
Lindquist, Susan, 205
Lippard, Stephen, 124
liquid state, 139-40
Littlewood, John, 51
liver cells, 194,206
Local Group of galaxies, 241,246
Long Island Expressway, 71
Loos, Adolf, 173
Love Canal, 186
Lustig, Cindy, 44-45
M31. See Andromeda galaxy
magnetism
electric current and, 107-8
terrestrial, 219-20
Malcolm, Janet, 13
Maniatis, Tom, 195,196
Mann, Thomas, 13
maps, 72
Mars, 217
Martin, Steve, 25-26
mass, 103
mass extinctions, 158,182
Mastermind game, 18-19,20-21
Mateo, Mario, 249
material chemistry, 124-25
mathematics, 27-34. See also statistics
Mathieu, Robert, 82,110
matter, 104,105
hydrogen and, 254
origin of, 250-51
quantum fluctuations and, 253
states of, 123,138-41
Maxwell, James Clerk, 107
Mayo, Stephen, 191
mean, 62, 63,65

I N D E X 
• 
2 8 8
measurement, units of, 73-75. See also
scale
electricity and, 102-3
median, 62-63
medical test results, 56-59
Mendeleev, Dmitri, 259
Mercer, Molly, 54-55
mercury (element), 140
messenger RNA, 202,204,205
metallic bond, 130,139-40
metals
Big Bang and, 258
electron flow and, 100,103-4
meteors, 236
methyl groups, 207
metric system, 74-75
Mexican salamander (Bolitoglossa
rufescens), 77
Meyerowitz, Elliott, 31
micron, 84
microscope, 24
microsecond, 77
microwave radiation, 111-12
Milky Way galaxy, 240-41,259,264
Miller, Kenneth, 179-81
Miller, Stanley, 181
millipedes, 161
millisecond, 77
Mills, James L, 68
"miracle," meaning of, 51
miracle cure, 65-66
mitochondria, 232
molecule. See also DNA
atoms and, 91-92
bonds and, 123-30,140
definition of, 128
heat and, 116-17
size of, 85-86
states and, 123,138-41
monophyletic origin of cells, 187
Montefiore Cemetery (Queens, New
York), 71
Montgomery County school buses, 60
moon
formation of, 218
observation of, 23
phases of, 45-46
Morrison, Philip, 76
Morrison, Phylis, 76
Mosteller, Frederick, 68
Mount St. Helens, 225
Murray, Charles, 63
Museum of Earth History (Eureka
Springs, Ark.), 176
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (Berke-
ley, Calif.), 147-48
mutation, 158-62,209-10
mysteries, 25-26
nanosecond, 77
nanotechnology, 263
National Academy of Sciences, 15
National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, 68
National Institutes of Health, 197
National Science Board, 10
Natural History Museum (Oslo, Nor-
way), 149
natural selection
biogeography and, 167-68
convergent evolution and, 170-72
creationism and, 20,175-76
disagreement among scientists on,
157-58
evidence for, 162-72
fossil record and, 162-67
as fundamental law, 148-50,158
intelligent design (ID) arguments
and, 176-81
operation of, 158-62
randomness and, 172-73
residual traits and, 173-74
resistance to idea of, 151-52,172,175-81
sexual selection and, 174-75
taxonomy and, 168-70
as theory, 153-58
thinking scientifically and, 31,37
natural selection (Darwinism)
as fundamental law, 149-50
Nature (journal), 35
nature-nurture debate, 210-11
Neanderthals, 166
neuroethologists, 33-34
neutrons, 91,92-93
Newton, Sir Isaac, 6,35,113,140
New Yorker (magazine), 5

INDEX 
• 
2 8 9
New York Times, 5,45
night sky, 235-38,240-41
nitric oxide, 126,127
nitrogen compounds, 125,126,127-28
nitrogen "fixing," 185
Noah's flood, 176
noble elements, 134
Nocera, Daniel, 32,109
Nolan, Deborah, 39-40,47-49,51-52, 63
normal distribution (bell curve), 63-66
Novacek, Michael, 184
nucleosynthesis, 257
nucleus
of atom, 91,96
of cells, 188
objective reality, 22-26
math and, 27-28
seeing and, 23-25
ocean
Earth's atmosphere and, 229
formation of, 227-29
sea floor studies and, 224-25
Ohm, Georg Simon, 103
ohm (electrical resistance unit), 103
Olema, Calif., 226
opinions, 29,30-31
ordered system, 119-20
Oregon Museum of Science and Indus-
try (OMSI), 2
organic chemistry, 133-34
Owen, Richard, 149
oxidation, 144
oxygen
Earth's atmosphere and, 232-33
red blood cells and, 197
painted bunting, 148-49
Palenque (ancient Mayan city), 237
paleontology. See fossils; natural selec-
tion
pancreatic cell, 200-204,206
paramecia, 177
Paulos, John Allen, 30,65
peacock, 174-75
Pediculus capitis (head lice), 161
pencil, 132-33
penguin species, 168
pesticide resistance, evolution of, 161-62
Peto, Sir Richard, 67-68
pharmaceutical industry, 211
Phillips Academy, 10
photons, 99
photosynthesis, 230
physics
atomic architecture and, 96-98
atomic hypothesis and, 87,89-92
color and, 24-25
electric charge and, 99-102
electric current and, 102-9
electromagnetism and, 98
four fundamental forces of, 94-96
laws of, 112-20,254-55
light and, 109-12
math and, 27,28-29
in science education, 88-89
subatomic charge and, 93-94
subatomic particles and, 92-94
time and, 75-76
picosecond, 77-78
Planck time, 78-79
planets, 73,236,237
formation of, 259,262-63
plants
bacteria and, 185
chemistry and, 145-46
convergent evolution and, 170-71
molecular bonds and, 137-38
origin of plant cells and, 232
photosynthesis and, 230,232-33
plaque, 184
plasma, and Big Bang, 251-53
plate tectonics, 36,216,221,222-27
Pollock, Steven, 87-88
polyproteins, 195
pottery clay, 132
powers of ten. See scientific notation
prehistory, astronomy in, 236-37
pressure within Earth, 219
prions, 38
probability. See also statistics
estimation and, 59-61
multiplication rule and, 48
patterns and, 49-53
quantitative reasoning and, 29-30
sample space and, 54-59

INDEX • 
290
prokaryotes, 169,188
proteins
blood-clotting mechanism and,
176-81
cells and, 192-95
composition of, 191-93
DNA and, 198-200
dynamic equilibrium and, 204-5,
210-11
function of, 193-96
genetics and, 38
hydrogen bonds and, 137
synthesis of, 199-206
protons, 91,92-94» 97
protozoa, 189
Prusiner, Stanley, 38
RS. 28 (Bronx, New York), 72
PubMed (medical Web site), 68
punctuated equilibrium, 158
Quammen, David, 169-70
quantitative reasoning. See also proba-
bility; statistics
evidence and, 30-36
probability and, 29-30,59-61
thinking scientifically and, 29-34
"quantum leap," 97,222
quark, 78n, 88,99
radar, 111-12
radioactive isotopes, 164
radio waves, 111
randomness
entropy and, 118
natural selection and, 172-73
patterns and, 49-50
reality, subjective vs. objective, 22-23
red blood cells, 197
red-eyed tree frog, 32
Redford, Kent, 171-72
redshift, 245-46
reductionism, 88
regression to mean, 65
relativity, special theory of, 154,247-48
religion and science
astronomy, 237, 238
evolution, 149,150,175-78
mysteries and, 26
revolutionary ideas, 35-36
ribosomes, 202-3
rigidity, of materials, 133
risk assessment, 40-41
risk factor, 58
RNA,38
Robinson, Gene, 33-34
Roentgen, Wilhelm, 112
Rubner, Michael, 16
Sadoway, Donald, 121,123-24
Safire, William, 5
Saleton, William, 175
Salle, David, 13
Salon (online magazine), 5,152
salt (sodium chloride), 129
sample size, 63-64
sample space, 54-59
San Andreas Fault, 226
scale
cosmic distance and, 81-83,240-42
fundamental forces and, 95
intuitive concepts and, 71-75
scientific notation and, 76-77
smallness and, 83-86
time and, 73-74,75-76,77-81
units of measurement and, 73-75
Schmidt, Maarten, 83
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), 70
Schwarz, John, 27
science awareness
civic arguments for, 7-11
common worries and, 40-41
essential ideas and, 13-17
fun of science and, 11-13,15-16,
19
lack of, 1-7,10
public cynicism and, 38-41
scientists and, 6-7\ 16
uncertainty and, 36-37
science education
adolescence and, 2-3,6
careers in science and, 10-11
evolution in, 151
math and, 28
misconceptions and, 43-46
for nonchildren, 14-17,28
place of physics in, 88-89

I N D E X 
• 
2 9 1
science writing
critical thinking and, 39-40
fact checking and, 45
math and, 28
process of, 17
science awareness and, 1-6
scientific notation
large numbers and, 76-77,79-83
small numbers and, 77-79
scientists
consensus and, 36-37
egos of, 34
need for, 10
public apathy and, 6-7
skepticism and, 24-26
support for basic research and, 9-10
sea floor, 186,224-25
seasonality, 43-44
sea squirt (tunicate), 173
"seismic," meaning of, 226
SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intel-
ligence), 264
sexual selection, 174-75
Shankar, Ramamurti, 89,94,98
shells (atomic), 96-97,125
shooting star, 236
Shubin, Neil, 19,20
Silber, Sherman, 68
Singapore Air, 61
Singh, Simon, 244
single-celled organisms, 186-87
singularity, 243. See also Big Bang
skepticism, 34-35
Slate (online magazine), 175
smallness
cells and, 189-90,204
scale and, 83-86
solar system
distances in, 81-82
expansion of universe and,
248
formation of, 259—61
night sky and, 236, 237
stability and, 78
solid state, 138-40
Solomon Island leaf frog, 159-60
solvents, 131,143
Sonoran plateau, 170
space. See astronomy; empty space;
universe
speed of light, 110,240
spider species, 175
spin synchronization, 108
Sports Illustrated jinx, 65
Stardust, 254,261
star-nosed mole, 148
stars
composition of human body and,
260-61
distances between, 82-83
galaxies and, 253-54
giant, 254,256-59
night sky and, 235-38,240-41
number of, 262-63
static electricity, 99-102
statistics
"average" and, 62-63
bell curve and, 63-66
correlation vs. causation and, 66-68
critical thinking and, 29-30,39-40
defenses against lies in, 68-70
lying with, 61-68
sample size and, 63-64
significance and, 61—62, 68
Steidel, Chuck, 37,238,258
Steinberg, Saul, 72
stem cells, 11, 207,208
Sternberg, Paul, 21
Stevenson, David, 19,216,262,263,264
stick insect, 160
stickleback fish, 162
stock market predictions, 30
Strobel, Scott, 18-19,20-21,37
strong force, 94,95
subatomic charge, 93-94,98
subatomic particles, 92-94. See also elec-
trons; neutrons; protons
subjective reality, 22-23
sublimation, 141
succulents, 170-71
sugar, 142,201
sun. See also solar system
fusion and, 257
life span of, 260
solar radiation and, 219
Sundrum, Raman, 249

INDEX 
• 
2 9 2
sunlight, 109-10,111
supernova, 112,242,256-59
superstitious thinking
probabilities and, 49-52,65
science and, 7-8,25
swallowtail caterpillar, 160
symbiotic bacteria, 231
taxonomic system, 168-70
"tectonic shift," meaning of, 222
telescopes, 3,239-40,241-42
deep-space, 241-43
temperature, units of, 74-75. See also
heat
termites, 185
terms in science, 16,190. See also scale
Tethys Sea, 164
"theory," in science
evolution and, 153-58
plate tectonics and, 222
predictive power of, 156-57
thermal conductivity, 135
thermodynamics
first law of, 113-15
second law of, 115-20,158,217
thermonuclear fusion, 255-58
thinking scientifically, 18-46
critical thinking vs. cynicism, 39-41
in everyday life, 20-22
evidence and, 30-36
facts and, 18-20
intuitive concepts and, 41-46
language of mathematics and, 27-29
mysteries and, 25-26
objective reality and, 22-25
statistics and, 29-30
uncertainty and, 36-38
Thiomargarita namibiensis (bacterium),
189
Thomas, Lewis, 203
thymine, 198
time
everyday sense of, 73-74,75-76
scientific notation and, 77-81
tooth decay, 183-85
toucan, 148
Trefil, James, 115
trilobites, 155-56
triple bonding, 127-28
trumpeter swans, 148
truth, proximate nature of, 37-38
tunicate (sea squirt), 173
uncertainty, 8-9,36-38,90
universe
age of, 80,242
birth of (Big Bang), 242-43,249-59
distances in, 75,81-83
empty space in, 81-83
entropy and, 120
as expanding, 25-26,244-49
extraterrestrial life and, 261-64
first law of thermodynamics and,
114-15
human understanding of, 22-26,75
uracil, 202
Urey, Harold, 181
valence, 127
van der Waals force, 131-33,137,140
Varmus, Harold, 5
vinegar, 143
virus, 84-85,187-88,208
"visible" light, 109-10,111
Volta, Count Alessandro, 102-3
Wake, David, 147-48,149,152,153
Wallace, Alfred, 158
Ward, Bess, 40-41
Washington, George, 22
Washington, D.C., 212-13
water. See also ocean
atmosphere and, 228
chemical links in, 78
comets and, 227
Earth and, 138,227-28
hydrogen bonding and, 130-31
life and, 263
Watson, James, 35
Watt, James, 103
weak force, 28-29,94,95
Wegener, Alfred, 222
Weinberg, Steven, 11,25,28-29
whale, 164
whip scorpion, 160
White, Tim, 152

INDEX 
• 
2 9 3
white blood cells, in invertebrates, 
X-rays, 112
179-81
Whitman, Walt, 36 
yeast
Wigler, Michael, 35 
cell division and, 157
Wigner, Eugene, 27 
fermentation and, 141-43
Wildlife Conservation Society (Bronx, 
metabolism and, 232
New York), 171-72 
yoctosecond, 78
Wilson, Edward O., 171
Wolberger, Cynthia, 189-90 
zeptosecond, 78
Women's Health Initiative, 69

